CHAPTER LIII

CONCLUSION


WE have completed our task. Only a few words will be added to
emphasise the leading features of our theory of the moral
consciousness and to point out some general conclusions which may
be drawn as regards its evolution.

Our study of the origin and development of the moral ideas was
divided into three main sections. As moral ideas are expressed in
moral judgments, we had to examine the general nature of both the
predicates and the subjects of such judgments, as well as the
moral valuation of the chief branches of conduct with which the
moral consciousness of mankind concerns itself. And in each case
our aim was not only to describe or analyse but also to explain
the phenomena which came under our observation.

The theory was laid down that the moral concepts, which form the
predicates of moral judgments, are ultimately based on moral
emotions, that they are essentially generalisations of tendencies
in certain phenomena to call forth either indignation or
approval. It was therefore necessary for us to investigate the
nature and origin of these emotions, and subsequently to consider
their relations to the various moral concepts.

We found that the moral emotions belong to a wider class of
emotions, which may be described as retributive; that moral
disapproval is a kind of resentment, akin to {739} anger and
revenge, and that moral approval is a kind of retributive kindly
emotion, akin to gratitude. At the same time they differ from
kindred non-moral emotions by their disinterestedness, apparent
impartiality, and flavour of generality. As for the origin of the
retributive emotions, we may assume that they have been acquired
by means of natural selection in the struggle for existence; both
resentment and retributive kindly emotion are states of mind
which have a tendency to promote the interests of the individuals
who feel them. This explanation also applies to the moral
emotions in so far as they are retributive: it accounts for the
hostile attitude of moral disapproval towards the cause of pain,
and for the friendly attitude of moral approval towards the cause
of pleasure. Our retributive emotions are always reactions
against pain or pleasure felt by ourselves; this holds true of
the moral emotions as well as of revenge and gratitude. But how
shall we explain those elements in the moral emotions by which
they are distinguished from other, non-moral retributive
emotions? First, why should we, quite disinterestedly, feel pain
evoking indignation because our neighbour is hurt, and pleasure
calling forth approval because he is benefited?

We noticed that sympathy aided by the altruistic sentiment--sympathy
in the common sense of the word--tends to produce disinterested
retributive emotions. In all animal species which possess the
altruistic sentiment in some form or other we may be sure to find
sympathetic resentment as its accompaniment. And this sentiment
may also give rise to disinterested retributive kindly emotion,
even though it is more readily moved by the sight of pain than by
the sight of pleasure and though sympathetic retributive
kindliness has a powerful rival in the feeling of envy. Moreover,
sympathetic retributive emotions may not only be reactions
against sympathetic pain or pleasure, but may also be directly
produced by the cognition of the signs of resentment or of the
signs of retributive kindliness. Punishments and {740} rewards
tend to reproduce the emotions from which they sprang, and
language communicates retributive emotions by terms of
condemnation and by terms of praise. Finally, there are cases of
disinterested retributive emotions into which sympathy does not
enter at all--sentimental antipathies and likings quite
disinterested in character.

There are thus various ways in which disinterested retributive
emotions may originate. But how shall we explain the fact that
disinterestedness together with apparent impartiality and the
flavour of generality have become characteristics by which the
so-called moral emotions are distinguished from other retributive
emotions? To this question the following answer was
given:--Society is the birthplace of the moral consciousness. The
first moral judgments expressed not the private emotions of
isolated individuals but emotions which were felt by the
community at large. Public indignation is the prototype of moral
disapproval and public approval the prototype of moral
approbation. And these public emotions are characterised by
generality, individual disinterestedness, and apparent
impartiality.

The moral emotions give rise to a variety of moral concepts,
which are in different ways connected with the emotions from
which they were derived. Thus moral disapproval is at the bottom
of the concepts bad, vice, and wrong, ought and duty, right and
rights, justice and injustice; whilst moral approval has led to
the concepts good, virtue, and merit. It has, in particular, been
of fundamental importance for the whole of our investigation to
recognise the true contents of the notions of ought and duty. If
these concepts were unanalysable, as they have often been
represented to be, any attempt to explain the origin and
development of the moral ideas would, in my opinion, be a
hopeless failure.

From the predicates of moral judgments we proceeded to consider
their subjects. Generally speaking, such judgments are passed on
conduct or character, and {741} allowance is made for the various
elements of which conduct and character are composed in
proportion as the moral judgment is scrutinising and enlightened.
It is only owing to ignorance or lack of due reflection if, as is
often the case, moral estimates are influenced by external events
which are entirely independent of the agent's will; if
individuals who are incapable of recognising any act of theirs as
right or wrong are treated as responsible beings; if motives are
completely or partially disregarded; if little cognisance is
taken of forbearances in comparison with acts; if want of
foresight or want of self-restraint is overlooked when the effect
produced by it is sufficiently remote. We were also able to
explain _why_ moral judgments are passed on conduct and
character. This is due to the facts that moral judgments spring
from moral emotions; that the moral emotions are retributive
emotions; that a retributive emotion is a reactive attitude of
mind, either kindly or hostile, towards a living being (or
something looked upon in the light of a living being), regarded
as a cause of pleasure or as a cause of pain; and that a living
being is regarded as a true cause of pleasure or pain only in so
far as this feeling is assumed to be caused by its will. It is a
circumstance of the greatest importance that not only moral
emotions but non-moral retributive emotions are felt with
reference to phenomena exactly similar in their general nature to
those on which moral judgments are passed. How could we account
for this remarkable coincidence unless the moral judgments were
based on emotions and the moral emotions were retributive
emotions akin to gratitude and revenge?

Our theory as to the nature of the moral concepts and emotions is
further supported by another and very comprehensive set of facts.
In our discussion of the particular modes of conduct which are
subject to moral valuation and of the judgments passed on them by
different peoples and in different ages, this theory has
constantly been called in to explain the data before us. It is
noteworthy that the very acts, forbearances, and omissions {742}
which are condemned as wrong are also apt to call forth anger and
revenge, and that the acts and forbearances which are praised as
morally good are apt to call forth gratitude. This coincidence,
again, undoubtedly bears testimony both to the emotional basis of
the moral concepts and to the retributive character of the moral
emotions. Thus the conclusions arrived at in the first section of
the work, while helping to explain the facts mentioned in the two
other sections, are at the same time greatly strengthened by
these facts. Any attempt to discover the nature and origin of the
moral consciousness must necessarily take into account the moral
ideas of mankind at large. And though painfully conscious of the
incompleteness of the present treatise, I think I may confidently
ask, with reference to its fundamental thesis, whether any other
theory of the moral consciousness has ever been subjected to an
equally comprehensive test.

The general uniformity of human nature accounts for the great
similarities which characterise the moral ideas of mankind. But
at the same time these ideas also present radical differences. A
mode of conduct which among one people is condemned as wrong is
among another people viewed with indifference or regarded as
praiseworthy or enjoined as a duty. One reason for these
variations lies in different external conditions. Hardships of
life may lead to the killing of infants or abandoning of aged
parents or eating of human bodies; and necessity and the force of
habit may deprive these actions of the stigma which would
otherwise be attached to them. Economic conditions have
influenced moral ideas relating, for instance, to slavery,
labour, and cleanliness; whilst the form of marriage and the
opinions concerning it have been largely determined by such a
factor as the numerical proportion between the sexes. But the
most common differences of moral estimates have undoubtedly a
psychical origin.

When we examine the moral rules of uncivilised races we find that
they in a very large measure resemble those prevalent among
nations of culture. In every savage {743} community homicide is
prohibited by custom, and so is theft. Savages also regard
charity as a duty and praise generosity as a virtue--indeed,
their customs concerning mutual aid are often much more stringent
than our own; and many uncivilised peoples are conspicuous for
their aversion to telling lies. But at the same time there is a
considerable difference between the regard for life, property,
truth, and the general wellbeing of a neighbour, which displays
itself in primitive rules of morality and that which is found
among ourselves. Savages' prohibitions of murder, theft, and
deceit, as also their injunctions of charity and kind behaviour,
have, broadly speaking, reference only to members of the same
community or tribe. They carefully distinguish between an act of
homicide committed among their own people and one where the
victim is a stranger; whilst the former is in ordinary
circumstances disapproved of, the latter is in most cases allowed
and often considered worthy of praise. And the same thing holds
true of theft and lying and other injuries. Apart from the
privileges which are granted to guests, and which are always of
very short duration, a stranger is in early society devoid of all
rights. This is the case not only among savages but among nations
of archaic culture as well. When we from the lower races pass to
peoples more advanced in civilisation we find that the social
unit has grown larger, that the nation has taken the place of the
tribe, and that the circle of persons within which the infliction
of injuries is prohibited has extended accordingly. But the old
distinction between offences against compatriots and harm done to
foreigners remains. Nay, it survives to some extent even among
ourselves, as appears from the prevailing attitude towards war
and the readiness with which wars are waged. But although the
difference between a fellow countryman and a foreigner has not
ceased to affect the moral feelings of men even in the midst of
modern civilisation, its influence has certainly been decreasing.
The doctrine has been set forth, and has been gradually gaining
ground, that our duties towards our {744} fellow men are
universal duties, not restricted by the limits of country or
race. Those who recognise the emotional origin of the rules of
duty find no difficulty in explaining all these facts. The
expansion of the commandments relating to neighbours coincides
with the expansion of the altruistic sentiment. And the cause of
this coincidence at once becomes clear when we consider that such
commandments mainly spring from the emotion of sympathetic
resentment, and that sympathetic resentment is rooted in the
altruistic sentiment.

Besides the extension of duties towards neighbours so as to
embrace wider and wider circles of men, there is another point in
which the moral ideas of mankind have undergone an important
change on the upward path from savagery and barbarism to
civilisation. They have become more enlightened. Though moral
ideas are based upon emotions, though all moral concepts are
essentially generalisations of tendencies in certain phenomena to
call forth moral approval or disapproval, the influence of
intellectual considerations upon moral judgments is naturally
very great. All higher emotions are determined by cognitions--sensations
or ideas; they therefore vary according as the cognitions vary,
and the nature of a cognition may very largely depend upon
reflection or insight. If a person tells us an untruth we are apt
to feel indignant; but if, on due reflection, we find that his
motive was benevolent, for instance a desire to save the life of
the person to whom the untruth was told, our indignation ceases,
and may even be succeeded by approval. The change of cognitions,
or ideas, has thus produced a change of emotions. Now, the
evolution of the moral consciousness partly consists in its
development from the unreflecting to the reflecting stage, from
the unenlightened to the enlightened. This appears from the
decreasing influence of external events upon moral judgments and
from the growing discrimination with reference to motives,
negligence, and other factors in conduct which are carefully
considered by a scrupulous judge. More penetrating reflection has
also reduced {745} the part played by disinterested likes and
dislikes in the formation of moral ideas. When we clearly realise
that a certain act is productive of no real harm but is condemned
simply because it causes aversion or disgust, we can hardly look
upon it as a proper object of moral censure--unless, indeed, its
commission is considered to imply a blamable disregard for other
persons' sensibilities. Deliberate resentment, whether moral or
non-moral, is too much concerned with the will of the agent to be
felt towards a person who obviously neither intends to offend
anybody nor is guilty of culpable oversight. Nay, even when the
agent knows that his behaviour is repulsive to others, he may be
considered justified in acting as he does. Some degree of
reflection easily leads to the notion that sentimental
antipathies are no sufficient ground for interfering with other
individuals' liberty of action either by punishing them or by
subjecting them to moral censure, provided of course that they do
not in an indelicate manner shock their neighbours' feelings.
Hence many persons have recourse to utilitarian pretexts to
support moral opinions or legal enactments which have originated
in mere aversions; thus making futile attempts to reconcile old
ideas with the requirements of a moral consciousness which is
duly influenced by reflection.

In innumerable cases the variations of moral estimates are due to
differences of beliefs. Almost every chapter of this work has
borne witness to the enormous influence which the belief in
supernatural forces or beings or in a future state has exercised
upon the moral ideas of mankind, and has at the same time shown
how exceedingly varied this influence has been. Religion, or
superstition (as the case may be), has on the one hand
stigmatised murder and suicide, on the other hand it has
commended human sacrifice and certain cases of voluntary
self-destruction. It has inculcated humanity and charity, but has
also led to cruel persecutions of persons embracing another
creed. It has emphasised the duty of truthspeaking, and has
itself been a cause of pious fraud. It has promoted {746} both
cleanly habits and filthiness. It has enjoined labour and
abstinence from labour, sobriety and drunkenness, marriage and
celibacy, chastity and temple prostitution. It has introduced a
great variety of new duties and virtues, quite different from
those which are recognised by the moral consciousness when left
to itself, but nevertheless in many cases considered more
important than any other duties or virtues. It seems that the
moral ideas of uncivilised men are more affected by magic than by
religion, and that the religious influence has reached its
greatest extension at certain stages of culture which, though
comparatively advanced, do not include the highest stage.
Increasing knowledge lessens the sphere of the supernatural, and
the ascription of a perfectly ethical character to the godhead
does away with moral estimates which have sprung from less
elevated religious conceptions.

I have here pointed out only the most general changes to which
the moral ideas have been subject in the course of progressive
civilisation; the details have been dealt with each in their
separate place. There can be no doubt that changes also will take
place in the future, and that similar causes will produce similar
effects. We have every reason to believe that the altruistic
sentiment will continue to expand, and that those moral
commandments which are based on it will undergo a corresponding
expansion; that the influence of reflection upon moral judgments
will steadily increase; that the influence of sentimental
antipathies and likings will diminish; and that in its relation
to morality religion will be increasingly restricted to
emphasising ordinary moral rules, and less preoccupied with
inculcating special duties to the deity.




ADDITIONAL NOTES TO VOL. II


P. 287, _n._ 6.--The connection between the Hebrew Sabbath and
the moon has been fully discussed by Professor Webster in his
recent book, _Rest Days_, ch. viii.

P. 377, _n._ 1.--In his book, _Totemism and Exogamy_, Sir J. G.
Frazer has definitely separated exogamy from totemism and
thereby, it is to be hoped, saved us from further speculations
about the totemic origin of the exogamous rules. Like myself,
Frazer thinks (iv. 105 _sqq._) that these rules have sprung from
an aversion to the marriages of near kin. But whilst my own
belief is that the aversion to such marriages through an
association of ideas led to the prohibitions of marriage between
members of the same clan on account of the notion of intimacy
connected with a common descent and a common name, Frazer is of
opinion that exogamy was deliberately instituted for the purpose
of preventing the sexual unions of near kin. To me it seems
almost inconceivable that the extensive, cumbersome, and
sometimes very complicated institution of exogamy should have
been invented simply as a precaution against unions between the
nearest relatives.

Granting the prevalence of an aversion to the marriages of near
kin, Frazer is confronted with the question how it has
originated. His answer is, "We do not know and it is difficult
even to guess." Yet he makes a cautious attempt to solve the
riddle. He observes (iv. 156 _sqq._) that the great severity with
which incest is generally punished by savages seems to show that
they believe it to be a crime which endangers the whole
community. It may have been thought to render the women of the
tribe sterile and to prevent animals and plants from multiplying;
such beliefs, Frazer remarks, appear in point of fact to have
been held by many races in different parts of the world. But he
admits himself that all the peoples who are known to hold them
seem to be agricultural, and that incest is in particular
supposed to have a sterilising effect on the crops. It is indeed
a poor argument to conjecture that a careful search among the
most primitive exogamous peoples now surviving, especially among
the Australian aborigines, might still reveal the existence of a
belief in the sterilising or injurious effects of incest "upon
women generally and particularly upon edible animals and plants."
It may also be asked if it really is reasonable to presume that
an aversion which had originated in the superstition mentioned
could have remained unimpaired among all the civilised nations of
the world. Moreover, if this superstition were the root of the
aversion to incest, we should still have to explain the origin of
the superstition itself, and this Frazer has not even attempted
to do. If, on the other hand, the abhorrence of incest has
originated in the way I have suggested, the superstition which he
is inclined to regard as the cause of that feeling is a very
natural result of it or of the prohibition to which it gave rise.
That this is the case is all the more probable because the same
injurious effects as are attributed to incest are supposed to
result from other sexual irregularities as well, such as adultery
and fornication (_cf._ _supra_, ii. 417).

Sir J. G. Frazer also subjects my theory to a detailed criticism
(iv. 96 _sqq._). He admits that there seems to be some ground for
believing in the existence of "a natural aversion to, or at least
a want of inclination for, sexual intercourse between persons who
have been brought up closely together {748} from early youth";
but he finds it difficult to understand how this could have been
changed into an aversion to sexual intercourse with persons near
of kin, and maintains that, till I explain this satisfactorily,
the chain of reasoning by which I support my theory breaks down
entirely at the crucial point. For my own part I think that the
transition which Frazer finds so difficult to understand is not
only possible and natural, but well-nigh proved by an exactly
analogous case of equally world-wide occurrence and of still
greater social importance, namely, the process which has led to
the association of all kinds of social rights and duties with
kinship. As I have pointed out above (ch. xxxiv.), the maternal
and paternal sentiments, which largely are at the bottom of
parental duties and rights, cannot in their simplest forms be
based on a knowledge of blood relationship, but respond to
stimuli derived from other circumstances, notably the proximity
of the helpless young, that is, the external relationship in
which the offspring from the beginning stand to the parents. Nor
is the so-called filial love in the first instance rooted in
considerations of kinship; it is essentially retributive, the
agreeable feeling produced by benefits received making the
individual look with pleasure and kindliness upon the giver. Here
again the affection is ultimately due to close living together,
and is further strengthened by it, as appears from the cooling
effect of long separation of children from their parents. So also
fraternal love and the duties and rights which have sprung from
it depend in the first place on other circumstances than the idea
of a common blood; and the same may be said of the tie which
binds together relatives more remotely allied. Its social force
is ultimately derived from near relatives' habit of living
together. "Men became gregarious by remaining in the circle where
they were born; if, instead of keeping together with their
kindred, they had preferred to isolate themselves or to unite
with strangers, there would certainly be no blood-bond at all.
The mutual attachment and the social rights and duties which
resulted from this gregarious condition were associated with the
relation in which members of the group stood to one another--the
relation of kinship as expressed by a common name--and these
associations might last even after the local tie was broken,"
being kept up by the common name (_supra_, ii. 203).

Here we have an immense group of facts which, though ultimately
depending upon close living together, have been interpreted in
terms of kinship. Why, then, could not the same have been the
case with the aversion to incest and the prohibitory rules
resulting from it? They really present a most striking analogy to
the instances just mentioned. They have been associated with
kinship because near relatives normally live together. They have
come to include relatives more remotely allied who do not live
together, owing to an association of ideas, especially through
the influence of a common name; clan exogamy has its counterpart,
for instance, in the blood feud as a duty incumbent on the whole
clan. But there are also cases in which marriages between
unrelated persons who have been brought up together in the same
family, or who belong to the same local group, are held blamable
or are actually prohibited; and so there are, even in early
society, social rights and duties which are associated not with a
common descent but with close living together. Frazer asks: "If
the root of the whole matter is a horror of marriage between
persons who have always lived with each other, how comes it that
at the present day that horror has been weakened into a mere
general preference for marriage with persons whose attractions
have not been blunted by long familiarity? . . . Why should the
marriage of a brother with a sister, or of a mother with a son,
excite the deepest detestation, . . . while the origin of it all,
the marriage between housemates, should excite at most a mild
surprise too slight probably to suggest even a subject for a
farce, and should be as legitimate in the eye of the law among
all civilised nations as any other marriage?" For my own part, I
believe that marriage between a man and his foster-daughter or
between a foster-brother {749} and a foster-sister, in case the
social relations between them have been exactly similar to those
of blood-relatives of corresponding degrees, would cause more
than a mild surprise, and appear unnatural and objectionable. As
I have said above (ii. 375), I do not deny that unions between
the nearest blood-relatives inspire a horror of their own, but it
seems quite natural that they should do so considering that from
earliest times the aversion to sexual intercourse between persons
living closely together has been expressed in prohibitions
against unions between kindred. Nor can it be a matter of
surprise that the prohibitory rules so commonly refer to
marriages of kindred alone. Law only takes into account general
and well-defined cases, and hence relationships of some kind or
other between persons who are nearly always kindred are defined
in terms of blood-relationship. This is true not only of the
prohibitions of incest, but of many duties and rights inside the
family circle.

Sir J. G. Frazer raises another objection to my theory. He argues
that, if exogamy resulted from a natural instinct, there would be
no need to reinforce that instinct by legal pains and penalties;
the law only forbids men to do what their instincts incline them
to do, and hence we may always safely assume that crimes
forbidden by law are crimes which many men have a natural
propensity to commit. I must confess that this argument greatly
surprises me. Of course, where there is no transgression there is
no law. But Frazer cannot be ignorant of the variability of
instincts and of the great variability of the sexual instinct;
nor should he forget that there are circumstances in which a
natural sentiment may be blunted and overcome. Would he maintain
that there can be no deep natural aversion to bestiality because
bestiality is forbidden by law, and that the exceptional severity
with which parricide is treated by many law books proves that a
large number of men have a natural propensity to kill their
parents? The law expresses the feelings of the majority and
punishes acts that shock them.

Sir J. G. Frazer accuses me of having extended Darwin's methods
to subjects which only partially admit of such treatment, because
my theory of the origin of exogamy attempts to explain the growth
of a human institution "too exclusively from physical and
biological causes without taking into account the factors of
intelligence, deliberation, and will." This, he adds, is "not
science, but a bastard imitation of it." What have I done to
incur so severe an accusation? I have suggested that the
instinctive aversion to sexual intercourse between persons who
have been living very closely together from early youth may be
the result of natural selection. I am inclined to think--and so
is Frazer--that consanguineous marriages are in some way or other
detrimental to the species. This fact would lead to the
development of a sentiment which would be powerful enough, as a
rule, to prevent injurious unions--a sentiment which would not,
of course, show itself as an innate aversion to sexual
connections with near relatives as such, but as an aversion on
the part of individuals to union with others with whom they lived
closely together from early childhood. These, as a matter of
fact, would be blood-relations, and the result would consequently
be the survival of the fittest. All that I have done, then, is to
appeal to natural selection to explain the origin of a primeval
instinctive sentiment; and I can never believe that this is to
transgress the legitimate boundaries of Darwinism.

Sir J. G. Frazer himself thinks that "we may safely conclude that
infertility is an inevitable consequence of inbreeding continued
through many generations in the same place and under the same
conditions," and in support of this view he quotes the valuable
opinions of Mr. Walter Heape and Mr. F. H. A. Marshall. He thus
finds that the principles of exogamy present "a curious
resemblance" to the principles of scientific breeding, but he
rightly assumes that this analogy cannot be due to any exact
knowledge or farseeing care on the part of its savage founders.
How then shall we explain this analogy? Frazer's answer is that
"it must be an accidental {750} result of a superstition, an
unconscious mimicry of science." In prohibiting incest the poor
savages "blindly obeyed the impulse of the great evolutionary
forces which in the physical world are constantly educing higher
out of lower forms of existence and in the moral world
civilisation out of savagery. If that is so, exogamy has been an
instrument in the hands of that unknown power, the masked wizard
of history, who by some mysterious process, some subtle alchemy,
so often transmutes in the crucible of suffering the dross of
folly and evil into the fine gold of wisdom and good." I hope it
will not be considered uncalled-for impertinence on my part to
ask if this reasoning is a specimen of what Frazer regards as
science proper in contradistinction to my own "bastard imitation
of it"?

In any attempt to explain the origin of exogamy there are, in my
opinion, three parallel groups of facts of general occurrence
which necessarily must be taken into consideration:--Firstly, the
prohibitions of incest and rules of exogamy themselves; secondly,
the aversion to sexual intercourse between persons living
together from early youth; thirdly, the injurious consequences of
inbreeding. As for the facts of the first group, Frazer and I
agree that they all have the same root, exogamy being in some way
or other derived from an aversion to the marriages of near kin.
As for the facts of the second group, Frazer at all events admits
that "there seems to be some ground" for believing in them. As
for the facts of the third group, there is complete agreement
between us. I ask: Is it reasonable to think that there is no
causal connection between these three groups of facts? Is it
right to ignore the second group altogether, as does Frazer, and
to look upon the coincidence of the first and the third as
accidental? I gratefully acknowledge that Frazer's chapter on the
Origin of Exogamy has only strengthened my belief in my own theory.

Other objections to my theory have recently been made by Messrs.
Hose and McDougall in their work on _The Pagan Tribes of Borneo_,
vol. ii., p. 197, note. They observe that intercourse between a
youth and his sister-by-adoption is not regarded as incest in
these tribes, and that they know at least one instance of
marriage between two young Kenyahs brought up together as adopted
brother and sister. "This occurrence of incest between couples
brought up in the same household," they say, "is, of course,
difficult to reconcile with Professor Westermarck's well-known
theory of the ground of the almost universal feeling against
incest, namely, that it depends upon sexual aversion or
indifference engendered by close proximity during childhood."
They moreover maintain that "the occurrence of incest between
brothers and sisters, and the strong feeling of the Sea Dyaks
against incest between nephew and aunt (who often are members of
distinct communities)," are facts which are fatal to this theory.

In my attempt to explain the rules against incest I certainly did
not overlook the fact that these rules very frequently have
reference to persons who are, or may be, members of different
communities, and I found no difficulty in accounting for it (see
_supra_, ii. 369; _History of Human Marriage_, p. 330 _sq._).
Curiously enough Messrs. Hose and McDougall's own attempt to
solve the problem is, if I understand them rightly, based on the
supposition that the prohibitions of intermarriage originally
referred to persons who belonged to the same community. They
write:--"If we accept some such view of the constitution of
primitive society as has been suggested by Messrs. Atkinson and
Lang (_Primal Law_), namely, that the social group consisted of a
single patriarch and a group of wives and daughters, over all of
whom he exercised unrestricted power or rights; we shall see that
the first step towards the constitution of a higher form of
society must have been the strict limitation of his rights over
certain of the women, in order that younger males might be
incorporated in the society and enjoy the undisputed possession
of them. The patriarch, having accepted this limitation of his
rights over his daughters for the sake of the greater security
and strength of the band given by the inclusion of a {751}
certain number of young males, would enforce all the more
strictly upon them his prohibition against any tampering with the
females of the senior generation. Thus very strict prohibitions
and severe penalties against the consorting of the patriarch with
the younger generation of females, _i.e._ his daughters, and
against intercourse between the young males admitted to
membership of the group and the wives of the patriarch, would be
the essential conditions of advance of social organisation. The
enforcement of these penalties would engender a traditional
sentiment against such unions, and these would be the unions
primitively regarded as incestuous. The persistency of the
tendency of the patriarch's jealousy to drive his sons out of the
family group as they attained puberty would render the extension
of this sentiment to brother-and-sister unions easy and almost
inevitable. For the young male admitted to the group would be one
who came with a price in his hand to offer in return for the
bride he sought. Such a price could only be exacted by the
patriarch on the condition that he maintained an absolute
prohibition on sexual relations between his offspring so long as
the young sons remained under his roof." I should like to know
how Messrs. Hose and McDougall, on the basis of this theory,
would explain "the strong feeling of the Sea Dyaks against incest
between nephew and aunt (who often are members of distinct
communities)," and, generally speaking, the rules prohibiting the
intermarriage of persons belonging to different local groups. For
the rest, I must confess that the assumptions on which their
whole theory rests seem to me extremely arbitrary. Brothers are
prohibited from marrying their sisters because the old patriarch
drove away his grown-up sons out of jealousy; but his jealousy
was not strong enough to prevent other young males from joining
the band. On the contrary, he allowed them to be incorporated in
it, because they added to its strength; nay, he gave them his own
daughters in marriage, and refrained henceforth himself from
intercourse with these young women so rigorously that ever since
a father has been prohibited from marrying his daughter. But the
young men had to pay a price for their wives. It may be asked:
Why did not the old patriarch accept a price from his own sons or
let them work for him, instead of mercilessly turning them out of
their old home, although they would have been just as good
protectors of it as anybody else? And why did he give the young
men his _daughters_? He might have kept the young women for
himself and let the young men have the old ones. This is what is
done by the old men in Australia, where the young girls are, as a
rule, allotted to old men, and the boys, whenever they are
allowed to marry, get old _lubras_ as wives (Malinowski, _The
Family among the Australian Aborigines_, p. 259 _sqq._). Yet, in
spite of this custom, there is no country where incest has been
more strictly prohibited than in Australia.

Messrs. Hose and McDougall maintain that the occurrence of incest
between brothers and sisters and the feeling of the Sea Dyaks
against incest between nephew and aunt are facts which seem "to
point strongly to the view that the sentiment has a purely
conventional or customary source." I ask: Is it reasonable to
suppose that, if this were the case, the feeling against sexual
intercourse between the nearest relatives could have so long
survived the conditions from which it sprang without showing any
signs of decay? As I have pointed out above, the prohibited
degrees are very differently defined in the customs or laws of
different peoples, generally being more numerous among peoples
unaffected by modern civilisation than they are in more advanced
communities; and it appears that the extent to which relatives
are prohibited from intermarrying is closely connected with the
intimacy of their social relations. Whilst among ourselves
cousins are allowed to intermarry, there is still a strong
sentiment against intercourse between parents and children and
between brothers and sisters, who in normal cases belong to the
same family circle. Why should the feeling against incest have
survived in this case but not in others, if it had a purely
conventional origin? And how could any law {752} based on
convention alone account for the normal absence of erotic
feelings in the relation between parents and children and
brothers and sisters? It is true that cases of intercourse
between the nearest relatives do occur, but they are certainly
quite exceptional. Messrs. Hose and McDougall say themselves (p.
198) that "incest of any form is very infrequent" among the
tribes of Borneo, and they seem to know of only one instance of
marriage between young Kenyahs brought up together as adopted
brother and sister, although such marriages are allowed. To
maintain that cases of this kind are fatal to my theory seems to
me as illogical as it would be to assume that the occurrence of a
_horror feminæ_ in many men disproves the general prevalence of a
feeling of love between the sexes.

P. 396, _n._ 1.--In his recent work, _The Family among the
Australian Aborigines_, Dr. Malinowski has come to the same
conclusion. He observes that the individual family plays a
foremost part in the social life of those aborigines; it has a
very firm basis in their customs and ideas, and "by no means
bears the features of anything like recent innovation, or a
subordinate form subservient to the idea of group marriage." The
Australian husband had generally a definite sexual "over-right"
over his wife, which secured to him the privilege of disposing of
her, or at least of exercising a certain control over her conduct
in sexual matters, even though this "over-right" did not, as a
rule, amount to an exclusive right. There were customs like
wife-lending, exchange of wives, ceremonial defloration of girls
by old men, the different forms of licence practised at large
tribal gatherings, and especially the _Pirrauru_ relationship
found in several of the southern central tribes. But all this
does not constitute group _marriage_, the complete content of
which does not consist in sexual relations alone. Dr. Malinowski
emphasises the fact that marriage cannot be detached from family
life; "it is defined in all its aspects by the problems of the
economic unity of the family, of the bonds created by common life
in one wurley, through the common rearing of, and affection
towards, the offspring." In nearly all these respects even the
_Pirrauru_ relationship essentially differs from marriage, and
cannot, therefore, seriously encroach upon the individual family.
Nor can we regard this relationship as a survival of previous
group marriage. Dr. Malinowski also points out (p. 89 _sq._) how
highly objectionable it is that "our best informants (especially
Howitt and Spencer and Gillen) describe the facts of sexual life
of to-day in terms of their hypothetical assumptions."

P. 419, _n._ 5.--For Moorish beliefs relating to contact between
sexual uncleanness and holiness see my essays, _The Moorish
Conception of Holiness (Baraka)_, p. 123 _sqq._, and _Ceremonies
and Beliefs connected with Agriculture, certain Dates of the
Solar Year, and the Weather in Morocco_, pp. 17, 22, 23, 28, 46,
47, 54.

P. 463, _n._ 8.--During the years that have passed since the
first edition of this book was issued, the study of homosexuality
has been carried on with remarkable activity. The following books
are exclusively devoted to this subject:--_Das gleichgeschlechtliche
Leben der Naturvölker_, by F. Karsch-Haack (1911), _Intermediate
Types among Primitive Folk_, by Edward Carpenter (1914), and _Die
Homosexualität des Mannes und des Weibes_, by Magnus Hirschfeld
(1914). Carpenter's book chiefly deals with the invert in early
religion and in warfare. Hirschfeld's work is a veritable
encyclopædia of homosexuality--according to Dr. Havelock Ellis,
"not only the largest but the most precise, detailed, and
comprehensive--even the most condensed--work which has yet
appeared on the subject." In 1915 Dr. Havelock Ellis issued a
third, revised and enlarged, edition of his _Sexual Inversion_.

P. 485, _n._ 1.--This passage and, generally, the suggestion that
there is a certain relationship between the social reaction
against homosexuality {753} and against infanticide, have been
excluded from the last edition of Dr. Havelock Ellis's book.

P. 584, _n._ 1.--There is hardly any subject which during the
last four or five years has been more eagerly discussed by
students of social anthropology than the relation between
religion and magic. It has been dealt with, _e.g._, by Sir J. G.
Frazer in _The Magic Art_, by Professor Durkheim in _Les formes
élémentaires de la vie religieuse_, by Dr. Marett in _The
Threshold of Religion_ and other writings, by Dr. Irving King in
_The Development of Religion_, by Professor Leuba in _A
Psychological Study of Religion_, by Mr. Sidney Hartland in
_Ritual and Belief_, and by the present Archbishop of Sweden,
Nathan Söderblom, in his book _Gudstrons uppkomst_. According to
the French school of sociologists, religion is social in its aims
and magic antisocial; and this distinction has lately been
accepted by Dr. Marett, who writes (_Anthropology_, p. 209
_sq._): "Magic I take to include all bad ways, and religion all
good ways, of dealing with the supernormal--bad and good, of
course, not as we may happen to judge them, but as the society
concerned judges them." But this use of the terms is neither in
agreement with traditional usage nor, in my opinion, suitable for
the purpose of scientific classification. Besides black magic, or
witchcraft, there is also white magic; even a medieval theologian
like Albertus Magnus asserts that "magical science is not evil,
since through knowledge of it evil can be avoided and good
attained." The French distinction between magic and religion
implies that a prayer to a god for the destruction of an enemy
must be classified as religion if it is offered in a cause which
is considered just by the community, but as magic if it is
disapproved of. If a man makes a girl drink a love-potion in
order to gain her favour, it is religion if their union is
desirable from the society's point of view, but if he gives the
same drink to another man's wife it is magic. The best part of
what has been hitherto called imitative or hom[oe]opathic magic
no longer remains magic at all; if water is poured out for the
purpose of producing rain it is hom[oe]opathic magic only in case
rain is not wanted by the community, but if it is done during a
drought it is religion. Thus the very same practices are
qualified as religious or magical according as they have social
or antisocial ends; and, as Mr. Hartland rightly asks (_Ritual
and Belief_, p. 76): "How shall we define these ends?"

It should be added, however, that the definition of religion
which I have given in the text has reference only to religion in
the abstract, not to the various religions. In the popular sense
of the word, a religion may include many practices which are what
I have called magical. As I have said above (p. 649), "both
Christianity in its earlier phases and Muhammedanism are full of
magical practices expressly sanctioned by their theology."
Although the magical and the strictly religious attitude differ
from each other, they are not irreconcilable, and may therefore
very well form parts of one and the same religion; there is no
such thing as a magic being opposed to a religion. By a religion
is generally understood a system of beliefs and rules of
behaviour which have reference to men's relations to one or
several supernatural beings whom they call their god or gods,
that is, supernatural beings who are the objects of a regular
cult and between whom and their worshippers there are established
and permanent relationships. If it be admitted that the word
religion may be thus legitimately used in two different senses, I
think there is little ground left for further controversy on the
subject. After all, sociologists may more profitably occupy their
time than by continuous quarrelling about the meaning of terms.

P. 608, _n._ 4.--In _The Dying God_, p. 204, _n._ 1, Sir J. G.
Frazer writes: "There is a good deal to be said in favour of Dr.
Westermarck's theory, which is supported in particular by the
sanctity attributed to the regalia. But on the whole I see no
sufficient reason to abandon the view adopted {754} in the text,
and I am confirmed in it by the Shilluk evidence, which was
unknown to Dr. Westermarck when he propounded his theory."

According to Professor C. G. Seligman to whom Frazer is indebted
for detailed information on the subject (_op. cit._ p. 17 _sqq._)
it is a fundamental article of the Shilluk creed that the spirit
of Nyakang, the divine or semi-divine hero who settled the
Shilluk in their present territory and founded the dynasty of
their kings, is incarnate in the reigning king, who is
accordingly himself invested to some extent with the character of
a divinity. But while the Shilluk hold their kings in high,
indeed religious, reverence and take every precaution against
their accidental death, nevertheless they cherish the conviction
that the king must not be allowed to become ill or senile, lest
with his diminishing vigour the cattle should sicken and fail to
bear their increase, the crops should rot in the fields, and man,
stricken with disease, should die in ever-increasing numbers. To
prevent these calamities it used to be the regular custom with
the Shilluk to put the king to death whenever he showed signs of
ill-health or failing strength. Nay, from Dr. Seligman's
enquiries it appears that even while the king was yet in the
prime of health and strength he might at any time be attacked by
a rival and have to defend his crown in a combat to the death.
According to the common Shilluk tradition any son of a king had
the right thus to fight the king in possession and, if he
succeeded in killing him, to reign in his stead. Now "an
important part of the solemnities attending the accession of a
Shilluk king appears to be intended to convey to the new monarch
the divine spirit of Nyakang, which has been transmitted from the
founder of the dynasty to all his successors on the throne. For
this purpose a sacred four-legged stool and a mysterious object
which bears the name of Nyakang himself are brought with much
solemnity from the shrine of Nyakang at Akurwa to the small
village of Kwom near Fashoda, where the king elect and the chiefs
await their arrival. The thing called Nyakang is said to be of
cylindrical shape, some two or three feet long by six inches
broad. The chief of Akurwa informed Dr. Seligman that the object
in question is a rude wooden figure of a man, which was fashioned
long ago at the command of Nyakang in person. We may suppose that
it represents the divine king himself and that it is, or was
formerly, supposed to house his spirit, though the chief of
Akurwa denied to Dr. Seligman that it does so now. . . . The
image of Nyakang is placed on the stool; the king elect holds one
leg of the stool and an important chief holds another. . . . A
bullock is killed and its flesh eaten by the men of certain
families called _ororo_, who are said to be descended from the
third of the Shilluk kings. Then the Akurwa men carry the image
of Nyakang into the shrine, and the _ororo_ men place the king
elect on the sacred stool, where he remains seated for some time,
apparently till sunset. When he rises, the Akurwa men carry the
stool back into the shrine, and the king is escorted to three new
huts, where he stays in seclusion for three days. On the fourth
night he is conducted quietly, almost stealthily, to his royal
residence at Fashoda, and next day he shows himself publicly to
his subjects."

As regards this so-called evidence it should, first, be noticed
that it is only Dr. Seligman's own conjecture that the mysterious
object called Nyakang is or has been supposed to contain the
spirit of the holy founder of the dynasty, and that this
conjecture is expressly said to be opposed to the present beliefs
of the natives. On the other hand it is obvious that the object
in question is regarded as a holy object, and that its holiness,
or a particle of it, is supposed to be transmitted to the new
king through material contact--an idea which well agrees with my
own theory. But even if the Shilluk had once believed that their
king was a reincarnation of the spirit of Nyakang, that belief
could hardly be regarded as a direct proof of the idea that the
soul of the slain man-god is transmitted to his royal successor.
The Shilluk believe that Nyakang, unlike his royal descendants of
more recent times, did not die but simply disappeared.




AUTHORITIES QUOTED[1]


[Footnote 1: Of articles in periodicals only some of the more
important have been included in this list.]

_A Voice for South America_. London.

Aas (Einar), _Sjaeleliv og intelligens hos dyr_. Kristiania, 1893.

Abbot (Ezra), 'Literature of the Doctrine of a Future Life'; in
Alger, _A Critical History of the Doctrine of a Future Life_.
Philadelphia, 1864.

[(]Abd-Allatif, _Relation de l'Égypte_. Trans. by S. de Sacy.
Paris, 1810.

[(]Abd-es-Salâm Shabeeny, _An Account of Timbuctoo and Housa_.
Ed. by J. G. Jackson. London, 1820.

Abegg (J. F. H.), _Die verschiedenen Strafrechtstheorieen_.
Neustadt a.d.O., 1835.

Abel (Charles W.), _Savage Life in New Guinea_. London, [1901].

Abercromby (John), _The Pre- and Proto-Historic Finns_. 2 vols.
London, 1898.

Abreu de Galindo (Juan de), _The History of the Discovery and
Conquest of the Canary Islands_. Trans. London, 1764.

_Academy (The)_. London.

Achelis (Th.), 'Animal Worship'; in _The Open Court_, vol. xi.
Chicago, 1897.

---- _Moderne Völkerkunde_. Stuttgart, 1896.

Achery (L. d'), _Spicilegium sive collectio veterum aliquot
scriptorum qui in Galliæ bibliothecis delituerant_. 3 vols.
Parisiis, 1723.

Acosta (Joseph de), _The Natural and Moral History of the
Indies_. Trans. ed. by C. R. Markham. 2 vols. London, 1880.

_Acta Societatis Scientiarum Fennicæ_. Helsingfors.

Adair (James), _The History of the American Indians_. London,
1775.

Adalbero, 'Carmen ad Rotbertum regem Francorum'; in Bouquet,
_Recueil des historiens des Gaules et de la France_, vol. x.
Paris, 1760.

Adam of Bremen, 'Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiæ pontificum'; in
Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus completus_, vol. cxlvi. Parisiis, 1853.

Adams (John), _Sketches taken during Ten Voyages to Africa,
Between the Years 1786 and 1800_. London, [1825].

Addis (W. E.) and Arnold (Thomas), _A Catholic Dictionary_.
London, 1903.

Addosio (Carlo d'), _Bestie delinquenti_. Napoli, 1892.

Aelian, _De natura animalium, Varia historia, &c._ Ed. by R.
Hercher. Parisiis, 1858.

Aeschines, 'Orationes'; in _Oratores Attici_, ed. by C. Müller,
vol. ii. Parisiis, 1858.

Aeschylus, _Trag[oe]diæ et fragmenta_. Ed. by E. A. J. Ahrens.
Parisiis, 1842.

Aethelbirht (_King_), 'The Laws of'; in _Ancient Laws and
Institutes of England_. London, 1840.

{756} Aethelstan (_King_), 'The Laws of'; in _Ancient Laws and
Institutes of England_. London, 1840.

Afzelius (A. A.), _Swenska Folkets Sago-Häfder_. 11 vols.
Stockholm, 1839-70.

Agathias, 'Historiarum libri quinque'; in Migne, _Patrologiæ
cursus_, Ser. Graeca, vol. lxxxviii. Parisiis, 1860.

Ahlqvist (A.), 'Unter Wogulen und Ostjaken'; in _Acta Societatis
Scientiarum Fennicæ_, vol. xiv. Helsingfors, 1885.

Ahrens (Heinrich), _Naturrecht_. 2 vols. Wien, 1870-71.

_Aitareya Brahmanam of the Rigveda (The)_. Ed. and trans. by M.
Haug. 2 vols. Bombay, 1863.

Alabaster (Chal.), 'The Law of Inheritance'; in _The China
Review_, vol. v. Hongkong, 1876-77.

Alabaster (Ernest), _Notes and Commentaries on Chinese Criminal
Law_. London, 1899.

Alabaster (Henry), _The Wheel of the Law_. London, 1871.

Alagona (Petrus), _Compendium manualis D. Navarri_. Lugduni, 1603.

Alard (Paul), _Condition et droits des enfants naturels_. Paris, 1896.

Albericus, _Visio_. Ed. by Catello de Vivo. Ariano, 1899.

Alberti (L.), _De Kaffers aan de Zuidkust van Afrika_. Amsterdam, 1810.

Alden (T. J. Fox) and Hoesen (J. A. van), _A Digest of the Laws
of Mississippi_. New York, 1839.

Alexander (S.), _Moral Order and Progress_. London, 1896.

Alfonso de' Liguori, _Theologia moralis_. 3 vols. Bassani, 1822.

Alfred (_King_), 'The Laws of'; in _Ancient Laws and Institutes
of England_. London, 1840.

Alger (W. R.), _A Critical History of the Doctrine of a Future
Life_. Philadelphia, 1864.

_Alienist and Neurologist (The)_. St. Louis.

Allard (Paul), _Les esclaves chrétiens depuis les premiers temps
de l'Église jusqu'à la fin de la domination romaine en Occident_.
Paris, 1876.

Allardt (Anders), _Nyländska folkseder och bruk_. (_Nyland_, vol.
iv.) Helsingfors, 1889.

Allen (Grant), _The Evolution of the Idea of God_. London, 1897.

Allen (John), _Modern Judaism._ London, 1830.

Allen (W.) and Thomson (T. R. H.), _A Narrative of the Expedition
sent by Her Majesty's Government to the River Niger, in 1841_. 2
vols. London, 1848.

_Am Ur-Quell. Monatsschrift für Volkskunde_. Ed. by F. S. Krauss.
Lunden.

Amadori-Virgilj (Giovanni), _L'Istituto famigliare nelle Società
primordiali_. Bari, 1903.

Ambrose (_Saint_), _Opera omnia_. (Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_,
vols. xiv.-xvii.) Parisiis, 1845.

Ameer Ali (Syed), _The Ethics of Islâm_. Calcutta, 1893.

---- _The Life and Teachings of Mohammed or the Spirit of Islâm_.
London, 1891.

Amélineau (E.), _Essai sur l'évolution historique et
philosophique des idées morales dans l'Égypte ancienne_. Paris,
1895.

_American Anthropologist (The)_. Washington.

_American Antiquarian and Oriental Journal (The)_. Chicago.

_American Journal of Psychology (The)_. Worcester.

_American Journal of Theology (The)_. Chicago.

_American Naturalist (The)_. Philadelphia.

{757} Amira (Karl von), _Nordgermanisches Obligationenrecht_. 2
vols. Leipzig, 1882-95.

---- 'Recht'; in Paul, _Grundriss der germanischen Philologie_,
vol. ii. Strassburg, 1893.

---- _Thierstrafen und Thierprocesse_. Innsbruck, 1891.

Ammianus Marcellinus. See Marcellinus (A.).

Amos (Andrew), _Ruins of Time exemplified in Sir Matthew Hale's
History of the Pleas of the Crown_. London, 1856.

'Ancien Coutumier de Bourgogne,' ed. by A.-J. Marnier; in _Revue
historique de droit français et étranger_, vol. iii. Paris, 1857.

_Ancient Laws and Institutes of England_. London, 1840.

_Ancient Laws and Institutes of Ireland_. 4 vols. Dublin &
London, 1865-79.

_Ancient Laws and Institutes of Wales_. London, 1841.

_Ancient Sea-Laws of Oleron, Wisby, and the Hanse-Towns (The)_.
Trans. London, 1686.

Ancona (A. d'), _Origini del teatro italiano_. 2 vols. Torino,
1891.

Anderson (John), _Mandalay to Momien_. London, 1876.

Anderson (John W.), _Notes of Travel in Fiji and New Caledonia_.
London, 1880.

Andersson (C. J.), _Lake Ngami_. London, 1856.

---- _Notes on Travel in South Africa_. London, 1875.

André (Tony), _L'esclavage chez les anciens Hébreux_. Paris, 1892.

Andree (Richard), _Die Anthropophagie_. Leipzig, 1887.

---- 'Ethnographische Bemerkungen zu einigen Rechtsgebräuchen. I.
Jagdrecht. II. Die Asyle'; in _Globus_, vol. xxxviii.
Braunschweig, 1880.

---- _Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche_. 2 vols.
Stuttgart, 1878-89.

---- _Zur Volkskunde der Juden_. Bielefeld & Leipzig, 1881.

Andrews (William), _Old-Time Punishments_. Hull & London, 1890.

Angas (G. F.), _Polynesia_. London, [1866].

---- _Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand_.
London, 1850.

_Annales du Musée Guimet_. Paris.

_Année sociologique (L')_. Ed. by É. Durkheim. Paris.

_Annual Reports of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian
Institution_, Washington.

_Annual Reports of the Bureau of Ethnology_. Washington.

Anrich (G.), _Das antike Mysterienwesen in seinem Einfluss auf
das Christentum_. Göttingen, 1894.

_Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine_. Antananarivo.

_Ante-Nicene Christian Library_. Ed. by A. Roberts and J.
Donaldson. 24 vols. Edinburgh, 1867-72.

_Anthropological Essays presented to E. B. Tylor_. Oxford, 1907.

_Anthropologie (L')_. Paris.

_Antiquary (The)_. London.

'Anugitâ (The),' trans. by K. T. Telang; in _The Sacred Books of
the East_, vol. viii. Oxford, 1898.

'Âpastamba,' trans. by G. Bühler; in _The Sacred Books of the
East_, vol. ii. Oxford, 1897.

_Apocryphal Books (The)_. Trans. London, 1880.

Apollodorus Atheniensis, _Bibliotheca_. Lipsiae, 1854.

Apollonius Rhodius, _Argonautica_. Ed. by F. S. Lehrs. Parisiis,
1840.

{758} Apuleius (L.), _Opera omnia_. 7 vols. Londini, 1825.

Arbois de Jubainville (H. d'), 'Des attributions judiciaires de
l'autorité publique chez les Celtes'; in _Revue Celtique_, vol.
vii. Paris, 1886.

---- _La civilisation des Celtes et celle de l'épopée Homérique_.
Paris, 1899.

Arbousset (T.) and Daumas (F.), _Narrative of an Exploratory Tour
to the North-East of the Colony of the Cape of Good Hope_. Trans.
London, 1852.

Archilochus, _Reliquiæ_. Ed. by I. Liebel. Lipsiae, 1818.

_Archiv für Anthropologie_. Braunschweig.

---- _für Religionswissenschaft_. Leipzig.

---- _für wissenschaftliche Kunde von Russland_. Ed. by A. Erman.
Berlin.

_Archives d'anthropologie criminelle_. Paris.

_Archives de Neurologie_. Paris.

_Archivio per l'antropologia e la etnologia_. Firenze.

_Archivio per lo studio delle tradizioni popolari_. Palermo.

_Arda Viraf_. Ed. and trans. by M. Haug and E. W. West. Bombay &
London, 1872.

Argentré (Bertrand d'), _L'histoire de Bretaigne_. Paris, 1618.

Aristophanes, _Com[oe]diæ_. Parisiis, 1838.

Aristotle, _De republica Atheniensium_. Ed. by J. E. Sandys.
London, 1893.

---- The same work. Trans. by E. Poste. London, 1891.

---- _Opera omnia_. 5 vols. Parisiis, 1848-74.

---- _Politica et [OE]conomica_. 2 vols. Oxonii, 1810.

---- _The Politics_. Trans. by B. Jowett. 2 vols. Oxford, 1885.

Armstrong (Alex.), _A Personal Narrative of the Discovery of the
North-West Passage_. London, 1857.

Arnesen (John), _Historisk Indledning til den gamle og nye
Islandske Rættergang_. Kiöbenhavn, 1762.

Arnobius, 'Disputationum adversus gentes libri septem'; in Migne,
_Patrologiæ cursus_, vol. v. Parisiis, 1844.

Arnold (Thomas), _Fragment on the Church_. London, 1845.

Arnold (Wilhelm), _Deutsche Urzeit_. Gotha, 1879.

Arnot (Fred.), _Garenganze; or, Seven Years' Pioneer Mission Work
in Central Africa_. London, [1889].

Arrian, _Anabasis et Indica_. Ed. by Fr. Dübner. Parisiis, 1846.

Arvieux (_Chevalier_ d'), _Travels in Arabia the Desart_. Trans.
London, 1718.

Ashe (R. P.), _Two Kings of Uganda_. London, 1889.

_Asiatic(k) Researches_. Calcutta.

_Atharva-Veda, Hymns of the_. Trans. by M. Bloomfield. (_The
Sacred Books of the East_, vol. xlii.). Oxford, 1897.

Athenaeus, _Dipnosophistarum libri quindecim_. Ed. by G. Kaibel.
3 vols. Lipsiae, 1887-90.

Athenagoras, 'Legatio pro Christianis'; in Migne, _Patrologiæ
cursus_, Ser. Graeca, vol. vi. Parisiis, 1857.

Atkinson (E. T.), 'Notes on the History of Religion in the
Himálaya of the N.W. Provinces'; in _Journal of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal_, vol. liii. pt. i. Calcutta, 1884.

Atkinson (J. C.), _Forty Years in a Moorland Parish_. London, 1891.

Atkinson (J. J.), 'The Natives of New Caledonia'; in _Folk-Lore_,
vol. xiv. London, 1903.

---- _Primal Law_. London, 1903.

_Augustana Confessio_. Lipsiae, 1730.

{759} Augustine (_Saint_), _Opera omnia_. 16 vols. (Migne,
_Patrologiæ cursus_, vols. xxxii.-xlvii.) Parisiis, 1845-49.

Aurelius Victor (Sextus), _Libri de Romanæ gentis origine, Viris
illustribus, Imperatoribus, Epitome_. Lipsiae & Francofurti, 1704.

_Ausland (Das)_. Stuttgart & Augsburg.

Aust (Emil), _Die Religion der Römer_. Münster i. W., 1899.

Austin (John), _Lectures on Jurisprudence_. 2 vols. London, 1873.

Avebury (_Lord_), _The Origin of Civilisation_. London, 1902.

Ayala (Balthazar), _De jure et officiis bellicis et disciplina
militari, libri III._ Duaci, 1582.

Ayrault (Pierre), _Des procez faicts au cadaver, aux cendres, a
la mémoire, aux bestes brutes, &c._ Angers, 1591.

Azara (F. de), _Voyages dans l'Amérique méridionale_. 4 vols.
Paris, 1809.


Baarda (M. J. van), 'Fabelen, verhalen en overleveringen der
Galelareezen'; in _Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde
van Nederlandsch-Indië_, vol. xlv. (ser. vi. vol. i.).
's-Gravenhage, 1895.

Babington (Churchill), _The Influence of Christianity in
promoting the Abolition of Slavery in Europe_. Cambridge, 1846.

Bachofen (J. J.), _Das Mutterrecht_. Stuttgart, 1861.

Bacon (_Lord_), _Works_. Ed. by J. Spedding, R. L. Ellis, and D.
D. Heath. 14 vols. London, 1857-74.

Baden-Powell (B. H.), _The Indian Village Community_. London, 1896.

Bagehot (Walter), _Physics and Politics_. London, 1873.

Bailey (John), 'An Account of the Wild Tribes of the Veddahs of
Ceylon'; in _Trans. Ethn. Soc._ new ser. vol. ii. London, 1863.

Bain (Alex.), _The Emotions and the Will_. London, 1880.

Baker (_Sir_ S. W.), _The Albert N'yanza_. 2 vols. London, 1866.

---- _Ismailïa_. London, 1879.

---- _The Nile Tributaries of Abyssinia_. London, 1871.

Baldwin (J. M.), _Social and Ethical Interpretations in Mental
Development_. New York, 1897.

Balfour (A. J.), _The Foundations of Belief_. London, 1895.

Balfour (Edward), _The Cyclopædia of India, and Eastern and
Southern Asia_. 3 vols. London, 1885.

Ball (C. J.), 'Glimpses of Babylonian Religion'; in _Proceed.
Soc. Biblical Archæology_, vol. xiv. London, 1892.

Ball (J. Dyer), _Things Chinese_. London, 1900.

Ball (W. McK.) and Roane (S. C.), _Revised Statutes of the State
of Arkansas_. Boston, 1838.

Balmes (_Don_ Jaime), _El Protestantismo comparado con el
Catolicismo en sus relaciones con la civilizacion Europea_. 4
vols. Barcelona, 1844-45.

Baluze (Stephen), _Capitularia Regum Francorum_. 2 vols.
Parisiis, 1677.

Bancroft (H. H.), _The Native Races of the Pacific States of
North America_. 5 vols. New York, 1875-76.

Bar (L. von), _Die Grundlagen des Strafrechts_. Leipzig, 1869.

Barbeyrac (Jean), _Traité de la morale des Pères de l'Église_.
Amsterdam, 1728.

Baring-Gould (S.), _The Origin and Development of Religious
Belief_. 2 vols. London, 1892.

---- _Strange Survivals_. London, 1892.

{760} Barnes (Albert), _The Church and Slavery_. Philadelphia,
1857.

Baronius (C.), _Annales Ecclesiastici_. 38 vols. Lucae, 1738-59.

Barrington (George), _The History of New South Wales_. London,
1810.

Barrow (John), _An Account of Travels into the Interior of
Southern Africa, in the Years 1797 and 1798_. 2 vols. London,
1801-04.

Bartels (Max), _Die Medicin der Naturvölker_. Leipzig, 1893.

Barth (A.), _The Religions of India_. Trans. London, 1882.

Barth (Heinrich), _Reisen und Entdeckungen in Nord- und
Central-Afrika_. 5 vols. Gotha, 1857-58.

Bartholinus (Thomas), _Antiquitates Danicæ_. Hafniae, 1690.

Bartram (William), 'Observations on the Creek and Cherokee
Indians'; in _Trans. American Ethn. Soc._ vol. iii. pt. i. New
York, 1853.

Basil (_Saint_), _Opera_. 4 vols. (Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_,
Ser. Graeca, vols. xxix.-xxxii.) Parisiis, 1857.

Bastian (A.), _Afrikanische Reisen. Ein Besuch in San Salvador_.
Bremen, 1859.

---- _Allerlei aus Volks- und Menschenkunde_. 2 vols. Berlin, 1888.

---- _Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste_. 2 vols. Jena,
1874-75.

---- _Der Mensch in der Geschichte_. 3 vols. Leipzig, 1860.

Batchelor (John), _The Ainu and their Folk-Lore_. London, 1901.

---- _The Ainu of Japan_. London, 1892.

---- 'Notes on the Ainu'; in _Trans. Asiatic Soc. Japan_, vol. x.
Yokohama, 1882.

Bates (H. W.), _The Naturalist on the River Amazons_. 2 vols.
London, 1863.

'Baudhâyana,' trans. by G. Bühler; in _The Sacred Books of the
East_, vol. xiv. Oxford, 1882.

Baudissin (W. W.), _Studien zur semitischen Religionsgeschichte_.
2 vols. Leipzig, 1876-78.

Baumann (Oscar), 'Conträre Sexual-Erscheinungen bei der
Neger-Bevölkerung Zanzibars'; in _Verhandl. der Berliner
Gesellsch. für Anthropologie_, 1899.

---- _Durch Massailand zur Nilquelle_. Berlin, 1894.

---- _Usambara_. Berlin, 1891.

Baur (F. Chr.), _Das Manichäische Religionssystem_. Tübingen,
1831.

Bax (E. B.), _The Ethics of Socialism_. London, 1893.

Bayle (P.), _Dictionnaire historique et critique_. 16 vols.
Paris, 1820.

Baynes (Herbert), _The Idea of God and the Moral Sense in the
Light of Language_. London, 1895.

Beardmore (E.), 'The Natives of Mowat, Daudai, New Guinea'; in
_Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xix. London, 1890.

Beauchamp (W. M.), 'The Iroquois White Dog Feast'; in _The
American Antiquarian and Oriental Journal_, vol. vii. Chicago,
1885.

Beaumanoir (Philippe de), _Les coutumes du Beauvoisis_. 2 vols.
Paris, 1842.

Beccaria Bonesana (Cesare), _Opere_. 2 vols. Milano, 1821-22.

Becker (W. A.), _Charikles_. Ed. by H. Göll. 3 vols. Berlin,
1877-78.

Beecham (John), _Ashantee and the Gold Coast_. London, 1841.

Beechey (F. W.), _Narrative of a Voyage to the Pacific and
Behring's Strait_. 2 vols. London, 1831.

Beltrame (A. G.), _Il Fiume Bianco e i Dénka_. Verona, 1881.

---- _Il Sénnaar e lo Sciangàllah_. 2 vols. Verona & Padova,
1879.

Benedict (_Saint_), _Regula monachorum_. Ed. by E. Woelfflin.
Lipsiae, 1895.

{761} Benny (Ph. Berger), _The Criminal Code of the Jews
according to the Talmud Massecheth Synhedrin_. London, 1880.

Bent (J. Theodore), _The Cyclades_. London, 1885.

Bentham (Jeremy), _Deontology_. Ed. by J. Bowring. 2 vols. London
& Edinburgh, 1834.

---- _An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and
Legislation_. Oxford, 1879.

---- _The Rationale of Punishment_. London, 1830.

---- _Theory of Legislation_. Trans. from the French of E.
Dumont. London 1882.

---- _The Works of_. 11 vols. Edinburgh, 1838-43.

'Berakhoth'; in _Le Talmud de Jérusalem_, trans. by M. Schwab,
vol. i. Paris, 1871.

Bergaigne (Abel), _La religion védique_. 3 vols. Paris,
1878-83.

Bergemann (P.), _Die Verbreitung der Anthropophagie über die
Erde_. Bunzlau, 1893.

Bergmann (B.), _Nomadische Streifereien unter den Kalmüken_. 4
vols. Riga, 1804-05.

Bernard (_Saint_), _Opera omnia_. 2 vols. Parisiis, 1719.

Bernard (Montague), 'The Growth of Laws and Usages of War'; in
_Oxford Essays, 1856_. London, [1856].

Bernau (J. H.), _Missionary Labours in British Guiana_. London,
1847.

Berner (A. F.), _Lehrbuch des Deutschen Strafrechtes_. Leipzig,
1881.

Bertholet (Alfred), _Die Stellung der Israeliten und der Juden zu
den Fremden_. Freiburg i.B. & Leipzig, 1896.

Best (Elsdon), 'The Lore of the Whare-Kohanga'; in _Jour.
Polynesian Soc._ vol. xiv. Wellington, 1905.

---- 'Notes on the Art of War, as conducted by the Maori of New
Zealand'; in _Jour. Polynesian Soc._ vol. xi. Wellington, 1902.

---- 'Pre-historic Civilisation in the Philippines'; in _Jour.
Polynesian Soc._ vol. i. Wellington, 1892.

---- 'Tuhoe Land'; in _Trans. and Proceed. New Zealand
Institute_, vol. xxx., 1897. Wellington, 1898.

Bethune-Baker (J. F.), _The Influence of Christianity on War_.
Cambridge, 1888.

'Bhagavadgîtâ (The)', trans. by K. T. Telang; in _The Sacred
Books of the East_, vol. viii. Oxford, 1898.

_Bible (The Holy)_. Appointed to be read in Churches.

Bickmore (A. S.), _Travels in the East Indian Archipelago_.
London, 1868.

Biener (F. A.), _Das englische Geschwornengericht_. 2 vols.
Leipzig, 1852.

_Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië_.
's-Gravenhage.

Bindemann (C.), _Der heilige Augustinus_. 2 vols. Berlin, 1844-55.

Binding (Karl), _Die Normen und ihre Übertretung_. 2 vols.
Leipzig, 1872-77.

Bingham (J.), _Works_. Ed. by R. Bingham. 10 vols. Oxford, 1855.

Binsfeldius (P.), _Tractatus de confessionibus maleficorum et
sagarum recognitus_. Augustae Trevirorum, 1591.

Biot (Édouard), _De l'abolition de l'esclavage ancien en
Occident_. Paris, 1840.

---- 'Mémoire sur la condition des esclaves et des serviteurs
gagés en Chine'; in _Journal Asiatique_, ser. iii. vol. iii.
Paris, 1837.

Bird (Isabella L.), _Unbeaten Tracks in Japan_. 2 vols. London,
1880.

Birney (J. G.), _Letter to the Churches_ [on the subject of
Slavery]. _S.l._, 1834.

---- _Second Letter_ [on the same subject]. _S.l._, [1834?].

{762} Bishop (J. P.), _Commentaries on the Criminal Law_. 2 vols.
Boston, 1877.

Black (J. S.), 'Fasting'; in _Encyclopædia Britannica_, vol. ix.
Edinburgh, 1879.

Blackstone (William), _The Commentaries on the Laws of England_.
Adapted to the present State of the Law, by R. M. Kerr. 4 vols.
London, 1876.

Blakey (Robert), _The Temporal Benefits of Christianity_. London,
1849.

Bledsoe (A. T.), _An Essay on Liberty and Slavery_. Philadelphia,
1857.

Block (Maurice), _Dictionnaire général de la politique_. 2 vols.
Paris, 1873-74.

Blümner (Heinrich), _Ueber die Idee des Schicksals in den
Tragödien des Aischylos_. Leipzig, 1814.

Blümner (Hugo), _The Home Life of the Ancient Greeks_. Trans.
London, 1893.

Blumentritt (Ferd.), 'Der Ahnencultus und die religiösen
Anschauungen der Malaien des Philippinen-Archipels'; in
_Mittheilungen der kais. und kön. Geographischen Gesellschaft in
Wien_, vol. xxv. Wien, 1882.

---- 'Die Sitten und Bräuche der alten Tagalen'; in _Zeitschr. f.
Ethnol._ vol. xxv. Berlin, 1893.

---- _Versuch einer Ethnographie der Philippinen_. Gotha, 1882.

Blunt (_Lady_ Anne), _Bedouin Tribes of the Euphrates_. 2 vols.
London, 1879.

Bluntschli (J. C.), _Le droit international codifié_. Trans.
Paris, 1886.

Boas (Franz), 'The Central Eskimo'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur. Ethn._
vi., 1884-85. Washington, 1888.

---- 'First General Report on the Indians of British Columbia';
in _Fifth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada_.
(Reprinted from the Report of the British Association for 1889.)
London.

---- 'The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the
Kwakiutl Indians'; in _Annual Report of the Board of Regents of
the Smithsonian Institution, 1895_. Washington, 1897.

Bock (Carl), _The Head-Hunters of Borneo_. London, 1881.

Bodenschatz (J. Chr. G.), _Kirchliche Verfassung der heutigen
Juden_. 4 vols. Erlang, 1748-49.

Bodin (Jean), _De republica_. Ursellis, 1601.

Boeckh (A.), _Gesammelte kleine Schriften_. 7 vols. Leipzig,
1858-72.

Bogle (George), _Narrative of the Mission of, to Tibet, &c._ Ed.
by C. R. Markham. London, 1876.

Bohnenberger (K.), _Der altindische Gott Varu[n.]a_. Tübingen,
1893.

Boissier (Gaston), _La religion romaine d'Auguste aux Antonins_.
2 vols. Paris, 1874.

Boller (H. A.), _Among the Indians_. Philadelphia, 1868.

Bonaventura (_Saint_), _Opera_. 13 vols. Venetiis, 1751-56.

Bonet (Honoré), _L'arbre des batailles_. Ed. by E. Nys. Bruxelles
& Leipzig, 1883.

Bonfanti (M.), 'L'incivilimento dei negri nell' Africa
intertropicale'; in _Archivio per l'antropologia e la etnologia_,
vol. xv. Firenze, 1885.

Bonney (F.), 'On some Customs of the Aborigines of the River
Darling'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xiii. London, 1884.

Bonwick (James), _Daily Life and Origin of the Tasmanians_.
London, 1870.

_Book of the Dead_. Trans. by Sir P. le Page Renouf. (Reprinted
from the _Proceed. Soc. Biblical Archæology_, vols. xiv.-xix.)
London, 1892-97.

_Book of the Ordre of Chyualry or Knyghthode (The)_. Trans. by W.
Caxton. [Westminster, 1484?]

{763} Boone (W. J.), _An Essay, on the proper Rendering of the
Words Elohim and [Greek: Theos] into the Chinese Language_.
Canton, 1848.

Bory de St. Vincent (J. B. G. M.), _Essais sur les Isles
Fortunées_. Paris, 1803.

Bose (Shib Chunder), _The Hindoos as they are_. London &
Calcutta, 1881.

Bosman (William), _A New and Accurate Description of the Coast of
Guinea_. Trans. London, 1721.

Bosquett (A.), _Treatise on Duelling_. London, _s.d._

Bossu (--), _Travels through that Part of North America formerly
called Louisiana_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1771.

_Boston Journal of Natural History_. Boston.

_Boston Review (The). Devoted to Theology and Literature_. Boston.

Bouche (P.), _Sept ans en Afrique occidentale. La Côté des
Esclaves et Le Dahomey_. Paris, 1885.

Boulainvilliers (_Count_ de), _Histoire de l'ancien gouvernement
de la France_. 3 vols. La Haye & Amsterdam, 1727.

Bouquet (Martin) and others, _Recueil des Historiens des Gaules
et de la France_. 24 vols. Paris, 1738-1904.

Bourke (J. G.), 'The Medicine-Men of the Apache'; in _Ann. Rep.
Bur. Ethn._ vol. ix. Washington, 1892.

---- _The Snake-Dance of the Moquis of Arizona_. London, 1884.

Bourquelot (Félix), 'Recherches sur les opinions et la
legislation en matière de mort volontaire pendant le moyen âge';
in _Bibliothèque de l'École des Chartes_, vols. iii.-iv. Paris,
1841-43.

Bouvier (J.-B.), _Institutiones philosophicæ_. Parisiis, 1844.

Bove (Giacomo), _Patagonia. Terra del Fuoco. Mari Australi_.
Genova, 1883.

Bowdich (T. E.), _Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee_.
London, 1819.

Bowring (_Sir_ John), _The Kingdom and People of Siam_. 2 vols.
London, 1857.

---- _A Visit to the Philippine Islands_. London, 1859.

Boyle (D.), 'On the Paganism of the Civilised Iroquois of
Ontario'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxx. London, 1900.

Boyle (Fred.), _Adventures among the Dyaks of Borneo_. London,
1865.

Brace (C. Loring), _Gesta Christi_. London, 1890.

Bracton (Henricus de), _De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliæ_.
Ed. by Sir Travers Twiss. 2 vols. London, 1878-79.

Bradbury (John), _Travels in the Interior of America, in the
Years 1809-1811_. Liverpool, 1817.

Bradley (F. H.), _Ethical Studies_. London, 1876.

Bradley-Birt (F. B.), _Chota Nagpore_. London, 1903.

Brainne (Ch.), _La Nouvelle-Calédonie_. Paris, 1854.

Brandt (A. J. H. W.), _Die Mandäische Religion_. Leipzig, 1889.

---- _Mandäische Schriften übersetzt und erläutert_. Göttingen,
1893.

Brebeuf (Jean de), 'Relation de ce qui s'est passé dans le pays
des Hurons, en l'année 1636'; in _Relations des Jésuites_, vol.
i. Quebec, 1858.

Breeks (J. Wilkinson), _An Account of the Primitive Tribes of the
N[=i]lagiris_. London, 1873.

Brehm (A. E.), _From North Pole to Equator_. Trans. London, 1896.

---- _Thierleben_. 10 vols. Leipzig, 1877-80.

Brenchley (J. L.), _Jottings during the Cruise of H.M.S. Curaçoa
among the South Sea Islands in 1865_. London, 1873.

Brenner (J. von), _Besuch bei den Kannibalen Sumatras_. Würzburg,
1894.

Breton (W. H.), _Excursions in New South Wales, &c._ London, 1833.

{764} Brett (W. H.), _The Indian Tribes of Guiana_. London, 1868.

Brevard (Joseph), _An Alphabetical Digest of the Public Statute
Law of South Carolina_. 3 vols. Charleston (S. C.), 1814.

Bridel (Louis), _Le droit des femmes et le mariage_. Paris, 1893.

Bridges (Thomas), [Letter referring to the Fuegians,] in _The
South American Missionary Magazine_, vol. xiii. London, 1879.

---- 'Manners and Customs of the Firelanders'; in _A Voice for
South America_, vol. xiii. London, 1866.

'Brihaspati,' trans. by J. Jolly; in _The Sacred Books of the
East_, vol. xxxiii. Oxford, 1889.

Brinton (D. G.), _American Hero-Myths_. Philadelphia, 1882.

---- _The Myths of the New World_. New York, 1868.

---- _Religions of Primitive Peoples_. New York & London, 1899.

Brissonius (B.), _De regio Persarum principatu_. Argentorati,
1710.

Britton, [On the Laws of England]. Ed. and trans. by F. M.
Nichols. 2 vols. Oxford, 1865.

Brooke (Charles), _Ten Years in Saráwak_. 2 vols. London, 1866.

Brown (Thomas), _Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human Mind_.
Edinburgh, 1834.

Browne (E. H.), _An Exposition of the Thirty-Nine Articles_.
London, 1887.

Browne (_Sir_ Thomas), _Christian Morals_. Cambridge, 1716.

Bruce (James), _Travels to discover the Source of the Nile_. 8
vols. Edinburgh, 1805.

Brugsch (Heinrich), _Die Ægyptologie_. Leipzig, 1891.

---- _A History of Egypt under the Pharaohs_. Trans. 2 vols.
London, 1881.

---- _Im Lande der Sonne_. Berlin, 1886.

Brunner (Heinrich), _Deutsche Rechtsgeschichte_. 2 vols. Leipzig,
1887-92.

---- _Forschungen zur Geschichte des deutschen und französischen
Rechtes_. Stuttgart, 1894.

Bruns (C. G.), _Fontes juris romani antiqui_. Ed. by Th. Mommsen
and O. Gradenwitz. Friburgi i. B. & Lipsiae, 1893.

Brunus (Conradus), _De Legationibus libri quinque_. Moguntiae,
1548.

Brussel (N.), _Nouvel examen de l'usage général des fiefs en
France, pendant les onzième, douzième, treizième et quatorzième
siècles_. 2 vols. Paris, 1750.

Bry (Theodor de), _Narrative of Le Moyne, an Artist who
accompanied the French Expedition to Florida under Laudonnière,
1564_. Trans. Boston, 1875.

Bryce (James), _Studies in History and Jurisprudence_. 2 vols.
Oxford, 1901.

Buch (M.), 'Die Wotjaken'; in _Acta Soc. Scientiarum Fennicæ_,
vol. xii. Helsingfors, 1883.

Buchanan (James), _Sketches of the History, Manners, and Customs
of the North American Indians_. London, 1824.

Buchner (Max), _Kamerun_. Leipzig, 1887.

Buckle (H. T.), _History of Civilization in England_. 3 vols.
London, 1894.

---- _Miscellaneous and Posthumous Works_. 3 vols. London, 1872.

Bücher (Karl), _Die Entstehung der Volkswirtschaft_. Tübingen,
1904.

Bühler (J. G.), _Grundriss der indo-arischen Philologie und
Altertumskunde_. Ed. by J. G. B. Strassburg, 1896, &c.

_Bulletins de la Société d'Anthropologie de Paris_.

Bulmerincq (A.), _Das Asylrecht und die Auslieferung flüchtiger
Verbrecher_. Dorpat, 1853.

{765}'Bundahis (The),' trans. by E. W. West; in _The Sacred Books
of the East_, vol. v. Oxford, 1880.

Bunsen (C. C. J.), _Analecta Ante-Nicæna_. 3 vols. London, 1854.

---- _Christianity and Mankind_. 7 vols. London, 1854.

---- _De jure hereditario Atheniensium_. Gottingae, 1813.

Buonafede (A.), _Istoria critica e filosofica del suicidio_.
Venezia, 1788.

Burchell (W. J.), _Travels in the Interior of Southern Africa_. 2
vols. London, 1822-24.

Burckhardt (J. L.), _Arabic Proverbs_. London, 1830.

---- _Notes on the Bedouins and Wahábys_. London, 1830.

---- _Travels in Arabia_. 2 vols. London, 1829.

---- _Travels in Nubia_. London, 1822.

Buret (F.), _La syphilis aujourd'hui et chez les anciens_. Paris,
1890.

---- _Syphilis in the Middle Ages and in Modern Times_. Trans.
Philadelphia, 1895.

Burns (Robert), 'The Kayans of the North-West of Borneo'; in _The
Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia_, vol. iii.
Singapore, 1849.

Burrows (Guy), _The Land of the Pigmies_. London, 1898.

Burton (R. F.), _Abeokuta and the Camaroons Mountains_. 2 vols.
London, 1863.

---- _The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night_. 10 vols.
London, 1885-86. (Quoted in ch. xliii.)

---- The same work. 12 vols. London, 1894.

---- _The City of the Saints_. London, 1861.

---- _First Footsteps in East Africa_. London, 1856.

---- _The Highlands of the Brazil_. 2 vols. London, 1869.

---- _The Lake Regions of Central Africa_. 2 vols. London, 1860.

---- _A Mission to Gelele, King of Dahome_. 2 vols. London, 1864.

---- _Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to Al-Madinah & Meccah_.
2 vols. London, 1898.

---- _Sind Revisited_. 2 vols. London, 1877.

---- _Sindh_. London, 1851.

---- _Two Trips to Gorilla Land and the Cataracts of the Congo_.
2 vols. London, 1876.

---- _Wit and Wisdom from West Africa_. London, 1865.

---- _Zanzibar_. 2 vols. London, 1872.

---- and Drake (Ch. F. Tyrwhitt), _Unexplored Syria_. 2 vols.
London, 1872.

Butler (John), _Travels and Adventures in the Province of Assam_.
London, 1855.

Butler (Joseph), _The Analogy of Religion, Dissertations, and
Sermons_. London, 1893.

Buxtorf (J.), _Synagoga Judaica_. Basileæ, 1680.

Bynkershoek (C. van), _Observationum Juris Romani libri quatuor_.
Lugduni Batavorum, 1710.

---- _Quæstionum juris publici libri duo_. Lugduni Batavorum, 1737.


Caesar (C. J.), _Opera omnia_. 5 vols. London, 1819.

Caillié (Réné), _Travels through Central Africa to Timbuctoo_. 2
vols. London, 1830.

Caird (Edward), _The Evolution of Religion._ 2 vols. Glasgow, 1894.

{766} Caland (W.), _Die Altindischen Todten- und Bestattungsgebräuche_.
Amsterdam, 1896.

_Calcutta Review (The)_. Calcutta.

Caldwell (R.), _The Tinnevelly Shanars_. Madras, 1849.

Callaway (Henry), _The Religious System of the Amazulu_. Natal,
1868-70.

Calvert (A. F.), _The Aborigines of Western Australia_. London, 1894.

Calvin (J.), _Institutio Christianæ religionis_. 2 vols.
Berolini, 1834-35.

Cameron (A. L. P.), 'Notes on some Tribes of New South Wales'; in
_Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xiv. London, 1885.

Campbell (F. A.), _A Year in the New Hebrides, Loyalty Islands,
and New Caledonia_. Geelong & Melbourne, [1873].

Campbell (John), _A Personal Narrative of Thirteen Years' Service
amongst the Wild Tribes of Khondistan_. London, 1864.

Campbell (John), _Travels in South Africa_. London, 1815.

---- _Travels in South Africa, being a Narrative of a Second
Journey in the Interior of that Country_. 2 vols. London, 1822.

Candelier (H.), _Rio-Hacha et les Indiens Goajires_. Paris, 1893.

_Canons and Decrees of the Council of Trent (The)_. Trans. by J.
Waterworth. London, 1848.

'Canons enacted under King Edgar'; in _Ancient Laws and
Institutes of England_. London, 1840.

_Cape Monthly Magazine (The)_. Cape Town.

'Capitularium Caroli Magni et Ludovici Pii libri VII.'; in
Georgisch, _Corpus juris Germanici antiqui_. Halae Magdeburgicae,
1738.

Cardi (Le Comte C. N. de), 'Ju-ju Laws and Customs in the Niger
Delta'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxix. London, 1899.

Carmichael (Alexander), _Carmina Gadelica_. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1900.

Carpenter (Edward), _Intermediate Types among Primitive Folk_.
London, 1914.

Carrington (F. A.) and Payne (J.), _Reports of Cases argued and
ruled at Nisi Prius, in the Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas,
& Exchequer_. 9 vols. London, 1825-41.

Caruthers (R. L.) and Nicholson (A. O. P.), _A Compilation of the
Statutes of Tennessee_. Nashville (Tenn.), 1836.

Carver (J.), _Travels through the Interior Parts of North
America_. London, 1781.

Casalis (E.), _The Basutos_. London, 1861.

Casati (G.), _Ten Years in Equatoria_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1891.

Castelnau (F. de), _Expédition dans les parties centrales de
l'Amérique du Sud_. 7 vols. Paris, 1850-59.

Castrén (M. A.), _Nordiska resor och forskningar_. 5 vols.
Helsingfors, 1852-58.

_Catechism of the Council of Trent (The)_. Trans. by Th. A.
Buckley. London, 1852.

Catlin (George), _Illustrations of the Manners, Customs, and
Condition of the North American Indians_. 2 vols. London, 1876.

Catullus (C. V.), _Opera omnia_. 2 vols. Londini, 1822.

Cauvet (J.), 'De l'organisation de la famille à Athènes'; in
_Revue de legislation et de jurisprudence_, vol. xxiv. Paris, 1845.

_Celtic Magazine (The)_. Inverness.

Certeux (A.) and Carnoy (E. H.), _L'Algérie traditionnelle_.
Paris & Alger, 1884.

{767} Chaikin (A.), _Apologie des Juifs_. Paris, 1887.

Chalmers (--), 'Cruelty to Animals'; in _The Methodist Magazine_,
vol. ix. New York, 1826.

Chalmers (James), _Pioneer Life and Work in New Guinea
1877-1894_. London, 1895.

---- _Pioneering in New Guinea_. London, 1887.

---- and Gill (W. W.), _Work and Adventure in New Guinea_.
London, 1885.

Chalmers (John), 'Chinese Natural Theology'; in _The China
Review_, vol. v. Hongkong, 1876-77.

Chamberlain (A. F.), _The Child and Childhood in Folk-Thought_.
New York, 1896.

Chamberlain (B. H.), _Things Japanese_. London, 1902.

Chambers (R.), _The Book of Days_. 2 vols. London & Edinburgh,
[1862-64].

_Chambers's Edinburgh Journal_. Edinburgh & London.

Chanler (W. A.), _Through Jungle and Desert_. London & New York,
1896.

Chapelain (J.), _De la lecture des vieux romans_. Ed. by A.
Feillet. Paris, 1870.

Chapman (J.), _Travels in the Interior of South Africa_. 2 vols.
London, 1868.

Charlemagne, _Opera omnia_. 2 vols. (Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_,
vols. xcvii.-xcviii.) Parisiis, 1851.

Charles V. (_Emperor_), _Die Peinliche Gerichtsordnung_. Ed. by
H. Zoepfl. Heidelberg, 1842.

Charlevoix (P. F. X. de), _The History of Paraguay_. Trans. 2
vols. London, 1769.

---- _A Voyage to North-America_. Trans. 2 vols. Dublin, 1766.

Chasseb[oe]uf de Volney (C. F.), _Travels through Syria and
Egypt, in the Years 1783-1785_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1788.

Chauveau (A.) and Helie (F.), _Théorie du Code pénal_. 8 vols.
Paris, 1852.

Chavanne (J.), _Die Sahara_. Wien, &c., 1879.

Cherry (R. R.), _Lectures on the Growth of Criminal Law in
Ancient Communities_. London, 1890.

Chevalier (J.), _L'inversion sexuelle_. Lyon & Paris, 1893.

Chevers (Norman), _A Manual of Medical Jurisprudence for India_.
Calcutta, 1870.

Cheyne (T. K.) and Black (J. S.), _Encyclopædia Biblica_. 4 vols.
London, 1899-1903.

Childers (R. C.), _A Dictionary of the Pali Language_. London, 1875.

_China Review (The)_. Hongkong.

_Chinese Repository (The)_. Canton.

Chitty (Joseph), _A Treatise on the Laws of Commerce and
Manufactures_. 4 vols. London, 1820-24.

Chlotar II. (_King_), 'Edictum de Synodo Parisiensi'; in Migne,
_Patrologiæ cursus_, vol. lxxx. Paris, 1850.

Christian (F. W.), _The Caroline Islands_. London, 1899.

_Christian Review (The)_. Rochester (N.Y.).

Chrysostom (_Saint_ J.), _Opera omnia_. (Migne, _Patrologiæ
cursus_, Ser. Graeca, vols. xlvii.-lxiv.) Parisiis,
1858-60.

'Chung Yung'; in Legge, _The Chinese Classics_, vol. i. Oxford, 1893.

_Church Missionary Intelligencer (The)_. London.

Churchill (Ch. H.), _Mount Lebanon_. 3 vols. London, 1853.

Chwolsohn (D.), _Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus_. 2 vols. St.
Petersburg, 1856.

Cibrario (Luigi), _Delia economia politica del media eve_. 2
vols. Torino, 1861.

---- _Della schiavitù e del servaggio_. 2 vols. Milano, 1868.

{768} Cicero (M. Tullius), _Opera_. 17 vols. Londini, 1830.

Cieza de Leon (P. de), 'La Crónica del Perú [parte primera]'; in
_Biblioteca de autores españoles_, vol. xxvi. Madrid, 1853.

---- _Segunda parte de la Crónica del Perú_. Madrid, 1880.

Clark (C.) and Finnelly (W.), _Reports of Cases decided in the
House of Lords, on Appeals and Writs of Error_. London, 1835-47.

Clark (E. C.), _An Analysis of Criminal Liability_. Cambridge, 1880.

Clarke (R. F.), 'On Cruelty to Animals in its Moral Aspect'; in
_The Month and Catholic Review_, vol. xxv. London, 1875.

Clarke (Samuel), _A Discourse concerning the Being and Attributes
of God, the Obligations of Natural Religion, and the Truth and
Certainty of the Christian Revelation_. London, 1738.

Clarkson (Thomas), _An Essay on the Slavery and Commerce of the
Human Species_. London, 1788.

Clarus (Julius), _Opera omnia_. 2 vols. Genevae, 1739.

Clavigero (F. S.), _The History of Mexico_. Trans. 2 vols.
London, 1807.

Clay (C. C.), _A Digest of the Laws of the State of Alabama_.
Tuskaloosa, 1843.

Clay (W. Lowe), _The Prison Chaplain_. Cambridge, 1861.

Cleffelius (J. Chr.), _Antiquitates Germanorum potissimum
septentrionalium_. Francofurti & Lipsiae, 1733.

Clement of Alexandria, _Opera omnia_. (Migne, _Patrologiæ
cursus_, Ser. Graeca, vols. viii.-ix.) Parisiis, 1857.

Clement I. of Rome (_Saint_), _Opera omnia_. (Migne, _Patrologiæ
cursus_, Ser. Graeca, vols. i.-ii.) Parisiis, 1857.

Cleveland (A. R.), _Woman under the English Law_. London, 1896.

Clifford (W. K.), _Lectures and Essays_. Ed. by Leslie Stephen
and Frederick Pollock. London, 1886.

Clodd (Edward), _Tom Tit Tot_. London, 1898.

Cnut (_King_), 'The Laws of'; in _Ancient Laws and Institutes of
England_. London, 1840.

Cobb (Th. R. R.), _An Inquiry into the Law of Negro Slavery in
the United States of America_. Philadelphia & Savannah, 1858.

Cobbe (Frances P.), _The Modern Rack. Papers on Vivisection_.
London, 1889.

Cochin (A.), _L'abolition de l'esclavage_. 2 vols. Paris, 1861.

_Code Civil_. Ed. by G. Griolet and Ch. Vergé. Paris, 1907.

_Code Napoléon_. Paris, 1853.

_Code Noir (Le)_. Paris, 1767.

_Code of Virginia (The)_. 2 vols. Richmond, 1849.

_Code Pénal_. 2 vols. Paris, 1810.

_Codex Justinianus_. See Justinian.

_Codex Theodosianus_. Ed. by G. Haenel. Bonnae, 1842.

_Codice Penale per il Regno d'Italia (II)_. Ed. by G. Crivellari.
Torino, 1889.

_Codigo Penal dos Estados Unidos do Brazil_. Ed. by M. G. d
Alencastro Autran. Rio de Janeiro, 1892.

_Código Penal reformado_. Madrid, 1870.

Codrington (R. H.), _The Melanesians_. Oxford, 1891.

Cohn (L.), _Zur Lehre vom versuchten und unvollendeten
Verbrechen_. Breslau, 1880.

Coke (Edward), _The Third Part of the Institutes of the Laws of
England_. London, 1680.

Cole (H.), 'Notes on the Wagogo of German East Africa'; in _Jour.
Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxxii. London, 1902.

{769} Colebrooke (T. E.), _Miscellaneous Essays_. 3 vols. London,
1873.

Colenso (William), _On the Maori Races of New Zealand_. _S. l._,
[1865].

Collins (David), _An Account of the English Colony in New South
Wales_. 2 vols. London, 1798-1802.

Colquhoun (A. R.), _Amongst the Shans_. London, 1885.

Compayré (G.), _L'évolution intellectuelle et morale de
l'enfant_. Paris, 1893.

Comte (Auguste), _Cours de philosophie positive_. 6 vols. Paris,
1830-42.

_Conférence de Bruxelles_. La Haye, 1890.

_Conférence internationale de la paix. La Haye 18 Mai-29 Juillet
1899_. 4 parts. La Haye, 1899.

_Confession of Faith (The), together with The Larger and Shorter
Catechisms, composed by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster_.
London, 1717.

Connolly (R. M.), 'Social Life in Fanti-land'; in _Jour. Anthr.
Inst._ vol. xxvi. London, 1897.

Constant (Benjamin), _De la religion_. 6 vols. Paris, 1824-32.

'Constitutiones Apostolicae'; in Bunsen, _Christianity and
Mankind_, vol. vi. London, 1854.

_Constitutiones Neapolitanæ sive Siculæ_. See Frederick II.

_Contemporary Review (The)_. London.

_Convention signed at Geneva, August 22, 1864, for the
Amelioration of the Condition of the Wounded in Armies in the
Field_. (Appendix No. VI. in Lorimer, _The Institutes of the Law
of Nations_, vol. ii.) Edinburgh, 1884.

Cook (F. C.), _The Holy Bible_, ed. by F. C. C. 10 vols. London,
1871-81.

Cook (James), _A Journal of a Voyage round the World . . . in the
Years 1768-71_. London, 1771.

---- _A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean . . . in the Years 1776-80_.
3 vols. London, 1875.

Cooke (G. Wingrove), _China_. London, 1858.

Cooper (T. T.), _The Mishmee Hills_. London, 1873.

Coquilhat (C.), _Sur le Haut-Congo_. Paris, 1888.

Coreal (F.), _Voyages aux Indes Occidentales_. Trans. 3 vols.
Amsterdam, 1722.

_Cosmos_. Ed. by G. Cora. Torino.

Coudreau (H. A.), _La France équinoxiale_. 2 vols. Paris, 1887.

Couto de Magalhães (J. V.), _Trabalho preparatorio para
aproveitamento do selvagem e do solo por elle occupado no Brazil.
O selvagem_. Rio de Janeiro, 1876.

Couty (Louis), _L'esclavage au Brésil_. Paris, 1881.

Covarruvias a Leyva (D. de), _Opera omnia_. 2 vols. Antverpiæ, 1638.

Coxe (William), _Account of the Russian Discoveries between Asia
and America_. London, 1804.

Cranz (David), _The History of Greenland_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1820.

Crawfurd (John), _History of the Indian Archipelago_. 3 vols.
Edinburgh, 1820.

Crawley (Ernest), _The Mystic Rose_. London, 1902.

Crell (J.), _Ethica Christiana_. Selenoburgi, [1663?].

Cremony (J. C.), _Life among the Apaches_. San Francisco, 1868.

Crooke (W.), _The North-Western Provinces of India_. London, 1897.

---- _The Popular Religion and Folk-Lore of Northern India_. 2
vols. Westminster, 1896.

---- _Things Indian_. London, 1906.

---- _The Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and
Oudh_. 4 vols. Calcutta, 1896.

{770} Crowther (S.) and Taylor (J. C.), _The Gospel on the Banks
of the Niger_. London, 1859.

Crozals (J. de), _Histoire de la civilisation_. 2 vols. Paris, 1887.

Crozet (--), _Voyage to Tasmania, &c. in the Years 1771-2_.
Trans. London, 1891.

'Cruelty to Animals in Naples'; in _The Saturday Review_, vol.
lix. London, 1885.

Cruickshank (B.), _Eighteen Years on the Gold Coast of Africa_. 2
vols. London, 1853.

Cumming (C. F. Gordon), _In the Himalayas and on the Indian
Plains_. London, 1884.

Cunningham (J. F.), _Uganda and its Peoples_. London, 1905.

Cunow (H.), _Die Verwandtschafts-Organisationen der
Australneger_. Stuttgart, 1894.

Curr (E. M.), _The Australian Race_. 4 vols. Melbourne & London,
1886-87.

---- _Recollections of Squatting in Victoria_. Melbourne, &c., 1883.

Curtiss (S. I.), _Primitive Semitic Religion To-day_. London, 1902.

Curtius Rufus (Quintus), _De gestis Alexandri Magni_. Ed. by E.
Foss. Lipsiae, 1862.

Cusack (M. F.), _A History of the Irish Nation_. London, 1876.

Cyprian (_Saint_), _Opera omnia_. (Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_,
vol. iv.) Parisiis 1844.


'Dâdistân-î Dînîk (The),' trans. by E. W. West; in _The Sacred
Books of the East_, vol. xviii. Oxford, 1882.

Dahn (Felix), _Bausteine_. Berlin, 1879, &c.

Dalager (Lars), _Grønlandske Relationer_. Kiøbenhavn, _s.d._

Dale (G.), 'An Account of the Principal Customs and Habits of the
Natives inhabiting the Bondei Country'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._
vol. xxv. London, 1896.

Dall (W. H.), _Alaska and its Resources_. London, 1870.

Dalton (E. T.), _Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal_. Calcutta, 1872.

Damhouder (J. de), _Praxis rerum criminalium_. Antverpiæ, 1570.

Dandini (J.), 'A Voyage to Mount Libanus'; in Pinkerton,
_Collection of Voyages and Travels_, vol. x. London, 1811.

Dapper (O.), _Africa_. Trans. London, 1670.

Dareste (R.), _Études d'histoire du droit_. Paris, 1889.

---- _Nouvelles Études d'histoire du droit_. Paris, 1902.

Dargun (L.), _Mutterrecht und Vaterrecht_. Leipzig, 1892.

---- 'Ursprung und Entwicklungs-Geschichte des Eigenthums'; in
_Zeitschr. f. vergleichende Rechtswiss._ vol. v. Stuttgart, 1884.

Darmesteter (James), _Essais orientaux_. Paris, 1883.

---- 'Introduction to the Vendîdâd'; in _The Sacred Books of the
East_, vol. iv. Oxford, 1880.

---- _Ormazd et Ahriman_. Paris, 1877.

Darwin (Charles), 'Biographical Sketch of an Infant'; in _Mind_,
vol. ii. London, 1877.

---- _The Descent of Man_. London, 1890.

---- _Journal of Researches into the Geology and Natural History
of the Various Countries visited by H.M.S. Beagle_. London, 1839.

Daumas (E.), _La vie arabe et la société musulmane_. Paris, 1869.

{771} Dautremer (J.), 'The Vendetta or Legal Revenge in Japan';
in _Trans. Asiatic Soc. Japan_, vol. xiii. Yokohama, 1885.

Davids (T. W. Rhys), _Hibbert Lectures on the Origin and Growth
of Religion as illustrated by some Points in the History of
Indian Buddhism_. London, 1881.

Davis (_Sir_ John Francis), _China_. 2 vols. London, 1857.

Davis (W. W. H.), _El Gringo_. New York, 1857.

Dawson (James), _Australian Aborigines_. Melbourne, &c., 1881.

Decle (Lionel), _Three Years in Savage Africa_. London, 1898.

Decrusy (--) and others, _Recueil général des Anciennes Lois
Françaises_. 29 vols. Paris, 1822-33.

Delécluze (E. J.), _Roland ou la Chevalerie_. 2 vols. Paris, 1845.

Delepierre (J. O.), _L'enfer décrit par ceux qui l'ont vu_. 2
pts. London [1864-65].

Delitzsch (Friedrich), _Wo lag das Paradies?_ Leipzig, 1881.

Demangeat (Charles), _Histoire de la condition civile des
étrangers en France dans l'ancien et dans le nouveau droit_.
Paris, 1844.

Demidoff (E.), _A Shooting Trip to Kamchatka_. London, 1904.

Demosthenes, _Opera_. Ed. by J. T. V[oe]melius. Parisiis, 1843.

Denham (Dixon) and Clapperton (Hugh), _Narrative of Travels and
Discoveries in Northern and Central Africa_. London, 1826.

Denis (J.), _Histoire des théories et des idées morales dans
l'antiquité._ 2 vols. Paris, 1856.

_Denkschriften der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften_. Wien.

Dennett (R. E.), 'Laws and Customs of the Fjort or Bavili
Family'; in _Jour. African Soc._ vol. i. London, 1902.

---- _Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort (French Congo)_. London,
1898.

Dennys (N. B.), _The Folk-Lore of China_. London, 1876.

Descartes (René), _Meditationes de prima philosophia_.
Amstelodami, 1678.

Deschamps (É.), _Carnet d'un voyageur--Au pays des Veddas_. Paris
1892.

Desmaze (Charles), _Les pénalités anciennes_. Paris, 1866.

Dessoir (Max), 'Zur Psychologie der Vita sexualis'; in
_Allgemeine Zeitschrift für Psychiatrie und psychisch-gerichtliche
Medicin_, vol. l. Berlin 1893-94.

Deutsch (E.), 'Islam'; in _The Quarterly Review_, vol. cxxvii.
London, 1869.

---- _Literary Remains._ London, 1874.

_Deutsche Rundschau für Geographie und Statistik_. Wien, &c.

Dewey (John), _The Study of Ethics_. Ann Arbor (Mich.), 1897.

_Dhammapada (The)_. Trans. by F. Max Müller. (_The Sacred Books
of the East_, vol. x.) Oxford, 1898.

Diaz del Castillo (Bernal), 'Verdadera historia de los sucesos de
la conquista de la Nueva-España'; in _Biblioteca de autores
españoles_, vol. xxvi. Madrid, 1853.

Dickinson (G. Lowes), _The Greek View of Life_. London, 1896.

Diderot (Denis), _[OE]uvres_. 7 vols. Paris, 1818-19.

Dieffenbach (E.), _Travels in New Zealand_. 2 vols. London, 1843.

Diels (Hermann), 'Ein orphischer Demeterhymnus'; in _Festschrift
Theodor Gomperz dargebracht_. Wien, 1902.

Digby (K. H.), _Mores Catholici_. 3 vols. London, 1845-47.

_Digesta_. See Justinian.

{772}'Dimetian Code (The)'; in _Ancient Laws and Institutes of
Wales_. London, 1841.

Dimitroff (Z.), _Die Geringschätzung des menschlichen Lebens und
ihre Ursachen bei den Naturvölkern_. Leipzig-Reudnitz, 1891.

'Dînâ-î Maînôg-î Khirad,' trans. by E. W. West; in _The Sacred
Books of the East_, vol. xxiv. Oxford, 1885.

Dio Cassius, _Historia Romana_. 4 vols. Lipsiae, 1863-64.

Dio Chrysostom, _Opera Græca_. 2 vols. Brunsvigae, 1844.

Diodorus Siculus, _Bibliotheca historica_. Ed. by C. Müllerus. 2
vols. Parisiis, 1842-44.

Diogenes Laertius, _De clarorum philosophorum vitis libri decem_.
Ed. by C. G. Cobet. Parisiis, 1850.

Dionysius of Halicarnassus, _Antiquitatum Romanarum quæ
supersunt_. Parisiis, 1886.

Dirksen (H. E.), _Civilistische Abhandlungen_. 2 vols. Berlin, 1820.

Dithmar of Merseburg, 'Chronicon'; in Pertz, _Monumenta Germaniæ
historica_, vol. v. Hannoverae, 1839.

Dixon (W. H.), _New America_. Eighth edit. London, _s.d._

Dobell (Peter), _Travels in Kamtschatka and Siberia_. 2 vols.
London, 1830.

Dobrizhoffer (M.), _An Account of the Abipones_. Trans. 3 vols.
London, 1822.

Dodge (R. Irving), _Our Wild Indians_. Hartford, 1882.

Döllinger (J. J. I.), _The Gentile and the Jew in the Courts of
the Temple of Christ_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1862.

Domenech (E.), _Seven Years' Residence in the Great Deserts of
North America_. 2 vols. London, 1860.

Donaldson (James), 'On the Expiatory and Substitutionary
Sacrifices of the Greeks'; in _Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh_, vol.
xxvii. Edinburgh, 1876.

---- 'The Position of Women among the Early Christians'; in _The
Contemporary Review_, vol. lvi. London, 1889.

Donne (John), _Biathanatos_. London, 1648.

Doolittle (J.), _Social Life of the Chinese_. 2 vols. New York, 1867.

Dorman (R. M.), _The Origin of Primitive Superstitions_.
Philadelphia, 1881.

Dorner (I. A.), _A System of Christian Doctrine_. Trans. 4 vols.
Edinburgh, 1880-82.

Dorsey (J. Owen), 'Mourning and War Customs of the Kansas'; in
_The American Naturalist_, vol. xix. Philadelphia, 1885.

---- 'Omaha Sociology'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur. Ethn._ vol. iii.
Washington, 1884.

---- 'Siouan Folk-Lore'; in _The American Antiquarian_, vol. vii.
Chicago, 1885.

---- 'Siouan Sociology'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur. Ethn._ vol. xv.
Washington, 1897.

---- 'A Study of Siouan Cults'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur. Ethn._ vol.
xi. Washington, 1894.

Doughty (C. M.), _Travels in Arabia Deserta_. 2 vols. Cambridge, 1888.

Douglas (R. K.), _Confucianism and Taouism_. London, 1889.

---- _Society in China_. London, 1894.

Dove (T.), 'Moral and Social Characteristics of the Aborigines of
Tasmania'; in _The Tasmanian Journal of Natural Science, &c._
vol. i. Hobart Town, 1842.

Dreyer (I. C. H.), _Specimen juris publici Lubecensis_. Lubecae, 1761.

{773} Driver (S. R.), _A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on
Deuteronomy_. Edinburgh, 1895.

Drury (Rob.), _Journal during Fifteen Years' Captivity on the
Island of Madagascar_. London, 1890.

_Dublin Review (The)_. London.

Dubois (Félix), _Timbuctoo_. Trans. London, 1897.

Dubois (J. A.), _Description of the Character, Manners, and
Customs of the People of India_. Trans. London, 1817.

Du Boys (Albert), _Histoire du droit criminel de l'Espagne_.
Paris, 1870.

---- _Histoire du droit criminel des peuples modernes_. 3 vols.
Paris, 1854-60.

Du Cange (C. Dufresne), 'Dissertations ou Réflexions sur
l'histoire de S. Louys, du Sire de Joinville'; in Petitot,
_Collection des Mémoires relatifs à l'histoire de France_, vol.
iii. Paris, 1824.

---- _Glossarium ad scriptores mediæ et infimæ Latinitatis_. 6
vols. Parisiis, 1733-36.

Du Chaillu (P. B.), _Explorations and Adventures in Equatorial
Africa_. London, 1861.

---- _A Journey to Ashango-Land_. London, 1867.

Duchesne (L.), _Christian Worship_. Trans. London, 1904.

Düben (G. von), _Om Lappland och Lapparne_. Stockholm, 1873.

Dümmler (Ernst), _Geschichte des Ostfränkischen Reichs_. 3 vols.
Berlin, Leipzig, 1862-88.

Dufour (Pierre), _Histoire de la Prostitution_. 6 vols.
Bruxelles, 1851-54.

Dumont (J.), _Corps universal diplomatique du droit des gens_.
8 vols. Amsterdam, 1726-31.

Dumont d'Urville (J. S. C.), _Voyage pittoresque autour du
monde_. 2 vols. Paris, 1834-35.

Du-Moulin (Lewis), _Moral Reflections upon the Number of the
Elect_. London, 1680.

Dunbar (J. B.), 'The Pawnee Indians'; in _The Magazine of
American History_, vols. iv., v., viii. New York & Chicago, 1880,
1882.

Dunham (S. A.), _A History of the Germanic Empire_. 3 vols.
London, 1834-35.

Durkheim (Émile), _De la division du travail social_. Paris, 1893.

---- 'Deux lois de l'évolution pénale; in _L'année sociologique_,
vol. iv., 1899-1900. Paris, 1901.

---- _Les formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse_. Paris, 1912.

---- 'La prohibition de l'inceste et ses origines'; in _L'année
sociologique_, vol. i., 1896-97. Paris, 1898.

---- _Le suicide_. Paris, 1897.

Du Tertre (J. B.), _Histoire générale des Antilles_. 4 vols.
Paris, 1667-71.

Duveyrier (Henri), _Exploration du Sahara_. Paris, 1864.

Dyer (T. F. Thiselton), _The Ghost World_. London, 1893.

Dymond (J.), _Essays on the Principles of Morality_. London, 1851.


Earl (G. W.), _Papuans_. London, 1853.

Eastman (Mary), _Dacotah_. New York, 1849.

_Eclectic Magazine of Foreign Literature, Science, and Art
(The)_. New York.

_Edda Snorra Sturlusonar_. See Snorri Sturluson.

Eden (_Sir_ F. M.), _The State of the Poor; or, an History of the
Labouring Classes in England_. 3 vols. London, 1797.

_Edinburgh Review (The)_. London.

{774} Edkins (J.), _Religion in China_. London, 1878.

Edmund (_King_), 'The Laws of'; in _Ancient Laws and Institutes
of England_. London, 1840.

Edward the Confessor (_King_), 'Leges'; in _Ancient Laws and
Institutes of England_. London, 1840.

Edwards (Bryan), _The History of the British West Indies_. 5
vols. London, 1819.

Edwards (Jonathan), _Works_. 8 vols. London, 1817.

Egede (Hans), _A Description of Greenland_. Trans. London, 1845.

Eicken (H. von), _Geschichte und System der mittelalterlichen
Weltanschauung_. Stuttgart, 1887.

Ellinger (G.), _Das Verhältniss der öffentlichen Meinung zu
Wahrheit und Lüge im 10. 11. und 12. Jahrhundert_. Sondershausen,
1884.

Elliot (_Sir_ Henry M.), _Memoirs on the History, Folk-Lore, and
Distribution of the Races of the North Western Provinces of
India_. 2 vols. London, 1869.

Elliot (_Sir_ W.), 'On the Characteristics of the Population of
Central and Southern India'; in _Jour. Ethn. Soc. London_, new
ser. vol. i. London, 1869.

Elliott (Henry W.), _Our Arctic Province Alaska and the Seal
Islands_. New York, 1886.

---- 'Report on the Seal Islands of Alaska'; in _Tenth Census of
the United States_. Washington, 1884.

Ellis (A. B.), _The E[(w]e-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast of
West Africa_. London, 1890.

---- _The Land of Fetish_. London, 1883.

---- _The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast of West
Africa_. London 1887.

---- _The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast of West
Africa_. London 1894.

Ellis (Havelock), _The Criminal_. London, 1895.

---- _Man and Woman_. London, 1904.

---- _Studies in the Psychology of Sex_. 5 vols. Philadelphia,
1901-06. (The third edition of vol. i., 'Sexual Inversion,'
published in 1915, referred to in the Additional Notes.)

---- _Ursprung und Entwicklung der Prostitution._ (Reprinted from
_Mutterschutz_, vol. iii.) _S. l. & d._

---- and Symonds (J. A.), _Das konträre Geschlechtsgefühl_.
Trans. Leipzig, 1896.

Ellis (W. Gilmore), 'The Amok of the Malays'; in _The Journal of
Mental Science_, vol. xxxix. London, 1893.

Ellis (William), _History of Madagascar_. 2 vols. London, 1838.

---- _Narrative of a Tour through Hawaii_. London, 1827.

---- _Polynesian Researches_. 2 vols. London, 1829.

---- The same work. 4 vols. London, 1859. (This edition referred
to, if not indicated otherwise.)

Elphinstone (Mountstuart), _An Account of the Kingdom of Caubul_.
2 vols. London, 1839.

---- _The History of India_. 2 vols. London, 1843.

---- The same work. Ed. by E. B. Cowell. London, 1866.

Elton (Ch. I.), _Origins of English History_. London, 1890.

Elton (F.), 'Notes on Natives of the Solomon Islands'; in _Jour.
Anthr. Inst._ vol. xvii. London, 1888.

{775}_Emin Pasha in Central Africa_. Trans. London, 1888.

Emmons (Nathanael), _Works_. Ed. by J. Ide. 6 vols. Boston, 1842.

_Encyclopædia Britannica_. Ninth edition. Edinburgh, 1875, &c.

_Encyclopédie Méthodique_. 167 vols. Paris, 1782-1832.

Epictetus, _Dissertationum libri IV, Enchiridion et Fragmenta_. 5
vols. Lipsiae, 1799-1800.

Erasmus (Desiderius), _Adagiorum chiliades quatuor_. Coloniae
Allobrogum, 1612.

Erman (Adolf), _A Handbook of Egyptian Religion_. Trans. London, 1907.

---- _Life in Ancient Egypt_. Trans. London, 1894.

Erman (G. A.), _Reise um die Erde_. 3 vols. Berlin, 1833-48.

Erskine (J. E.), _Journal of a Cruise among the Islands of the
Western Pacific_. London, 1853.

Erskine of Carnock (John), _Principles of the Law of Scotland_.
Ed. by J. Rankine. Edinburgh, 1890.

Escayrac de Lauture (--d'), _Die afrikanische Wüste_. Trans.
Leipzig, 1867.

Eschwege (L. W. von), _Brasilien_. 2 vols. Braunschweig, 1830.

Esmein (A.), _Cours élémentaire d'histoire du droit français_.
Paris, 1898.

---- _Histoire de la procédure criminelle en France_. Paris, 1882.

Esquirol (E.), _Des maladies mentales_. 2 vols. Paris, 1838.

Ethelred (_King_), 'The Laws of'; in _Ancient Laws and Institutes
of England_. London, 1840.

Euripides, _Fabulæ_. Ed. by T. Fix. Parisiis, 1843.

---- _Fragmenta_. Ed. by F. G. Wagner. Parisiis, 1846.

Eusebius, _Opera_. 6 vols. (Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_, Ser.
Graeca, vols. xix-xxiv.) Parisiis, 1857.

Evans (E. P.), 'Ethical Relations between Man and Beast'; in _The
Popular Science Monthly_, vol. xlv. New York, 1894.

Ewald (G. H. A. von), _The Antiquities of Israel_. Trans. London,
1876.

Ewers (J. Ph. G.), _Das älteste Recht der Russen_. Dorpat &
Hamburg, 1826.

Eyre (E. J.), _Journals of Expeditions of Discovery into Central
Australia_. 2 vols. London, 1845.


Faber (Ernst), _A Systematical Digest of the Doctrines of
Confucius_. Hongkong, 1875.

Fabrice (H. von), _Die Lehre von der Kindsabtreibung und vom
Kindsmord_. Erlangen, 1868.

Falkner (Thomas), _A Description of Patagonia_. Hereford, 1774.

Farnell (L. R.), _The Cults of the Greek States_. Oxford, 1896,
&c. _In progress_.

---- 'Sociological Hypotheses concerning the Position of Women in
Ancient Religion'; in _Archiv für Religionswissenschaft_, vol.
vii. Leipzig, 1904.

Farrar (F. W.), _Mercy and Judgment_. London, 1881.

Farrer (J. A.), _Military Manners and Customs_. London, 1885.

---- _Paganism and Christianity_. London & Edinburgh, 1891.

---- _Primitive Manners and Customs_, London, 1879.

Favyn (André), _The Theater of Honour and Knight-Hood_. Trans.
London, 1623.

Fawcett (F.), 'The Nâyars of Malabar'; in the Madras Government
Museum's _Bulletin_, vol. iii. Madras, 1901.

---- _On the Saoras_. (Reprinted from _The Journal of the
Anthropological Society of Bombay_, vol. i.) Bombay, 1888.

{776} Featherman (A.), _Social History of the Races of Mankind_.
7 vols. London, 1881-91.

Felkin (R. W.), 'Notes on the For Tribe of Central Africa'; in
_Proceed. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh_, vol. xiii. Edinburgh, 1886.

---- 'Notes on the Madi or Moru Tribe of Central Africa'; in
_Proceed. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh_, vol. xii. Edinburgh, 1884.

---- 'Notes on the Waganda Tribe of Central Africa'; in _Proceed.
Roy. Soc. Edinburgh_, vol. xiii. Edinburgh, 1886.

Ferrero (G.), 'Les formes primitives du travail'; in _Revue
scientifique_, ser. iv. vol. v. Paris, 1896.

Ferri (Enrico), _Criminal Sociology_. London, 1895.

Festus (S. Pompejus), _De verborum significatione quæ supersunt_.
Ed. by C. O. Muellerus. Lipsiae, 1839.

Feuerbach (P. J. A. von), _Aktenmässige Darstellung merkwürdiger
Verbrechen_. 2 vols. Giessen, 1828-29.

---- _Caspar Hauser_. Trans. London, 1834.

---- _Kritik des Kleinschrodischen Entwurfs zu einem peinlichen
Gesetzbuche für die Chur-Pfalz-Bayrischen Staaten_. 2 vols.
Giesen, 1804.

---- _Lehrbuch des gemeinen in Deutschland gültigen Peinlichen
Rechts_. Ed. by C. J. A. Mittermaier. Giessen, 1847.

---- _Ueber die Strafe als Sicherungsmittel vor künftigen
Beleidigungen des Verbrechers_. Chemnitz, 1800.

---- _Ueber die Unterdrückung und Wiederbefreiung Europens_.
[München & Leipzig], 1813.

Feyfer (D. de), _Verhandeling over den Kindermoord_. Utrecht, 1866.

Fichte (J. G.), _Reden an die deutsche Nation_. Leipzig, 1824.

---- _The Science of Ethics_. Trans. London, 1897.

---- _Das System der Sittenlehre_. Jena & Leipzig, 1798.

---- _Ueber den Begriff des wahrhaften Krieges in Bezug auf den
Krieg im Jahre 1813_. Tübingen, 1815.

Fielding Hall (H.), _The Soul of a People_. London, 1902.

Filangieri (Gaetano), _La scienza della legislazione_. 6 vols.
Milano, 1822.

Finck (H. T.), _Primitive Love and Love-Stories_. New York, 1899.

Finger (A.), _Compendium des Oesterreichischen Rechtes--Das
Strafrecht_. 2 vols. Berlin, 1894-95.

Finsch (Otto), _Neu-Guinea_. Bremen, 1865.

Fischer (Chr. A.), _Bergreisen_. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1804-05.

Fischer (J.), 'Notes sur l'intelligence des singes'; in _Revue
scientifique_, vol. xxxiii. (ser. iii. vol. vii.). Paris, 1884.

Fisher (_Captain_), 'Memoir of Sylhet, Kachar, &c.'; in _Jour.
Asiatic Soc. Bengal_, vol. ix. pt. ii. Calcutta, 1840.

Fiske (John), _Outlines of Cosmic Philosophy_. 2 vols. London,
1874.

Fison (L.) and Howitt (A. W.), _Kamilaroi and Kurnai_. Melbourne
& Sydney, 1880.

Flacourt (É. de), _Histoire de la grande isle Madagascar_. Paris,
1661.

Fleming (William), _A Manual of Moral Philosophy_. London, 1867.

_Fleta, seu Commentarius Juris Anglicani_. London, 1735.

Fleury (C.), _An Historical Account of the Manners and Behaviour
of the Christians_. Trans. London, 1698.

Flügel (G.), _Mani_. Leipzig, 1862.

_Folk-Lore_. London.

_Folk-Lore Journal (The)_. London,

{777}_Folk-Lore Record (The)_. London.

Fonseca (L. A. da), _A escravidão, o clero e o abolicionismo_.
Bahia, 1887.

Forbes (Anna), _Insulinde_. Edinburgh & London, 1887.

Forbes (C. J. F. S.), _British Burma and its People_. London, 1878.

Forbes (David), 'On the Aymara Indians of Bolivia and Peru'; in
_Jour. Ethn. Soc. London_, new ser. vol. ii. London, 1870.

Forbes (F. E.), _Dahomey and the Dahomans_. 2 vols. London, 1851.

Forbes (H. O.), _A Naturalist's Wanderings in the Eastern
Archipelago_. London, 1885.

Foreman (John), _The Philippine Islands_. London, 1890.

Fornander (Abraham), _An Account of the Polynesian Race_. 3 vols.
London, 1878-85.

Forsman (J.), _Bidrag till läran om skadestånd i brottmål enligt
finsk räit_. Helsingfors, 1893.

Forster (G.), _A Voyage round the World_. 2 vols. London, 1777.

Forsyth (J.), _The Highlands of Central India_. London, 1871.

_Fortnightly Review (The)_. London.

Foster (Michael), _A Report of . . . Crown Cases_. London, 1776.

Foucart (P.), _Des associations religieuses chez les Grecs_.
Paris, 1873.

Fountain (P.) and Ward (Thomas), _Rambles of an Australian
Naturalist_. London, 1907.

Fowler (Thomas), _Progressive Morality_. London, 1895.

---- See Wilson (J. M.) and Fowler.

Fowler (W. Warde), _The Roman Festivals of the Period of the
Republic_. London, 1899.

Franciscus a Victoria, _Relectiones Theologicæ_. Lugduni, 1587.

Franois (H. von), _Nama und Damara Deutsch-Süd-West-Afrika_.
Magdeburg, [1896].

Frank (J. P.), _System einer vollständigen medicinischen
Polizey_. 9 vols. Mannheim, &c., 1784-1827.

Frankel (Z.), _Grundlinien des mosaisch-talmudischen Eherechts_.
Leipzig, 1860.

Franklin (B.), _Works_. Ed. by J. Sparks. 10 vols. Boston, 1836-40.

Franklin (John), _Narrative of a Journey to the Shores of the
Polar Sea_. London, 1823.

Fraser (J. B.), _Journal of a Tour through Part of the Snowy
Range of the Him[=a]l[=a] Mountains_. London, 1820.

Fraser (John), _The Aborigines of New South Wales_. Sydney, 1892.

Frauenstadt (Paul), _Blutrache und Todtschlagsühne im Deutschen
Mittelalter_. Leipzig, 1881.

Frazer (_Sir_ J. G.), _Adonis Attis Osiris_. London, 1906.

---- 'Certain Burial Customs as illustrative of the Primitive
Theory of the Soul'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xv. London, 1886.

---- _The Dying God_. London, 1911.

---- 'Folk-Lore in the Old Testament'; in _Anthropological Essays
presented to E. B. Tylor_. Oxford, 1907.

---- _The Golden Bough_. 3 vols. London, 1900.

---- _Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship_. London, 1905.

---- _The Magic Art_. 2 vols. London, 1911.

---- 'The Origin of Totemism'; in _The Fortnightly Review_, new
ser. vol. lxv. London, 1899.

---- _Pausanias's Description of Greece_. 6 vols. London, 1898.

{778} Frazer (_Sir_ J. G.), _Totemism_. Edinburgh, 1887.

---- _Totemism and Exogamy_. 4 vols. London, 1910.

Frederick II. (_Emperor_), 'Constitutiones Neapolitanæ sive
Siculæ'; in Lindenbrog, _Codex legum antiquarum_. Francofurti, 1613.

Freeman (E. A.), _Comparative Politics_. London, 1896.

---- _The Reign of William Rufus_. 2 vols. Oxford, 1882.

Freytag (G. W.), _Arabum Proverbia_. 3 vols. Bonnae ad Rhenum, 1838-43.

Friedländer (L.), _Darstellungen aus der Sittengeschichte Roms_.
2 vols. Leipzig, 1901.

Friedrichs (Karl), 'Einzeluntersuchungen zur vergleichenden
Rechtswissenschaft'; in _Zeitschr. f. vergleichende Rechtswiss._
vol. x. Stuttgart, 1892.

---- 'Mensch und Person'; in _Das Ausland_, vol. lxiv. Stuttgart,
1891.

Fries (J. F.), _Neue oder anthropologische Kritik der Vernunft_.
3 vols. Heidelberg, 1828-31.

Friis (J. A.), _Lappisk Mythologi_. Christiania, 1871.

Fritsch (Gustav), _Drei Jahre in Süd-Afrika_. Breslau, 1868.

---- _Die Eingeborenen Süd-Afrika's_. Breslau, 1872.

Fryer (G. E.), _The Khyeng People of the Sandoway District,
Arakan_. (Reprinted from _Jour. Asiatic Soc. Bengal_.) Calcutta,
1875.

Fryer (John), _A New Account of East-India and Persia_. London,
1698.

Fuld (L.), 'Das Asylrecht im Alterthum und Mittelalter'; in
_Zeitschr. f. vergleichende Rechtswiss._ vol. vii. Stuttgart,
1887.

Fulgentius (_Saint_), 'De fide'; in Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_,
vol. lxv. Parisiis, 1847.

Funk (--), 'Die Entwicklung des Osterfastens'; in _Theologische
Quartalschrift_, vol. lxxv. Tübingen, 1893.

Furness (W. H.), _The Home-Life of Borneo Head-Hunters_.
Philadelphia, 1902.

Fustel de Coulanges (N. D.), _La Cité antique_. Paris, 1864.
(Quoted in vol. ii.)

---- The same work. Paris, 1866. (Quoted in vol. i.)

Fytche (A.), _Burma Past and Present_. 2 vols. London, 1878.


Gadelius (Bror), _Om tvångstankar_. Lund, 1896.

Gage (Matilda J.), _Woman, Church and State_. Chicago, 1893.

Gaidoz (H.), 'Le suicide'; in _Mélusine_, vol. iv. Paris,
1888-89.

Gaius, _Institutionum juris civilis commentarii quattuor_. Ed.
and trans. by E. Poste. Oxford, 1890.

Galton (Francis), 'Eugenics'; in _Sociological Papers_, vols.
i.-ii., 1904-05. London, 1905-06.

---- _Inquiries into Human Faculty and its Development_. London,
1883.

Gans (E.), _Das Erbrecht in weltgeschichtlicher Entwickelung_. 4
vols. Berlin, &c., 1824-35.

Garcilasso de la Vega, _First Part of the Royal Commentaries of
the Yncas_. Trans. ed. by C. R. Markham. 2 vols. London, 1869-71.

Gardiner (A. H.), 'Egyptian Ethics and Morality'; in Hastings,
_Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics_, vol. v. Edinburgh, 1912.

Garnett (Lucy M. J.), _The Women of Turkey and their Folk-Lore_.
2 vols. 1890-91.

Garofalo (R.), _La Criminologie_. Paris, 1890.

Garraud (R.), _Traité théorique et pratique du droit pénal
Français_. 6 vols. Paris, 1898-1902.

{779} Gason (S.), 'The Manners and Customs of the Dieyerie
Tribe'; in Woods, _The Native Tribes of South Australia_.
Adelaide, 1879.

Gass (W.), _Geschichte der christlichen Ethik_. 3 vols. Berlin,
1881-87.

'Gautama,' trans. by G. Bühler; in _The Sacred Books of the
East_, vol. ii. Oxford, 1897.

Gautier (Léon), _La Chevalerie_. Paris, 1884.

Geiger (K. A.), _Der Selbstmord im klassischen Altertum_.
Augsburg, 1888.

Geiger (W.), _Civilization of the Eastern Ir[=a]nians in Ancient
Times_. Trans. 2 vols. London., 1885-86.

Geiseler (--), _Die Oster-Insel_. Berlin, 1883.

Gelli (J.), _Il duello_. Firenze, 1886.

Gellius (Aulus), _Noctes Atticæ_. Ed. by A. Lion. 2 vols.
Gottingae, 1824.

Gennep (A. van), _Les rites de passage_. Paris, 1911.

---- _Tabou et totémisme à Madagascar_. Paris, 1904.

_Geographical Journal (The)_. London.

Georgi (J. G.), _Russia_. Trans. 4 vols. London, 1780-83.

Georgisch (P.), _Corpus juris Germanici antiqui_. Halae
Magdeburgicae, 1738.

Gerhohus, 'De aedificio Dei'; in Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_, vol.
cxciv. Parisiis, 1855.

Geusius (J.), _Victimæ Humanæ_. 2 vols. Groningae, 1675.

Geyer (A.), _Die Lehre von der Nothwehr_. Jena, 1857.

Ghani (M. A.), 'Social Life and Morality in India'; in _Internal.
Jour. of Ethics_, vol. vii. London, 1897.

Ghillany (F. W.), _Die Menschenopfer der alten Hebräer_.
Nürnberg, 1842.

Gibb (John), 'The Christian Church and War'; in _The British
Quarterly Review_, vol. lxxiii. London, 1881.

Gibbon (Edward), _The History of the Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire_. Ed. by W. Smith. 8 vols. London, 1854-55.

Gibbons (A. S. H.), _Exploration and Hunting in Central Africa_.
London. 1898.

Gibbs (George), 'Tribes of Western Washington and Northwestern
Oregon'; in _U.S. Geographical and Geological Survey of the Rocky
Mountain Region:--Contributions to North American Ethnology_,
vol. i. Washington, 1877.

Giddings (F. H.), _The Principles of Sociology_. New York, 1896.

Gide (Paul), _Étude sur la condition privée de la femme_. Ed. by
A. Esmein. Paris, 1885.

Gieseler (J. C. L.), _Text-Book of Ecclesiastical History_.
Trans. 3 vols. Philadelphia, 1836.

Giles (H. A.), _Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio_. 2 vols.
London, 1880.

Gill (W. W.), _Life in the Southern Isles_. London, 1876.

---- _Myths and Songs from the South Pacific_. London, 1876.

Gillen (F. J.), 'Notes on Some Manners and Customs of the
Aborigines of the McDonnell Ranges belonging to the Arunta
Tribe'; in _Report on the Work of the Horn Scientific Expedition
to Central Australia_, pt. iv. London & Melbourne, 1896.

Gilmour (James), _Among the Mongols_. London, [1892].

Ginoulhiac (Ch.), _Histoire du régime dotal_. Paris, 1842.

Ginsburg (Ch. D.), _The Essenes_. London, 1864.

Girard (F.), _Manuel élémentaire de droit romain_. Paris, 1901.

Girard de Rialle (J.), _La mythologie comparée_. Paris, 1878.

Gisborne (William), _The Colony of New Zealand_. London, 1888.

{780} Gizycki (G. von), _An Introduction to the Study of Ethics_.
Adapted from the German by Stanton Coit. London, 1891.

Glaber (R.), 'Historiarum sui temporis libri quinque'; in
Bouquet, _Recueil des Historiens des Gaules et de la France_,
vol. x. Paris, 1760.

Gladstone (W. E.), _Studies on Homer and the Homeric Age_. 3
vols. Oxford, 1858.

Glanvilla (R. de), _Tractatus de Legibus et Consuetudinibus Regni
Angliæ_. Londini, [1555?].

---- The same work. Trans. by John Beames. London, 1812.

Glasson (Ernest), _Le mariage civil et le divorce_. Paris, 1880.

_Glimpses of the Eastern Archipelago_. Trans. Singapore, 1894.

_Globus. Illustrirte Zeitschrift für Länder- und Völkerkunde_.
Braunschweig, &c.

Gobineau (A. de), _The Moral and Intellectual Diversity of
Races_. Trans. Philadelphia, 1856.

Goblet d'Alviella (Eugène), _Hibbert Lectures on the Origin and
Growth of the Conception of God_. London, 1892.

Godwin (William), _Enquiry concerning Political Justice_. 2 vols.
London, 1796.

Goehlert (V.), 'Die geschlechtsverschiedenheit der Kinder in den
Ehen'; in _Zeitschr. f. Ethnol._ vol. xiii. Berlin, 1881.

Göpfert (F. A.), _Moraltheologie_. Vol. i. Paderborn, 1899.

Goesius (W.), _Rei agrariæ auctores legesque variæ_.
Amstelredami, 1674.

Götte (W.), _Das Delphische Orakel_. Leipzig, 1839.

_Göttinger Studien_. Göttingen.

_Göttingische gelehrte Anzeigen_.  Göttingen.

Goiten (E.), _Das Vergeltungsprincip im biblischen und
talmudischen Strafrecht_. Frankfurt a.M., 1893.

Goldast (M.), _Collectio consuetudinum et legum imperialium_.
Francofordiae ad Moenum, 1613.

Goldziher (Ignaz), _Abhandlungen zur arabischen Philologie_. 2
vols. Leiden, 1896-99.

---- _Muhammedanische Studien_. 2 vols. Halle a.S., 1889-90.

Gomara (F. Lopez de), 'Primera parte de la historia general de
las Indias'; in _Biblioteca de autores españoles_, vol. xxii.
Madrid, 1852.

Gomme (G. L.), _Ethnology in Folklore_. London, 1892.

---- 'Some Traditions and Superstitions connected with
Buildings'; in _The Antiquary_, vol. iii. London, 1881.

Goodell (William), _The American Slave Code in Theory and
Practice_. New York, 1853.

---- _Slavery and Anti-Slavery_. New York, 1852.

Goos (C.), _Forelæsninger over den almindelige Retslære_. 2 vols.
Kjøbenhavn, 1889-94.

Gop[vc]evi['c] (S.), _Oberalbanien und seine Liga_. Leipzig, 1881.

'Gospel of the Nativity of Mary (The)'; in _Ante-Nicene Christian
Library_, vol. xvi. Edinburgh, 1870.

'Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew (The)'; in _Ante-Nicene Christian
Library_, vol. xvi. Edinburgh, 1870.

_Gotlands-Lagen_. Ed. by C. J. Schlyter. (_Corpus Juris
Sueo-Gotorum Antiqui_, vol. vii.) Lund, 1852.

Gråberg di Hemsö (J.), _Specchio geografico, e statistico dell'
impero di Marocco_. Genova, 1834.

_Grágás, Hin forna lögbók Íslendínga_. 2 vols. Havniae, 1829.

{781} Grange (--), 'Extracts from the Journal of an Expedition
into the Naga Hills'; in _Jour. Asiatic Soc. Bengal_, vol. ix.
pt. ii. Calcutta, 1840.

Granger (F. S.), 'The Moral Life of the Early Romans'; in
_Internal. Jour. of Ethics_, vol. vii. London, 1897.

---- _The Worship of the Romans_. London, 1895.

Granville (R. K.) and Roth (F. N.), 'Notes on the Jekris'; in
_Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxviii. London, 1899.

Gratian, _Decretum_. (Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_, vol. clxxxvii.)
Parisiis, 1855.

Graul (K.), _Reise nach Ostindien_. 5 vols. Leipzig, 1854-56.

Gray (J. H.), _China_. 2 vols. London, 1878.

Green (J. R.), _History of the English People_. 4 vols. London,
1879-81.

Greenwood (Thomas), _The First Book of the History of the
Germans_. London, 1836.

Gregor (Walter), _Notes on the Folk-lore of the North-East of
Scotland_. London, 1881.

Gregorovius (Ferdinand), _Wanderings in Corsica_. Trans. 2 vols.
London, 1855.

Gregory I. (_Saint_), surnamed _the Great_, _Opera omnia_. 5
vols. (Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_, vols. lxxv.-lxxix.) Parisiis,
1849.

Gregory III., 'Judicia congrua poenitentibus'; in Labbe-Mansi,
_Sacrorum Conciliorum collectio_, vol. xii. Florentiæ, 1766.

Gregory IX., 'Decretales'; in _Corpus juris canonici_, ed. by A.
Friedberg, vol. ii. Lipsiæ, 1881.

Gregory Nazianzen (_Saint_), _Opera omnia_. 4 vols. (Migne,
_Patrologiæ cursus_, Ser. Graeca, vols. xxxv.-xxxviii.) Parisiis,
1857-58.

Gregory of Tours (_Saint_), _Opera omnia_. (Migne, _Patrologiæ
cursus_, vol. lxxi.) Parisiis, 1849.

Grey (George), _Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery in
North-West and Western Australia_. 2 vols. London, 1841.

---- _Polynesian Mythology_. Auckland, 1885.

Grierson (G. A.), _Bih[=a]r Peasant Life_. Calcutta, 1885.

Griesinger (W.), _Mental Pathology and Therapeutics_. Trans.
London, 1867.

Griffis (W. E.), _Corea_. London, 1882.

---- _The Mikado's Empire_. New York, 1883.

---- _The Religions of Japan_. London, 1895.

Griffith (William), 'Journal of a Visit to the Mishmee Hills in
Assam'; in _Jour. Asiatic Soc. Bengal_, vol. vi. Calcutta, 1837.

Grimm (Jacob), _Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer_. Ed. by A. Heusler
and R. Hübner. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1899.

---- _Kinder- und Hausmärchen. Grosse Ausgabe_. Berlin, 1870.

---- _Kleinere Schriften_. 8 vols. Berlin, 1864-90.

---- _Reinhart Fuchs_. Berlin, 1834.

---- _Teutonic Mythology_. Trans. 4 vols. London, 1882-88.

Grinnell (G. B.), _Pawnee Hero Stories and Folk-Tales_. New York,
1889.

---- _The Story of the Indian_. London, 1896.

Gronovius (J.), _Thesaurus Græcarum antiquitatum_. 12 vols.
Lugduni Batavorum, 1697-1702.

Groot (J. J. M. de), _The Religious System of China_. Leyden,
1892, &c. _In progress_.

Grosse (Ernst), _Die Formen der Familie und die Formen der
Wirthschaft_. Freiburg i.B. & Leipzig, 1896.

{782} Grote (John), _A Treatise on the Moral Ideals_. Ed. by J.
B. Mayor. Cambridge, 1876.

Grotius (Hugo), _De jure belli et pacis libri tres_. With a
trans. by W. Whewell. 3 vols. Cambridge, 1853.

Gruppe (Otto), _Die griechischen Culte und Mythen_. Vol. i.
Leipzig, 1887.

Guazzini (S.), _Tractatus ad defensam inquisitorum, carceratorum
reorum, & condemnatorum super quocunque crimine_. Venetiis, 1639.

Gudgeon (W. E.), 'Maori Religion'; in _Jour. Polynesian Soc._
vol. xiv. Wellington, 1905.

Gudmundsson (V.) and Kålund (Kr.), 'Sitte. Skandinavische
Verhältnisse'; in Paul, _Grundriss der germanischen Philologie_,
vol. iii. Strassburg, 1900.

Günther (L.), _Die Idee der Wiedervergeltung in der Geschichte
und Philosophie des Strafrechts_. 3 vols. Erlangen, 1889-95.

Guérard (B. E. C.), _Collection des Cartulaires de France. Tomes
I-II. Cartulaire de l'Abbaye de Saint-Père de Chartres_. 2 vols.
Paris, 1840.

Guibal (Georges), _Histoire du sentiment national en France
pendant la guerre de Cent ans_. Paris, 1875.

Guibertus de Novigento, 'Monodiarum sive de vita sua libri tres';
in Bouquet, _Recueil des Historiens des Gaules et de la France_,
vol. xii. Paris, 1781.

Guinnard (A.), _Three Years' Slavery among the Patagonians_.
Trans. London, 1871.

Gumilla (J.), _El Orinoco ilustrado_. 2 vols. Madrid, 1745.

Gummere (F. B.), _Germanic Origins_. London, 1892.

Guppy (H. B.), _The Solomon Islands_. London, 1887.

Gurney (J. J.), _Observations on the Distinguishing Views and
Practices of the Society of Friends_. London, 1834.

Gutzlaff (Charles), _A Sketch of Chinese History_. 2 vols.
London, 1834.

Guyau (J. M.), _Esquisse d'une morale sans obligation ni
sanction_. Paris, 1885.

'Gwentian Code (The)'; in _Ancient Laws and Institutes of Wales_.
London, 1841.


Haberland (C.), 'Der Kindermord als Volkssitte'; in _Globus_,
vol. xxxvii. Braunschweig, 1880.

---- 'Ueber Gebräuche und Aberglauben beim Essen'; in _Zeitschr.
f. Völkerpsychologie und Sprachwissenschaft_, vols. xvii.-xviii.
Leipzig, 1887-88.

Haddon (A. C.), 'The Ethnography of the Western Tribe of Torres
Straits'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xix. London, 1890.

---- _Head-Hunters_. London, 1901.

---- _Magic and Fetishism_. London, 1906.

---- in _Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to
Torres Straits_. vol. v. Cambridge, 1904.

Haeckel (Ernst), _A Visit to Ceylon_. Trans. London, 1883.

Hagen (B.), _Unter den Papua's_. Wiesbaden, 1899.

Hagman (Lucina), 'Från samskolan'; in _Humanitas_, vol. ii.
Helsingfors, 1897.

Hahn (C.), _Kaukasische Reisen und Studien_. Leipzig, 1896.

Hahn (J. G. von), _Albanesische Studien_. 3 vols. Jena, 1854.

Hahn (Theophilus), _Tsuni-Goam. The Supreme Being of the
Khoi-Khoi_. London, 1881.

{783} Hale (Horatio), 'The Iroquois Sacrifice of the White Dog';
in _The American Antiquarian and Oriental Journal_, vol. vii.
Chicago, 1885.

---- _U.S. Exploring Expedition under the Command of Ch. Wilkes.
Vol. VI. Ethnography and Philology_. Philadelphia, 1846.

Hale (Matthew), _The History of the Pleas of the Crown_. 2 vols.
London, 1800.

Halévy (J.), _Mélanges de critique et d'histoire relatifs aux
peuples sémitiques_. Paris, 1883.

Hall (C. F.), _Arctic Researches and Life among the Esquimaux_.
New York, 1865.

Hall (G. Stanley), 'Children's Lies'; in _The American Journal of
Psychology_, vol. iii. Worcester, 1890-91.

---- 'A Study of Anger'; in _The American Journal of Psychology_,
vol. x. Worcester, 1898-99.

Hall (W. E.), _A Treatise on International Law_, Oxford, 1890.
(Referred to in vol. i.)

---- The same work. Ed. by J. B. Atlay. Oxford, 1904. (Referred
to in vol. ii.)

Hallam (Henry), _View of the State of Europe during the Middle
Ages_. 3 vols. London, 1837. (Referred to in ch. xxvii.)

---- The same work. 3 vols. London, 1860.

Halleck (H. W.), _International Law_. Ed. by Sir Sherston Baker.
2 vols. London, 1893.

Hamilton (Augustus), _Maori Art_. Wellington, 1896-1901.

Hamilton (William), _Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic_. 2 vols.
Edinburgh & London, 1877.

Hamilton (William J.), _Researches in Asia Minor, Pontus, and
Armenia_. 2 vols. London, 1842.

[Hv]ammurabi (_King of Babylon_), _The Code of Laws
promulgated by_. Trans. by C. H. W. Johns. Edinburgh, 1903.

Hanoteau (A.) and Letourneux (A.), _La Kabylie et les coutumes
Kabyles_. 3 vols. Paris, 1872-73.

Hansard (T. C.), _The Parliamentary Debates from 1803 to the
Present Time_. London, 1812, &c.

Hardeland (A.), _Dajacksch-deutsches Wörterbuch_. Amsterdam, 1859.

Hardisty (W. L.), 'The Loucheux Indians'; in _Smithsonian Report,
1866_. Washington, 1867.

Hardman (E. T.), 'Notes on some Habits and Customs of the Natives
of the Kimberley District, Western Australia'; in _Proceed. Roy.
Irish Academy_, ser. iii. vol. i. Dublin, 1889-91.

Hardy (R. Spence), _Eastern Monachism_. London, 1850.

---- _A Manual of Budhism, in its Modern Development_. London,
1880.

Harkness (H.), _A Description of a Singular Aboriginal Race
inhabiting the Neilgherry Hills_. London, 1832.

Harmon (D. W.), _A Journal of Voyages and Travels in the Interior
of North America_. Andover, 1820.

Harnack (A.), _History of Dogma_. Trans. 7 vols. London, 1894-99.

---- 'Manichaeism'; in _Encyclopædia Britannica_, vol. xv.
Edinburgh, 1883.

Harris (S.), 'The Christian Doctrine of Labor'; in _The New
Englander_, vol. xxiv. New Haven, 1865.

Harris (S. F.), _Principles of the Criminal Law_. London, 1899.

{784} Harris (Thomas) and Johnson (R.), _Reports of Cases argued
and determined in the General Court and Court of Appeals of the
State of Maryland, from 1800 to 1805, inclusive_. 4 vols.
Annapolis, 1821-27.

Harris (W. Cornwallis), _The Highlands of Æthiopia_. 3 vols.
London, 1844.

Harrison (Ch.), 'Religion and Family among the Haidas'; in _Jour.
Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxi. London, 1892.

Harrison (Jane Ellen), _Prolegomena to the Study of Greek
Religion_. Cambridge, 1903.

Hartknoch (Christ.), _Alt- und Neues Preussen_. 2 vols.
Franckfurt & Leipzig, 1684.

Hartland (E. Sidney), 'Concerning the Rite at the Temple of
Mylitta'; in _Anthropological Essays presented to E. B. Tylor_.
Oxford, 1907.

---- _The Legend of Perseus_. 3 vols. London, 1894-96.

---- _Ritual and Belief_. London, 1914.

Hartley (David), _Observations on Man_. 2 vols. London, 1810.

---- _Theory of the Human Mind, on the Principle of the
Association of Ideas; with Essays relating to the Subject of it.
By Joseph Priestley_. London, 1790.

Hartmann (R.), _Die menschenähnlichen Affen_. Leipzig, 1883.

Hartshorne (B. F.), 'The Weddas'; in _The Indian Antiquary_, vol.
viii. Bombay, 1879.

Hartung (J. A.), _Die Religion der Römer_. 2 vols. Erlangen, 1836.

_Harvard Law Review_. Cambridge (Mass.).

Hastings (J.), _A Dictionary of the Bible_. 5 vols. Edinburgh,
1899-1904.

---- _Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics_. Edinburgh, 1908, &c.
_In progress_.

Haug (B.), _Die Alterthümmer der Christen_. Stuttgart, 1785.

Haupt (Paul), 'Die zwölfte Tafel des babylonischen Nimrod-Epos';
in _Beiträge zur Assyriologie_, vol. i. Leipzig, 1889.

Hawtrey (S. H. C.), 'The Lengua Indians of the Paraguayan Chaco';
in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxxi. London, 1901.

Haxthausen (A. von), _The Russian Empire_. Trans. 2 vols. London,
1856.

---- _Transcaucasia_. Trans. London, 1854.

Haynes (E. S. P.), _Religious Persecution_. London, 1904.

Haywood (John) and Cobbs (R. L.), _The Statute Laws of the State
of Tennessee_. 2 vols. Knoxville, 1831.

Hearn (W. E.), _The Aryan Household_. London & Melbourne, 1879.

Hearne (S.), _A Journey from Prince of Wales's Fort to the
Northern Ocean_. Dublin, 1796.

Heber (R.), _Narrative of a Journey through the Upper Provinces
of India_. 2 vols. London, 1828.

Hedley (J. C.), 'Dr. Mivart on Faith and Science'; in _The Dublin
Review_, ser. iii. vol. xviii. London, 1887.

Hefele (C. J.), _Beiträge zur Kirchengeschichte, Archäologie und
Liturgik_. 2 vols. Tübingen, 1864.

---- _A History of the Councils of the Church_. Trans. 5 vols.
Edinburgh, 1871-96.

Heffter (A. W.), _Das Europäische Völkerrecht der Gegenwart_. Ed.
by F. H. Geffken. Berlin, 1882.

Hegel (G. W. F.), _Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts_. Ed.
by G. J. P. J. Bolland. Leiden, 1902.

---- _Philosophy of Right_. Trans. by S. W. Dyde. London, 1896.

{785} Hehn (V.), _The Wanderings of Plants and Animals from their
First Home_. Ed. by J. S. Stallybrass. London, 1888.

Hellwald (F. von), _Die menschliche Familie_. Leipzig, 1889.

Hellwig (A.), _Das Asylrecht der Naturvölker_. Berlin, 1903.

Helmold (--), _Chronik der Slaven_. Trans. Berlin, 1852.

Helps (_Sir_ Arthur), _Some Talk about Animals and their
Masters_. London, 1883.

---- _The Spanish Conquest in America_. 4 vols. London, 1855-61.

Helvetius (C. A.), _De l'Homme, de ses facultés intellectuelles
et de son éducation_. 2 vols. London, 1773.

Henault (Ch. J. F.), _Nouvel abregé chronologique de l'histoire
de France_. Paris, 1752.

Henderson (John), _Observations on the Colonies of N.S. Wales and
Van Diemen's Land_. Calcutta, 1832.

Henke (A.), _Lehrbuch der gerichtlichen Medicin_. Ed. by C.
Bergmann. Berlin, 1859.

Henke (E.), _Grundriss einer Geschichte des deutschen peinlichen
Rechts und der peinlichen Rechtswissenschaft_. 2 vols. Sulzbach,
1809.

Henkenius (H.), 'Entstehung und Verbreitung der Anthropophagie';
in _Deutsche Rundschau für Geographie und Statistik_, vol. xv.
Wien, &c., 1893.

Hennepin (Louis), _Description de la Louisiane_. Paris, 1683.

---- _A New Discovery of a Vast Country in America, . . . between
New France and New Mexico._ Trans. 2 vols. London, 1698.

---- _Nouvelle Découverte d'un très Grand Pays situé dans
l'Amerique, entre Le Nouveau Mexique, et La Mer Glaciale_.
Utrecht, 1697.

Henry I. (_King_), 'Leges'; in _Ancient Laws and Institutes of
England_. London, 1840.

Hepp (F. C. Th.), _Die Zurechnung auf dem Gebiete des Civilrechts
insbesondere die Lehre von den Unglücksfällen_. Tübingen, 1838.

Heriot (George), _Travels through the Canadas_. London, 1807.

Hermann (C. F.), _Disputatio de terminis eorumque religione apud
Græcos_. Gottingae, 1846.

---- _Lehrbuch der gottesdienstlichen Alterthümer der Griechen_.
Ed. by K. B. Stark. Heidelberg, 1858.

---- _Lehrbuch der Griechischen Privatalterthümer_. Ed. by H.
Blümner. Freiburg i.B. & Tübingen, 1882.

---- _Lehrbuch der Griechischen Rechtsalterthümer_. Ed. by Th.
Thalheim. (_Lehrbuch der Griechischen Antiquitäten_, vol. ii. pt.
i.) Freiburg i.B. & Tübingen, 1884.

Hernsheim (Franz), _Beitrag zur Sprache der Marshall-Inseln_.
Leipzig, 1880.

Herodotus, _Historiarum libri IX._ Ed. by G. Dindorfius.
Parisiis, 1844.

---- The same work. English version, ed. by G. Rawlinson, Col.
Rawlinson, and Sir J. G. Wilkinson. 4 vols. London, 1875.

Herrera (Antonio de), _The General History of the West Indies_.
Trans. 6 vols. London, 1825-26.

Hershon (P. I.), _Treasures of the Talmud_. London, 1882.

Hertz (E.), _Voltaire und die französische Strafrechtspflege im
achtzehnten Jahrhundert_. Stuttgart, 1887.

Hertz (R.), 'Contribution à une étude sur la représentation
collective de la mort'; in _L'année sociologique_, vol. x.,
1905-06. Paris, 1907.

Herzog (J. J.), _Realencyclopädie für protestantische Theologie_.
Ed. by A. Hauck. Leipzig, 1896, &c. _In progress_.

{786} Herzog (J. J.), and Plitt (G. L.), _Realencyclopädie für
protestantische Theologie_. 18 vols. Leipzig, 1877-88.

Herzog (R.), _Rücktritt vom Versuch und thätige Reue_. Würzburg,
1889.

Hesiod, _Carmina_. Ed. by F. S. Lehrs. Parisiis, 1840.

Hessey (J. A.), _Sunday_, London, 1889.

Hettner (H.), _Geschichte der französischen Literatur im
achtzehnten Jahrhundert_. Braunschweig, 1894.

Hetzel (H.), _Die Todesstrafe in ihrer kulturgeschichtlichen
Entwicklung_. Berlin, 1870.

Heuglin (M. Th. von), _Reise nach Abessinien_. Jena, 1868.

Hewitt (J. N. B.), 'The Iroquoian Concept of the Soul'; in _Jour.
of American Folk-Lore_, vol. viii. Boston & New York,
1895.

Hickson (S. J.), _A Naturalist in North Celebes_. London, 1889.

Hilary (_Saint_), _Opera omnia_. 2 vols. (Migne, _Patrologiæ
cursus_, vol. ix.-x.) Parisiis, 1844-45.

Hildebrand (R.), _Recht und Sitte auf den verschiedenen
wirtschaftlichen Kulturstufen_. Vol. i. Jena, 1896.

Hildebrandt (J. M.), 'Ethnographische Notizen über Wakámba und
ihre Nachbaren'; in _Zeitschr. f. Ethnologie_, vol. x. Berlin,
1878.

Hilhouse (William), _**Indian Notices_. _S.l._, 1825.

Hill (Richard) and Thornton (George), _Notes on the Aborigines of
New South Wales_. Sydney, 1892.

Hillebrandt (Alfred), 'Eine Miscelle aus dem Vedaritual'; in
_Zeitschr. der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft_, vol. xl.
Leipzig, 1886.

Hinde (S. L. and Mrs. Hildegarde), _The Last of the Masai_.
London, 1901.

Hippel (Robert von), _Die Thielquälerei in der Strafgesetzgebung_.
Berlin, 1891.

Hirn (Yrjö), _The Origins of Art_. London, 1900.

Hirschfeld (H.), 'Remarks on the Etymology of [vS]abb[=a]th'; in
_Jour. Roy. Asiatic Soc._ London, 1896.

Hirschfeld (Magnus), _Die Homosexualität des Mannes und des
Weibes_. Berlin, 1914.

Hislop (S.), _Papers relating to the Aboriginal Tribes of the
Central Provinces_. Ed. by R. Temple. _S.l._, 1866.

_Hitopadesa_. Trans. by F. Pincott. London, 1880.

Hlothhære and Eadric (_Kings_), 'The Laws of'; in _Ancient Laws
and Institutes of England_. London, 1840.

Hobbes (Thomas), _Leviathan_. Oxford, 1881.

Hobhouse (L. T.), _Morals in Evolution_. 2 vols. London, 1906.

Hodge (Charles), _Systematic Theology_. 3 vols. London &
Edinburgh, 1871-73.

Hodgson (B. H.), _Miscellaneous Essays relating to Indian
Subjects_. 2 vols. London, 1880.

Hodgson (C. P.), _Reminiscences of Australia_. London, 1846.

Hodson (T. C.), 'The "Genna" amongst the Tribes of Assam': in
_Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxxvi. London, 1906.

Høffding (H.), _Etik_. København, 1897.

Höfler (M.), 'Krankheits-Dämonen'; in _Archiv f. Religionswiss._
vol. ii. Freiburg i.B., 1899.

Högström (M. P.), _Beskrifning öfver de til Sveriges Krona
lydande Lapmarker_. Stockholm, [1745?].

Hoffman (W. J.), 'The Menomini Indians'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur.
Ethn._ vol. xiv. Washington, 1896.

{787} Hoffmann (René), _La notion de l'Être suprême chez les
peuples non civilisés_. Genève, 1907.

Holbach (P. H. D. d'), _Système de la nature_. Ed. by D. Diderot.
2 vols. Paris, 1821.

Holden (W. C.), _The Past and Future of the Kaffir Races_.
London, [1866].

Holinshed (R.), _Chronicles of England, Scotland, and Ireland_. 6
vols. London, 1807-08.

Holland (F. M.), _The Reign of the Stoics_. New York, _s.d._

Holland (Thomas A.), _A Time of War_. Brighton, 1855.

Hollis (A. C.), _The Masai_. Oxford, 1905.

Holm (G.), 'Ethnologisk Skizze af Angmagsalikerne'; in
_Meddelelser om Grönland_, vol. x. Kjøbenhavn, 1888.

Holmberg (H. J.), 'Ethnographische Skizzen über die Völker des
russischen Amerika'; in _Acta Soc. Scientiarum Fennicæ_, vol. iv.
Helsingfors, 1856.

Holmes (O. W.), _The Common Law_. London, 1882.

Hoist (H. von), _The Constitutional and Political History of the
United States_. Trans. 5 vols. Chicago, 1876-89.

Holtzendorff (F. von), _Encyclopädie der Rechtswissenschaft_. 2
vols. Leipzig, 1873-76.

Holtzmann (Adolf), _Deutsche Mythologie_. Ed. by A. Holder.
Leipzig, 1874.

Holub (E.), 'Central South African Tribes'; in _Jour. Anthr.
Inst._ vol. x. London, 1881.

---- 'Die Ma-Atabele'; in _Zeitschr. f. Ethnol._ vol. xxv.
Berlin, 1893.

---- _Seven Years in South Africa_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1881.

Holzman (M.), 'Sünde und Sühne in den Rigvedahymnen und den
Psalmen'; in _Zeitschr. f. Völkerpsychologie und Sprachwissenschaft_,
vol. xv. Berlin, 1884.

_Home and Foreign Review (The)_. London.

Homer, _Carmina_. Parisiis, 1838.

Hommel (Fritz), _Die Semitischen Völker und Sprachen_. Leipzig,
1881-83.

Honoré de Sainte Marie, _Dissertations historiques et critiques
sur la chevalerie_. Paris, 1718.

Hood (T. H.), _Notes of a Cruise in H.M.S. "Fawn" in the Western
Pacific_. Edinburgh, 1863.

Hooker (J. D.), _Himalayan Journals_. 2 vols. London, 1855.

Hooker (Richard), _The Ecclesiastical Polity and other Works_. 3
vols. London, 1830.

Hooper (W. H.), _Ten Months among the Tents of the Tuski_.
London, 1853.

Hopkins (E. W.), _The Religions of India_. London, 1896.

Horatius Flaccus (Q.), _Opera omnia_. 4 vols. Londini, 1825.

Horwicz (Adolf), _Psychologische Analysen auf physiologischer
Grundlage_. 2 vols. Halle & Magdeburg, 1872-78.

Hose (Charles), 'A Journey up the Baram River to Mount Dulit and
the Highlands of Borneo'; in _The Geographical Journal_, vol. i.
London, 1893.

---- and McDougall (W.), _The Pagan Tribes of Borneo_. 2 vols.
London, 1912.

---- and McDougall, 'The Relations between Men and Animals in
Sarawak'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxxi. London, 1901.

Hourst (--), _Sur le Niger et au pays des Touaregs_. Paris, 1898.

Howard (B. Douglas), _Life with Trans-Siberian Savages_. London,
1893.

{788} Howard (G. E.), _A History of Matrimonial Institutions_.
3 vols. Chicago & London, 1904.

Howell (T. B. and T. J.). See _State Trials_.

Howitt (A. W.), 'Australian Group Relations'; in _Smithsonian
Report, 1883_. Washington, 1885.

---- _The Native Tribes of South-East Australia_. London, 1904.

---- 'The Native Tribes of South-East Australia'; in _Folk-Lore_,
vol. xvii. London, 1906.

---- 'On Australian Medicine Men'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol.
xvi. London, 1887.

---- 'On some Australian Beliefs'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol.
xiii. London, 1884.

---- 'On some Australian Ceremonies of Initiation'; in _Jour.
Anthr. Inst._ vol. xiii. London, 1884.

Hozumi (Nobushige), _Ancestor-Worship and Japanese Law_. Tokyo,
Osaka & Kyoto, 1913.

'Hsiâo King (The),' trans. by J. Legge; in _The Sacred Books of
the East_, vol. iii. Oxford, 1879.

Hubert (H.) and Mauss (Marcel), 'Essai sur la nature et la
fonction du sacrifice'; in _L'année sociologique_, vol. ii.,
1897-98. Paris, 1899.

Huc (E. R.), _The Chinese Empire_. Trans. London, 1859.

---- _Travels in Tartary, Thibet, and China_. Trans. 2 vols.
London, _s.d._

Hübbe-Schleiden (W.), _Ethiopien. Studien über West-Afrika_.
Hamburg, 1879.

Hüllmann (K. D.), _Stædtewesen des Mittelalters_. 4 vols. Bonn,
1826-29.

Humboldt (A. von), _Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial
Regions of the New Continent_. Trans. 7 vols. London, 1814-29.

Hume (_Baron_ David), _Commentaries on the Law of Scotland,
respecting the Description and Punishment of Crimes_. 2 vols.
Edinburgh, 1797.

Hume (David), _Philosophical Works_. Ed. by T. H. Green and T. H.
Grose. 4 vols. London, 1874-75.

Hunt (A. E.), 'Ethnographical Notes on the Murray Islands'; in
_Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxviii. London, 1899.

Hunter (W. A.), _A Systematical and Historical Exposition of
Roman Law_. London, 1885.

Hunter (W. W.), _The Annals of Rural Bengal_. 3 vols. London,
1868-72.

Hutcheson (Francis), _An Essay on the Nature and Conduct of the
Passions and Affections. With Illustrations on the Moral Sense_.
London, 1730.

---- _An Inquiry into the Original of our Ideas of Beauty and
Virtue; In Two Treatises . . . II. Concerning Moral Good and
Evil_. London, 1738.

---- _A System of Moral Philosophy_. 2 vols. London, 1755.

Hyades (P.) and Deniker (J.), _Mission scientifique du Cap Horn,
1882-1883. Tome VII. Anthropologie, Ethnographie_. Paris, 1891.

Hyltén-Cavallius (G. O.), _Wärend och Wirdarne_. 2 vols.
Stockholm, 1863-68.


Ignatius (_Saint_), 'Epistolae'; in Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_,
Ser. Graeca, vol. v. Parisiis, 1857.

Im Thurn (E. F.), _Among the Indians of Guiana_. London, 1883.

Immerwahr (Walter), _Die Kulte und Mythen Arkadiens_. Vol. i.
Leipzig, 1891.

_Indian Antiquary (The)_, a Journal of Oriental Research. Bombay.

_Indo-Chinese Gleaner (The)_. 3 vols. Malacca, 1818-21.

Ine (_King_), 'The Laws of'; in _Ancient Laws and Institutes of
England_. London, 1840.

{789} Inge (W. R.), _Society in Rome under the Cæsars_. London,
1888.

Inglis (John), _In the New Hebrides_. London, 1887.

Ingram (J. K.), _A History of Slavery and Serfdom_. London, 1895.

Innes (Cosmo), _Scotland in the Middle Ages_. Edinburgh, 1860.

_Institutes of Vishnu (The)_. Trans. by J. Jolly (_The Sacred
Books of the East_, vol. vii.) Oxford, 1880.

_Institutiones_. See Justinian.

_Instructions for the Government of Armies of the United States
in the Field_. (Appendix No. 1 in Lorimer, _The Institutes of the
Law of Nations_, vol. ii.) Edinburgh, 1884.

_International Journal of Ethics_. London & Philadelphia.

_Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie_. Ed. by J. D. E.
Schmeltz. Leiden.

Irenaeus (_Saint_), _Contra hæreses libri quinque_. (Migne,
_Patrologiæ cursus_, Ser. Graeca, vol. vii.) Parisiis, 1857.

Isaeus, 'Orationes'; in _Oratores Attici_, ed. by C. Müller, vol.
i. Parisiis, 1847.

Isambert (F. A.) and others, _Recueil général des Anciennes Lois
Françaises_. 29 vols. Paris, 1822-33.

Isocrates, _Orationes_. Ed. J. G. Baiter. Parisiis, 1846.

Itard (E. M.), _An Historical Account of the Discovery and
Education of a Savage Man_. Trans. London, 1802.

Ives (George), _The Classification of Crimes_. [London], 1904.

Iyer (S. A.), 'Nay[=a]dis of Malabar'; in the Madras Government
Museum's _Bulletin_, vol. iv. Madras, 1901.

Jackson (A. V. W.), _An Avesta Grammar_. Part i. Stuttgart, 1892.

Jackson (J. G.), _An Account of Timbuctoo and Housa_. See
[(]Abd-es-Salâm Shabeeny.


Jacob (Georg), _Das Leben der vorislâmischen Beduinen_. Berlin, 1895.

Jacob (K. G.), 'Der muslimische Fastenmonat Rama[d.]ân'; in _VI.
Jahres-bericht der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Greifswald_,
vol. i. 1893-1896. Greifswald, 1896.

Jacob (William), _An Historical Inquiry into the Production and
Consumption of the Precious Metals_. 2 vols. London, 1831.

Jacobs (Joseph), _Studies in Biblical Archæology_. London, 1894.

Jacobs (Julius), _Eenigen Tijd onder de Baliërs_. Batavia, 1883.

Jähns (Max), _Ueber Krieg, Frieden und Kultur_. Berlin, 1893.

Jaffur Shurreef, _Qanoon-e-Islam, or the Customs of the
Mussulmans of India_. Trans. by G. A. Herklots. Madras, 1863.

Jagor (F.), _Travels in the Philippines_. [Trans.] London, 1875.

_Jahrbuch für sexuelle Zwischenstufen mit besonderer
Berucksichtigung der Homosexualität_. Ed. by M. Hirschfeld.
Leipzig.

Jamblichus, _De mysteriis liber_. Ed. by G. Parthey. Berolini, 1857.

---- _De Pythagorica vita liber_. Ed. by A. Westermann. Parisiis, 1850.

James (Edwin), _Account of an Expedition from Pittsburgh to the
Rocky Mountains, performed in the Years 1819 and 20, under the
Command of S. H. Long._ 2 vols. Philadelphia, 1823.

James (William), _The Principles of Psychology_. 2 vols. London, 1891.

Jameson (Mrs.), _A Common-Place Book of Thoughts, Memories, and
Fancies_. London, 1877.

Jamieson (G.), 'Marriage Laws'; in _The China Review_, vol. x.
Hongkong, 1881-82.

Janka (Karl), _Der strafrechtliche Notstand_. Erlangen, 1878.

{790} Jarcke (C. E.), _Handbuch des gemeinen deutschen
Strafrechts_. 3 vols. Berlin, 1827-30.

Jarves (J. J.), _History of the Hawaiian Islands_. Honolulu, 1872.

Jastrow (Morris), 'The Original Character of the Hebrew Sabbath';
in _The American Journal of Theology_, vol. ii. Chicago, 1898.

---- _The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria_. Boston, 1898.

_J[=a]taka Tales, Buddhist Birth Stories_. Trans. by T. W. Rhys
Davids. London, 1880.

Jellinghaus (Th.), 'Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche der Munda-Kolhs
in Chota Nagpore'; in _Zeitschr. f. Ethnol._ vol. iii. Berlin, 1871.

Jensen (P.), _Assyrisch-Babylonische Mythen und Epen_. Berlin, 1900.

---- _Die Kosmologie der Babylonier_. Strassburg, 1890.

Jeremias (A.), _Die babylonisch-assyrischen Vorstellungen vom
Leben nach dem Tode_. Leipzig, 1887.

---- _Izdubar-Nimrod. Eine altbabylonische Heldensage_. Leipzig, 1891.

Jerez (Francisco de), 'Verdadera relacion de la conquista del
Perú y provincia del Cuzco'; in _Biblioteca de autores
españoles_, vol xxvi. Madrid, 1853.

Jerome (_Saint_), _Opera omnia_. 11 vols. (Migne, _Patrologiæ
cursus_, vols. xxii.-xxx.) Parisiis, 1845-46.

Jessen (E. J.), _Afhandling om de Norske Finners og Lappers
Hedenske Religion_. København, 1767.

Jevons (F. B.), _An Introduction to the History of Religion_.
London, 1896.

_Jewish Encyclopedia (The)_. 12 vols. New York & London, 1901-06.

Jhering (R. von), _Geist des römischen Rechts_. 3 vols. Leipzig,
1852-78.

---- _Das Schuldmoment im römischen Privatrecht_. Giessen, 1867.

---- _Der Zweck im Recht_. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1877-83.

Jochelson (W.), _The Koryak Religion and Myth_. (_The Jesup North
Pacific Expedition_, vol. vi. pt. i.) Leiden & New York, 1905.

Jodl (F.), _Lehrbuch der Psychologie_. Stuttgart, 1896.

Johnston (_Sir_ H. H.), _British Central Africa_. London, 1897.

---- 'The Ethics of Cannibalism'; in _The Fortnightly Review_,
new ser. vol. xlv. London, 1889.

---- _The Kilima-njaro Expedition_. London, 1886.

---- _The River Congo_. London, 1884.

---- _The Uganda Protectorate_. 2 vols. London, 1902.

Johnstone (J. C.), _Maoria_. London, 1874.

Joinville (--), 'On the Religion and Manners of the People of
Ceylon'; in _Asiatick Researches_, vol. vii. Calcutta, 1801.

Jolly (J.) 'Beiträge zur indischen Rechtsgeschichte'; in
_Zeitschr. der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellsch._ vol. xliv.
Leipzig, 1890.

---- 'Recht und Sitte'; in Bühler, _Grundriss der indo-arischen
Philologie_, vol. ii. Strassburg, 1896.

Jones (_Sir_ William), 'The Tenth Anniversary Discourse'; in
_Asiatick Researches_, vol. iv. Calcutta, 1795.

Jordanes, _Romana et Getica_. Ed. by Th. Mommsen. Berolini, 1882.

Josephus, _Opera_. Ed. by G. Dindorfius. 2 vols. Parisiis, 1845-47.

Joubert (J.), _Pensées, essais et maximes_. 2 vols. Paris, 1842.

Jourdan (A. J. L.) and others, _Recueil général des Anciennes
Lois Françaises_. 29 vols. Paris, 1822-33.

_Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New South
Wales_. Sydney & London.

{791}_Journal Asiatique_. Paris.

---- _des Museum Godeffroy_. Hamburg.

---- _of the African Society_. London.

---- _of American Folk-Lore (The)_. Boston & New York.

---- _of the American Oriental Society_. New York.

---- _of the (Royal) Anthropological Institute of Great Britain
and Ireland (The)_. London.

---- _of the Asiatic Society of Bengal_. Calcutta.

---- _of the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society_.
Colombo.

---- _of the Ethnological Society of London_.

---- _of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia_. Singapore.

---- _of the Polynesian Society_. Wellington.

---- _of the Royal Asiatic Society_. London.

---- _of the Royal Geographical Society of London_.

---- _of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society_.
Singapore.

Jousse (D.), _Traité de la justice criminelle de France_. 4 vols.
Paris, 1771.

_Jouuencel (Le)_, [A Romance commenced by J. de Soreuil, and
completed by J. Tibergeau, M. Morin, and N. Riolai.] Paris, 1493.

Joyce (P. W.), _A Social History of Ancient Ireland_. 2 vols.
London, 1903.

Juan (G.) and Ulloa (A. de), _A Voyage to South America_. Trans.
2 vols. London, 1760.

Jung (C. E.), 'Aus dem Seelenleben der Australier'; in
_Mittheilungen des Vereins für Erdkunde zu Leipzig_, 1877.

---- 'Die Mündungsgegend des Murray und ihre Bewohner'; in
_Mittheilungen des Vereins für Erdkunde zu Halle a/S_, 1877.

Junghuhn (Franz), _Die Battaländer auf Sumatra_. Trans. 2 vols.
Berlin, 1847.

Junker (Wilhelm), _Travels in Africa during the Years 1882-86_.
Trans. London, 1892.

Junod (H. A.), _Les Ba-Ronga_. Neuchatel, 1898.

Jusserand (J. J.), _English Wayfaring Life in the Middle Ages_.
Trans. London, 1892.

Justi (Ferd.), 'Die Weltgeschichte des Tabari'; in _Das Ausland_,
vol. xlviii. Stuttgart, 1875.

Justin Martyr, 'Apologia prima pro Christianis'; in Migne,
_Patrologiæ cursus_, Ser. Graeca, vol. vi. Parisiis, 1857.

Justinian (_Emperor_), _Codex Justinianus_. Ed. by P. Krueger.
(_Corpus juris civilis_, vol. ii.) Berolini, 1888.

---- 'Digesta,' ed. by Th. Mommsen; in _Corpus juris civilis_,
vol. i. Berolini, 1889.

---- 'Institutiones,' ed. by P. Krueger; in _Corpus juris
civilis_, vol. i. Berolini, 1889.

---- _Novellæ_. Ed. by R. Schoell and G. Kroll. (_Corpus juris
civilis_, vol. iii.) Berolini, 1895.

Juvenalis (D. J.), _Opera omnia_. 3 vols. Londini, 1820.

_Jydske Lovbog (Den)_. Ed. by P. K. Ancher. Kiøbenhavn, 1783.


Kaegi (Adolf), _The Rigveda: the Oldest Literature of the
Indians_. Trans. Boston, 1886.

Kaibel (G.), _Epigrammata Græca_. Berolini, 1878.

Kålund (Kr.), 'Skandinavische Verhältnisse'; in Paul, _Grundriss
der germanischen Philologie_, vol. ii. Strassburg, 1893.

{792} Kames (_Lord_), _Essays on the Principles of Morality and
Natural Religion_. Edinburgh, 1751.

---- _Sketches of the History of Man_. 4 vols. Edinburgh, 1788.

Kane (E. K.), _Arctic Explorations_. 2 vols. Philadelphia, 1856.

Kant (I.), _Metaphysische Anfangungsgründe der Tugendlehre_.
Königsberg, 1803.

---- _Sämmtliche Werke_. Ed. by G. Hartenstein. 8 vols. Leipzig,
1867-68.

---- _Zum ewigen Frieden_. Königsberg, 1795.

Karsch-Haack (F.), _Das gleichgeschlechtliche Leben der
Naturvölker_. München, 1911.

---- _Das gleichgeschlechtliche Leben der Ostasiaten_. München,
1906.

---- 'Päderastie und Tribadie bei den Tieren'; in _Jahrbuch f.
sexuelle Zwischenstufen_, vol. ii. Leipzig, 1901.

---- 'Uranismus oder Päderastie und Tribadie bei den
Naturvölkern'; in _Jahrbuch f. sexuelle Zwischenstufen_, vol.
iii. Leipzig, 1901.

Karsten (R.), _The Origin of Worship_. Wasa, 1905.

---- _Studies in Primitive Greek Religion_. (_Ofversigt af Finska
Vetenskaps-Societetens Förhandlingar_, vol. xlix., 1906-07, no.
1.) Helsingfors, 1907.

Kate (H. F. C. ten), _Reizen en onderzoekingen in Noord-Amerika_.
Leiden, 1885.

Katscher (L.), _Bilder aus dem chinesischen Leben._ Leipzig &
Heidelberg, 1881.

Katz (Albert), _Der wahre Talmudjude_. Berlin, 1893.

Katz (Edwin), _Ein Grundriss des kanonischen Strafrechts_. Berlin
& Leipzig, 1881.

Kaufmann (Georg), _Deutsche Geschichte_. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1880-81.

Kearns (J. F.), _The Tribes of South India_. [London, 1865.]

Keary (Ch. F.), _Outlines of Primitive Belief among the
Indo-European Races_. London, 1882.

Keate (George), _An Account of the Pelew Islands_. London, 1788.

Keating (W. H.), _Narrative of an Expedition to the Source of St.
Peter's River_. 2 vols. Philadelphia, 1824.

Keil (C. F.). _Manual of Biblical Archæology_. Trans. 2 vols.
Edinburgh, 1887-88.

Keller (A. G.), _Homeric Society_. New York, &c., 1902.

Kemble (J. M.), _The Saxons in England_. Ed. by W. De Gray Birch.
2 vols. London, 1876.

Kenny (C. S.), _Outlines of Criminal Law_. Cambridge, 1902.

Kern (H.), _Der Buddhismus und seine Geschichte in Indien_.
Trans. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1882-84.

---- _Manual of Indian Buddhism_. Strassburg, 1896.

Kessler (K ), 'Mani, Manichäer'; in Herzog-Hauck, _Realencyclopädie
f. Protestantische Theologie und Kirche_, vol. xii. Leipzig, 1903.

Keyser (J. R.), _Efterladte Skrifter_. 2 vols. Christiania,
1865-67.

Kidd (Benjamin), _Social Evolution_. London, 1894.

Kidd (Dudley), _The Essential Kafir_. London, 1904.

King (Irving), _The Development of Religion_. New York, 1910.

King (J. H.), _The Supernatural_. 2 vols. London, 1892.

King (L. W.), _Babylonian Magic and Sorcery_. London, 1896.

King (P. P.) and Fitzroy (R.), _Narrative of the Voyages of the
"Adventure" and "Beagle."_ 3 vols. London, 1839.

{793} King (Richard), 'On the Intellectual Character of the
Esquimaux'; in _Jour. Ethn. Soc._ London, vol. i. London, 1848.

Kingsley (Mary H.), 'The Fetish View of the Human Soul'; in
_Folk-Lore_, vol. viii. London, 1897.

---- _Travels in West Africa_. London, 1897.

---- _West African Studies_. London, 1901.

Kipling (J. Lockwood), _Beast and Man in India_. London, 1891.

Kirke (Henry), _Twenty-five Years in British Guiana_. London,
1898.

Kittlitz (F. H. von), _Denkwürdigkeiten einer Reise nach dem
russischen Amerika, nach Mikronesien und durch Kamtschatka_. 2
vols. Gotha, 1858.

Klemm (G.), _Allgemeine Cultur-Geschichte der Menschheit_. 10
vols. Leipzig. 1843-52.

Klenze (--), 'Die Cognaten und Affinen nach Römischem Rechte in
Vergleichung mit andern verwandten Rechten'; in _Zeitschr. f.
geschichtliche Rechtswiss._ ed. by F. C. von Savigny and others,
vol. vi. Berlin & Stettin, 1828.

Kloss (C. B.), _In the Andamans and Nicobars_. London, 1903.

Klugmann (N.), _Die Frau im Talmud_. Wien, 1898.

Klunzinger (C.-B.), _Upper Egypt_. Trans. London, 1878.

Knox (William), _Three Tracts respecting the Conversion and
Instruction of the Free Indians and Negroe Slaves in the
Colonies_. London, 1789.

Kobelt (W.), _Reiseerinnerungen aus Algerien und Tunis_.
Frankfurt a. M., 1885.

Koch (Theodor), 'Die Anthropophagie der südamerikanischen
Indianer'; in _Internationales Archiv f. Ethnographie_, vol. xii.
Leiden, 1899.

Köhler (J. A. E.), _Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, &c. im Voigtlande_.
Leipzig, 1867.

Koenigswarter (L. J.), _Études historiques sur le développement
de la société humaine_. Paris, 1850.

---- _Histoire de l'organisation de la famille en France_. Paris,
1851.

Kohl (J. G.), _Kitchi-Gami. Wanderings round Lake Superior_.
Trans. London, 1860.

---- _Reise nach Istrien, Dalmatien und Montenegro_. 2 vols.
Dresden, 1851.

Kohler (J.), _Altindisches Prozessrecht_. Stuttgart, 1891.

---- 'Das Banturecht in Ostafrika'; in _Zeitschr. f.
vergleichende Rechtswiss._ vol. xv. Stuttgart, 1901.

---- 'Indisches Ehe- und Familienrecht'; in _Zeitschr. f.
vergleichende Rechtswiss._ vol. iii. Stuttgart, 1882.

---- 'Das Recht der Herero'; in _Zeitschr. f. vergleichende
Rechtswiss._ vol. xiv. Stuttgart, 1900.

---- 'Das Recht der Hottentotten'; in _Zeitschr. f. vergleichende
Rechtswiss._ vol. xv. Stuttgart, 1901.

---- 'Das Recht der Marschallinsulaner'; in _Zeitschr. f.
vergleichende Rechtswiss._ vol. xiv. Stuttgart, 1900.

---- 'Das Recht der Papuas'; in _Zeitschr. f. vergleichende
Rechtswiss._ vol. xiv. Stuttgart, 1900.

---- 'Die Rechte der Urvölker Nordamerikas'; in _Zeitschr. f.
vergleichende Rechtswiss._ vol. xii. Stuttgart, 1897.

---- _Rechtsvergleichende Studien über islamitisches Recht, &c._
Berlin, 1889.

---- _Shakespeare vor dem Forum der Jurisprudenz_. Würzburg,
1883.--_Nachwort_. Würzburg, 1884.

{794} Kohler (J.) and Peiser (F. E.), _Aus dem Babylonischen
Rechtsleben_. 4 vols. Leipzig, 1890-98.

Kolben (Peter), _The Present State of the Cape of Good-Hope_.
Trans. 2 vols. London, 1731.

Kolff (D. H.), _Voyage of the Dutch Brig of War Dourga, through
the Southern Parts of the Moluccan Archipelago, &c._ London, 1840.

Kollmann (Paul), _The Victoria Nyanza_. Trans. London, 1899.

Koppenfels (H. von), 'Meine Jagden auf Gorillas'; in _Die
Gartenlaube_, 1877. Leipzig.

_Korân (The)_. Trans. by J. M. Rodwell. London, 1876.

---- See _Qur'ân (The)_.

_Kosmos_. Leipzig.

Kotzebue (O. von), _A Voyage of Discovery into the South Sea and
Behring's Straits_. Trans. 3 vols. London, 1821.

Kovalewsky (Maxime), _Coutume contemporaine et loi ancienne_.
Paris, 1893.

---- _Modern Customs and Ancient Laws of Russia_. London, 1891.

---- 'Les origines du devoir'; in _Revue Internationale de
sociologie_, vol. ii. Paris, 1894.

---- _Tableau des origines et de l'évolution de la famille et de
la propriété_. Stockholm, 1890.

Krafft-Ebing (R. von), _Lehrbuch der Gerichtlichen
Psychopatologie_. Stuttgart, 1900.

---- _Psychopathia sexualis_. Stuttgart, 1903.

Krapf (J. L.), _Reisen in Ost-Afrika_. 2 vols. Kornthal &
Stuttgart, 1858.

---- _Travels, Researches, and Missionary Labours, during an
Eighteen Years' Residence in Eastern Africa_. London, 1860.

Krasheninnikoff (S. P.), _The History of Kamschatka, and the
Kurilski Islands_. Trans. Glocester, 1764.

Krause (Aurel), _Die Tlinkit-Indianer_. Jena, 1885.

Krause (Ernst), 'Die Ablösung der Menschenopfer'; in _Kosmos_,
vol. iii. Leipzig, 1878.

Krauss (F. S.), 'Das Bauopfer bei den Südslaven'; in
_Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien_, vol.
xvii. Wien, 1887.

---- _Sitte und Brauch der Südslaven_. Wien, 1885.

Kremer (Alfred von), _Culturgeschichte des Orients unter den
Chalifen_. 2 vols. Wien, 1875-77.

---- _Studien zur vergleichenden Culturgeschichte_. 2 parts.
(Reprinted from _Sitzungsberichte der Kais. Akademie der
Wissenschaften in Wien, Philosophisch-historische Classe_, vol.
cxx.) Wien, 1889-90.

Kropf (A.), _Das Volk der Xosa-Kaffern im östlichen Südafrika_.
Berlin, 1889.

Kropotkin (P.), _Mutual Aid_. London, 1902.

Kubary (J.), 'Die Bewohner der Mortlock Inseln'; in
_Mittheilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft in Hamburg_,
1878-79.

---- 'Die Ebongruppe im Marshall's Archipel'; in _Journal des
Museum Godeffroy_, pt. i. Hamburg, 1873.

---- _Ethnographische Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Karolinischen
Inselgruppe. Heft I.: Die socialen Einrichtungen der Pelauer_.
Berlin, 1885.

---- 'Die Palau-Inseln in der Südsee'; in _Journal des Museum
Godeffroy_, pt. iv. Hamburg, 1873.

---- 'Die Religion der Pelauer'; in Bastian, _Allerlei aus
Volks- und Menschenkunde_, vol. i. Berlin, 1888.

{795} Kubary (J.), 'Die Verbrechen und das Strafverfahren auf den
Pelau-Inseln'; in _Original-Mittheilungen aus der ethnologischen
Abtheilung der königlichen Museen zu Berlin_, vol. i. Berlin, 1886.

Kükenthal (W.), _Ergebnisse einer zoologischen Forschungsreise in
den Molukken und Borneo. Erster Teil: Reisebericht_. Frankfurt a.
M., 1896.

Kuenen (A.), _Hibbert Lectures on National Religions and
Universal Religions_. London, 1882.

---- _The Religion of Israel_. Trans. 3 vols. London, 1874-75.


Labat (J. B.), _Relation historique de l'Éthiopie occidentale_.
5 vols. Paris, 1732.

Labbe (Ph.), _Sacrorum Conciliorum collectio_. Ed. by J. D.
Mansi. 31 vols. Florentiae, Venetiis, 1759-98.

Labillardière (J. J. Houtou de), _An Account of a Voyage in
Search of La Pérouse in the Years 1791-93_. Trans. 2 vols.
London, 1800.

Laboulaye (E.), _Recherches sur la condition civile et politique
des femmes_. Paris, 1843.

Lactantius (L. C. F.), _Opera omnia_. 2 vols. (Migne, _Patrologiæ
cursus_, vols. vi.-vii.) Parisiis, 1844.

Läffler (L. F.), _Den gottländska Taksteinar-sägnen_. (_Bidrag
till kännedom om de svenska landsmålen ock svenskt folkliv_, vol.
xix. art. 6.) Stockholm, 1903.

---- 'Om den fornsvenska hednalagen'; in _Kongl. Vitterhets
Historie och Antiquitets Akademiens Månadsbad_, vol. viii.
Stockholm, 1879.

Lafitau (J. F.), _Moeurs des sauvages ameriquains_. 2 vols.
Paris, 1724.

La Flesche (F.), 'Death and Funeral Customs among the Omahas'; in
_The Journal of American Folk-Lore_, vol. ii. Boston & New York,
1889.

Lagerborg (Rolf), 'La nature de la morale'; in _Revue
Internationale de sociologie_, vol. xi. Paris, 1903.

Lago (V.), _Memorie sulla Dalmazia_. 3 vols. Venezia, 1869-71.

Lahontan (J. de), _Mémoires de l'Amérique septentrionale_. La
Haye, 1703.

Laing (A. Gordon), _Travels in the Timannee, Kooranko, and
Soolima Countries in Western Africa_. London, 1825.

Laing (Samuel), _Notes of a Traveller, on the Social and
Political State of France, Prussia, Switzerland, Italy, &c._
London, 1842.

Laistner (L.), _Das Recht in der Strafe_. München, 1872.

Lala (R. Reyes), _The Philippine Islands_. New York, 1899.

Lallemand (Léon), _Histoire des enfants abandonnés et délaissés_.
Paris, 1885.

_Lancelot du Lac_. 3 vols. Paris, 1520.

Landa (Diego de), _Relacion de las cosas de Yucatan_. Paris,
1864.

'Landnámabók'; in _Íslendínga sögur, udgivne af Del Kongelige
Nordiske Oldskrift-Selskab_, vol. i. Kjøbenhavn, 1843.

Landor (A. H. Savage), _Alone with the Hairy Ainu_. London,
1893.

Landtman (G.), _The Origin of Priesthood_. Ekenaes, 1905.

Lane (E. W.), _An Account of the Manners and Customs of the
Modern Egyptians_. 2 vols. London, 1871.

---- The same work. London, 1896.

---- _Arabian Society in the Middle Ages_. Ed. by Stanley
Lane-Poole. London, 1883.

Lane-Poole (Stanley), _The Speeches and Table-Talk of the Prophet
Mohammad_. London, 1882.

---- _Studies in a Mosque_. London, 1893.

Lanessan (J.-L. de), _La morale des philosophes chinois_. Paris,
1896.

{796} Lang (Andrew), _Magic and Religion_. London, 1901.

---- _The Making of Religion_. London, 1898.

---- _Social Origins_. London, 1903.

Lang (J. D.), _Cooksland in North-Eastern Australia_. London,
1847.

---- _Queensland_. London, 1861.

Langkavel (B.), 'Pferde und Naturvölker'; in _Internationales
Archiv für Ethnographie_, vol. i. Leiden, 1888.

Langsdorf (G. H. von), _Voyages and Travels in various Parts of
the World, during the Years, 1803-1807_. 2 vols. London, 1813-14.

La Nouë (François de), _Discours politiques et militaires_.
Basle, 1587.

La Pérouse (J. F. G. de), _A Voyage round the World, in the Years
1785-88_. Trans. 3 vols. London, 1799.

Lappenberg (J. M.), _A History of England under the Anglo-Saxon
Kings_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1881.

_Larger Catechism (The), agreed upon by the Assembly of Divines
at Westminster_. Ed. by H. Cooke. Belfast, 1833.

La Roche-Fontenilles (L. A. M. de), _L'Église et la pitié envers
les animaux_. Paris, &c., 1903.

La Rochefoucauld (F. de), _Les maximes_. Paris, 1881.

La Salle (R. R. de), 'An Account of Monsieur de la Salle's Last
Expedition and Discoveries in North America'; in _Collections of
the New-York Historical Society, for the Year 1814_, vol. ii.
New-York, 1814.

Lasaulx (Ernst von), _Der Eid bei den Römern_. Würzburg, 1844.

---- _Der Fluch bei Griechen und Römern_. Würzburg, 1843.

---- _Die Sühnopfer der Griechen und Römer_. Würzburg, 1841.

Lasch (Richard), 'Die Behandlung der Leiche des Selbstmörders';
in _Globus_, vol. lxxvi. Braunschweig, 1899.

---- 'Besitzen die Naturvölker ein persönliches Ehrgefühl?' in
_Zeitschr. f. Socialwissensch._ vol. iii. Berlin, 1900.

---- 'Rache als Selbstmordmotiv'; in _Globus_, vol. lxxiv.
Braunschweig, 1898.

---- 'Religiöser Selbstmord und seine Beziehung zum
Menschenopfer'; in _Globus_, vol. lxxv. Braunschweig, 1899.

---- 'Der Selbstmord aus erotischen Motiven bei den primitiven
Völkern'; in _Zeitschr. f. Socialwissensch._ vol. ii. Berlin,
1899.

Lasson (Adolf), _System der Rechtsphilosophie_. Berlin & Leipzig,
1882.

Latham (R. G.), _Descriptive Ethnology_. 2 vols. London, 1859.

Laurent (François), _Études sur l'histoire de l'Humanité_. 18
vols. Paris, 1865-80.

Laurie (S. S.), _Ethica_. London, 1891.

Laurière (E. de), _Glossaire du droit françois_. Niort, 1882.

Laveleye (É. de), _De la propriété et de ses formes primitives_.
Paris, 1874.

---- _Das Ureigenthum_. Ed. by K. Bücher. Leipzig, 1879.

_Law Quarterly Review (The)_. Ed. by Sir F. Pollock. London.

_Law Reports, Cases determined in the Queen's Bench Division_.
London, 1876, &c.

Lawrence (John), _A Philosophical and Practical Treatise on
Horses, and on the Moral Duties of Man towards the Brute
Creation_. 2 vols. London, 1796-98.

Lawrence (T. J.), _Essays on some disputed Questions in Modern
International Law_. Cambridge, 1885.

{797}_Laws of Manu (The)_. Trans. by G. Bühler. (_The Sacred
Books of the East_, vol. xxv.) Oxford, 1886.

Layard (A. H.), _Discoveries in the Ruins of Nineveh and
Babylon_. London, 1853.

Lea (H. C.), _An Historical Sketch of Sacerdotal Celibacy in the
Christian Church_. Boston, 1884.

---- _A History of the Inquisition of the Middle Ages_. 3 vols.
London, 1888.

---- _Superstition and Force_. Philadelphia, 1892.

Le Blant (E.), _Inscriptions chrétiennes de la Gaule antérieures
au VIII. siècle_. 2 vols. Paris, 1856-65.

Le Bon (Gustave), _La civilisation des Arabes_. Paris, 1884.

Lecky (W. E. H.), _Democracy and Liberty_. 2 vols. London, 1899.

---- _History of European Morals from Augustus to Charlemagne_.
2 vols. London, 1890.

---- _History of the Rise and Influence of the Spirit of
Rationalism in Europe_. 2 vols. London, 1893.

Leem (Knud), _Beskrivelse over Finmarkens Lapper_. Kjöbenhavn,
1767.

Leffler (L. F.). See Läffler.

'Leges Burgundionum'; in Pertz, _Monumenta Germaniæ historica_,
Leges, vol. iii. Hannoverae, 1863.

Legge (James), _The Chinese Classics_. 2 vols. Oxford, 1893-95.

---- _The Notions of the Chinese concerning God and Spirits_.
Hongkong, 1852.

---- _The Religions of China_. London, 1880.

_Legis Duodecim Tabularum reliquiæ_. Ed. by R. Schoell. Lipsiae,
1866.

Legoyt (A.), _Le suicide ancien et moderne_. Paris, 1881.

Legrand (Louis), _L'idée de patrie_. Paris, 1897.

Le Grand d'Aussy (P. J. B.), _Histoire de la vie privée des
François_. Ed. by J. B. B. de Roquefort. 3 vols. Paris, 1815.

Leguével de Lacombe (B. F.), _Voyage à Madagascar et aux Iles
Comores_. 2 vols. Paris, 1840.

Lehmann (Alfr.), _Hovedlovene for det menneskelige Følelseliv_.
København, 1892.

Lehmann (E.), _Zarathustra_. 2 vols. København, 1899-1902.

Leibnitz (G. W.), _Essais de Theodicée sur la bonté de Dieu, la
liberté de l'homme, et l'origine du mal_. Amsterdam,
1712.

Leist (B. W.), _Alt-arisches Jus Civile_. 2 vols. Jena, 1892-96.

---- _Alt-arisches Jus Gentium_. Jena, 1889.

---- _Græco-italische Rechtsgeschichte_. Jena, 1884.

Le Mesurier (C. J. R.), 'The Veddás of Ceylon'; in _Jour. Roy.
Asiatic Soc. Ceylon Branch_, vol. ix. Colombo, 1887.

Leo Africanus, _The History and Description of Africa_. Trans.
ed. by R. Brown. 3 vols. London, 1896.

Leo I. (_Saint_), surnamed _the Great_, _Opera omnia_. 3 vols.
(Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_, vols. liv.-lvi.) Parisiis, 1846.

Leonhardi (M. von), 'Über einige religiöse und totemistische
Vorstellungen der Aranda und Loritja in Zentralaustralien'; in
_Globus_, vol. xci. Braunschweig, 1907.

Lepsius (Richard), _Letters from Egypt, Ethiopia, and the
Peninsula of Sinai_. Trans. London, 1853.

Leslie (David), _Among the Zulus and Amatongas_. Edinburgh,
1875.

{798} Letourneau (Ch.), _L'évolution de la morale_. Paris,
1887.

---- _L'évolution religieuse dans les diverses races humaines_.
Paris, 1892.

Leuba (J. H.), _A Psychological Study of Religion_. New York,
1912.

Le Vaillant (François), _Travels from the Cape of Good-Hope, into
the Interior Parts of Africa_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1790.

Levy (Jacob), _Neuhebräisches und Chaldäisches Wörterbuch über
die Talmudim_. 4 vols. Leipzig, 1876-89.

Lewin (T. H.), _The Hill Tracts of Chittagong_. Calcutta, 1869.

---- _Wild Races of South-Eastern India_. London, 1870.

Lewis (A. H.), _A Critical History of Sunday Legislation_. New
York, 1888.

---- _Paganism surviving in Christianity_. London, 1892.

Lewis (M.) and Clarke (W.), _Travels to the Source of the
Missouri River, &c._ London, 1814.

'Lex Baiuwariorum'; in Pertz, _Monumenta Germaniæ historica_,
Leges, vol. iii. Hannoverae, 1863.

_Lex Duodecim Tabularum_. See _Legis, &c._

_Lex Frisionum_. Ed. by E. T. Gaupp. Vratislaviae, 1832.

'Lex Ripuariorum'; in Georgisch, _Corpus juris Germanici
antiqui_. Halae Magdeburgicae, 1738.

_Lex Salica: The Ten Texts with the Glosses, and the Lex
Emendata_. Ed. by J. H. Hessels. London, 1880.

'Lex Saxonum'; in Pertz, _Monumenta Germaniæ historica_, Leges,
vol. v. Hannoverae, 1875-89.

'Lex Wisigothorum'; in Georgisch, _Corpus juris Germanici
antiqui_. Halae Magdeburgicae, 1738.

Leyden (J.), 'On the Languages and Literature of the Indo-Chinese
Nations'; in _Asiatic Researches_, vol. x. Calcutta, 1811.

_Lî Kî (The)_. Trans. by J. Legge. 2 vols. (_The Sacred Books of
the East_. vols. xxvii.-xxviii.) Oxford, 1885.

Lichtenberg (G. Chr.), _Vermischte Schriften_. 9 vols. Göttingen,
1800-06.

Lichtenstein (H.), _Travels in Southern Africa_. Trans. 2 vols.
London, 1812-15.

Lichtschein (L.), _Die Ehe nach **mosaisch-talmudischer
Auffassung_. Leipzig, 1879.

Liddell (H. G.) and Scott (R.), _A Greek-English Lexicon_.
Oxford, 1897.

Liebich (R.), _Die Zigeuner_. Leipzig, 1863.

Liebrecht (Felix), _Zur Volkskunde_. Heilbronn, 1879.

Lilly (W. S.), _On Right and Wrong_. London, 1891.

Lindenbrog (F.), _Codex legum antiquarum_. Francofurti, 1613.

Lippert (Julius), _Christenthum, Volksglaube und Volksbrauch_.
Berlin, 1882.

---- _Kulturgeschichte der Menschheit_. 2 vols. Stuttgart, 1886-87.

---- _Die Religionen der europäischen Culturvölker_. Berlin, 1881.

---- _Der Seelencult in seinen Beziehungen zur althebräischen
Religion_. Berlin, 1881.

Lisiansky (U.), _A Voyage round the World_. London, 1814.

Lisle (E.), _Du suicide_. Paris, 1856.

Liszt (Franz von), _La législation pénale comparée. Publiée par
l'Union Internationale de droit pénal. 1^er volume: Le droit
criminel des états européens_. Berlin, 1894.

---- _Lehrbuch des deutschen Strafrechts_. Berlin, 1891.

Little (H. W.), _Madagascar_. Edinburgh & London, 1884.

{799} Littré (É.), _Dictionnaire de la langue française_. 2 vols.
Paris, 1863-72.

---- _Études sur les Barbares et le Moyen Age_. Paris, 1867.

Livingstone (D.), _The Last Journals of, in Central Africa_. Ed.
by H. Waller. 2 vols. London, 1874.

---- _Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa_. London,
1857.

---- and Livingstone (Charles), _Narrative of an Expedition to
the Zambesi and its Tributaries_. London, 1865.

Livy (T.), _Historiarum libri qui supersunt_. 25 vols. Londini,
1828.

Lobo (J.), _A Voyage to Abyssinia_. Trans. London, 1887.

Locke (John), _Philosophical Works_. London, 1843.

---- _Two Treatises of Government_. London, 1713.

Locqueneuille (Scarsez de), _L'esclavage, ses promoteurs et ses
adversaires_. Liège, 1890.

Löw (Leopold), _Gesammelte Schriften_. 4 vols. Szegedin, 1889-98.

Logan (James), _The Scottish Gaël_. Ed. by Alex. Stewart. 2 vols.
Inverness [1876].

Logan (William), _Words of Comfort for Parents bereaved of Little
Children_. London, 1861.

Loir (A.), 'L'esclavage en Tunisie'; in _Revue scientifique_,
ser. iv. vol. xii. Paris, 1899.

Lomonaco (A.), 'Sulle razze indigene del Brasile'; in _Archivio
per l'antropologia e la etnologia_, vol. xix. Firenze, 1889.

Lopez Cogolludo (Diego), _Historia de Yucathan_. Madrid, 1688.

Lorimer (James), _The Institutes of the Law of Nations_. 2 vols.
Edinburgh, 1883-84.

Loskiel (G. H.), _History of the Mission of the United Brethren
among the Indians in North America_. Trans. 3 vols. London, 1794.

Lovisato (Domenico), 'Appunti etnografici con accenni geologici
sulla Terra del Fuoco'; in _Cosmos_, ed. by Guido Cora, vol.
viii. Torino, 1884-85.

Low (Hugh), _Sarawak_. London, 1848.

Loysel (Antoine), _Institutes coutumières_. Ed. by M. Dupin and
Éd. Laboulaye. 2 vols. Paris, 1846.

Lubbock (_Sir_ John). See Avebury (_Lord_).

Lucian, _Opera_. Parisiis, 1867.

Ludwig (G.), _Tertullian's Ethik_. Leipzig, 1885.

Lumholtz (Carl), _Among Cannibals_. London, 1889.

---- _Unknown Mexico_. 2 vols. London, 1903.

'Lun Yü'; in Legge, _The Chinese Classics_, vol. i. Oxford, 1893.

Lyall (A. C.), _Asiatic Studies_. London, 1882.

Lycurgus, _Oratio in Leocratem_. Ed. by F. Blass. Lipsiae, 1899.

---- The same work. Ed. and trans. by E. Jenicke. Leipzig, 1856.

Lyon (G. F.), _The Private Journal during the Voyage of Discovery
under Captain Parry_. London, 1824.

Lyttelton (George), _The History of the Life of King Henry the
Second_. 4 vols. London, 1767-71.


Mabille (Paul), _La guerre_. Paris, 1884.

MacCauley (Clay), 'The Seminole Indians of Florida'; in _Ann.
Rep. Bur. Ethn._ vol. v. 1887.

McCord (D. J.), _The Statutes at large of South Carolina_. 10
vols. Columbia (S. C.), 1836-41.

{800} McCoy (Isaac), _History of Baptist Indian Missions_.
Washington, 1840.

McCurdy (J. F.), 'The Moral Evolution of the Old Testament'; in
_The American Journal of Theology_, vol. i. Chicago, 1897.

Macdonald (D.), _Oceania_. Melbourne & London, 1889.

Macdonald (Duff), _Africana_. 2 vols. London, 1882.

Macdonald (James), 'East Central African Customs'; in _Jour.
Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxii. London, 1893.

---- _Light in Africa_. London, 1890.

---- _Religion and Myth_. London, 1893.

Macdonell (A. A.), _Vedic Mythology_. Strassburg, 1897.

Macfie (M.), _Vancouver Island and British Columbia_. London, 1865.

McGee (W. J.), 'The Seri Indians'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur. Ethn._ vol.
xvii. pt. i. Washington, 1898.

---- 'The Siouan Indians'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur. Ethn._ vol. xv.
Washington, 1897.

Macgillivray (John), _Narrative of the Voyage of H.M.S.
Rattlesnake_. 2 vols. London, 1852.

MacGregor (William), 'Lagos, Abeokuta, and the Alake'; in _Jour.
African Soc._ nr. xii. London, 1904.

Machiavelli (Niccolo), _Opere_. 10 vols. Milano, 1804-05.

Macieiowski (W. A.), _Slavische Rechtsgeschichte_. Trans. 4 vols.
Stuttgart & Leipzig, 1835-39.

Mackenzie (Alex.), _Voyages from Montreal to the Frozen and
Pacific Oceans_. London, 1801.

Mackenzie (John S.), _A Manual of Ethics_. London, 1900.

Mackenzie (Thomas), _Studies in Roman Law_. Ed. by John
Kirkpatrick. Edinburgh, 1886.

Mackintosh (John), _The History of Civilisation in Scotland_. 4
vols. Aberdeen, 1878-92.

Maclean (John), _A Compendium of Kafir Laws and Customs_. Mount
Coke, 1858.

McLennan (J. F.), 'The Levirate and Polyandry'; in _The
Fortnightly Review_, new ser. vol. xxi. London, 1877._

---- _Studies in Ancient History_. London, 1886.

M'Leod (John), _A Voyage to Africa, with some Account of the
Manners and Customs of the Dahomian People_. London, 1820.

MacMahon (A. R.), _Far Cathay and Farther India_. London, 1893.

Macmillan (Michael), _The Promotion of General Happiness_.
London, 1890.

McNair (F.), _Perak and the Malays_. London, 1878.

Macpherson (S. C.), 'An Account of the Religious Opinions and
Observances of the Khonds'; in _Jour. Roy. Asiatic Soc._ vol.
vii. London, 1843.

---- _Memorials of Service in India_. London, 1865.

Macrae (John), 'Account of the Kookies'; in _Asiatick
Researches_, vol. vii. Calcutta, 1831.

Mac Ritchie (David), _The Aïnos_. Leiden, 1892.

Macrobius (A. T.), _Opera_. Ed. by L. Janus. 2 vols. Quedlinburgi
& Lipsiae, 1845-52.

Madras Government Museum's _Bulletins_. Madras.

Magalhanes de Gandavo (Pero de), _Histoire de la Province de
Sancta-Crux_. Trans. Paris, 1837.

_Magazine of American History (The)_. New York & Chicago.

Magyar (L.), **_Reisen in Süd-Afrika_. Pest & Leipzig, 1859.

{801}_Mahabharata of Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa_. Trans. by P.
Chandra Roy. 18 vols. Calcutta, 1883-96.

Mahaffy (J. P.), _Social Life in Greece from Homer to Menander_.
London, 1874.

Maine (_Sir_ H. Sumner), _Ancient Law_. London, 1885.

---- _Dissertations on Early Law and Custom_. London, 1891.

---- _Lectures on the Early History of Institutions_. London,
1875.

---- _The Whewell Lectures. International Law_. London, 1888.

Maitland (S. R.), _The Dark Ages_. London, 1844.

Makarewicz (J.), _Évolution de la peine_. _S. l. & d._

'Makkoth'; in _Le Talmud de Jérusalem_, trans. by M. Schwab, vol.
xi. Paris, 1889.

Malalas (J.), 'Chronographia'; in Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_,
Ser. Graeca, vol. xcvii. Parisiis, 1860.

Malcolm (_Sir_ John), _A Memoir of Central India_. 2 vols.
London, 1823.

---- _Sketch of the Sikhs_. London, 1812.

Malinowski (B.), _The Family among the Australian Aborigines_.
London, 1913.

Mallat (J.), _Les Philippines_. 2 vols. Paris, 1846.

Mallery (Garrick), _Israelite and Indian_. New York, 1889.

---- 'Manners and Meals'; in _The American Anthropologist_, vol.
i. Washington, 1888.

Mallet (P. H.), _Northern Antiquities_. Trans. London, 1847.

Malloch (M. M.), 'How the Church dealt with Slavery'; in _The
Month_, vol. xxvii. London, 1876.

Malone (R. E.), _Three Years' Cruise in the Australian Colonies_.
London, 1854.

_Man. A Monthly Record of Anthropological Science_. London.

Man (E. G.), _Sonthalia and the Sonthals_. London, [1867].

Man (E. H.), 'On the Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Andaman
Islands'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xii. London, 1885.

Manacéine (Marie), _Le surmenage mental dans la civilisation
moderne_. Trans. Paris, 1890.

Mandeville (B. de), _The Fable of the Bees_. London, 1724.

Manning (James), 'Notes on the Aborigines of New Holland'; in
_Jour. and Proceed. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales_, 1882, vol. xvi.
Sydney, 1883.

Mansel (H. L.), _Prolegomena Logica_. Oxford, 1860.

Mantegazza (Paolo), _Rio de la Plata e Tenerife_. Milano, 1867.

---- 'Studii sull' etnologia dell' India'; in _Archivio per
l'antropologia e la etnologia_, vol. xiii. Firenze, 1883.

_Manu, The Laws of_. See _Laws of Manu (The)_.

_Manual of the Laws of War on Land_. Prepared by the Institute of
International Law. Trans. (Appendix No. III. in Lorimer, _The
Institutes of the Law of Nations_, vol. ii.) Edinburgh, 1884.

Manzoni (Alessandro), _Osservazioni sulla morale cattolica_.
Firenze, 1887.

Marcellinus (Ammianus), _Rerum gestarum libri qui supersunt_. Ed.
by V. Gardthausen. 2 vols. Lipsiae, 1874-75.

Marcgravius de Liebstad (G.), _Historia rerum naturalium
Brasiliæ_. Lugduni Batavorum & Amstelodami, 1648.

Marculfus, 'Formularum libri duo'; in Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_.
vol. lxxxvii. Parisiis, 1851.

{802} Marcus Aurelius, _Commentariorum libri XII._ Ed. by I.
Stich. Lipsiæ, 1903.

Mareschalcus (Nicolaus), 'Annalium Herulorum ac Vandalorum libri
septem'; in _Monumenta inedita rerum Germanicarum, &c._, ed. by
E. J. de Westphalen, vol. i. Lipsiae, 1739.

Marett (R. R.), _Anthropology_. London, 1912.

---- _The Threshold of Religion_. London, 1914.

Marillier (L.), _La survivance de l'âme et l'idée de justice chez
les peuples non civilisés_. Paris, 1894.

Mariner (William), _An Account of the Natives of the Tonga
Islands_. Compiled by John Martin. 2 vols. London, 1817.

Mariti (Giovanni), _Travels through Cyprus, Syria, and
Palestine_. Trans. 3 vols. London, 1791-92.

Markham (A. H.), _The Cruise of the "Rosario" amongst the New
Hebrides and Santa Cruz Islands_. London, 1873.

Markham (_Sir_ C. R.), _A History of Peru_. Chicago, 1892.

---- 'A List of the Tribes in the Valley of the Amazon'; in
_Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxiv. London, 1895.

---- 'On the Geographical Positions of the Tribes which formed
the Empire of the Yncas'; in _Jour. Roy. Geo. Soc._ vol. xli.
London, 1871.

Marquardt (J.), _Römische Staatsverwaltung_. 3 vols. Leipzig,
1873-78.

Marquette (Jacques), _Récit des voyages et des découvertes_.
Albanie (N.Y.), 1855.

Marsden (W.), _The History of Sumatra_. London, 1811.

Marshall (Frederic), _International Vanities_. Edinburgh &
London, 1875.

Marshall (H. R.), _Pain, Pleasure, and Æsthetics_. London, 1894.

Marshall (W. E.), _A Phrenologist amongst the Todas_. London, 1873.

Martensen (H.), _Christian Ethics_. [_General Part_.] Trans.
Edinburgh, _s. d._

---- _Christian Ethics. Special Part. Individual Ethics_. Trans.
Edinburgh, 1881.

Martialis (M. V.), _Epigrammata_. 3 vols. Londini, 1822-23.

Martin (Henri), _Histoire de France depuis les temps les plus
reculés jusqu'en 1789_. 17 vols. Paris, 1878.

Martin (K.), _Reisen in den Molukken, &c._ Leiden, 1894.

Martineau (James), _Types of Ethical Theory_. 2 vols. Oxford, 1891.

Martinengo-Cesaresco (_Countess_ Evelyn), _Essays in the Study of
Folk-Songs_. London, 1886.

Martius (C. F. Ph. von), _Beiträge zur Ethnographie und
Sprachenkunde Amerika's zumal Brasiliens_. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1867.

---- _Von dem Rechtszustande unter den Ureinwohnern Brasiliens_.
München, 1832.

Marx (Karl), _Capital_. Trans. Ed. by F. Engels. London, 1896.

Mas (S. de), _Informe sobre el estado de las Islas Filipinas en
1842_. Vol. i. Madrid, 1843.

Mason (F.), 'On Dwellings, Works of Art, Laws, &c. of the
Karens'; in _Jour. Asiatic Soc. Bengal_, vol. xxxvii. pt. ii.
Calcutta, 1868.

---- 'Physical Character of the Karens'; in _Jour. Asiatic Soc.
Bengal_, vol. xxxv. pt. ii. Calcutta, 1867.

---- 'Religion, Mythology, and Astronomy among the Karens'; in
_Jour. Asiatic Soc. Bengal_, vol. xxxiv. pt. ii. Calcutta, 1865.

Mason (O. T.), _Woman's Share in Primitive Culture_. London, 1895.

Maspero (G.), _The Dawn of Civilization_. Trans. London, 1896.

{803} Maspero (G.), _Études de mythologie et d'archéologie
égyptiennes_. 2 vols. Paris, 1893.

---- _Life in Ancient Egypt and Assyria_. Trans. London, 1892.

Massey (William), _A History of England during the Reign of
George III._ 4 vols. London, 1865.

Mathew (John), 'The Australian Aborigines'; in _Jour. and
Proceed. Roy. Soc. N.S. Wales_, vol. xxiii. London & Sydney, 1889.

---- _Eaglehawk and Crow_. London & Melbourne, 1899.

Mathews (R. H.), _Ethnological Notes on the Aboriginal Tribes of
N.S. Wales and Victoria_. Sydney, 1905.

Matiegka (H.), 'Anthropophagie in der prähistorischen Ansiedlung
bei Knovize und in der prähistorischen Zeit überhaupt'; in
_Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien_, vol.
xxvi. Wien, 1896.

Matignon (J.-J.), 'Deux mots sur la pédérastie en Chine'; in
_Archives d'anthropologie criminelle_, vol. xiv. Paris, 1899.

---- 'Le suicide en Chine'; in _Archives d'anthropologie
criminelle_, vol. xii. Paris, 1897.

Matthews (Washington), _Ethnography and Philology of the Hidatsa
Indians_. Washington, 1877.

---- _Navaho Legends_. (_Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore
Society_, vol. v.) Boston & New York, 1897.

---- 'The Study of Ethics among the Lower Races'; in _Jour.
American Folk-Lore_, vol. xii. Boston & New York, 1899.

Maudsley (Henry), _Responsibility in Mental Disease_. London,
1892.

Maurer (Konrad), _Die Bekehrung des Norwegischen Stammes zum
Christenthume_. 2 vols. München, 1856.

Maury (L. F. A.), _Histoire des religions de la Grèce antique_.
3 vols. Paris, 1857-59.

Mauss (M.), 'La religion et les origines du droit pénal'; in
_Revue de l'histoire des religions_, vols. xxxiv.-xxxv. Paris,
1896-97.

Maximus Tyrius, _Dissertationes_. Ed. by F. Dübner. Parisiis, 1840.

May (Th. Erskine), _The Constitutional History of England since
the Accession of George III. 1760-1860_. 2 vols. London, 1863.

Mayer (S.), _Die Rechte der Israeliten, Athener und Römer_.
2 vols. Leipzig, 1862-66.

Mayne (J. D.), _A Treatise on Hindu Law and Usage_. Madras, 1888.

Mayne (R. C.), _Four Years in British Columbia and Vancouver
Island_. London, 1862.

Mazzarella (G.), _La condizione giuridica del marito nella
famiglia matriarcale_. Catania, 1899.

Meade (H.), _A Ride through the disturbed Districts of New
Zealand_. London, 1870.

Meakin (Budgett), _The Moors_. London, 1902.

Meares (John), _Voyages made in the Years 1788 and 1789 from
China to the North-West Coast of America_. London, 1790.

Medhurst (W. H.), 'Marriage, Affinity, and Inheritance in China';
in _Trans. Roy. Asiatic Soc. China Branch_, vol. iv. Hongkong,
1855.

Medwin (Thomas), _The Angler in Wales_. 2 vols. London, 1834.

'Meghilla'; in _Le Talmud de Jérusalem_, trans. by M. Schwab,
vol. vi. Paris, 1883.

Mehring (G. von), _Die Frage von der Todesstrafe_. Stuttgart,
1867.

Meier (M. H. E.) and Schömann (G. F.), _Der attische Process_.
Ed. by J. H. Lipsius. Berlin, 1883-87.

{804} Meiners (C.), _Allgemeine kritische Geschichte der
Religioner_. 2 vols. Hannover, 1806-07.

---- _Grundriss der Geschichte der Menschheit_. Lemgo, 1785.

---- _History of the Female Sex_. Trans. 4 vols. London, 1808.

---- _Vergleichung des ältern und neuern Russlandes_. 2 vols.
Leipzig, 1798.

Meissner (B.), _Beiträge zum altbabylonischen Privatrecht_.
Leipzig, 1893.

Mela (Pomponius), _De chorographia (situ orbis) libri tres_. Ed.
by C. Frick. Lipsiae, 1880.

_Mélusine. Revue de mythologie, littérature populaire, traditions
et usages_. Ed. by H. Gaidoz. Paris.

Melville (H.), _Typee_. London, [1892].

_Mémoires de l'Institut Royal de France, Académie des
Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres_. Paris.

_Memoirs of the American Folk-Lore Society_. Boston & New York.

---- _of the American Museum of Natural History_. New York.

---- _of the International Congress of Anthropology_. Ed. by C.
Staniland Wake. Chicago, 1894.

Ménabréa (Léon), _De l'origine de la forme et de l'esprit des
jugements rendus au moyen-âge contre les animaux_. Chambéry,
1846.

Mencius, 'The Works of'; in Legge. _The Chinese Classics_, vol.
ii. Oxford, 1895.

Mendelsohn (S.), _The Criminal Jurisprudence of the Ancient
Hebrews_. Baltimore, 1891.

Menger (Anton), _The Right to the Whole Produce of Labour_.
Trans. London, 1899.

Merker (M.), _Die Masai_. Berlin, 1904.

Merolla da Sorrento (J.), 'A Voyage to Congo.' Trans.; in
Pinkerton, _Collection of Voyages and Travels_, vol. xvi. London,
1814.

Merzbacher (G.), _Aus den Hochregionen des Kaukasus_. 2 vols.
Leipzig, 1901.

_Methodist Magazine_. London.

_Methodist Magazine_. New York.

Methodius (_Saint_), 'Opera omnia'; in Migne, _Patrologiæ
cursus_, Ser. Graeca, vol. xviii. Parisiis, 1857.

Metz (F.), _The Tribes inhabiting the Neilgherry Hills_.
Mangalore, 1864.

Meursius (J.), 'Themis Attica, sive de legibus Atticis'; in
Gronovius, _Thesaurus Græcarum antiquitatum_, vol. v. Lugduni
Batavorum, 1699.

Meyer (Eduard), _Geschichte des Alterthums_. Vol. i. Stuttgart,
1884.

Meyer (H. E. A.), 'Manners and Customs of the Aborigines of the
Encounter Bay Tribe'; in Woods, _Native Tribes of South
Australia_. Adelaide, 1879.

Meyrick (F.), _Moral and Devotional Theology of the Church of
Rome. No. I. S. Alfonso de Liguori's Theory of Truthfulness_.
London, 1855.

Michaelis (J. D.), _Commentaries on the Laws of Moses_. Trans. 4
vols. London, 1814.

Michelet (J.), _Origines du droit français_. Paris, [1900].

Middleton (C.), _A Free Inquiry into the Miraculous Powers, Which
are supposed to have subsisted in the Christian Church_. London,
1749.

Mielziner (M.), _Die Verhältnisse der Sklaven bei den alien
Hebräern_. Kopenhagen, 1859.

Migne (J. P.), _Patrologiæ cursus completus_. 221 vols. Parisiis,
1844-64.

---- _Patrologiæ cursus completus_. Series Græca. 162 vols.
Parisiis, 1857-66.

Miklosich (Franz), 'Die Blutrache bei den Slaven'; in
_Denkschriften der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften,
Philosophisch-historische Classe_, vol. xxxvi. Wien, 1888.

{805} Miler (E.), 'Die Hauskommunion der Südslaven'; in _Jahrbuch
der internationalen Vereinigung für vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft
und Volkswirtschaftslehre zu Berlin_, vol. iii. Berlin, 1897.

Mill (James), _Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind_. Ed.
by J. S. Mill. 2 vols. London, 1869.

---- _A Fragment on Mackintosh_. London, 1835.

Mill (John Stuart), _An Examination of Sir William Hamilton's
Philosophy_. London, 1865.

---- _Principles of Political Economy_. 2 vols. London, 1865.

---- _Utilitarianism_. London, 1895.

Millar (John), _The Origin of the Distribution of Ranks_.
Edinburgh, 1806.

Millingen (J. G.), _The History of Duelling_. 2 vols. London,
1841.

Mills (Charles), _The History of Chivalry_. 2 vols. London, 1826.

Milman (H. H.), _History of Latin Christianity_. 9 vols. London,
1867.

Milton (J.), _Poetical Works_. Ed. by D. Masson. 3 vols. London,
1874.

_Mind. A Quarterly Review of Psychology and Philosophy_. London.

Mindeleff (C.), 'Navaho Houses'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur. Ethn._ vol.
xvii. Washington, 1898.

_Missions Catholiques (Les)_. Lyon.

_Missions-Blatt aus der Brüdergemeine_. Hamburg.

Mitchell (T. L.), _Three Expeditions into the Interior of Eastern
Australia_. 2 vols. London, 1839.

Mitford (A. B.), _Tales of Old Japan_. 2 vols. London, 1871.

Mittermaier (C. J. A. von), 'Beyträge zur Lehre vom Verbrechen
des Kindesmordes'; in _Neues Archiv des Criminalrechts_, vol.
vii. Halle, 1824-25.

---- _Grundsätze des gemeinen deutschen Privatrechts_. 2 vols.
Regensburg, 1847.

---- _On the Effect of Drunkenness on Criminal Responsibility_.
Trans. Edinburgh, 1841.

---- _Die Todesstrafe_. Heidelberg, 1862.

_Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien_.

---- _der Geographischen Gesellschaft (für Thüringen) zu Jena_.

---- _der Geographischen Gesellschaft in Hamburg_.

---- _der kais. und könig. Geographischen Gesellschaft in Wien_.

---- _des Vereins für Erdkunde zu Halle a. S._

---- _des Vereins für Erdkunde zu Leipzig_.

Mockler-Ferryman (A. F.), _British Nigeria_. London, 1902.

Modigliani (Elio), _Un viaggio a Nías_. Milano, 1890.

Mökern (Ph. von), _Ostindien_. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1857.

Möller (P.), Pagels (G.), and Gleerup (E.), _Tre år i Kongo_.
2 vols. Stockholm, 1887-88.

Moerenhout (J. A.), _Voyages aux îles du Grand Océan_. 2 vols.
Paris, 1837.

Moffat (Robert), _Missionary Labours and Scenes in Southern
Africa_. London, 1842.

---- The same work. London, 1846.

Molina (Christoval de), 'The Fables and Rites of the Yncas'; in
_Narratives of the Rites and Laws of the Incas_. Trans. and ed.
by C. R. Markham. London, 1873.

Molina (J. J.), _The Geographical, Natural, and Civil History of
Chili_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1809.

{806} Moll (Albert), _Die Conträre Sexualempfindung_. Berlin, 1891.

Mommsen (Theodor), _History of Rome_. Trans. 5 vols. London, 1894.

---- _Römisches Strafrecht_. Leipzig, 1899.

Monier-Williams (Monier), _Br[=a]hmanism and Hind[=u]ism_.
London, 1887.

---- _Buddhism_. London, 1890.

---- _Hinduism_. London, s.d.

---- _Indian Wisdom_. London, 1893.

Monrad (H. C.), _Bidrag til en Skildring af Guinea-Kysten og dens
Indbyggere_. Kjøbenhavn, 1822.

Montaigne (M. de), _[OE]uvres_. Ed. by J. A. C. Buchon. Paris, 1837.

Montefiore (C. G.), _Hibbert Lectures on . . . the Religion of
the Ancient Hebrews_. London, 1892.

Montesquieu (C. de Secondat de), _[OE]uvres_. Paris, 1837.

Montgomery (James), _Journal of Voyages and Travels by D. Tyerman
and G. Bennet_. 2 vols. London, 1831.

_Month and Catholic Review (The)_. London.

Mooney (James), 'Myths of the Cherokee'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur.
Ethn._ vol. xix. pt. i. Washington, 1900.

Moorcroft (William) and Trebeck (George), _Travels in the
Himalayan Provinces of Hindustan and the Panjab_. Ed. by H. H.
Wilson. 2 vols. London, 1841.

Moore (Charles), _A Full Inquiry into the Subject of Suicide,
&c._ 2 vols. London, 1790.

Moore (Samuel), _The Public Acts in force; passed by the
Legislature of Barbados, 1762-1800_. London, 1801.

Moore (Theofilus), _Marriage Customs, &c. of the Various Nations
of the Universe_. London, 1814.

More (_Sir_ Thomas), _Utopia_. Trans. ed. by E. Arber. London, 1869.

Morehead (C. S.) and Brown (Mason), _A Digest of the Statute Laws
of Kentucky_. 2 vols. Frankfort (Ky.), 1834.

Morgan (C. Lloyd), _Animal Life and Intelligence_. London, 1890-91.

Morgan (L. H.), _Houses and House-Life of the American
Aborigines_. Washington, 1881.

---- _League of the Ho-de'-no-sau-nee, or Iroquois_. Rochester, 1851.

Morley (John), _Voltaire_. London, 1886.

Morrison (W. D.), _Crime and its Causes_. London, 1891.

Morselli (E.), _Il suicidio_. Milano, 1879.

_Mort de Garin le Loherain (La)_. Ed. by É. du Méril. Paris, 1846.

_Morte Darthur_. London, 1868.

Moschus (Joannes), 'Pratum spirituale'; in Migne, _Patrologiæ
cursus_, Ser. Graeca, vol. lxxxvii. Parisiis, 1860.

Moseley (H. N.), _Notes by a Naturalist on the "Challenger."_
London, 1879.

---- 'On the Inhabitants of the Admiralty Islands, &c.'; in
_Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. vi. London, 1877.

Mosheim (J. L. von), _Institutes of Ecclesiastical History_.
3 vols. London. 1863.

Mouhot (H.), _Travels in the Central Parts of Indo-China, &c._
2 vols. London, 1864.

Mozley (J. B.), _Sermons preached before the University of
Oxford_. London, 1883.

Müller (C. O.), _Dissertations on the Eumenides of Æschylus_.
Trans. London & Cambridge, 1853.

{807} Müller (C. O.), _The History and Antiquities of the Doric
Race_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1830.

Müller (Friedrich), _Allgemeine Ethnographie_. Wien, 1879.

---- _Reise der österreichischen Fregatte Novara um die Erde_.
Ethnographie. Wien, 1868.

Müller (Friedrich Max), _Anthropological Religion_. London, 1892.

---- _Physical Religion_. London, 1891.

Müller (J. G.), _Geschichte der Amerikanischen Urreligionen_.
Basel, 1867.

Müller (Josef), _Das sexuelle Leben der alten Kulturvölker_.
Leipzig, 1902.

---- _Das sexuelle Leben der christlichen Kulturvölker_. Leipzig,
1904.

Müller (W. J.), _Die Africanische, Auff der Guineischen Gold-Cust
gelegene Landschafft Fetu_. Hamburg, 1673.

Mürdter (F.), _Geschichte Babyloniens und Assyriens_. Ed. by F.
Delitzsch. Calw & Stuttgart, 1891.

Muir (John), _Additional Moral and Religious Passages metrically
rendered from the Sanskrit_. London, [1875].

---- _Original Sanskrit Texts_. 5 vols. London, 1868-84.

---- _Religious and Moral Sentiments metrically rendered from
Sanskrit Writers_. London, 1875.

Muir (William), _The Life of Mahomet_. 4 vols. London, 1858-61.

Muirhead (J. H.), _The Elements of Ethics_. London, 1897.

Munzinger (W.), _Ostafrikanische Studien_. Schaffhausen, 1864.

---- _Ueber die Sitten und das Recht der Bogos_. Winterthur, 1859.

Muratori (L. A.), _Dissertazioni sopra le antichità Italiane_. 5
vols. Milano, 1836-37.

---- _Rerum Italicarum scriptores_. 25 vols. Mediolani, 1723-51.

Murdoch (John), 'Ethnological Results of the Point Barrow
Expedition'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur. Ethn._ vol. ix. Washington, 1892.

Murray (A. W.), _Forty Years' Mission Work in Polynesia and New
Guinea_. London, 1876.

Murray (J. A. H.), _A New English Dictionary_. Oxford, 1884, &c.
_In progress_.

Murray (J. Clark), _An Introduction to Ethics_. London, 1891.

Musters (G. C.), _At Home with the Patagonians_. London, 1873.


Nachtigal (G.), _Sahara und Sudan_. 3 vols. Berlin, 1879-89.

Nadaillac (_Marquis_ de), 'L'anthropophagie et les sacrifices
humains'; in _Revue des Deux Mondes_, vol. lxvi. Paris, 1884.

Nägelsbach (C. F. von), _Homerische Theologie_. Ed. by G.
Autenrieth. Nürnberg, 1884.

---- _Die nachhomerische Theologie des griechischen Volksglaubens
bis auf Alexander_. Nürnberg, 1857.

Nansen (F.), _Eskimo Life_. Trans. London, 1893.

---- _The First Crossing of Greenland_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1890.

'Nârada,' trans. by J. Jolly; in _The Sacred Books of the East_,
vol. xxxiii. Oxford, 1889.

_Narrative of the Chinese Embassy to the Khan of the Tourgouth
Tartars_. Trans. from the Chinese by Sir G. T. Staunton. London, 1821.

_Narratives of the Rites and Laws of the Yncas_. Trans. and ed.
by C. R. Markham. London, 1873.

Nassau (R. H.), _Fetichism in West Africa_. London, 1904.

_Nation (The); a Weekly Journal_. New York.


{808}'National Personality'; in _The Edinburgh Review_, vol.
cxciv. London, 1901.

'Nationality'; in _The Home and Foreign Review_, vol. i. London, 1862.

Natorp (Paul), _Die Ethika des Demokritos_. Marburg, 1893.

'Naturalization Act, 1870 (The)'; in Chitty, _Statutes of
Practical Utility_, vol. i. London, 1894.

_Nature; a Weekly Illustrated Journal of Science_. London.

Naudet (--), 'Des secours publics chez les Romains'; in _Mémoires
de l'Institut Royal de France, Académie des Inscriptions et
Belles-Lettres_, vol. xiii. Paris, 1838.

Navarette (D. F.), 'An Account of the Empire of China.' Trans.;
in Awnsham and Churchill, _Collection of Voyages and Travels_,
vol. i. London, 1704.

Neale (E. V.), _Feasts and Fasts_. London, 1845.

Neander (Joseph), _General History of the Christian Religion and
Church_. Trans. 9 vols. Edinburgh, 1847-55.

Nelson (E. W.), 'The Eskimo about Bering Strait'; in _Ann. Rep.
Bur. Ethn._ Washington, 1899.

Nelson (J. H.), _A View of the Hind[=u] Law_. Madras, &c., 1877.

Nennius, _The Irish Version of the Historia Britonum of_. Ed. and
trans. by J. H. Todd. Dublin, 1848.

Nepos (Cornelius), _Vitæ excellentium imperatorum_. 2 vols.
Londini, 1822.

Neubauer (A.), 'Notes on the Race-Types of the Jews'; in _Jour.
Anthr. Inst._ vol. xv. London, 1886.

_Neues Archiv des Criminalrechts_. Halle.

Neumann (K. F.), _Die Völker des südlichen Russlands_. Leipzig, 1847.

Nevill (Hugh), 'Vaeddas of Ceylon'; in _The Taprobanian_, vols.
i.-ii. Bombay, 1887-88.

New (Charles), _Life, Wanderings, &c. in Eastern Africa_. London, 1874.

_New Englander (The)_. New Haven.

Newbold (T. J.), _Political and Statistical Account of the British
Settlements in the Straits of Malacca_. 2 vols. London, 1839.

Newman (F. W.), _Anglo-Saxon Abolition of Negro Slavery_. London, 1889.

Newman (J. H.), _Apologia pro vita sua_. London, 1873.

Nicolaus I. (_Pope_), 'Epistolae et decreta'; in Migne,
_Patrologiæ cursus_, vol. cxix. Parisiis, 1852.

Nieboer (H. J.), _Slavery as an Industrial System_. The Hague, 1900.

Niebuhr (C.), _Travels through Arabia_. Trans. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1792.

Nielsen (F.), _Tertullians Ethik_. Kjøbenhavn, 1879.

Nietzsche (F.), _Also sprach Zarathustra_. 4 vols. Chemnitz &
Leipzig, 1883-91.

Nisbet (Hume), _A Colonial Tramp_. 2 vols. London, 1891.

_Njála_. Ed. by Det Kongelige Nordiske Oldskrift-Selskab. 2 vols.
Köbenhavn, 1875-89.

Nonius Marcellus, _De proprietate sermonis_. Lipsiae, 1826.

Noodt (G.), _Opera omnia_. 2 vols. Lugduni Batavorum, 1767.

Nordenskiöld (A. E.), _Den andra Dicksonska expeditionen till
Grönland_. Stockholm, 1885.

---- _Vegas färd kring Asien och Europa_. 2 vols. Stockholm, 1880-81.

Nordström (J. J.), _Bidrag till den svenska samhälls-författningens
historia_. 2 vols. Helsingfors, 1839-40.

Noreen (Ad.), _Spridda studier. Andra samlingen_. Stockholm, 1903.

{809} Norman (Henry), _The Real Japan_. London, 1892.

_North Indian Notes and Queries: a Monthly Periodical_. Ed. by W.
Crooke. Allahabad.

Norton (A.), _Tracts concerning Christianity_. Cambridge, 1852.

Nowack (Wilhelm), _Lehrbuch der hebräischen Archäologie_. 2 vols.
Freiburg i. B. & Leipzig, 1894.

Numa Praetorius, 'Die strafrechtlichen Bestimmungen gegen den
gleichgeschlechtlichen Verkehr'; in _Jahrbuch für sexuelle
Zwischenstufen_, vol. i. Leipzig, 1899.

Nuñez Cabeza de Vaca (Alvar), 'Naufragios y relacion de la
jornada que hizo a la Florida'; in _Biblioteca de autores
españoles_, vol. xxii. Madrid, 1852.

Nyrop (K.), 'Navnets magt'; in _Mindre Afhandlinger udgivne af
del Philologisk-historiske Samfund_. Kjøbenhavn, 1887.

---- _Romanske Mosaiker_. Kjøbenhavn, 1885.

Nys (Ernest), _Le droit de la guerre et les précurseurs de
Grotius_. Bruxelles & Leipzig, 1882.

---- _Le droit international_. 2 vols. Bruxelles & Paris, 1904-05.


Oberländer (R.), 'Die Eingeborenen der australischen Kolonie
Victoria'; in _Globus_, vol. iv. Hildburghausen, 1863.

Oehler (G. F.), _Theology of the Old Testament_. Vol. i. Trans.
Edinburgh, 1874.

Oldenberg (H.), _Buddha_. Trans. London, 1882.

---- _Die Religion des Veda_. Berlin, 1894.

Oldfield (A.), 'On the Aborigines of Australia'; in _Trans. Ethn.
Soc._ new ser. vol. iii. London, 1865.

Olivecrona (K.), _Om dödsstraffet_. Upsala, 1866.

Olmsted (F. A.), _Incidents of a Whaling Voyage_. New York, 1841.

_Open Court (The)_. Chicago.

Oppert (J.), 'La condition des esclaves à Babylone'; in _Académie
des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres--Comptes rendus des séances de
l'année 1888_, ser. iv. vol. xvi. Paris.

---- and Ménant (J.), _Documents juridiques de l'Assyrie et de la
Chaldée_. Paris, 1877.

Origen, _Opera omnia_. 7 vols. (Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_, Ser.
Graeca, vols. xi.-xvii.) Parisiis, 1857-60.

_Original-Mittheilungen aus der ethnologischen Abtheilung der
königlichen Museen zu Berlin_. Berlin.

Orosius (P.), 'Historiarum libri septem'; in Migne, _Patrologiæ
cursus_, vol. xxxi. Parisiis, 1846.

Orpen (J. M.), 'A Glimpse into the Mythology of the Maluti
Bushmen'; in _The Cape Monthly Magazine_, new ser. vol. ix. Cape
Town, 1874.

Ortolan (J.), _Éléments de droit pénal_. Paris, 1859.

Osenbrüggen (E.), _Das Alamannische Strafrecht_. Schaffhausen, 1860.

---- _Studien zur deutschen und schweizerischen Rechtsgeschichte_.
Schaffhausen, 1868.

_Ostfriesische Land-Recht (Das)_. Aurich, [1746].

_Ottoman Penal Code (The)_. Trans. by C. G. Walpole. London, 1888.

Ovidius Naso (P.), _Opera omnia_. 9 vols. Londini, 1821.

Oviedo y Valdés (G. Hernandez de), 'Summario de la natural
historia de las Indias'; in _Biblioteca de autores españoles_,
vol. xxii. Madrid, 1852.


{810} Paget (John), _Hungary and Transylvania_. 2 vols. London, 1839.

Paley (W.), _Complete Works_. 4 vols. London, 1825.

Palgrave (W. G.), _Narrative of a Year's Journey through Central
and Eastern Arabia_. 2 vols. London & Cambridge, 1865.

Palissot de Montenoy (Charles), _Les philosophes_. Paris, 1760.

Pallas (P. S.), _Travels through the Southern Provinces of the
Russian Empire_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1802-03.

Palmer (Edward), 'Notes on some Australian Tribes'; in _Jour.
Anthr. Inst._ vol. xiii. London, 1884.

_Panchatantram_. With an English translation and a Glossary. 5
pts. Madras, 1891-93.

---- See _Pantschatantra_.

_Panjab Notes and Queries, a Monthly Periodical_. Ed. by R. C.
Temple. Allahabad.

_Pantschatantra_. Trans. into German by Th. Benfey. 2 vols.
Leipzig, 1859.

Paramo (L. de), _De origine et progressu Sanctæ Inquisitionis_.
Matriti, 1598.

Pardessus (J. M.), _Collection de lois maritimes antérieures au
XVIII^e siècle_. 6 vols. Paris, 1828-45.

---- _Loi Salique_. Paris, 1843.

---- _Us et coutumes de la mer_. 2 vols. Paris, 1847.

Paris (Gaston), _La poésie du moyen âge_. Paris, 1885.

Park (Mungo), _Travels in the Interior Districts of Africa_. 2
vols. London, 1816-17.

---- The same work. Edinburgh, 1860.

Parker (E. H.), 'Comparative Chinese Family Law'; in _The China
Review_, vol. viii. Hongkong, 1879-80.

Parker (E. S.), _The Aborigines of Australia_. Melbourne, 1854.

Parker (_Mrs._ K. Langloh), _The Euahlayi Tribe_. London, 1905.

Parker (Theodore), _The Collected Works of_. Ed. by F. P. Cobbe.
14 vols. London, 1863-71.

---- _A Sermon of War_. Boston, 1846.

Parkinson (John), 'Notes on the Asaba People'; in _Jour. Anthr.
Inst._ vol. xxxvi. London, 1906.

Parkinson (R.), _Zur Ethnographie der nordwestlichen Salomo
Inseln_. Berlin, 1899.

Parkman (Francis), _The Jesuits in North America in the
Seventeenth Century_. London, 1885.

Parkyns (M.), _Life in Abyssinia_. 2 vols. London, 1853.

_Parliamentary History and Review; containing Reports of the
Proceedings of the Two Houses of Parliament during the Session of
1825-26_. London, 1826.

Parry (W. E.), _Journal of a Second Voyage for the Discovery of a
North-West Passage from the Atlantic to the Pacific_. London, 1824.

Partridge (Charles), _Cross River Natives_. London, 1905.

Patetta (F.), _Le ordalie_. Torino, 1890.

Paul (Hermann), _Grundriss der germanischen Philologie_. Ed. by
H. P. 2 vols. Strassburg, 1889-93.

---- The same work. 3 vols. Strassburg, 1896-1900.

Paulhan (F.), _L'activité mentale et les éléments de l'esprit_.
Paris, 1889.

Paulitschke (Ph.), _Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas_. 2 vols.
Berlin, 1893-96.

Paulsen (F.), _System der Ethik_. 2 vols. Berlin, 1894.

{811} Pauly (A. F. von), _Real-Encyclopädie der classischen
Alterthumswissenschaft_. 6 vols. Stuttgart, 1842-62.

Pausanias, _Descriptio Græciæ_. Ed. by L. Dindorfius. Parisiis, 1845.

---- See Frazer (_Sir_ J. G.).

Payne (E. J.), _History of the New World called America_. 2 vols.
Oxford, 1892-99.

Peacock (Mabel), 'Executed Criminals and Folk-Medicine'; in
_Folk-Lore_, vol. vii. London, 1896.

Pearson (Charles H.), _National Life and Character_. London, 1893.

Peirce (L.), Taylor (M.), and King (W. W.), _The Consolidation
and Revision of the Statutes of the State_ [_Louisiana_]. New
Orleans, 1852.

Peltzer (A.), _Deutsche Mystik und deutsche Kunst_. Strassburg, 1899.

Penny (Alfred), _Ten Years in Melanesia_. London, 1887.

Percival (Peter), _The Land of the Veda_. London, 1854.

Percival (Robert), _An Account of the Island of Ceylon_. London, 1803.

Perelaer (M. T. H.), _Ethnographische beschrijving der Dajaks_.
Zalt-Bommel, 1870.

Perez (Bernard), _The First Three Years of Childhood_. Trans.
London, 1892.

Perham (J.), 'Petara'; in _Jour. Straits Branch Roy. Asiatic
Soc._ no. 8. Singapore, 1882.

---- 'Sea Dyak Religion'; in _Jour. Straits Branch Roy. Asiatic
Soc._ no. 10. Singapore, 1883.

Perrin du Lac (F. M.), _Voyage dans les deux Louisianes et chez
les nations sauvages du Missouri_. Paris, 1805.

Perrot (Nicholas), _Memoire sur les m[oe]urs, coustumes et
relligion des sauvages de l'Amerique septentrionale_. Ed. by R.
P. J. Tailhan. Leipzig & Paris, 1864.

Perry (G. G.), _A History of the English Church. First Period_.
London, 1881.

Pertile (Antonio), 'Gli animali in giudizio'; in _Atti del Reale
Istituto Veneto di scienze, lettere ed arti_, ser. vi. vol. iv.
Venezia, 1884-85.

Pertuiset (E.), _Le trésor des Incas à la Terre de Feu_. Paris, 1877.

Perty (Max.), _Ueber das Seelenleben der Thiere_. Leipzig &
Heidelberg, 1876.

Pertz (G. H.), _Monumenta Germaniæ historica_. Leges. 5 vols.
Hannoverae, 1837-75.

Peschel (O.), _The Races of Man_. Trans. London, 1876.

Petherick (John), _Egypt, the Soudan and Central Africa._
Edinburgh & London, 1861.

---- and Petherick (_Mrs._), _Travels in Central Africa, and
Explorations of the Western Nile Tributaries_. 2 vols. London, 1869.

Petitot (C. B.), _Collection complète des Mémoires relatifs à
l'histoire de France_. 130 vols. Paris, 1819-29.

Petitot (É.), _Les Grands Esquimaux_. Paris, 1887.

Petrie (W. M. Flinders), _Religion and Conscience in Ancient
Egypt_. London, 1898.

Petroff (Ivan), 'Report on the Population, Industries, and
Resources of Alaska'; in _Tenth Census of the United States_.
Washington, 1884.

Pfeiffer (Ida), _A Lady's Second Journey round the World_.
[Trans.] 2 vols. London, 1855.

Pfleiderer (Otto), _Philosophy and Development of Religion_.
Trans. 2 vols. Edinburgh & London, 1894.

Philip (Robert), _The Life and Opinions of the Rev. William
Milne_. London, 1840.

{812} Philo Judaeus, _Opera_. Ed. by Th. Mangey. 2 vols. London, 1742.

Piedrahita (L. Fernandez de), _Historia general de las conquistas
del nuevo reyno de Granada_. Amberes, [1688].

Pierotti (Ermete), _Customs and Traditions of Palestine_. Trans.
Cambridge, 1864.

Pike (L. Owen), _A History of Crime in England_. 2 vols. London,
1873-76.

Pindar, _Carmina_. Ed. by C. I. T. Mommsen. Berolini, 1864.

Pinel (Ph.), _Traité médico-philosophique sur l'aliénation
mentale_. Paris, 1809.

Pinkerton (John), _A General Collection of Voyages and Travels_.
17 vols. London, 1808-14.

Pitcairn (Robert), _Criminal Trials in Scotland_. 3 vols.
Edinburgh, 1838.

Pitcairn (W. D.), _Two Years among the Savages of New Guinea_.
London, 1891.

Placucci (M.), _Usi e pregiudizj dei contadini della Romagna_.
Ed. by G. Pitrè. Palermo, 1885.

Plato, _Dialogues_. Trans. by B. Jowett. 5 vols. Oxford, 1892.

---- _Opera_. 3 vols. Parisiis, 1846-73.

Plautus (T. M.), _Com[oe]diæ_. 5 vols. Londini, 1829.

Pliny, the Elder, _Historia naturalis_. 13 vols. Londini, 1826.

Pliny, the Younger, _Epistolarum libri decem_. Ed. by N. E.
Lemaire. 2 vols. Parisiis, 1822-23.

Ploss (H. H.), _Das Kind im Brauch und Sitte der Völker_. 2 vols.
Stuttgart, 1876.

---- _Das Weib in der Natur- und Völkerkunde_. Ed. by M. Bartels.
2 vols. Leipzig, 1902.

Plowden (E.), _The Commentaries or Reports of_. Trans. 2 parts.
Savoy (London), 1661.

Plutarch, _Romane Questions._ Trans. ed. by F. B. Jevons. London, 1892.

---- _Scripta moralia_. 2 vols. Parisiis, 1839-41.

---- _Vitæ_. Ed. by Th. D[oe]hner. 2 vols. Parisiis, 1846-47.

Pogge (Paul), _Im Reiche des Muata Jamwo_. Berlin, 1880.

Poircy (L. de), _Histoire naturelle et morale des Iles Antilles
de l'Amerique_. Ed. by C. de Rochefort. Rotterdam, 1681.

Polack (J. S.), _Manners and Customs of the New Zealanders_. 2
vols. London, 1840.

Polak (J. E.), _Persien_. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1865.

---- 'Die Prostitution in Persien'; in _Wiener Medizinische
Wochenschrift_, vol. xi. Wien, 1861.

Pollock (_Sir_ Frederick), _Essays on Jurisprudence and Ethics_.
London, 1882.

---- 'The King's Peace'; in _The Law Quarterly Review_, vol. i.
London 1885.

---- _The Law of Torts_. London, 1897.

---- _Oxford Lectures_. London, 1890.

---- and Maitland (F. W.), _The History of the English Law before
the Time of Edward I._ 2 vols. Cambridge, 1898.

Pollux (Julius), _Onomasticum_. 2 vols. Amstelædami, 1706.

Polo (Marco), _The Book of, concerning the Kingdoms and Marvels
of the East_. Trans. ed. by H. Yule. 2 vols. London, 1871.

Polybius, _Historiarum reliquiæ_. 2 vols. Parisiis, 1839.

Pommerol (Jean), _Among the Women of the Sahara_. Trans. London, 1900.

Pool (J. J.), _Studies in Mohammedanism_. Westminster, 1892.

{813} Poole (R. Lane), _Illustrations of the History of Medieval
Thought in the Departments of Theology and Ecclesiastical
Politics_. London, 1884.

Poole (S. Lane). See Lane-Poole (S.).

Popovi[vc] (Georg), _Recht und Gericht in Montenegro_. Agram, 1877.

_Popular Science Monthly (The)_. New York.

Porphyry, _De abstinentia ab esu animalium_. Ed. by R. Hercher.
Parisiis, 1858.

Porter (G. R.), _The Progress of the Nation from the Beginning of
the Nineteenth Century to the Present Time_. London, 1843.

Post (A. H.), _Afrikanische Jurisprudenz_. 2 vols. Oldenburg &
Leipzig, 1887.

---- _Die Anfange des Staats- und Rechtslebens_. Oldenburg, 1878.

---- _Die Geschlechtsgenossenschaft der Urzeit und die Entstehung
der Ehe_. Oldenburg, 1875.

---- _Die Grundlagen des Rechts_. Oldenburg, 1884.

---- _Grundriss der ethnologischen Jurisprudenz_. 2 vols.
Oldenburg & Leipzig, 1894-95.

---- _Studien zur Entwicklungsgeschichte des Familienrechts_.
Oldenburg & Leipzig; 1890.

Potgiesser (J.), _Commentariorum juris Germanici de statu servorum
veteri perinde atque novo libri quinque_. Lemgoviae, 1736.

Potter (John), _Archæologia Græca_. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1832.

Powell (J. W.), 'Outlines of Sociology'; in _The Saturday
Lectures delivered in the Lecture-Room of the U.S. National
Museum_. Washington, 1882.

---- 'Sociology'; in _The American Anthropologist_, new ser. vol.
i. New York, 1899.

---- 'Wyandot Government'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur. Ethn._ vol. i.
Washington, 1881.

Powell (Wilfred), _Wanderings in a Wild Country; or, Three Years
amongst the Cannibals of New Britain_. London, 1883.

Powers (Stephan), _Tribes of California_. Washington, 1877.

Prain (David), 'The Angami Nagas'; in _Revue coloniale
internationale_, vol. v. Amsterdam, 1887.

Prejevalsky (N.), _Mongolia_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1876.

Preller (L.), _Griechische Mythologie_. Vol. i. Ed. by Carl
Robert. Berlin, 1894.

_Prem Ságar; or, the Ocean of Love_. Trans. by E. B. Eastwick.
Hertford & London, 1851.

Prentiss (G. L.), 'Infant Salvation and its Theological Bearings';
in _The Presbyterian Review_, vol. iv. New York, 1883.

_Presbyterian Review (The)_. New York.

Prescott (W. H.), _History of the Conquest of Mexico_. Ed. by J.
F. Kirk. London, 1887.

---- _History of the Conquest of Peru_. 3 vols. London, [1890].

Preuss (Theodor), _Die Begräbnisarten der Amerikaner und
Nordostasiaten_. Königsberg, 1894.

Prexl (R.), 'Geburts- und Todtengebräuche der Rumänen in
Siebenbürgen'; in _Globus_, vol. lvii. Braunschweig, 1890.

Price (Richard), _A Review of the Principal Questions in Morals_.
London, 1787.

Prichard (H. H.), _Through the Heart of Patagonia_. London, 1902.

Pridham (Charles), _An Account of Ceylon_. 2 vols. London, 1849.

Priestley (Joseph). See Hartley, _Theory of the Human Mind_.

Prince (O. H.), _A Digest of the Laws of the State of Georgia_.
Athens (U.S.), 1837.

{814} Pritchard (W. T.), _Polynesian Reminiscences_. London, 1866.

_Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society and Monthly Record
of Geography_. London.

---- _of the Royal Irish Academy_. Dublin.

---- _of the Royal Society of Edinburgh_.

---- _of the Society of Biblical Archæology_. London.

Procopius, ex recensione G. Dindorfii. 3 vols. Bonnae, 1833-38.

Proudhon (P.-J.), _La guerre et la paix_. 2 vols. Bruxelles, [1861].

Proyart (L. B.), 'History of Loango, &c.' Trans.; in Pinkerton,
_Collection of Voyages and Travels_, vol. xvi. London, 1814.

Ptan-Hotep, 'The Precepts of'. Trans. by Ph. Virey; in _Records
of the Past_, new ser. vol. iii. London, _s. d._

Puchta (G. F.), _Cursus der Institutionen_. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1875.

Pufendorf (Samuel), _De jure naturæ et gentium_. Amstelodami, 1688.

Purcell (B. H.), 'Rites and Customs of Australian Aborigines'; in
_Verhandl. Berliner Gesellsch. Anthrop._, 1893.


_Quarterly Review (The)_. London.

Quatremère (E. M.), 'Mémoire sur les asiles chez les Arabes'; in
_Mémoires de l'lnstitut Royal de France, Académie des
Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres_, vol. xv. pt. ii. Paris, 1842.

Quintilian (M. F.), _Declamationes quæ supersunt CXLV._ Ed. by C.
Ritter. Lipsiae, 1884.

_Institutionis oratoriæ libri duodecim_. Ed. by C. Halm. 2 vols.
Lipsiae, 1868.

_Qur'ân (The)_. Trans. by E. H. Palmer. 2 vols. (_The Sacred
Books of the East_, vols. vi. and ix.) Oxford, 1880.


Rabbinowicz (I. J. M.), _Législation criminelle du Talmud_.
Paris, 1876.

Radde (G.), _Die Chews'uren und ihr Land_. Cassel, 1878.

Radloff (W.), _Das Schamanenthum_. Leipzig, 1885.

Raffenel (Anne), _Nouveau voyage dans le pays des nègres_.
2 vols. Paris, 1856.

Raffles (T. S.), _The History of Java_. 2 vols. London, 1817.

Rájendralála Mitra, _Indo-Aryans_. 2 vols. London & Calcutta, 1881.

Ralston (W. R. S.), _The Songs of the Russian People_. London, 1872.

Rambaud (A.), _Histoire de la civilisation française_. 2 vols.
Paris, 1893-94.

Ramsay (W. M.), _The Church in the Roman Empire before A.D. 170_.
London, 1903.

---- _The Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia_. 2 vols. Oxford, 1895-97.

---- _The Historical Geography of Asia Minor_. London, 1890.

Ramseyer (F. A.) and Kühne (J.), _Four Years in Ashantee_. Ed. by
Mrs. Weitbrecht. London, 1875.

Ranking (John), _Historical Researches on the Conquest of Peru,
Mexico, &c._ London, 1827.

Rattray (R. S.), _Some Folk-Lore Stories and Songs in Chinyanja_.
London, 1907.

Ratzel (F.), _The History of Mankind_. Trans. 3 vols. London, 1896-98.

Ravenscroft (A. G. B.), 'Some Habits and Customs of the Chingalee
Tribe'; in _Trans. Roy. Soc. South Australia_, vol. xv. Adelaide,
1892.

Rawlinson (George), _The Religions of the Ancient World_. London,
_s. d._

{815} Read (C. H.) and Dalton (O. M.), _Antiquities from the City
of Benin_. London, 1899.

Reade (W. Winwood), _Savage Africa_. London, 1863.

Réal de Courban (G. de), _La science du gouvernement_. 8 vols.
Aix-la-Chapelle, &c., 1761-65.

_Recopilacion de leyes de los reinos de las Indias_. 4 vols.
Madrid, 1841.

_Records of the Past_. London.

Rée (Paul), _Die Entstehung des Gewissens_. Berlin, 1885.

---- _Der Ursprung der moralischen Empfindungen_. Chemnitz, 1877.

Reed (_Sir_ E. J.), _Japan_. 2 vols. London, 1880.

Rehme (Paul), 'Das Recht der Amaxosa'; in _Zeitschr. f. vergl.
Rechtswiss._ vol. x. Berlin, 1892.

Reichard (Paul), 'Die Wanjamuesi'; in _Zeitschr. der Gesellschaft
für Erdkunde zu Berlin_, vol. xxiv. Berlin, 1889.

Reid (A. P.), 'Religious Belief of the Ojibois or Sauteux
Indians'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. iii. London, 1874.

Reid (Thomas), _An Inquiry into the Human Mind_. London, 1785.

Rein (J. J.), _Japan_. Trans. London, 1884.

Rein (Wilhelm), _Das Criminalrecht der Römer_. Leipzig, 1844.

Reinhard (F. V.), _System der Christlichen Moral_. 5 vols.
Wittenberg, 1805-15.

Remy (Jules), _Ka Mooolelo Hawaii_. Paris & Leipzig, 1862.

Renan (Ernest), _Hibbert Lectures on the Influence of the
Institutions, Thought and Culture of Rome, on Christianity_.
London, 1885.

Rengger (J. R.), _Naturgeschichte der Säugethiere von Paraguay_.
Basel, 1830.

Renouf (P. Le Page), _Hibbert Lectures on . . . the Religion of
Ancient Egypt_. London, 1884.

Renton (A. W.), _Encyclopædia of the Laws of England_. London,
[1897, &c.].

_Report on the Work of the Horn Scientific Expedition to Central
Australia_. Ed. by B. Spencer. Part iv. London & Melbourne, 1896.

_Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres
Straits_. Ed. by A. C. Haddon. Vol. v. Cambridge, 1904.

Réville (Albert), _Hibbert Lectures on . . . the Native Religions
of Mexico and Peru_. London, 1884.

---- _Prolegomena of the History of Religions_. Trans. London, 1884.

---- _La Religion Chinoise_. Paris, 1889.

---- _Les religions des peuples non-civilisés_. 2 vols. Paris, 1883.

Réville (André), 'L'abjuratio regni'; in _Revue historique_, vol.
l. Paris, 1892.

_Revised Statutes of the State of North Carolina (The), passed by the
General Assembly at the Session of 1836-7_. 2 vols. Raleigh, 1837.

_Revue Celtique_. Paris.

---- _coloniale internationale_. Amsterdam.

---- _de législation et de jurisprudence_. Paris.

---- _de l'histoire des religions_. Paris.

---- _des Deux Mondes_. Paris.

---- _historique_. Paris.

---- _historique de droit français et étranger_. Paris.

---- _internationale de sociologie_. Ed. by R. Worms. Paris.

---- _scientifique_. Paris.

_Rheinisches Museum für Philologie_. Frankfurt a. M.

Rh[^y]s (John), _Celtic Folklore_. 2 vols. Oxford, 1901.

{816} Ribbe (Ch. de), _Les families et la société en France avant
la Révolution_. Paris, 1873.

Ribeiro de Sampaio (F. X.), _Diario da viagem_. Lisboa, 1825.

Ribot (Th.), _The Psychology of the Emotions_. [Trans.] London, 1897.

Richardson (C. H.), 'Observations among the Cameroon Tribes of
West Central Africa'; in _Memoirs of the International Congress
of Anthropology_. Chicago, 1894.

Richardson (James), _Narrative of a Mission to Central Africa
performed in the Years 1850-51_. 2 vols. London, 1853.

Richardson (John), _Arctic Searching Expedition_. 2 vols. London, 1851.

Richmond (Legh), 'A Sermon on the Sin of Cruelty to the Brute
Creation'; in _The Methodist Magazine_, vol. xxx. London, 1807.

Richter (W.), _Die Sklaverei im Griechischen Altertume_. Breslau, 1886.

Rickaby (J.), _Moral Philosophy_. London, 1892.

Ridley (William), _The Aborigines of Australia_. Sydney, 1864.

---- _Kámilarói, and other Australian Languages_. N. S. Wales, 1875.

---- _Kamilaroi, Dippil, and Turrubul_. N. S. Wales, 1866.

Riedel (J. G. F.), _De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen
Selebes en Papua_. 's-Gravenhage, 1886.

_Rigveda (Der)_. Trans. into German by A. Ludwig. 6 vols. Prag,
1876-88.

Rink (H. J.), _Danish Greenland_. Ed. by R. Brown. London, 1877.

---- _The Eskimo Tribes_. Copenhagen & London, 1887.

---- _Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo_. Edinburgh & London, 1875.

Risley (H. H.), _Census of India, 1901. Vol. I. Ethnographic
Appendices_. Calcutta, 1903.

---- _Tribes and Castes of Bengal. Ethnographic Glossary_. 2
vols. Calcutta, 1891.

Ritchie (D. G.), _Natural Rights_. London, 1895.

Ritson (Jos.), _An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food as a
Moral Duty_. London, 1802.

Ritter (B.), _Philo und die Halacha_. Leipzig, 1879.

Rivers (W. H. R.), _The Todas_. London, 1906.

Rivier (Alphonse), _Précis du droit de famille romain_. Paris, 1891.

Rivière (Armand), _L'Église et l'esclavage_. Paris, 1864.

_Rivista italiana di sociologia_. Roma.

Roberts (George), _The Social History of the People of the
Southern Counties of England in Past Centuries_. London, 1856.

Robertson (_Sir_ G. Scott), _The Káfirs of the Hindu-Kush_.
London, 1896.

Robertson (H. A.), _Erromanga, the Martyr Isle_. Ed. by J.
Eraser. London, 1902.

Robertson (John M.), _Patriotism and Empire_. London, 1899.

Robertson (William), _The History of America_. 2 vols. London, 1777.

---- _The History of the Reign of the Emperor Charles V._ 4 vols.
London, 1806.

Robinson (A.), _Life in California_. New York, 1846.

Robinson (Cecilia), _The Ministry of Deaconesses_. London, 1898.

Robinson (Edward), _Biblical Researches in Palestine_. 3 vols.
London, 1867.

Rochas (V. de), _La Nouvelle Calédonie et ses habitants_. Paris,
1862.

Rochefort (C. de). See Poircy (L. de).

Rochholz (E. L.), _Deutscher Glaube und Brauch im Spiegel der
heidnischen Vorzeit_. 2 vols. Berlin, 1867.

{817} Rochon (A. M.), _A Voyage to Madagascar and the East
Indies_. Trans. London, 1793.

---- The same work. Trans.; in Pinkerton, _Collection of Voyages
and Travels_, vol. xvi. London, 1814.

Rockhill (W. W.), _The Land of the Lamas_. London, 1891.

---- 'Notes on Some of the Laws, Customs, and Superstitions of
Korea'; in _The American Anthropologist_, vol. iv. Washington, 1891.

Rogers (Ch.), _Social Life in Scotland_. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1884-86.

Rohde (Erwin), 'Paralipomena'; in _Rheinisches Museum für
Philologie, neue Folge_, vol. xv. Frankfurt a. M., 1895.

---- _Psyche_. Freiburg i. B. & Leipzig, 1894.

Romanes (G. J.), _Animal Intelligence_. London, 1895.

---- 'Conscience in Animals'; in _The Quarterly Journal of
Science_, vol. xiii. London, 1876.

---- _Mental Evolution in Animals_. London, 1883.

_Romanische Forschungen_. Erlangen.

_Romans de Raoul de Cambrai et de Bernier (Li)_. Ed. by E. Le
Glay. Paris, 1840.

Romilly (H. H.), _From my Verandah in New Guinea_. London, 1889.

---- _The Western Pacific and New Guinea_. London, 1887.

Romilly (Henry), _The Punishment of Death_. London, 1886.

Rorarius (Hieronymus), _Quod Animalia bruta ratione utantur
melius Homine_. Paris, 1648.

Roscoe (J.), 'The Bahima'; in _Jour. Roy. Anthr. Inst._ vol.
xxxvii. London, 1907.

Rosenbaum (Julius), _Geschichte der Lustseuche im Alterthume_.
Halle, 1845.

Rosenberg (C. F. V. M.), _Nordboernes Aandsliv_. 3 vols.
Kjøbenhavn, 1878-85.

---- _Traek af Livet paa Island i Fristats-Tiden_. Kjøbenhavn,
1894.

Rosenberg (H. von), _Der malayische Archipel_. Leipzig, 1878.

Roskoff (G. G.), _Geschichte des Teufels_. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1869.

Ross (B. R.), 'The Eastern Tinneh'; in _Smithsonian Report,
1866_. Washington, 1867.

Ross (John), _History of Corea_. Pasley, [1879].

Rossbach (A.), _Untersuchungen uber die römische Ehe_. Stuttgart,
1853.

Rossi (P.), _Traité de droit pénal_. 3 vols. Genève, 1829.

Roth (H. Ling), _The Aborigines of Tasmania_. London, 1890.

---- _Great Benin_. Halifax, 1903.

---- _The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo_. 2 vols.
London. 1896.

---- 'On the Origin of Agriculture'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol.
xvi. London, 1887.

---- 'On Salutations'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xix. London,
1890.

---- 'On the Signification of Couvade'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._
vol. xxii. London, 1893.

Roth (Rud.), 'Brahma und die Brahmanen'; in _Zeitschr. der
Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellsch._ vol. i. Leipzig, 1846.

---- 'On the Morality of the Veda.' Trans.; in _Journal of the
American Oriental Society_, vol. iii. New York, 1853.

Roth (Walter E.), _Ethnological Studies among the North-West-Central
Queensland Aborigines_. Brisbane & London, 1897.

{818} Rothar (_King_), 'Edictus'; in Pertz, _Monumenta Germaniæ
historica_, Leges, vol. iv. Hannoverae, 1868.

Rouse (W. H. D.), _Greek Votive Offerings_. Cambridge, 1902.

Rousseau (J. J.), _[OE]uvres complètes_. 4 vols. Paris, 1837.

Rowlatt (E. A.), 'Report of an Expedition into the Mishmee
Hills'; in _Jour. Asiatic Soc. Bengal_, vol. xiv. pt. ii.
Calcutta, 1845.

Rowley (Henry), _Africa Unveiled_. London, 1876.

---- _The Religion of the Africans_. London, [1877].

Rowney (H. B.), _The Wild Tribes of India_. London, 1882.

Rühs (F.), _Handbuch der Geschichte des Mittelalters_. Berlin, 1816.

Rüppell (E.), _Reise in Abyssinien_. 2 vols. Frankfurt a. M.,
1838-40.

Ruskin (John), _The Works of_. 11 vols. Keston, Orpington, 1871-83.


Sabatier (Paul), _Life of St. Francis of Assisi_. Trans. London, 1894.

Sachau (E.), _Muhammedanisches Recht nach Schafiitischer Lehre_.
Stuttgart & Berlin, 1897.

Saco (_Don_ J. A.), _Historia de la esclavitud_. 3 vols. Paris &
Barcelona, 1875-78.

_Sacred Books of the East (The)_. Ed. by F. Max Müller. Oxford, 1879, &c.

'Sad Dar,' trans. by E. W. West; in _The Sacred Books of the
East_, vol. xxiv. Oxford, 1885.

Sagard Théodat (G.), _Le grand voyage du pays des Hurons_. Paris, 1632.

Sahagun (F. Bernardino de), _Historia general de las cosas de
Nueva España_. 3 vols. Mexico, 1829-30.

Sainte-Palaye (De la Curne de), _Mémoires sur l'ancienne
chevalerie_. 3 vols. Paris, 1781.

St. John (Bayle), _Adventures in the Libyan Desert_. London, 1849.

---- _Village Life in Egypt_. 2 vols. London, 1852.

St. John (Spenser), _Life in the Forests of the Far East_.
2 vols. London, 1863.

Saint Louis, _Les Établissements de_. Ed. by Paul Viollet. 4 vols.
Paris, 1881-86.

Saint-Simon (_Duc_ de), _Mémoires complets et authentiques_.
40 vols. Paris, 1840-41.

Sale (George), 'Preliminary Discourse'; in Wherry, _A
Comprehensive Commentary on the Qurán_, vol. i. London, 1882.

Salt (H. S.), _Animals' Rights_. London, 1900.

Salt (Henry), _A Voyage to Abyssinia_. London, 1814.

Salvado (R.), _Mémoires historiques sur l'Australie_. Paris, 1854.

Salvioli (G.), _Manuale di storia del diritto italiano_. Torino,
1892.

Samuelson (James), _The History of Drink_. London, 1880.

Sandys (Edwin), _The Sermons of_. Ed. by John Ayre. Cambridge, 1841.

Santos (Joano dos), 'History of Eastern Ethiopia.' Trans.; in
Pinkerton, _Collection of Voyages_, vol. xvi. London, 1814.

Sarasin (Paul and Fritz), _Ergebnisse naturwissenschaftlicher
Forschungen auf Ceylon_. 3 vols. Wiesbaden, 1887-93.

Sarbah (J. M.), _Fanti Customary Laws_. London, 1897.

Sartori (Paul), 'Die Sitte der Alten- und Krankentötung'; in
_Globus_, vol. lxvii. Braunschweig, 1895.

---- 'Ueber das Bauopfer'; in _Zeitschr. f. Ethnologie_, vol.
xxx. Berlin, 1898.

{819} Sarytschew (G.), 'Account of a Voyage of Discovery to the
North-East of Siberia, the Frozen Ocean, and the North-East Sea.'
Trans.; in _A Collection of Modern and Contemporary Voyages and
Travels_, vols. v.-vi. London, 1807.

_Satapatha-Brâhmana (The)_. Trans. by J. Eggeling. 5 vols. (_The
Sacred Books of the East_, vols. xii., xxvi., xli., xliii., and
xliv.) Oxford, 1882-1900.

Sauer (M.), _An Account of a Geographical and Astronomical
Expedition to the Northern Parts of Russia performed by J.
Billings_. London, 1802.

Savage (T. S.), 'Observations on the External Characters and
Habits of the _Troglodytes Niger_'; in _Boston Journal of Natural
History_, vol. iv. Boston, 1844.

Sayce (A. H.), _Hibbert Lectures on . . . the Religion of the
Ancient Babylonians_. London, 1887.

Scaramucci (F.) and Giglioli (E. H.), 'Notizie sui Danakil'; in
_Archivio per l'anthropologia e la etnologia_, vol. xiv. Firenze,
1884.

Schaafhausen (H.), 'Die Menschenfresserei und das Menschenopfer';
in _Archiv für Anthropologie_, vol. iv. Braunschweig, 1870.

Schadenberg (Alex.), 'Ueber die Negritos in den Philippinen'; in
_Zeitschr. f. Ethnol._ vol. xii. Berlin, 1880.

Schaff (Philip), _History of the Christian Church: Ante-Nicene
Christianity, A.D. 100-325_. Edinburgh, 1884.

Scherman (L.), 'Eine Art visionärer Höllenschilderung aus dem
indischen Mittelalter'; in _Romanische Forschungen_, vol. v.
Erlangen, 1890.

---- _Materialien zur Geschichte der Indischen Visionslitteratur_.
Leipzig, 1892.

Scherzer (K. von), _Reise der Oesterreichischen Fregatte Novara
um die Erde_. 3 vols. Wien, 1861-62.

Schiaparelli (E.), _Del sentimento religioso degli antichi
egiziani_. Torino, 1877.

Schinz (Hans), _Deutsch-Süd-West-Afrika_. Oldenburg & Leipzig, 1891.

Schmidt (Bernhard), _Das Volksleben der Neugriechen und das
hellenische Alterthum_. Leipzig, 1871.

Schmidt (C. C.), _Jahrbücher der in- und ausländischen gesammten
Medicin_. Leipzig.

Schmidt (Emil), _Ceylon_. Berlin, [1897].

Schmidt (Leopold), _Die Ethik der alten Griechen_. 2 vols.
Berlin, 1882.

Schneider (Wilhelm), _Die Naturvölker_. 2 vols. Paderborn &
Münster, 1885-86.

---- _Die Religion der afrikanischen Naturvölker_. Münster i. W.,
1891.

Schoemann (G. F.), _Griechische Alterthümer_. 2 vols. Berlin,
1855-59.

Schoen (J. F.) and Crowther (Samuel), _Journals of, who
accompanied the Expedition up the Niger in 1841_. London, 1842.

Schönwerth (Fr.), _Aus der Oberpfalz. Sitten und Sagen_. 3 vols.
Augsburg, 1857-59.

Schomburgk (_Sir_ Robert H.), 'Journal of an Expedition from
Pirara to the Upper Corentyne'; in _Jour. Roy. Geo. Soc._ vol.
xv. London, 1845.

---- 'On the Natives of Guiana'; in _Jour. Ethn. Soc. London_,
vol. i. London, 1848.

Schoolcraft (H. R.), _Historical and Statistical Information
respecting the History, Condition, and Prospects of the Indian
Tribes of the United States_ (the title pages of vols. iv.-vi.
read: _Archives of Aboriginal Knowledge, &c._). 6 vols.
Philadelphia, 1851-60.

---- _The Indian in his Wigwam_. New York, 1848.

{820} Schopenhauer (Arthur), _Die beiden Grundprobleme der
Ethik_. (_Sämmtliche Werke in zwölf Bänden_, vol. vii.)
Stuttgart, _s. d._

---- _Essays_. Trans. by Mrs. R. Dircks. London, _s. d._

---- _Parerga und Paralipomena_. 2 vols. Berlin, 1851.

---- _Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung_. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1859.

Schrader (E.), _Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament_. Ed.
by H. Zimmern and H. Winckler. Berlin, 1903.

Schrader (O.), _Prehistoric Antiquities of the Aryan Peoples_.
Trans. by F. B. Jevons. London, 1890.

---- _Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde_.
Strassburg, 1901.

Schröder (Richard), _Lehrbuch der deutschen Rechtsgeschichte_.
Leipzig, 1898.

Schuermann (C. W.), 'The Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln'; in
Woods, _Native Tribes of South Australia_. Adelaide, 1879.

Schütz-Holzhausen (D. von), _Der Amazonas_. Freiburg i. B., 1895.

_Schulchan Aruch oder Die vier judischen Gesetzbücher_. Trans. by
H. G. F. Löwe. 2 vols. Wien, 1896.

Schultz (H.), _Old Testament Theology_. Trans. 2 vols. Edinburgh,
1892.

Schultze (Fritz), _Der Fetischismus_. Leipzig, 1871.

---- _Vergleichende Seelenkunde_. Leipzig, 1892, &c.

Schurtz (H.), _Das afrikanische Gewerbe_. Leipzig, 1900.

---- 'Die Anfänge des Landbesitzes'; in _Zeitschr. f.
Socialwissensch._ vol. iii. Berlin, 1900.

---- _Die Speiseverbote_. Hamburg, 1893.

---- _Urgeschichte der Kultur_. Leipzig & Wien, 1900.

Schuyler (E.), _Turkistan_. 2 vols. London, 1876.

---- _Schwabenspiegel (Der)_. Ed. by F. L. A. von Lassberg.
Tübingen, 1840.

Schwally (F.), _Das Leben nach dem Tode nach den Vorstellungen
des alten Israel und Judentums_. Giessen, 1892.

Schwaner (C. A. L. M.), _Borneo_. 2 vols. Amsterdam, 1853.

Schwarz (W.), _Prähistorisch-anthropologische Studien_. Berlin,
1884.

Schweinfurth (Georg), _The Heart of Africa_. Trans. 2 vols.
London, 1873.

_Science. An Illustrated Journal_. Cambridge (Mass.).

Scott (_Sir_ Walter), 'An Essay on Chivalry'; in _Miscellaneous
Prose Works_, vol. vi. Edinburgh, 1827.

Scotus Novanticus. See Laurie (S. S.).

Seaver (James E.), _A Narrative of the Life of Mrs. Mary Jemison,
Who was taken by the Indians, in the Year, 1755_. Howden, 1826.

'Second Helvetic Confession'; in _Sylloge confessionum sub tempus
reformandæ ecclesiæ_. Oxonii, 1804.

Seebohm (F.), _The English Village Community_. London, 1883.

---- _Tribal Custom in Anglo-Saxon Law_. London, 1902.

---- _The Tribal System in Wales_. London, 1895.

Seeger (Hermann), _Ueber die Ausbildung der Lehre vom Versuch der
Verbrechen in der Wissenschaft des Mittelalters_. Tübingen, 1869.

---- _Der Versuch der Verbrechen nach römischen Recht_. Tübingen,
1879.

Seeley (J. R.), _Ecce Homo_. London, 1892.

---- _Natural Religion_. London & New York, 1895.

Seemann (B.), _Narrative of the Voyage of H.M.S. Herald during
the Years 1845-51_. 2 vols. London, 1853.

---- _Viti_. Cambridge, 1862.

{821} Selden (J.), _De Synedriis et Præfecturis Juridicis veterum
Ebræorum_. Francofurti, 1696.

Selenka (Emil and Lenore), _Sonnige Welten. Ostasiatische
Reise-Skizzen_. Wiesbaden, 1896.

Seligmann (C. G.), in _Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological
Expedition to Torres Straits_, vol. v. Cambridge, 1904.

---- 'Sexual Inversion among Primitive Races'; in _The Alienist
and Neurologist_, vol. xxxiii. St. Louis, 1902.

Sell (Edward), _The Faith of Islám_. London, 1896.

Semper (Karl), _Die Palau-Inseln im Stillen Ocean_. Leipzig, 1873.

Seneca (L. A.), _Opera quæ supersunt_. Ed. by F. Haase. 3 vols.
Lipsiae, 1853-62.

Sepp (Johannes), _Völkerbrauch bei Hochzeit, Geburt und Tod_.
München, 1891.

Serpillon (F.), _Code Criminel, ou Commentaire sur l'Ordonnance
de 1670_. 2 vols. Lyon, 1784.

Servius Maurus Honoratus, _Commentarii in Virgilium_. Ed. by H.
A. Lion. 2 vols. Gottingae, 1826.

Seth (James), _A Study of Ethical Principles_. Edinburgh &
London, 1898.

Sextus Empiricus, _Opera Græce et Latine_. Ed. by I. A.
Fabricius. 2 vols. Lipsiae, 1842.

Shaftesbury (Antony _Earl of_), _Characteristicks_. 3 vols.
London, 1733.

Shakespeare (W.), _Works_. Ed. by A. Dyce. 9 vols. London, 1864-67.

Shand (A. F.), 'Character and the Emotions'; in _Mind_, new ser.
vol. v. London, 1896.

---- 'The Sources of Tender Emotion'; in Stout, _The Groundwork
of Psychology_. London, 1903.

'Shâyast Lâ-Shâyast,' trans. by E. W. West; in _The Sacred Books
of the East_, vol. v. Oxford, 1880.

Shaw (Thomas), 'On the Inhabitants of the Hills near Rájamahall';
in _Asiatick Researches_, vol. iv. Calcutta, 1795.

Sheane (J. H. West), 'Some Aspects of the Avemba Religion'; in
_Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxxvi. London, 1906.

Sherwill (W. S.), 'Notes upon a Tour through the Rájmahal Hills';
in _Jour. Asiatic Soc. Bengal_, vol. xx. Calcutta, 1852.

Shooter (Joseph), _The Kafirs of Natal and the Zulu Country_.
London, 1857.

_Short Treatise upon the Propriety and Necessity of Duelling
(A)_. Bath, 1779.

Shortland (Edward), _Traditions and Superstitions of the New
Zealanders_. London, 1854.

Shortt (John), 'An Account of the Hill Tribes of the Neilgherries';
in _Trans. Ethn. Soc._ new ser. vol. vii. London, 1869.

---- 'A Contribution to the Ethnology of Jeypore'; in _Trans.
Ethn. Soc._ new ser. vol. vi. London, 1868.

---- _The Hill Ranges of Southern India_. 5 parts. Madras, 1870-76.

Shway Yoe (_i.e._ Sir J. G. Scott), _The Burman_. 2 vols. London,
1882.

Sibree (James), _The Great African Island. Chapters on
Madagascar_. London, 1880.

Siculus Flaccus, 'De conditionibus agrorum'; in Goesius, _Rei
agrariæ auctores_. Amstelredami, 1674.

Sidgwick (H.), _The Methods of Ethics_. London, 1901.

---- 'The Morality of Strife'; in _Internal. Jour. of Ethics_,
vol. i. Philadelphia & London, 1891.

{822} Sidonius (C. Sollius Apollinaris), _Epistulæ_. Ed. by P.
Mohr. Lipsiae, 1895.

Siebold (H. von), _Ethnologische Studien über die Aino auf der
Insel Yesso_. Berlin, 1881.

Simancas (Jacobus), _De catholicis institutionibus liber_. Romae,
1575.

Simcox (E. J.), _Primitive Civilizations_. 2 vols. London, 1894.

Simmel (Georg), _Einleitung in die Moralwissenschaft_. 2 vols.
Berlin, 1892-93.

---- 'Die Verwandtenehe'; in _Vossische Zeitung_, June 3rd and
10th, 1894. Berlin.

Simonde de Sismondi (J. C. L.), _Histoire des républiques
italiennes du moyen âge_. 16 vols. Paris, 1826.

Simons (F. A. A.), 'An Exploration of the Goajira Peninsula, U.S.
of Colombia'; in _Proceed. Roy. Geo. Soc._ new ser. vol. vii.
London, 1885.

Simson (Alfred), _Travels in the Wilds of Ecuador_. London, 1886.

Skeat (W. W.), _Malay Magic_. London, 1900.

---- and Blagden (Ch. O.), _Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula_.
2 vols. London, 1906.

Skene (W. F.), _Celtic Scotland_. 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1876-80.

Skertchly (J. A.), _Dahomey as it is_. London, 1874.

Sleeman (_Sir_ W. H.), _Rambles and Recollections of an Indian
Official_. 2 vols. London, 1844.

Smaragdus, 'Via Regia'; in d'Achery, _Spicilegium_, vol. i.
Parisiis 1723.

Smeaton (D. Mackenzie), _The Loyal Karens of Burma_. London, 1887.

Smellie (William), _The Philosophy of Natural History_. 2 vols.
Edinburgh, 1790-99.

Smith (Adam), _An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the
Wealth of Nations_. Edinburgh, 1863.

---- _The Theory of Moral Sentiments_. London, 1887.

Smith (Arthur H.), _Chinese Characteristics_. London, 1895.

---- _The Proverbs and Common Sayings of the Chinese_. Shanghai,
1888.

Smith (E. R.), _The Araucanians_. New York, 1855.

Smith (Erminnie A.), 'Myths of the Iroquois'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur.
Ethn._ vol. ii. Washington, 1883.

Smith (George), _Chaldäische Genesis_. Trans. by H. Delitzsch,
ed. by F. Delitzsch. Leipzig, 1876.

---- _The Chaldean Account of Genesis_. Ed. by A. H. Sayce.
London, 1880.

Smith (Gerrit), _Letter to Rev. James Smylie, of the State of
Mississippi_. New York, 1837.

Smith (Goldwin), _Lectures and Essays_. Toronto, 1881.

Smith (R. Bosworth), _Mohammed and Mohammedanism_. London, 1889.

Smith (S. Percy), 'Futuna'; in _Jour. Polynesian Soc._ vol. i.
Wellington 1892.

---- 'Uea'; in _Jour. Polynesian Soc._ vol. i. Wellington, 1892.

Smith (_Sir_ Thomas), _The Common-wealth of England_. London, 1635.

Smith (W. Robertson), _Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia_. Ed.
by S. A. Cook. London, 1903.

---- _Lectures on the Religion of the Semites_. London, 1894.

---- 'Sacrifice'; in _Encyclopædia Britannica_, vol. xxi.
Edinburgh, 1886.

_Smithsonian Institution, Annual Reports of the Board of
Regents_. Washington.

Smyth (R. Brough), _The Aborigines of Victoria_. 2 vols. London,
1878.

Snorri Sturluson, _Edda_. Ed. by Þ. Jónsson. Kaupmannahöfn, 1875.

{823} Snorri Sturluson, _Heimskringla. Nóregs Konunga Sögur_. Ed.
by F. Jónsson. 4 vols. København, 1893-1901.

Snow (W. Parker), 'Remarks on the Wild Tribes of Tierra del
Fuego'; in _Trans. Ethn. Soc. London_, new ser. vol. i. London,
1861.

---- _A Two Years' Cruise off Tierra del Fuego_. 2 vols. London,
1857.

_Sociological Papers. Published for the Sociological Society_.
London.

Socrates, 'Historia ecclesiastica'; in Migne, _Patrologiæ
cursus_, Ser. Graeca, vol. lxvii. Parisiis, 1859.

Söderblom (Nathan), _Gudstrons uppkomst_. Stockholm, 1914.

Solinus, _Collectanea rerum memorabilium_. Ed. by Th. Mommsen.
Berlin, 1864.

Sommerville (B. T.), 'Ethnographical Notes in New Georgia'; in
_Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxvi. London, 1897.

Sophocles, _The Plays and Fragments_. Ed. and trans. by R. C.
Jebb. 7 vols. Cambridge, 1883-96.

---- _Trag[oe]diæ et Fragmenta_. Ed. by E. A. J. Ahrens.
Parisiis, 1842.

Soppitt (C. A.), _A Short Account of the Kuki-Lushai Tribes on
the North-East Frontier_. Shillong, 1887.

Soto (Dominicus), _De justitia et jure._ Lugduni, 1582.

_South American Missionary Magazine (The)_. London.

Southey (R.), _History of Brazil_. 3 vols. London, 1810-19.

Sozomenus (Hermias), 'Historia ecclesiastica'; in Migne,
_Patrologiæ cursus_, Ser. Graeca, vol. lxvii. Parisiis, 1859.

Spangenberg (--), 'Ueber das Verbrechen der Abtreibung der
Leibesfrucht'; in _Neues Archiv des Criminalrechts_, vol. ii.
Halle, 1818.

---- 'Ueber das Verbrechen des Kindermords und der Aussetzung der
Kinder'; in _Neues Archiv des Criminalrechts_, vol. iii. Halle,
1819-20.

Sparrman (A.), _A Voyage to the Cape of Good Hope_. Trans.
2 vols. London, 1785.

Spartian, 'Vita Hadriani,' ed. by J. Centerwall; in _Upsala
Universitets Årsskrift, 1870_. Upsala, 1869.

'Speculum Saxonum'; in Goldast, _Collectio consuetudinum et legum
imperialium_. Francofordiae ad Moenum, 1613.

Spencer (Baldwin) and Gillen (F. J.), _The Native Tribes of
Central Australia_. London, 1899.

---- _The Northern Tribes of Central Australia_. London, 1904.

Spencer (Herbert), _Descriptive Sociology_. 8 vols. London,
1873-81.

---- _The Principles of Ethics_. 2 vols. London, 1892-93.

---- _The Principles of Psychology_. 2 vols. London, 1890.

---- _The Principles of Sociology_. 3 vols. London, 1879-96.

Spiegel (F.), _Erdnische Alterthumskunde_. 3 vols. Leipzig,
1871-78.

Spieth (Jakob), _Die E[(w]e-Stämme_. Berlin, 1906.

Spinoza (B. de), _Opera philosophica omnia_. Ed. by A.
Gfr[oe]rer. Stuttgardiae, 1830.

Spix (J. B. von) and Martius (C. F. Ph. von), _Reise in
Brasilien_. 3 vols. München, 1823-31.

---- _Travels in Brazil in the Years 1817-20_. Trans. 2 vols.
London, 1824.

Sproat (G. M.), _Scenes and Studies of Savage Life_. London,
1868.

Squier (E. G.), _Nicaragua_. 2 vols. London, 1852.

---- 'Observations on the Archaeology and Ethnology of
Nicaragua'; in _Trans. American Ethn. Soc._ vol. iii. pt. i. New
York, 1853.

Stäudlin (C. F.), _Geschichte der Vorstellungen und Lehren vom
Selbstmorde_. Göttingen, 1824.

{824} Stanley (A. P.), _Christian Institutions_. London, 1884.

Stanley (Hiram M.), _Studies in the Evolutionary Psychology of
Feeling_. London, 1895.

Starbuck (E. D.), _The Psychology of Religion_. London, 1899.

Starcke (C. N.), _La famille dans les différentes sociétés_.
Paris, 1899.

_State Trials, Cobbett's Complete Collection of_. Continued by T.
B. and T. J. Howell. 33 vols. London, 1809-26.

_Statutes of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland_.
110 vols. Cambridge, London, 1762-1869.

Staunton (_Sir_ G. Thomas), _An Inquiry into the Proper Mode of
rendering the Word "God" in translating the Sacred Scriptures
into the Chinese Language_. London, 1849.

Stavorinus (J. S.), _Voyages to the East Indies_. Trans. 3 vols.
London, 1798.

Steinen (Karl von den), _Durch Central-Brasilien_. Leipzig, 1886.

---- _Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens_. Berlin, 1894.

Steinmetz (S. R.) 'Gli antichi scongiuri giuridici contro i
creditori'; in _Rivista italiana di sociologia_, vol. ii. Roma,
1898.

---- 'Continuität oder Lohn und Strafe im Jenseits der Wilden';
in _Archiv für Anthropologie_, vol. xxiv. Braunschweig, 1897.

---- _Endokannibalismus_. (Reprinted from _Mittheilungen der
Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien_, vol. xxvi.) Wien, 1896.

---- _Ethnologische Studien zur ersten Entwicklung der Strafe_.
2 vols. Leiden & Leipzig, 1894.

---- 'Die neueren Forschungen zur Geschichte der menschlichen
Familie,' in _Zeitschr. f. Socialwissensch._ vol. ii. Berlin,
1899.

---- _Rechtsverhältnisse von eingeborenen Völkern in Afrika und
Ozeanien_. Ed. by S. R. S. Berlin, 1903.

---- 'Suicide among Primitive Peoples'; in _The American
Anthropologist_, vol. vii. Washington, 1894.

---- 'Das Verhältnis zwischen Eltern und Kindern bei den
Naturvölkern'; in _Zeitschr. f. Socialwissensch._ vol. i. Berlin,
1898.

Steller (E.), _De Sangi-Archipel_. Amsterdam, 1866.

Steller (G. W.), _Beschreibung von dem Lande Kamtschatka_.
Frankfurt & Leipzig, 1774.

Stemann (Chr. L. E.), _Den danske Retshistorie indtil Christian
V.'s Lov_. Kjöbenhavn, 1871.

Stengel (Paul), _Die griechischen Kultusaltertümer_. München,
1898.

Stephen (A. M.), 'The Navajo'; in _The American Anthropologist_,
vol. vi. Washington, 1893.

Stephen (H. J.), _New Commentaries on the Laws of England_. 4
vols. London, 1903.

Stephen (James), _The Slavery of the British West India Colonies
delineated_. 2 vols. London, 1824-30.

Stephen (James Fitzjames), _A Digest of the Criminal Law_.
London, 1894.

---- _A History of the Criminal Law of England_. 3 vols. London,
1883.

---- _Hora Sabbaticæ_. 3 vols. London, 1891-92.

---- _Liberty, Equality, Fraternity_. London, 1873.

Stephen (Leslie), _The Science of Ethics_. London, 1882.

Stephens (Edward), 'The Aborigines of Australia'; in _Jour. &
Proceed. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales_, vol. xxiii. Sydney & London,
1889.

Stevenson (Matilda C.), 'A Chapter of Zuñi Mythology'; in
_Memoirs of the International Congress of Anthropology_. Chicago,
1894.

{825} Stevenson (Matilda C.), 'The Sia'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur.
Ethn._ vol. xi. Washington, 1894.

Stewart (David), _Sketches of the Character, Institutions, and
Customs of the Highlanders of Scotland_. Inverness, &c., 1885.

Stewart (Dugald), _The Philosophy of the Active and Moral Powers
of Man_. 2 vols. Edinburgh, 1828.

Stewart (R.), 'Notes on Northern Cachar'; in _Jour. Asiatic Soc.
Bengal_, vol. xxiv. Calcutta, 1855.

Stirling (E. C.), 'Anthropology'; in _Report on the Work of the
Horn Scientific Expedition to Central Australia_, pt. iv. London
& Melbourne, 1896.

Stobaeus (Joannes), _Florilegium_. Ed. by Th. Gaisford. 4 vols.
Oxonii, 1822.

Stokes (J. Lort), _Discoveries in Australia_. 2 vols. London, 1846.

Stokes (W.), _All War inconsistent with the Christian Religion_.
London, 1855.

Stoll (Otto), _Die Ethnologie der Indianerstämme von Guatemala_.
Leiden, 1889.

Stone (O. C.), _A Few Months in New Guinea_. London, 1880.

Storch (Henri), _Cours d'économie politique_. 6 vols. St.
Pétersbourg, 1815.

Storr (F.), 'Duel'; in _Encyclopædia Britannica_, vol. vii.
Edinburgh, 1877.

Stout (G. F.), _The Groundwork of Psychology_. London, 1903.

Strabo, _Geographica_. Parisiis, 1853.

Strachey (William), _The Historie of Travaile into Virginia
Britannia_. Ed. by R. H. Major. London, 1849.

Strack (H. L.), _Der Blutaberglaube in der Menschheit_. München,
1892.

_Strafgesetzbuch für das Deutsche Reich (Das)_. Leipzig, 1876.

Strauss (D. F.), _Der alte und der neue Glaube_. Leipzig, 1872.

Strausz (Adolf), _Die Bulgaren_. Leipzig, 1898.

Strieker (W.), 'Ethnographische Notizen über den Kindermord und
die künstliche Fruchtabtreibung'; in _Archiv f. Anthropologie_,
vol. v. Braunschweig, 1872.

Strickland (Samuel), _Twenty-seven Years in Canada West_. 2 vols.
London, 1853.

Stroud (G. M.), _A Sketch of the Laws relating to Slavery in the
Several States of the United States of America_. Philadelphia, 1856.

Strutt (Joseph), _A Complete View of the Manners, Customs, Arms,
&c. of the Inhabitants of England_. 3 vols. London, 1775-76.

Struve (B. von), 'Die Samojeden im Norden von Sibirien'; in _Das
Ausland_, vol. liii. Stuttgart, 1880.

Strzelecki (P. E. de), _Physical Description of New South Wales
and Van Diemen's Land_. London, 1845.

Stuhlmann (Franz), _Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika_. Berlin,
1894.

Sturt (Charles), _Narrative of an Expedition into Central
Australia_. 2 vols. London, 1849.

Suarez de Paz (Gonçalo), _Praxis ecclesiastica et secularis_.
Salamanticae, 1583.

Suetonius Tranquillus (C.), _De vita Cæsarum_. Ed. by C. L. Roth.
Lipsiae, 1886.

Sugenheim (S.), _Geschichte der Aufhebung der Leibeigenschaft und
Hörigkeit in Europa_. St. Petersburg, 1861.

Sully (James), _Studies of Childhood_. London, 1895.

Sumner (W. G.), 'The Yakuts,' from the Russian of Sieroshevski;
in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxxi. London, 1901.

_Suomi_. Helsingfors.

{826} Sutherland (Alex.), _The Origin and Growth of the Moral
Instinct_. 2 vols. London, 1898.

Swan (James G.), _The Northwest Coast; or, Three Years' Residence
in Washington Territory_. New York, 1857.

Swettenham (F. A.), _Malay Sketches_. London & New York, 1895.

Swift (J.), _Works_. With notes by Sir W. Scott. 19 vols.
Edinburgh, 1824.


'Tâ Hsio'; in Legge, _The Chinese Classics_, vol. i. Oxford, 1893.

_Ta Tsing Leu Lee_. Trans. by Sir G. Th. Staunton. London, 1810.

Tacitus (C. C.), _Opera omnia_. 11 vols. Londini, 1821.

Tallqvist (K. L.), 'Die assyrische Beschwörungsserie maqlû'; in
_Acta Soc. Scientiarum Fennicæ_, vol. xx. Helsingfors, 1895.

_Talmud de Jérusalem (Le)_. Trans. by M. Schwab, 11 vols. Paris,
1871-89.

'Tâo Teh King (The),' trans. by J. Legge; in _The Sacred Books of
the East_, vol. xxxix. Oxford, 1891.

Taplin (George), _The Folklore, Manners, Customs, and Languages
of the South Australian Aborigines_. Ed. by G. T. Adelaide, 1879.

---- 'The Narrinyeri'; in Woods, _Native Tribes of South
Australia_. Adelaide, 1879.

_Taprobanian (The)_. Bombay.

_Tasmanian Journal of Natural Science, &c._ Hobart Town.

Taylor (Jeremy), _The Whole Works of_. Ed. by R. Heber. 15 vols.
London, 1822.

Taylor (R.) _Te Ika a Maui; or, New Zealand and its Inhabitants_.
London, 1870.

Tedeschi (P.), _La schiavitù_. Piacenza, 1882.

Teit (James), 'The Thompson Indians of British Columbia'; in
_Memoirs of the American **Museum of Natural History, vol. ii.,
Anthropology_, vol. i. New York, 1900.

Tennent (_Sir_ J. Emerson), _Ceylon_. 2 vols. London, 1860.

Terme (J.-F.) and Montfalcon (J.-B.), _Histoire des enfants
trouvés_. Paris, 1840.

Tertullian, _Opera omnia_. 3 vols. (Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_,
vols. i.-iii.) Parisiis, 1844.

Tettau (W. J. A. von), and Temme (J. D. H.), _Die Volkssagen
Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens_. Berlin, 1837.

Texte (J.), _Jean-Jacques Rousseau and the Cosmopolitan Spirit in
Literature_. Trans. London, 1899.

'Thâi-Shang (The),' trans. by J. Legge; in _The Sacred Books of
the East_, vol. xl. Oxford, 1891.

Theal (G. M. M'Call), _History of the Boers in South Africa_.
London, 1887.

Theognis, _Studies in, together with a Text of the Poems_. By E.
Harrison. Cambridge, 1902.

_Theologische Quartalschrift_. Tübingen.

Thérou (_Abbé_), _Le christianisme et l'esclavage_. Paris, 1841.

Thesleff (A.), 'Zigenarlif i Finland'; in _Nya Pressen_, 1897,
no. 331 B. Helsingfors.

Thiers (A.), _De la propriété_. Paris, 1848.

Thomas (N. W.), 'Baiame and the Bell-bird'; in _Man_, 1905.
London.

---- _Kinship Organisations and Group Marriage in Australia_.
Cambridge, 1906.

---- 'Religious Ideas of the Arunta'; in _Folk-Lore_, vol. xvi.
London, 1905.

{827} Thomas Aquinas (_Saint_), _Summa theologica_, 4 vols.
(Migne, _Patrologiæ cursus_, Ser. Secunda, vols. i.-iv.)
Parisiis, 1845-46.

Thomassin (Louis), _Dictionnaire de discipline ecclésiastique_.
Ed. by J.-J. Bourassé. 2 vols. Paris, 1856.

Thoms (W. J.), _Anecdotes and Traditions, Illustrative of Early
English History and Literature_. London, 1839.

Thomson (A. S.), _The Story of New Zealand_. 2 vols. London, 1859.

Thomson (Basil C.), _Savage Island_. London, 1902.

Thomson (J. P.), _British New Guinea_. London, 1892.

Thomson (Joseph), _Through Masai Land_. London, 1887.

Thon (August), _Rechtsnorm und subjectives Recht_. Weimar, 1878.

Thonissen (J. J.), _Le droit pénal de la république athénienne_.
Bruxelles & Paris, 1875.

Thorpe (Benjamin), _Northern Mythology_. 3 vols. London, 1851.

_Three Early Assize Rolls for the County of Northumberland, sæc.
xiii_. (_The Publications of the Surtees Society_, vol.
lxxxviii.) Durham, 1891.

Threlkeld (L. E.), _An Australian Language as spoken by the
Awabakal_. Sydney, 1892.

Thrupp (John), _The Anglo-Saxon Home_. London, 1862.

Thucydides, _Historia Belli Peloponnesiaci_. Parisiis, 1840.

Thunberg (Ch. P.), _Travels in Europe, Africa, and Asia,
performed between the Years 1770 and 1779_. 4 vols. London, 1795.

Thurston (Edgar), 'Anthropology of the Todas and Kotas of the
Nilgiri Hills'; in the Madras Government Museum's _Bulletin_,
vol. i. Madras, 1896.

---- 'The Badágas of the Nilgiris'; in the Madras Government
Museum's _Bulletin_, vol. ii. Madras, 1897.

Tickell (--), 'Memoir on the Hodésum; in _Jour. Asiatic Soc.
Bengal_, vol. ix. Calcutta, 1840.

Tiele (C. P.), _Elements of the Science of Religion_. 2 vols.
Edinburgh & London, 1897-99.

---- _History of the Egyptian Religion_. Trans. London, 1882.

---- _Max Müller und Fritz Schultze über ein Problem der
Religionswissenschaft_. Trans. Leipzig, 1871.

Tissot (J.), _Le droit pénal étudié dans ses principes_. 2 vols.
Paris, 1860.

Tönnies (F.), 'Philosophical Terminology'; in _Mind_, new ser.
vol. viii. London, 1899.

Toplady (A. M.), _The Works of_. London, 1853.

Torday (E.) and Joyce (T. A.), 'Notes on the Ethnography of the
Ba-Huana'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxxvi. London, 1906.

---- 'Notes on the Ethnography of the Ba-Mbala'; in _Jour. Anthr.
Inst._ vol. xxxv. London, 1905.

---- 'Notes on the Ethnography of the Ba-Yaka'; in _Jour. Anthr.
Inst._ vol. xxxvi. London, 1906.

Torquemada (Juan de), _Veinte y un libros rituales y Monarchia
Indiana_. 3 vols. Madrid, 1723.

Tout (Ch. Hill), 'Report on the Ethnology of the S[=i]ciatl of
British Columbia; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxxiv. London, 1904.

---- 'Report on the Ethnology of the Stlatlumh of British
Columbia'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxxv. London, 1905.

Toy (C. H.), _Judaism and Christianity_. London, 1890.

_Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute_.
Wellington.

{828}_Transactions of the American Ethnological Society_. New York.

---- _of the Asiatic Society of Japan_. Yokohama.

---- _of the China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society_. Hongkong.

---- _of the Ethnological Society of London_. New Series. London.

---- _of the Royal **Society of Edinburgh_.

---- _of the Royal Society of South Australia_. Adelaide.

Travers (W. T. L.), 'On the Life and Times of Te Rauparaha'; in
_Trans. and Proceed. New Zealand Inst. 1872_, vol. v. Wellington,
1873.

Tregear (E.), 'Easter Island'; in _Jour. Polynesian Soc._ vol. i.
Wellington, 1892.

---- _The Maori-Polynesian Dictionary_. Wellington, 1891.

---- 'Niue'; in _Jour. Polynesian Soc._ vol. ii. Wellington, 1893.

Tristram (H. B.), _The Great Sahara_. London, 1860.

Trollope (Anthony), _South Africa_. 2 vols. London, 1878.

Tromp (S. W.), 'Uit de Salasila van Koetei'; in _Bijdragen tot de
taal-, land- en volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië_, vol. xxxvii.
(ser. v. vol. iii.). 's Gravenhage, 1888.

Truman (B. C.), _The Field of Honor_. London, 1884.

Trumbull (H. Clay), _The Blood Covenant_. Philadelphia, 1893.

---- _The Threshold Covenant_. New York, 1896.

Trummer (C.), _Vorträge über Tortur, Hexenverfolgungen, &c. in
der Hamburgischen Rechtsgeschichte_. 3 vols. Hamburg, 1844-49.

Tschudi (J. J. von), _Reisen durch Südamerika_. 5 vols. Leipzig,
1866-69.

Tucker (Abraham), _The Light of Nature pursued_. 2 vols. London,
1840.

Tuckey (J. K.) _Narrative of an Expedition to explore the River
Zaire_. London, 1818.

Tuke (D. H.), _Chapters in the History of the Insane in the
British Isles_. London, 1882.

---- _A Dictionary of Psychological Medicine_. 2 vols. London,
1892.

Turnbull (John), _A Voyage round the World, in the Years
1800-1804_. London, 1813.

Turner (George), _Nineteen Years in Polynesia_. London, 1861.

---- _Samoa_. London, 1884.

Turner (James), _Pallas Armata_. London, 1683.

Turner (L. M.), 'Ethnology of the Ungava District, Hudson Bay
Territory'; in _Ann. Rep. Bur. Ethn._ vol. xi. Washington, 1894.

Turner (Sharon), _The History of England._ 12 vols. London**, 1839.

Tutuila (--), 'The Line Islanders'; in _Jour. Polynesian Soc._
vol. i. Wellington, 1892.

Twells (Leonard) and others, _The Lives of Dr. E. Pocock, &c._ 2
vols. London, 1816.

Twiss (_Sir_ Travers), _The Law of Nations_. Oxford & London, 1875.

Tyler (Josiah), _Forty Years among the Zulus_. Boston & Chicago,
[1891].

Tylor (_Sir_ E. B.), _Anthropology_. London, 1895.

---- 'On the Limits of Savage Religion'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._
vol. xxi. London, 1892.

---- 'On a Method of investigating the Development of
Institutions'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xviii. London, 1889.

---- _Primitive Culture_. 2 vols. London, 1903.

---- 'Primitive Society'; in _The Contemporary Review_, vols.
xxi.-xxii. London, 1873.

{829} Tylor (E. B.), 'Remarks on Totemism'; in _Jour. Anthr.
Inst._ vol. xxviii. London, 1899.

---- _Researches into the Early History of Mankind_. London, 1878.

---- 'Salutations'; in _Encyclopædia Britannica_, vol. xxi.
London, 1886.


Uhlhorn (G.), _Die christliche Liebesthätigkeit_. 3 vols.
Stuttgart, 1882-90.

Unger (F. W.), 'Der gerichtliche Zweikampf bei den germanischen
Völkern'; in _Göttinger Studien_, 1847, Zweite Abtheilung:
Philosophische, philologische und historische Abhandlungen.
Göttingen.

Urquhart (D.), _The Spirit of the East_. 2 vols. London, 1838.

Usener (H.), _Götternamen_. Bonn, 1896.

Utie[vs]enovi['c] (O. M.), _Die Hauskommunionen der Südslaven_.
Wien, 1859.


Valerius Maximus, _Factorum dictorumque memorabilium libri
novem_. 3 vols. Londini, 1823.

Valikhanof (--) and others, _The Russians in Central Asia_.
Trans. by J. and R. Michell. London, 1865.

Vallon (Ch.) and Marie (A.), 'Des psychoses religieuses'; in
_Archives de neurologie_, ser. ii. vol. iii. Paris, 1897.

Valroger (L. de), _Les Celtes_. Paris, 1879.

Vámbéry (H.), _Der Islam im neunzehnten Jahrhundert_. Leipzig,
1875.

---- _Travels in Central Asia_. London, 1864.

---- _Das Türkenvolk_. Leipzig, 1885.

Vangerow (K. A. von), _Lehrbuch der Pandekten_. 3 vols. Marburg &
Leipzig, 1876.

Varro (M. Terentius), _De lingua Latina_. Ed. by M. Nisard.
Paris, 1850.

---- _Rerum rusticarum libri tres_. Lipsiae, 1889.

'Vasishtha,' trans. by G. Bühler; in _The Sacred Books of the
East_, vol. xiv. Oxford, 1882.

Vattel (E. de), _Le droit des gens_. 2 vols. Neuchatel, 1777.

Velten (C.), _Sitten und Gebräuche der Suaheli_. Göttingen, 1903.

_Vendîdâd (The)_. Trans. by J. Darmesteter. (_The Sacred Books of
the East_, vol. iv.) Oxford, 1895.

'Venedotian Code (The)'; in _Ancient Laws and Institutes of
Wales_. London, 1841.

_Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie,
Ethnologie und Urgeschichte_. Berlin.

Vierkandt (A.), _Naturvölker und Kulturvölker_. Leipzig, 1896.

Vigfusson (Gudbrand) and Powell (F. York), _Corpus Poeticum
Boreale_. 2 vols. Oxford, 1883.

Vignioli (Tito), _Myth and Science_. London, 1882.

Villemain (A. F.), _Cours de littérature française. Littérature
du moyen âge_. 2 vols. Paris, 1830.

Villot (E.), _M[oe]urs, coutumes et institutions des indigènes de
l'Algérie_. Alger, 1888.

Vincentius Bellovacensis, _Speculum naturale_. Venetijs, 1494.

Vinnius (A.), _In quatuor libros institutionum imperialium
commentarius_. Lugduni, 1747.

Vinogradoff (Paul), _Villainage in England_. Oxford, 1892.

Virgilius Maro (P.), _Opera omnia_. 10 vols. Londini, 1819.

Vischer (Wilhelm), _Kleine Schriften_. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1877-78.

Vishnu, _The Institutes of_. See _Institutes of Vishnu (The)_.

{830}_Vish['n]u Purá['n]a (The)_. Trans. by H. H. Wilson.
London, 1840.

Volkens (Georg), _Der Kilimandscharo_. Berlin, 1897.

Voltaire (F. M. Arouet de), _[OE]uvres complètes_. 70 vols. _S.
l._, 1785-89. (Quoted in vol. i.)

---- _[OE]uvres complètes_. 13 vols. Paris, 1836-38. (Quoted in
vol. ii.)

Vos (H.), 'Die Verbreitung der Anthropophagie auf dem asiatischen
Festlande'; in _Internat. Archiv f. Ethnogr._ vol. iii. Leiden, 1890.

_Vossische Zeitung_. Berlin.


Wachsmuth (Wilhelm), _Hellenische Alterthumskunde_. 2 vols.
Halle, 1846.

Waddell (L. A.), _The Buddhism of Tibet_. London, 1895.

Wachter (C. G. von), _Beiträge zur Deutschen Geschichte_.
Tübingen, 1845.

Waitz (Theodor), _Anthropologie der Naturvölker_. 6 vols. (vols.
v. pt. ii. and vol. vi. by G. Gerland). Leipzig, 1859-72.

---- _Introduction to Anthropology_. Trans. London, 1863.

Wall (W.), _The History of Infant-Baptism_. 2 vols. Oxford, 1862.

Wallace (A. Russel), _The Malay Archipelago_. London, 1890.

---- _Travels on the Amazon and Rio Negro_. London, 1853.

Wallace (D. Mackenzie), _Russia_. 2 vols. London, 1877.

Wallin (G. A.), _Första Resa från Cairo till Arabiska öknen
1845_. Helsingfors, 1853.

---- _Notes taken during a Journey through Part of Northern
Arabia, in 1848_. (Reprinted from _Jour. Roy. Geo. Soc._ vol.
xx.) London, 1850-51.

---- _Reseanteckningar från Orienten âren 1843-1849_. Ed. by S.
G. Elmgren. 4 vols. Helsingfors, 1864-66.

Wallon (H.), _Histoire de l'esclavage dans l'antiquité_. 3 vols.
Paris, 1879.

Walter (Ferdinand), _Das alte Wales_. Bonn, 1859.

---- _Geschichte des Römischen Rechts bis auf Justinian_. 2 vols.
Bonn, 1860-61.

Ward (Herbert), _Five Years with the Congo Cannibals_. London, 1890.

Ward (Robert), _An Enquiry into the Foundation and History of the
Law of Nations in Europe, from the Time of the Greeks and Romans,
to the Age of Grotius_. 2 vols. London, 1795.

Ward (W.), _A View of the History, Literature, and Religion of
the Hindoos_. 4 vols. London, 1817-20.

Wardlaw (R.), _Four Sermons: Two on Man's Accountableness for his
Belief, &c._ Glasgow, 1830.

Waronen (Matti), _Vainajainpalvelus muinaisilla suomalaisilla_.
Helsingissä, 1895.

Wasserschleben (F. W. H.), _Die Bussordnungen der abendländischen
Kirche_. Halle, 1851.

Waterland (D.), 'Sermon on Self-Love'; in _The English Preacher_,
vol. i. London, 1773.

Watson (J. Selby), _The Reasoning Power in Animals_. London, 1867.

Wayland (Francis), _The Elements of Moral Science_. London, 1863.

Weber (A.), _Indische Streifen_. 3 vols. Berlin & Leipzig, 1868-79.

---- 'Eine Legende des Çatapatha-Brâhma[n.]a über die
strafende Vergeltung nach dem Tode'; in _Zeitschr. der Deutschen
Morgenländischen Gesellsch._ vol. ix. Leipzig, 1855.

Weber (E. von), _Vier Jahre in Afrika_. 2 vols. Leipzig, 1878.

Webster (Hutton), _Rest Days_. New York, 1916.

Weddell (James), _A Voyage towards the South Pole_. London, 1825.

{831} Wegener (H.) _Geschichte der christlichen Kirche auf dem
Gesellschafts-Archipel_. Berlin, 1844.

Weinhold (Karl), _Altnordisches Leben_. Berlin, 1856.

---- _Die deutschen Frauen in dem Mittelalter_. 2 vols. Wien, 1882.

Welcker (F. G.), _Griechische Götterlehre_. 3 vols. Göttingen, 1857.

---- _Kleine Schriften_. 3 vols. Bonn, 1844-50.

Wellhausen (J.), _Prolegomena to the History of Israel_. Trans.
London, 1885.

---- _Reste des arabischen Heidentums_. Berlin, 1897.

Welling (J. C.), 'The Law of Torture'; in _The American
Anthropologist_, vol. v. Washington, 1892.

'Welsh Laws'; in _Ancient Laws and Institutes of Wales_. London, 1841.

Westcott (B. F.), _Essays in the History of Religious Thought in
the West_. London, 1891.

Westcott (W. W.), _Suicide_. London, 1885.

Westermarck (Edward), '_L-[(]âr_, or the Transference of
Conditional Curses in Morocco'; in _Anthropological Essays
presented to E. B. Tylor_. London, 1907.

---- _Ceremonies and Beliefs connected with Agriculture, certain
Dates of the Solar Year, and the Weather in Morocco_. (_Öfversigt
af Finska Vetenskaps-Societetens Förhandlingar. Bd. LIV.,
1911-1912. Afd. B. N: o_ 1) Helsingfors, 1913.

---- _The History of Human Marriage_. London, 1894.

---- 'The Magic Origin of Moorish Designs'; in _Jour. Anthr.
Inst._ vol. xxxiv. London, 1904.

---- _Marriage Ceremonies in Morocco_. London, 1914.

---- 'Méthode pour la recherche des institutions préhistoriques à
propos d'un ouvrage du professeur Kohler'; in _Revue
internationale de sociologie_, vol. v. Paris, 1897.

---- 'Midsummer Customs in Morocco'; in _Folk-Lore_, vol. xvi.
London, 1905.

---- _The Moorish Conception of Holiness (Baraka)_. (_Öfversigt
af Finska Vetenskaps-Societetens Förhandlingar. Bd. LVIII.,
1915-1916. Afd. B. N: o_ 1) Helsingfors, 1916.

---- 'The Nature of the Arab _[vG]inn_, Illustrated by the present
Beliefs of the People of Morocco'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol.
xxix. London, 1900.

---- 'Normative und psychologische Ethik'; in _Bericht über den
III. International Congress für Psychologie in München_. München,
1897.

---- 'The Popular Ritual of the Great Feast in Morocco'; in
_Folk-Lore_, vol. xxii. London, 1911.

---- 'The Position of Woman in Early Civilisation'; in
_Sociological Papers_, vol. i., 1904. London, 1905.

---- 'Sul culto dei santi nel Marocco'; in _Actes du douzième
Congrès International des Orientalistes_, Rome, 1899, vol. iii.
pt. i. Florence, 1902.

_Westgöta-Lagen_. Ed. by H. S. Collin and C. J. Schlyter.
(_Corpus Juris Sueo-Gotorum Antiqui_, vol. i.) Stockholm, 1827.

Wheaton (Henry), _Elements of International Law_. Ed. by A. C.
Boyd. London, 1889.

Wheeler (G. C.), _The Tribe, and Intertribal Relations in
Australia_. London, 1910.

Wheeler (J. D.), _A Practical Treatise on the Law of Slavery_.
New York & New Orleans, 1837.

Wheeler (J. Talboys), _The History of India_. 4 vols. London,
1867-74.

{832} Wherry (E. M.), _A Comprehensive Commentary on the Qurán_.
4 vols. London, 1882-86.

Whewell (William), _The Elements of Morality_. Cambridge, 1864.

Whitney (W. D.), 'On the Main Results of the later Vedic
Researches in Germany'; in _Jour. American Oriental Soc._ vol.
iii. New York, 1853.

Wichmann (Yrjö), 'Tietoja Votjaakkien mytologiiasta'; in _Suomi_,
ser. iii. vol. vi. Helsingissä, 1893.

Wied-Neuwied (Maximilian Prinz zu), _Reise nach Brasilien in den
Jahren 1815 bis 1817_. 2 vols Frankfurt a.M., 1820-21.

---- _Travels in the Interior of North America_. Trans. London, 1843.

Wiedemann (Alfred), _The Ancient Egyptian Doctrine of the
Immortality of the Soul_. Trans. London, 1895.

---- _Herodots zweites Buch mit sachlichen Erläuterungen
herausgegeben von_. Leipzig, 1890.

---- 'Ma[=a], déesse de la vérité'; in _Annales du Musée Guimet_,
vol. x. Paris, 1887.

---- _Religion of the Ancient Egyptians_. London, 1897.

Wiener (J.), 'Die alttestamentarischen Speiseverbote'; in
_Zeitschr. f. Ethnol._ vol. viii. Berlin, 1875.

_Wiener Medizinische Wochenschrift_. Wien.

Wigmore (J. H.), 'Responsibility for Tortious Acts'; in _Harvard
Law Review_, vol. vii., 1893-94. Cambridge (Mass.), 1894.

Wihtræd (_King_), 'The Laws of'; in _Ancient Laws and Institutes
of England_. London, 1840.

Wilda (W. E.), _Das Strafrecht der Germanen_. Halle, 1842.

Wilken (G. A.), _Het animisme bij de volken van den Indischen
Archipel_. Amsterdam, 1884-85.

---- _Huwelijken tusschen bloedverwanten_. (Reprinted from _De
Gids_, 1890, no. 6.) Amsterdam.

---- _Over de verwantschap en het huwelijks- en erfrecht bij de
volken van het maleische ras_. (Reprinted from _De Indische
Gids_, May, 1883.) Amsterdam.

---- 'Plechtigheden en gebruiken bij verlovingen en huwelijken
bij de volken van den Indischen Archipel'; in _Bijdragen tot de
taal-, land- en volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië_, ser. v.
vols. i., iv. 's Gravenhage, 1886, 1889.

---- 'Het Strafrecht bij de volken van het maleische ras'; in
_Bijdragen tot de taal-, land- en volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië_,
Land- en volkenkunde, 1883. 's Gravenhage.

---- 'Ueber das Haaropfer und einige andere Trauergebräuche bei
den Völkern Indonesien's'; in _Revue coloniale internationale_,
vols. iii.-iv. Amsterdam, 1886, vol. ii., and 1887, vol. i.
Amsterdam.

Wilkes (Charles), _Narrative of the United States Exploring
Expedition during the Years 1838-42_. 5 vols. Philadelphia &
London, 1845.

Wilkin (Anthony), in _Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological
Expedition to Torres Straits_, vol. v. Cambridge, 1904.

Wilkins (D.), _Concilia Magnæ Britanniæ et Hiberniæ_. 4 vols.
London, 1737.

Wilkins (W. J.), _Modern Hinduism_. London, 1887.

William the Conqueror (_King_), 'The Laws of'; in _Ancient Laws
and Institutes of England_. London, 1840.

Williams (Charles), _Dogs and their Ways_. London, 1863.

Williams (John), _A Narrative of Missionary Enterprises in the
South Sea Islands_. London, 1837.

{833} Williams (Monier). See Monier-Williams (Monier).

Williams (S. Wells), _The Middle Kingdom_. 2 vols. New York, 1883.

Williams (Thomas) and Calvert (James), _Fiji and the Fijians_.
London, 1870.

Wilson (Andrew), _The Abode of Snow_. Edinburgh & London, 1876.

Wilson (C. T.) and Felkin (R. W.), _Uganda and the Egyptian
Soudan_. 2 vols. London, 1882.

Wilson (H. H.), 'A Sketch of the Religious Sects of the Hindus';
in _Asiatic Researches_, vol. xvi. Calcutta, 1828.

---- _Works_. 12 vols. London, 1862-71.

Wilson (J. Leighton), _Western Africa_. London, 1856.

Wilson (J. M.) and Fowler (Th.), _The Principles of Morals_.
2 parts. Oxford, 1886-87.

Wilson (James), _A Missionary Voyage to the Southern Pacific
Ocean, performed in the Years 1796-1798_. London, 1799.

Wilson (M.), _Charity Mistaken_. St. Omer, 1630.

Wilson (_Sir_ R. K.), _History of Modern English Law_. London,
&c., 1875.

Wilson (S. G.), _Persian Life and Customs_. Edinburgh & London,
1896.

Windischmann (F.), _Zoroastrische Studien_. Ed. by F. Spiegel.
Berlin, 1863.

Winroth (A.), _Offentlig rätt. Familjerätt: Äktenskapshindren_.
Lund, 1890.

Winter (J.), _Die Stellung der Sklaven bei den Juden in
rechtlicher und gesellschaftlicher Beziehung nach talmudischen
Quellen_. Breslau, 1886.

Winterbottom (Thomas), _An Account of the Native Africans in the
Neighbourhood of Sierra Leone_. 2 vols. London, 1803.

Winternitz (M.), 'Das altindische Hochzeitsrituell'; in
_Denkschriften der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften,
Philosophisch-historische Classe_, vol. xl. Wien, 1892.

---- 'Einige Bemerkungen über das Bauopfer bei den Indern'; in
_Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien_, vol.
xvii. Wien, 1887.

Wissmann (H. von), _Unter deutscher Flagge quer durch Afrika_.
Berlin, 1889.

---- Wolf (L.), François (C. von), and Mueller (H.), _Im Innern
Afrikas_. Leipzig, 1891.

Wissowa (Georg), _Religion und Kultus der Römer_. München, 1902.

Wlislocki (H. von), _Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der
Magyaren_. Münster i.W., 1893.

---- _Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Zigeuner_. Münster
i.W., 1891.

Woldt (A.), _Kaptein Jacobsens Reiser til Nordamerikas
Nordvestkyst 1881-1883_. Trans. Kristiania, 1887.

Wolff (Christian von), _Jus Gentium_. Francofurti & Lipsiae, 1764.

Wolseley (G. J. _Viscount_), _The Soldier's Pocket-Book for Field
Service_. London, 1886.

Wood (John), _A Personal Narrative of a Journey to the Source of
the River Oxus_. London, 1841.

Wood-Martin (W. G.), _Traces of the Elder Faiths of Ireland_. 2
vols. London, 1902.

Wood-Renton (A.), 'Moral Mania'; in _The Law Quarterly Review_,
vol. iii. London, 1887.

Woods (J. D.), _The Native Tribes of South Australia_; with an
Introductory Chapter by J. D. W. Adelaide, 1879.

Woodthorpe (R. G.), 'Some Account of the Shans and Hill Tribes of
the States on the Mekong'; in _Jour. Anthr. Inst._ vol. xxvi.
London, 1897.

{834} Worcester (Dean C.), _The Philippine Islands and their
People_. New York, 1898.

_World (The)_. By Adam Fitz-Adam. 4 vols. London, 1753-56.

Wrangell (F. von), _Narrative of an Expedition to the Polar Sea,
in the Years 1820-1823_. Trans. London, 1840.

Wrede (A. von), _Reise in [H.]adhramaut_. Ed. by H. von Maltzan.
Braunschweig, 1870.

Wrede (Richard), _Die Körperstrafen bei alten Völkern_. Dresden,
1898-99.

Wright (Julia McNair), _Among the Alaskans_. Philadelphia, 1883.

Wright (Thomas), _Essays on Archæological Subjects_. 2 vols.
London, 1861.

---- _A History of Domestic Manners and Sentiments in England
during the Middle Ages_. London, 1862.

Wundt (W.), _Ethics_. Trans. by E. B. Titchener and others.
3 vols. London, 1897-1901.

---- _Ethik_. Stuttgart, 1892.

Wuttke (A.), _Der deutsche Volksaberglaube der Gegenwart_. Ed. by
E. H. Meyer. Berlin, 1900.

Wyatt (William), 'Some Account of the Manners and Superstitions
of the Adelaide and Encounter Bay Aboriginal Tribes'; in Woods,
_The Native Tribes of South Australia_. Adelaide, 1879.


Xenophon, _Scripta quæ supersunt_. Parisiis, 1838.


Yanoski (J.), _De l'abolition de l'esclavage ancien au moyen
âge_. Paris, 1860.

Yarrow (H. C.), 'A Further Contribution to the Study of the
Mortuary Customs of the North American Indians'; in _Ann. Rep.
Bur. Ethn._ vol. i. Washington, 1881.

---- _Introduction to the Study of Mortuary Customs among the
North American Indians_. Washington, 1880.

'Yasna (The),' trans. by L. H. Mills; in _The Sacred Books of the
East_, vol. xxxi. Oxford, 1887.

'Yasts (The),' trans. by J. Darmesteter; in _The Sacred Books of
the East_, vol. xxiii. Oxford, 1883.

Yate (William), _An Account of New Zealand_. London, 1835.

_Ymer. Tidskrift utgifven af Svenska Sällskapet för Antropologi
och Geografi_. Stockholm.

Young (Thomas), _An Essay on Humanity to Animals_. London, 1798.


Zachariä (H. A.), _Die Lehre vom Versuche der Verbrechen_.
2 vols. Göttingen, 1836-39.

_Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft_.
Leipzig.

---- _der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin_.

---- _für die Criminal-Rechts-Pflege in den Preussischen
Staaten_. Ed. by E. Hitzig. Berlin.

---- _für Ethnologie_. Berlin.

---- _für geschichtliche Rechtswissenschaft_. Ed. by F. C. von
Savigny and others. Berlin & Stettin.

---- _für Socialwissenschaft_. Ed. by J. Wolf. Berlin.

---- _für vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft_. Ed. by J. Kohler.
Stuttgart.

---- _für Völkerpsychologie und Sprachwissenschaft_. Leipzig.

Zeller (E.), _A History of Greek Philosophy from the Earliest
Period to the Time of Socrates_. Trans. 2 vols. London, 1881.

---- _Socrates and the Socratic School_. Trans. London, 1885.

{835} Zeller (E.), _The Stoics, Epicureans and Sceptics_. Trans.
London, 1892.

_Zend-Avesta (Le)_. Trans. into French by J. Darmesteter. 2 vols.
Paris, 1892.

Ziegler (Th.), _Social Ethics_. Trans. London, 1892.

Zimmer (Heinrich), _Altindisches Leben_. Berlin, 1879.

Zimmermann (W. F. A.), _Die Inseln des indischen und stillen
Meeres_. 3 vols. Berlin, 1863-65.

Zimmern (Heinrich), _Babylonische Busspsalmen_. Leipzig, 1885.

---- _Babylonische Hymnen und Gebete in Auswahl_. Leipzig, 1905.

---- _Beiträge zur Kenntnis der Babylonischen Religion. Die
Beschwörungstafeln [vS]urpu, &c._ Leipzig, 1901.

Zöckler (Otto), _Askese und Mönchtum_. 2 vols. Frankfurt a. M., 1897.

Zöller (Hugo), _Forschungsreisen in der deutschen Colonie
Kamerun_. 3 vols. Berlin & Stuttgart, 1885.

---- _Das Togoland und die Sklavenkuste_. Berlin & Stuttgart, 1885.

Zscharnack (L.), _Der Dienst der Frau in den ersten Jahrhunderten
der christlichen Kirche_. Göttingen, 1902.




SUBJECT INDEX


ABLUTIONS, i. 53-56, ii. 294, 295, 352-354, 358-359, 415, 416, 726

Abortion, i. 378, 408, 409, 413-417, ii. 705

_Accessio_, ii. 50

Accident, injuries due to, i. 217-240, 315, 316, 319, ii. 714;
  benefits due to, i. 318 _sq._;
  the future state of persons who have died by, ii. 238, 239, 241

Acts, i. 203-206

Adopted children, rules of inheritance relating to, ii. 46;
  maternal affection for, ii. 187-189

Adoption, of prisoners of war, i. 336;
  of unintentional manslayers, i. 484;
  the blood-covenant represented as a rite of, ii. 206 _sq._;
  marriage between relations by, ii. 369, 374, 375, 748-750, 752

Adultery, ii. 447-455;
  punishment of, i. 189, 311, 492, 521, 630, ii. 447-45. 452,
  453, 558;
  self-redress in case of, i. 290-293, 491 _sq._, ii. 447;
  as a ground for divorce or judicial separation, ii. 397, 455;
  supposed to injure the harvest, ii. 417, 747;
  stigmatised by religion, ii. 447, 448, 450, 453-455, 675, 676,
  684, 686, 700, 717;
  refuge denied to persons guilty of, ii. 632 _sq._

Aesthetic emotions, i. 326

---- judgments, i. 8

Affection. See Altruistic sentiment;
  Conjugal, Filial, Fraternal, Marital, Maternal, Paternal,
  Social affection

Age, restrictions in diet depending on, ii. 319 _sq._ See
Children, Old age, Old persons, Seniority

Agricultural tribes, the position of women among, i. 660 _sq._;
  slavery among, i. 673, 674, 681;
  social aggregates of, ii. 201;
  sympathy for domestic animals among, ii. 506, see Oxen

Agriculture, originally a feminine pursuit, i. 634, 635 n. ^4, 637;
  moral valuation of, ii. 273-277, 280, 402

Albinos, religious veneration of, ii. 590

All Souls, ii. 550

All-father. See Supreme beings

Alliance, prohibition of marriage between relations by, ii. 369, 377

Alms, connection between sacrifices offered to gods and, i. 565-569;
  between fasting and the giving of, ii. 316-318;
  between offerings to the dead and, ii. 550-552;
  to be given with an ungrudging eye, and not before witnesses,
  i. 594.
  See Charity

Altruistic sentiment, the, its origin and development, ch. xxxiv.
(ii. 186-228);
  i. 94, 95, 110-114, 129, 373, 468, 559, ii. 494-506, 510-514.
  See Conjugal, Filial, Fraternal, Marital, Maternal, Paternal,
  Social affection

Ancestors. See Dead

Anger, the nature and origin of, i. 21-23, 30, 38-42;
  in animals, i. 22, ii. 51;
  in children, i. 22 _sq._;
  towards inanimate things, i. 26, 27, 260-263, 315;
  appeased by repentance, i. 87;
  sympathetic resentment produced by the cognition of the signs
  of, i. 114 _sq._;
  injuries inflicted in, i. 290-298, 311, 316 _sq._;
  a cause of suicide, ii. 233

Animals, regard for the lower, ch. xliv. (ii. 490-514), i. 11 _sq._;
  anger in, i. 22, ii. 51;
  revenge taken upon, i. 26, 27, 251-253, 255, 256, 258;
  revenge taken by, i. 37 _sq._;
  self-regarding pride in, i. 39, ii. 137 _sq._;
  retributive kindly emotion in, i. 94;
  sympathetic resentment in, i. 112, ii. 52;
  killing of sacred, i. 227, ii. 603-606, 609;
  of totemic, ii. 210, 603, 604, 606;
  {838} of various kinds of, see Killing;
  eating of totemic, i. 227, ii. 210, 211, 323, 324, 606;
  credited with a conscience, i. 249-251;
  not responsible for their acts, i. 249-251;
  treated as responsible agents, i. 251-260, 264, 308;
  believed to take vengeance upon men, i. 252, 258, ii. 491, 497,
  500, 502, 504, 603;
  subject to regular punishment, ii. 253-260, 264, 308;
  sexual intercourse between men and, i. 253 _sq._, ii. 409, 749;
  believed to be rewarded or punished after death, i. 258 _sq._;
  regarded as on a footing of equality with man, i. 258-260, ii.
  494, 510;
  non-moral resentment in the case of injuries inflicted by, i. 316;
  sacrificed instead of human victims, i. 469 _sq._;
  sacrificed for the purpose of saving the lives of men or of
  other animals, i. 469 _sq._, ii. 616 _sq._;
  their desire to appropriate and to keep that which has been
  appropriated, ii. 51;
  maternal affection among, ii. 186-190, 193;
  paternal affection among, ii. 189, 190, 193;
  conjugal attachment among, ii. 191 _sq._;
  abstinence from eating various kinds of, ii. 319-335;
  from eating any kind of, ii. 335-338, 499;
  belief in the transmigration of human souls into, ii. 324, 328,
  338, 490, 496, 500, 504, 516, 517, 693, 709 _sq._;
  homosexual intercourse among, ii. 456, 466, 475 n. ^2;
  their fear of strange phenomena, ii. 582 _sq._;
  worship of, ii. 590, 598;
  sheltered by sacred places, ii. 627-629, 631, 635

Animism, ii. 595-597

Annihilation of the soul, belief in the, ii. 236, 515, 516, 559,
565, 580, 679

Anthropomorphism, ii. 595, 597-600

Antipathies, disinterested, i. 116, 117, 533, 713 _sq._, ii. 113,
166, 185, 227, 262, 266-268, 291, 334, 335, 351, 368, 372-375,
381, 382, 403, 404, 434, 439, 440, 483, 484, 744-746

Antivivisectionists, ii. 512, 514

Apes, the man-like, paternal care among, ii. 189 _sq._;
  the duration of their conjugal unions, ii. 192;
  not gregarious, ii. 195;
  chiefly monogamous, ii. 391.
  See Monkeys

Arbitration, i. 368 _sq._

Arms, stealing of, i. 287, ii. 14;
  regarded with superstitious veneration, i. 506;
  oaths taken upon, i. 506, ii. 119-121

Arson, i. 187, 188, 293, 676, ii. 633

Asceticism, ii. 281, 315-318, 355-363, 421

Astronomical changes, abstinence from work connected with, ii.
284-288, 747;
  fasting connected with, ii. 309-315

Asylums, ii. 628-638;
  i. 221, 224, 295-297, 307, 308, 380, 427, 579, 580, 585, 668,
  669, 690, 692, 696

Atheism, ii. 643 _sq._

Atonement. See Expiation, Expiatory sacrifice

---- the day (fast) of, i. 65, ii. 311, 312, 316, 357-359. 617

Attempts to commit crimes, i. 200, 241-247, 374


"BAD," analysis of the concept, i. 134

Badger-baiting, ii. 509

Bananas, abstinence from, ii. 321

Banishment, as a punishment, i. 46, 58, 172, 173, 224, 225, 227,
228, 267, 287, 312, 424, 601, ii. 4, 6, 7, 10, 12, 74, 123 n. ^1,
331, 424, 425, 452, 475 n. ^10, 478, 525

Baptism, i. 55, 411, 416, 417, 666, ii. 295, 417, 721-723

Barrenness of a wife, human sacrifices offered in cases of, i.
457 _sq._;
  a cause of polygyny, ii. 388

Bear-baiting, ii. 508-510

Beating, as a religious rite, ii. 294, 357-359

Beef, abstinence from, ii. 327, 330

Bees, prohibition of killing, ii. 490

Beliefs, as subjects of moral judgments, i. 215 _sq._

Benefit of Clergy, i. 491

Benevolence, ch. xxxiii. (ii. 153-185). See Charity, Hospitality

Bestiality, i. 253 _sq._, ii. 409, 749

Birds, defending their nests, ii. 51;
  paternal care among, ii. 189 _sq._;
  the duration of conjugal unions among, ii. 192

---- of night, abstinence from eating, ii. 333

---- of prey, prohibition of eating, ii. 321

Blasphemy, ii. 639, 640, 719

Blessings, materialistic conception of, i. 98, 562;
  pronounced by {839} recipients of gifts, i. 561-565;
  gods appealed to in, i. 562, 564 _sq._, ii. 686, 731;
  of strangers, i. 581-584, ii. 446;
  of parents, i. 621-627;
  of old persons, i. 626;
  in salutations, ii. 151

Blood, effusion of, at funerals, i. 26, 27, 476, ii. 544, 545, 547;
  abstinence from, i. 187, ii. 334 _sq._;
  as a religious rite, i. 470 _sq._, ii. 294, 557;
  pollution of, i. 225, 232, 233, 375-382, ii. 256 _sq._ n. ^2,
  262, 714;
  shedding of, prohibited in sacred places, i. 380, ii. 635;
  offered to the dead, i. 475 _sq._;
  drunk or licked in blood-revenge, i. 483 _sq._;
  as a conductor of curses, i. 586, 587, 591, ii. 69, 118-121,
  208, 209, 566, 567, 618-622, 687-689;
  primitive ideas concerning, i. 664 n. ^1;
  oaths taken upon, ii. 118-121, 621, 622, 687-689;
  supernatural or medicinal effect ascribed to the partaking of
  human, ii. 564 _sq._
  See Cannibalism

---- -covenant, the, ii. 206-209, 566 _sq._

---- -money. See Compensation for homicide

---- -revenge, i. 477-492, ii. 748;
  collective responsibility in, i. 24, 25, 30-36, 43;
  vow of, i. 58;
  restricted to the actual culprit, i. 71;
  a cause of social disturbance, i. 182 _sq._;
  in cases of accidental injury, i. 217, 218, 231 _sq._;
  taken upon animals, i. 251-253, 255 256, 258;
  upon lunatics, i. 271;
  connection between inheritance and, ii. 54 _sq._;
  between the system of tracing descent and, ii. 211

Bodily integrity, the right to, ch. xxii. (i. 511-525);
  of the dead, ii. 516 _sq._;
  of gods, ii. 602, 610

Boundaries. See Landmarks

Brother, killing of a, ii. 256 _sq._ n. ^2.
  See Fraternal affection, duties

---- the elder, allowed to inflict corporal punishment upon the
younger one, i. 515;
  respect for, i. 605, 606, 614;
  curses of, i. 626, ii. 703

Buffaloes, abstinence from the flesh of, ii. 320, 322;
  prohibition of killing, for food, ii. 330

Buildings, human sacrifices offered at the foundation of, i. 447
n. ^5, 461-465;
  animals sacrificed at the foundation of, ii. 617

Bull-baiting, ii. 509 _sq._

Burglary, i. 187, 312, ii. 58, 633

Burial, ii. 521-523, 525-527. 542, 543, 546-548, 704;
  depending on the mode of death, i. 26, ii. 238-240, 246, 248,
  252, 255 _sq._;
  denied to suicides, ii. 238, 250, 549;
  to murdered persons, ii. 239, 549;
  to persons struck by lightning, ii. 2 39, 549;
  to persons who have killed a parent, brother, or child, ii. 256
  _sq._ n. ^2;
  of criminals, ii. 694

Butchers, regarded as unclean, ii. 493;
  despised, ii. 498

Butter, abstinence from, ii. 326


CALUMNY, ii. 140-142;
  against dead persons, ii. 519, 552

Calves, abstinence from slaughtering, ii. 331

Camels, revenge in, i. 37 _sq._;
  abstinence from the flesh of, ii. 332, 334 n. ^2

Cannibalism, ch. xlvi. (ii. 553-581);
  old persons victims of, i. 390, ii. 554, 568 _sq._;
  practised for medicinal purposes, i. 401, ii. 562, 564 _sq._;
  the firstborn a victim of, i. 458 _sq._, ii. 562;
  as a punishment, ii. 4, 367, 554, 558 _sq._;
  considered polluting, ii. 538, 575 _sq._

Carelessness, i. 210-212, 305-310, 317 _sq._

Castes, intermarriage between different, ii. 379. See Rank

Casuistry, ii. 100, 101, 117

Cats, sympathetic resentment in, ii. 52;
  abstinence from eating, ii. 327, 330, 332;
  taken for spirits in disguise, ii. 491;
  their fear of strange phenomena, ii. 583

Cattle, stealing of, i. 187 _sq._, ii. 14;
  abstinence from killing, ii. 330, 493 _sq._;
  reverence for, ii. 331 _sq._;
  affection for, ii. 331, 494.
  See Beef, Calves, Cows, Oxen

---- -rearing, largely a masculine pursuit, i. 634, 636.
  See Pastoral peoples

Celibacy, ch. xli. (ii. 399-421);
  a cause of unchastity, ii. 432;
  of homosexual practices, ii. 467

Character, i. 214, 215, 310-314, 318 _sq._;
  the innate, i. 325 _sq._

Charity, ch. xxiii. (i. 526-569);
  as a duty emphasised by religion, i. {840}549-558, 561-569, ii.
  669, 672, 699, 705, 711, 717, 718, 725, 726, 732.
  See Alms

Charms, made from dead bodies, ii. 204, 546;
  against the evil eye, ii. 256 n. ^2;
  put in tombs, ii. 701

Chastity, ch. xlii. (ii. 422-455);
  suicide as a means of preserving, ii. 242, 251 _sq._;
  fasting the beginning of, ii. 318;
  required in connection with the religious cult, ii. 406-421, 736

Chiefs, tied by custom, i. 161 _sq._;
  justice administered by, i. 173-176, 180-184, 490 _sq._;
  protecting foreigners and persons who have no relations, i. 180;
  killing of, i. 43;
  human sacrifices offered for the purpose of saving the lives
  of, i. 454-456, 466;
  sacrificed, i. 466;
  the practice of compensation encouraged by, i. 490 _sq._;
  disrespect for, punished by gods, i. 626;
  proprietary rights of, ii. 33;
  suicide committed on the graves of, ii. 234;
  labour suspended on the death of, ii. 284;
  abstinence from fish after the death of, ii. 301;
  treatment of the dead bodies of, ii. 527;
  cannibalism practised by, ii. 558, 574;
  their tombs asylums, ii. 630;
  their houses asylums, ii. 636;
  their persons asylums, ii. 636 _sq._
  See King.

Children, the subjection of, ch. xxv. (i. 597-628);
  cursed or blessed by their parents, i. 58, 538, 621-627, ii.
  703, 715. 716 n. ^2, 732;
  punished if convicted of a design to kill their father or
  mother, i. 245;
  parents killing their infant, i. 378 394-413, 633, ii. 562, 752 _sq._;
  killing their parents, i. 383-386, 522, ii. 256 _sq._ n. ^2;
  killing or abandoning their aged parents, i. 386-390, 606, 607,
  612, 620;
  eating their parents, i. 390, ii. 554, 568 _sq._;
  parents killing their grown-up, i. 393 _sq._, ii. 256 _sq._ n. ^2;
  a father's affection for his, i. 401, 402, 405, 529-533, ii.
  187-190, 193, 397, 748;
  a mother's affection for her, i. 405, 529-531, ii. 186-190,
  193, 748;
  eaten by their parents or others, i. 401, 458 _sq._, ii. 554,
  555, 562, 568 _sq._;
  parents exposing their new-born, i. 406-412, 689;
  sacrificed to save the lives of their parents, i. 455, 456,
  459-461;
  sacrificed by their parents, i. 455-461;
  committing suicide on the death of their parents, i. 473;
  parents inflicting corporal punishment upon their, i. 513-515,
  607, 610;
  using violence against their parents, i. 513 624 _sq._, ii. 677;
  parents' duty of taking care of their, i. 526-533;
  their duty of taking care of their parents, i. 533-538;
  their respect for their parents, i. 534-538, 600, 601, 607-613,
  616-628, ii. 194;
  their affection for their parents i. 534-538, 618, ii. 194, 748;
  for their mothers, i. 618, 659;
  their duties to their parents emphasised by religion, i. 536,
  537, 608, 610, 612, 613, 616, 617, 620-627, ii. 711, 714, 715,
  716 n. ^2, 717 732;
  cursing their parents, i. 564;
  sold as slaves by their parents, i. 599, 607, 609, 611, 612,
  615, 675, 681, 682, 684, 685, 689, 691 _sq._;
  proprietary incapacities of, ii. 27, 28, 57;
  rules of inheritance relating to, ii. 44-49, 53-57;
  telling a falsehood in the presence of their parents, ii. 96;
  addressing abusive language to their parents, ii. 142;
  their duties to their parents, ii. 166, 748;
  parents' duties to their, ii. 166, 748;
  parents committing suicide on the death of their, ii. 232, 244
  n. ^3;
  parents fasting after the death of their, ii. 298-300;
  fasting after the death of their parents, ii. 298-301;
  punished after death for inflicting injuries upon their
  parents, ii. 715;
  adopted, see Adopted children;
  illegitimate, see Illegitimate children

Children, young, the anger of, i. 22 _sq._;
  sympathetic resentment in, i. 112;
  their ideas of right and wrong, i. 115;
  their respect for the customary, i. 159;
  injuries committed by, i. 217, 218, 264-269, 316;
  treatment of, in war i. 335, 336, 342, 343, 369 _sq._;
  sacrificed, i. 454-461;
  their desire to appropriate and to keep that which has been
  appropriated, ii. 51;
  truthfulness and mendacity of, ii. 88 n. ^5, 111 n. ^3, 116,
  117, 124-126, 129;
  disposed to believe what they are told, ii. 109;
  their {841} dislike of that which is strange or unfamiliar, ii. 227;
  the altruistic sentiment in, i. 228;
  treatment of the dead bodies of, ii. 526, 527, 549;
  their fear of strange phenomena, ii. 583;
  the future state of, ii. 673, 727;
  the future state of unbaptised, ii. 721-723

Chivalry, i. 352-355

Clan, the, i. 627 _sq._, ii. 202, 213, 214, 216-220, 222 _sq._

Class distinction, cleanliness a, ii. 351

Classes, intermarriage between different, ii. 379-382. See Rank

"Classificatory system," the, ii. 393

Cleanliness, ii. 346-356;
  ceremonial, ii. 294, 295, 352-354, 358, 359, 415-420, 700 n.
  ^5, 705, 718, 726, 752

Climate, connection between industry and, ii. 269-271;
  between cleanliness and, ii. 349 _sq._

Cock-fighting, ii. 509 _sq._

Cocks, prohibition of eating tame, ii. 330

Cocoa, abstinence from, ii. 321;
  religious veneration of, ii. 591

Common enjoyment of merits, i. 96-99

---- responsibility, in blood-revenge, i. 24, 25, 30-36, 43, 71;
  in the case of punishment, i. 43-48, 69-72;
  in the case of sin, i. 48-57, 61-72

"Communal marriage," ii. 445

Community of goods, ii. 50 _sq._

Compacts, sealing of, i. 587, ii. 622-624

Compensation, the relation between punishment and, i. 168 _sq._;
  for involuntary destruction of property, i. 222-225, 38 _sq._;
  for bodily injuries, i. 511-513, 517-520, 524 n. ^3, ii. 263;
  for the seduction of an unmarried woman, ii. 425, 426, 436 _sq._;
  for rape, ii. 438;
  for adultery, ii. 447 _sq._

---- for homicide, i. 183, 484-491;
  if committed accidentally, i. 217, 219-221, 224, 226;
  if committed by a child, i. 268;
  by an idiot, i. 272;
  if the victim is a woman, i. 420 _sq._;
  if the victim is a slave, i. 423;
  influenced by the rank of the victim, i. 430 _sq._

---- for sin, i. 86 _sq._

Compulsion, injuries committed under, i. 284, 285, 316, 319;
  confounded with causation, i. 322-326

"Compulsion by necessity," i. 285-287, ii. 1

Conduct, i. 202, 203, 214, 215, 314

Confession, i. 84 _sq._, ii. 360

Conjugal affection, i. 113, 532 _sq._, ii. 190-193;
  its influence on the form of marriage, ii. 192, 389, 391;
  on the duration of marriage, ii. 397;
  on moral ideas concerning unchastity, ii. 439 _sq._

Conscience, i. 105-107, 123-125;
  an unjust retributer, i. 15 _sq._;
  animals credited with a, i. 249-251

Contributions, military, ii. 27

_Contubernium_, of slaves, i. 693, 697, 706 _sq._;
  between freemen and slaves, ii. 381

Cooking, abstained from after a death, ii. 304-306

Corporal punishment, ii. 520-525

Cosmopolitanism, ii. 176-179, 182-185

Courage, admiration of, i. 16, 117, ii. 16, 58, 273, 590;
  the duel regarded as a test of, i. 509;
  suicide regarded as a test of, ii. 251, 261 _sq._;
  approved of by the supreme being, ii. 679;
  the future state of a warrior supposed to be determined by his,
  ii. 698

Couvade, the, ii. 205

Covenanting rites, i. 334 _sq._, ii. 622-624, 686.
  See Blood-covenant

Cowardice, forgiveness of enemies regarded as a sign of, i. 73,
74, 485, ii. 145;
  the secret commission of offences despised as, ii. 58, 96 _sq._;
  lying a sign of, ii. 113;
  suicide regarded as an act of, ii. 240, 262

Cow-dung, a means of purification, i. 54, ii. 353, 545;
  suicide committed in, ii. 244

Cows, contact with, regarded as purifying, i. 54;
  prohibition of eating the flesh of, ii. 327, 330;
  the killing of, abstained from or prohibited, ii. 330, 331, 497;
  reverence for, ii. 332.
  See Cattle

Coyness, female, ii. 435

Cremation, i. 476, ii. 522, 523, 526, 527, 542, 543, 546-548;
  of suicides, ii. 256 _sq._

Criminals, absence of remorse in, i. 90 n. ^1;
  punished in public, i. 191 {842}_sq._;
  detection of, i. 193;
  sacrificed, i. 439, 440, 467, 471 _sq._, ii. 651;
  enslaved, i. 518, 675, 676, 681, 682, 685, 688-691, ii. 7, 8,
  12, 13, 74;
  eaten, ii. 4, 367, 554, 558 _sq._;
  their blood partaken of, ii. 464 _sq._;
  treatment of the bodies of, ii. 527, 528, 549.
  See Asylums, Punishment

Crops, robbery of, i. 287, ii. 14 _sq._;
  human sacrifices offered for the purpose of securing good, i.
  443-451;
  unchastity supposed to injure the, ii. 417, 747

Cross, the, ii. 256 n. ^2

Cross-roads, i. 502, ii. 256, 256 _sq._ n. ^2

Crown, miraculous virtue attributed to the royal, ii. 608 n. ^4, 753

Crucifixion, ii. 256 n. ^2

Cruelty to animals, ii. 496, 508-510

Curiosity, ii. 109, 110, 135, 149, 595, 597

Curses, materialistic conception of, i. 57-61, 70, 233 _sq._, ii.
583. 584, 703;
  holiness not allowed to be defiled by, i. 58, 625, ii. 638;
  of parents, i. 58, 538, 621-627, ii. 703, 715, 716 n. ^2, 732;
  of the poor, i. 561-565;
  of magicians and priests, i. 563;
  of saints, i. 563, 622;
  of dying persons, i. 563, 626, ii. 245;
  of dissatisfied guests, i. 584-594, ii. 715, 732;
  of dissatisfied refugees, i. 585, 587 _sq._, ii. 636-638;
  of old persons, i. 622, 626;
  of husbands, i. 626;
  of elder brothers and sisters, i. 626, ii. 703;
  of superiors, i. 626 _sq._, ii. 703;
  of women, i. 668;
  of slaves, i. 716;
  of their masters, ii. 703;
  of kings, ii. 703;
  personified and elevated to the rank of supernatural beings, i.
  60, 379, 482, 561, 585, 623, 624, 626, ii. 68, 116, 715, 732;
  transformed into attributes of gods, i. 379, 561, 562, 585,
  624, ii. 68, 116, 715;
  supernatural beings appealed to in, i. 561, 564 _sq._, ii.
  66-68, 120-123, 658, 686-690, 699, 731;
  supernatural beings exposed to men's, i. 564, 566, 585, ii.
  584, 585, 618-624, 636, 638, 656-659, 700;
  conducted by various vehicles, i. 586-594, ii. 121, 151, 208,
  209, 567, 622-624, 687-690;
  by blood, i. 586, 587, 591, ii. 69, 118-121, 208, 209, 618-622,
  687-689;
  by human blood or flesh, ii. 566 _sq._;
  in reception ceremonies and salutations, i. 590 _sq._, ii. 151;
  pronounced on thieves or as a means of protecting property, ii.
  62-69, 703;
  sacrifices to gods as a means of transferring, ii. 618-624, 658;
  method of protecting the king against criminals, ii. 637;
  prayers assuming the character of, ii. 656-659;
  contained in ordeals, ii. 687-690;
  influencing men's state in the future life, ii. 692, 693, 708,
  709, 715 _sq._
  See _L-[(]âr_

Customs, and laws as expressions of moral ideas, ch. vii. (i.
158-201);
  rules of duty, i. 118-122, 159-162;
  their relations to laws, i. 163-166;
  stronger than law and religion combined, i. 164;
  the variety of, i. 327 _sq._;
  the rigidity of ancestral, ii. 519, 520, 541;
  transgressions of, punished by gods, ii. 670, 728;
  instituted by the supreme being, ii. 671


DARK, prohibition of eating in the, ii. 309

Daughters, committing suicide on the death of their parents,
i. 473.
  See Children

Days, tabooed, ii. 283-289, 747

Dead, regard for the, ch. xlv. (ii. **515-552);
  human sacrifices to the, i. 26-28, 472-476, 486, ii. 234, 450,
  451, 518;
  vindictiveness of murdered, i. 232, 372, 375, 376, 378, 379,
  406, 476, 481 _sq._, ii. 559 _sq._;
  the property of the, i. 399, ii. 44, 518, 539 _sq._, see
  Inheritance, Wills;
  the treatment of old persons influenced by beliefs regarding
  the, i. 620 _sq._;
  interred in the field belonging to the family, ii. 66 n. ^1;
  charms made from the bodies of the, ii. 204, 546;
  offerings to the, ii. 302, 303, 400-404, 517, 518, 524, 539,
  547 550, 692, 700, 701, 704, 708, _cf._ Alms;
  polluting influence attributed to the, ii. 303, 537 _sq._;
  marriages of the, ii. 400;
  self-regarding pride attributed to the, ii. 519;
  beliefs as regards the character and activity of the, ii.
  528-535, 693;
  fear of the, ii. 535-546, 548-550, 576;
  believed to be easily duped, ii. 548;
  worship of the, ii. 591, 596;
  revenge taken by the living upon {843} the, ii. 692 _sq._;
  supposed to be taken by the dead upon other, ii. 693 _sq._
  See Annihilation, Burial, Cannibalism, Cremation, Funeral rites,
  Future life, Future state, Mourning, Scalping, Suicide,
  Transmigration, Vampires

Death, attributed to the influence of magic, i. 24, 29, ii. 534, 651;
  self-mutilation after a, i. 26, 27, 476, ii. 524, 528, 544,
  545, 547;
  work suspended after a, ii. 283, 284, 306;
  polluting influence ascribed to, ii. 283, 302-307, 416,
  536-539, 544 _sq._;
  to self-inflicted, ii. 257 n. ^5, 262;
  to natural, ii. 416, 609;
  fasting after a, ii. 298-308, 524, 544;
  abstinence from cooking after a, ii. 304-306;
  abstinence from sexual intercourse after a, ii. 306;
  fear of, ii. 535 _sq._

Debtors, enslaved, i. 422, 675, 677, 680, 684, 688, 689, 691;
  creditors starving themselves to death before the doors of
  their, ii. 245

Debts, the owing of, ii. 93, 705

Deceit. See Truth, regard for

Deformed persons, religious veneration of, ii. 590

Deodand, i. 262-264, 308

Descent, the social influence of a common, ii. 198, 201-206, 220,
224, 227, 748;
  congruity or discrepancy between the principle of local
  proximity and the principle of, ii. 202, 219 _sq._
  See Kinship

----, the system of tracing, connection between the authority
over children and, i. 597 _sq._;
  supposed connection between the position of women and, i. 655 _sq._;
  the rules of inheritance influenced by, ii. 44-47, 54;
  the influence of local connections on, ii. 203, 368 _sq._;
  difference between the notion of actual blood-relationship and,
  ii. 205 _sq._;
  connection between the blood-feud and, ii. 211, 748

Despotism, a cause of the severity of criminal codes, i. 193-196, 198;
  a cause of deceitful habits, ii. 89, 130 _sq._;
  politeness engendered by, ii. 152;
  love of youths considered inimical to, ii. 478 _sq._

Determinism, i. 320-322, 325 _sq._

_Dharna_, the custom of sitting, ii. 245

Diet, restrictions in, ch. xxxvii, _sq._ (ii. 290-345).
  See Food

Disease, cured by contact with a saint, i. 63;
  transference of, i. 64 _sq._;
  supposed to be caused by supernatural beings, i. 392 _sq._, ii.
  592-594;
  by the dead, ii. 535;
  the future state of persons who have died of, i. 392, ii. 238
  n. ^3, 698;
  human flesh or blood partaken of as a remedy against, i. 401,
  ii. 562, 564 _sq._;
  human sacrifices offered for the purpose of curing, i. 446,
  447, 454-457;
  cured at cross-roads, ii. 256 n. ^2.
  See Epidemics, Sick persons

Disinterested antipathies. See Antipathies

---- likings. See Likings

Disinterestedness, a characteristic of moral concepts, i. 101;
  of the moral emotions, i. 102, 103, 107-122

Divorce, i. 514, 528, 630, 632, 638, 641, 646-654, ii. 192,
396-398, 455

Dog-fighting, ii. 509

Dogs, self-regarding pride in, i. 39, ii. 137 _sq._;
  sympathetic resentment in, i. 112, ii. 52;
  credited with a conscience, i. 249-251;
  the killing of, considered polluting, i. 381 n. ^6;
  fighting for their kennels or their prey, ii. 51;
  supposed deceitfulness of, ii. 125;
  abstinence from eating, ii. 330, 332;
  taken for spirits in disguise, ii. 491;
  regard for, ii. 493, 501, 705;
  affection for, ii. 495 _sq._;
  Erinyes of, ii. 504;
  their fear of strange phenomena, ii. 583

Drink, as a conductor of curses, i. 586, 589-591, ii. 121, 208,
209, 567, 687-689

---- , intoxicating, prohibition of, i. 228, ii. 341-345;
  abstained from after a death, ii. 302.
  See Drunkenness, Intoxicants, Wine

_Droit d'aubaine_, ii. 49

Drowned persons, the future state of, ii. 238, 521, 678, 697 _sq._

Drunkenness, i. 310, ii. 338-344;
  injuries committed in, i. 277-282, 306;
  attributed to possession by a god or spirit, i. 278, 281, ii. 344

Duel, the, ch. xxi. (i. 497-510); i. 163, 306, ii. 9, 145, 449

"Duty," analysis of the concept, i. 134-137;
  corresponding to a "right," i. 140 _sq._;
  the relation between "virtue" and, i. 149 _sq._;
  between "merit" and, i. 151

{844} Duty, the feeling of, as a motive, i. 283 _sq._


EAGLEHAWKS, abstinence from eating, ii. 326, 332

Earthly desires, sinfulness of, ii. 361-363

Eclipses, supposed connection between human activity and, ii. 284 _sq._;
  fasting in connection with, ii. 309 _sq._;
  of the moon, attributed to the influence of evil spirits, ii. 313

Education, a means of communicating resentment, i. 114 _sq._;
  its influence on the regard for truth, ii. 124;
  on moral ideas relating to self-regarding conduct, ii. 266-268;
  leading to homosexual practices, ii. 468-470

Eggs, abstinence from, ii. 320, 325, 326, 329

Election, divine, the future state of men determined by, ii. 719 _sq._

Elephants, the feeling of revenge in, i. 37 _sq._;
  abstinence from eating, ii. 329

Emasculation, as a punishment, i. 45, 521.
  See Eunuch priests

Emigration, punished by law, ii. 175;
  more injurious to the State than suicide, ii. 259

Emotions, moral judgments referring to, i. 215

Endogamy, ii. 378-382

Enemies, killing of, regarded as praiseworthy, i. 331-333;
  the future state influence by the killing of, i. 332, 373, ii. 693;
  hospitality towards, i. 576, 577, 587 _sq._
  See Blood-revenge, Forgiveness, Revenge, War

Envy, a hindrance to sympathetic retributive kindliness, i. 129;
  of gods, ii. 361, 714, 716

Epidemics, supposed to be caused by supernatural beings, i. 27,
ii. 592-594;
  human sacrifices offered for the purpose of stopping or
  preventing, i. 66, 441, 442, 449;
  fasting during, ii. 315

Equinoxes, fasting at, ii. 309, 310, 312 _sq._

Equivalence, the rule of, i. 177-180;
  i. 34, 35, 200, 217-219, 494, 496, 501, 511, 519 _sq._, ii. 233

Equivocation, ii. 100, 101, 117

Erinyes, i. 60, 379, 482, 561, 585, 623, 626, ii. 68, 504, 714,
715, 732

Ethics, the object of scientific, i. 18

Eucharist, the, i. 666, ii. 295, 415 n. **^8, 417, 480, 564;
  the ordeal of, ii. 690

Eunuch priests, ii. 408, 414, 488 n. ^6

Evil, materialistic conception of, i. 56, 57, 457;
  transference of, combined with a sacrifice, i. 62-65

---- eye, the, i. 561, 563, 584, 591-594, ii. 256 n. ^2, 354

---- spirits, lunatics supposed to be possessed with, i. 270,
274, 275, ii. 593;
  intoxicated persons supposed to be possessed with, i. 281, ii. 344;
  persecuting ghosts replaced by, i. 378 _sq._, ii. 493;
  disease supposed to be caused by, i. 392 _sq._, ii. 592-594;
  old women regarded as, i. 619;
  burying apart of persons supposed to have been killed by, ii. 239;
  eclipses of the moon attributed to the influence of, ii. 313;
  water regarded as haunted by, ii. 355;
  scourging as a means of driving away, ii. 358;
  sacred words as a weapon against, ii. 418;
  certain animals taken for, ii. 491;
  butchers regarded as haunted by, ii. 493;
  prevented from doing harm to the dead, ii. 523, 524, 544;
  the ghosts of dead persons regarded as, ii. 531-534, 693;
  places of striking appearance supposed to be haunted by, ii. 589;
  unexpected events ascribed to the influence of, ii. 594;
  taboos imposed upon the names of, ii. 640, 642;
  magic practised with the assistance of, ii. 649 _sq._;
  struggle of men and gods against, ii. 701, 702, 704-706, 729

Executioner, tribal, i. 174 _sq._;
  the injured party acting as, i. 184 _sq._

Exogamy. See Incest

Expiation, ii. 356-361;
  fasting as a means of, ii. 315-318;
  vicarious, ii. 719 _sq._

Expiatory sacrifice, vicarious, i. 65-70, 438-440

Exposure of infants, i. 406-412;
  a source of slavery, i. 689


FAITH, considered necessary for salvation, ii. 719-721, 725-727.
  See Unbelief

Faithfulness. See Good faith

False accusation, i. 522, ii. 79, 80, 140-142

{845} False testimony, ii. 86 n. ^4, 91, 92, 96-98, 123 n. ^1, 717

Falsehood. See Truth, regard for

Family, the, i. 113, 533, 627 _sq._, ii. 195, 196, 198, 199, 202, 223;
  the joint, i. 539 _sq._, ii. 213-216

Famines, human sacrifices offered in connection with, i. 442 _sq._;
  cannibalism caused by, ii. 555, 577 _sq._
  See Crops

_Fas_, i. 579 _sq._, ii. 717

Fasting, ii. 292-318;
  enjoined by religion, i. 271, ii. 246, 292-298, 308-318, 358,
  406, 725;
  as a means of purification, i. 375, ii. 294-296, 358;
  as a penance, ii. 246, 315-318, 406;
  after a death, ii. 298-308, 524, 544

Fat, abstinence from, i. 187, 229, ii. 312

Fatalism, i. 323-326

Father, the, his authority over his children, ch. xxv. (i. 597-628);
  permitted to punish his children with death, i. 393 _sq._;
  to kill or expose his new-born children, i. 394-411;
  to inflict corporal punishment upon his children, i. 513-515,
  607, 610;
  to sell his children, i. 599, 607, 609, 611, 612, 615, 675,
  681, 682, 684, 685, 689, 691;
  his affection for his children, i. 401, 402, 405, 529-533. ii.
  187-190, 193, 397, 748;
  obliged to protect and support his family, i. 526-533;
  descent traced through, i. 655 _sq._, ii. 44-47, 54, 202, 203,
  205, 206, 211, 220;
  the son allowed to eat only certain foods after the death of,
  ii. 301 _sq._
  See Parents

Fear, i. 40 _sq._;
  of death, ii. 535 _sq._;
  as an element in the religious sentiment, ii. 612-614, 725;
  of punishment in the future life, ii. 735

Females, the sexual impulse of, i. 657 _sq._, ii. 435

Feticide, i. 378, 408, 409, 413-417, ii. 705

Filial affection, i. 534-538, 618, 659, ii. 194, 748

---- reverence, i. 533-538, 600, 601, 607-613, 616-628, ii. 194

Firstborn child, the, all children killed except, i. 398;
  killed, i. 458-460, ii. 562;
  eaten, i. 458, ii. 562;
  regarded as sacred, ii. 538 n. ^2

Firstborn son, the, sacrifice of, i. 457-461;
  eaten, i. 458 _sq._;
  considered identical with his father, i. 460;
  fasting on the eve of Passover, ii. 296.
  See Primogeniture

Fish, anger shown by, i. 22, ii. 51;
  abstinence from eating, ii. 321, 322, 324 _sq._;
  after a death, ii. 301;
  deference shown for, ii. 492;
  killing of, ii. 497 _sq._

Fishing peoples, the position of women among, i. 660;
  slavery among, i. 672;
  social aggregates of, ii. 198-200;
  filthiness a characteristic of, ii. 349

Flagellation, ii. 294, 357-359

_Flagrante delicto_, offenders caught, i. 290-294, ii. 8, 13, 17,
18, 58, 429, 447

Food, prohibitory rules relating to, ch. xxxvii. _sq._ (ii.
290-345);
  stealing of, i. 286, 287, 676, ii. 14, 15, 57 _sq._;
  as a conductor of curses, i. 586-592, ii. 622-624;
  detrimental to holiness, ii. 294-296;
  the eating of certain kinds of, forbidden by gods, ii. 326, 33,
  335, 671

Forbearances, i. 209, 210, 303-305

Foreigners, protected by the chief or king, i. 180, 181, 338;
  killing of, i. 331-334, 337-34, 370, 371, 373;
  sacrifice of, i. 467 _sq._;
  infliction of bodily injuries upon, i. 519;
  kindness to, i. 545, 556-558, 570-572, 581;
  enslaving of, i. 674, 675, 689, 690, 691, 714 _sq._;
  respect for the proprietary rights of, ii. 2, 11, 59;
  demoralising influence of, ii. 2, 126-129, see White men;
  robbery committed upon, ii. 20-25, 58 _sq._;
  reduced to serfdom, ii. 24;
  rules of inheritance relating to, ii. 49;
  deceiving of, ii. 87, 88, 90, 94, 97, 112, 126-129;
  duties to, ii. 166;
  despised, ii. 171-174, 532;
  disregard of their interests, ii. 176;
  antipathy to, ii. 227;
  marriages with, ii. 378, 381 _sq._;
  eaten, ii. 554;
  sacrilege committed by, ii. 648.
  See Strangers

Forgery, punished with death, i. 187 _sq._;
  with mutilation, i. 521

Forgiveness, i. 73-79, 84-88, 99, 311, 318, ii. 145, 360

Foundation sacrifices. See Buildings

Fowls, abstinence from eating, ii. 320-322, 325, 327, 329, 332;
  affection for, ii. 495

{846} Foxes, abstinence from eating, ii. 327

Fraternal affection, ii. 194, 195, 748

---- duties, i. 538, ii. 748

Fraud. See Truth, regard for

Free love, ch. xlii. (ii. 422-455). See Unchastity

Freedmen, marriages with, i. 688, ii. 379;
  not allowed to bring criminal charges against freeborn persons,
  i. 697

Freedom, personal, i. 597, ii. 265

Free-will, moral valuation and, i. 320-326

Frogs, prohibition of eating, ii. 321

Funeral rites, ii. 519-528, 536-552;
  the ordinary, denied to suicides, ii. 238, 248, 250, 252-254,
  549.
  See Blood (effusion of, at funerals; offered to the dead),
  Burial, Cremation, Dead (human sacrifices to the; offerings to
  the), Self-mutilation (after a death)

Future life, belief in retribution in a, among civilised races,
i. 258, 259, 519, 550-553, 555, 556, 579, 580, 625, 650, 683,
687, ii. 165, 284, 341, 417, 479, 497, 700, 705, 706, 708-713,
715, 716, 718-720, 725, 734 _sq._;
  among uncivilised peoples, i. 403, 542-544, 578, ii. 59, 60,
  69, 115, 271, 272, 671-681, 683-685, 690-695;
  the belief in a, ii. 515 _sq._;
  its influence on the notions concerning homicide, i. 382;
  concerning the killing of old or sick persons, i. 390, 392;
  concerning infanticide, i. 411 _sq._;
  concerning feticide, i. 416 _sq._;
  concerning suicide, ii. 235-237, 244, 253, 262.
  See Dead

---- state, the, of persons who have been struck by lightning, i.
26, ii. 544, 549, 697 _sq._;
  who have not slain any enemies, i. 332;
  who have slain enemies, i. 373, ii. 693;
  who have died of old age, i. 390, ii. 235, 238 n. ^3, 698;
  of disease, i. 392, ii. 238 n. ^3, 698;
  by violence, i. 481 _sq._, ii. 237-239, 242;
  by accident, ii. 238, 239, 241;
  by starvation, ii. 238 n. ^3;
  who have committed suicide, ii. 235-239, 242-244, 246, 253,
  262, 694, 710;
  who have been killed in war, ii. 237, 521, 694, 697, 704, 708;
  who have been drowned, ii. 238, 521, 678, 697 _sq._;
  who have suffered pain in this life, ii. 360;
  who have died unmarried and childless, ii. 399-404;
  who have refrained from connections with women, ii. 414 _sq._;
  who have committed perjury, ii. 715 _sq._;
  of women, i. 662 _sq._, ii. 673;
  of women who have died in childbirth, ii. 238 n. ^3, 678;
  of children, ii. 673, 727;
  of unbaptised children, i. 411, 412, 416 _sq._, ii.
  721-723;
  of the heathen, ii. 720 _sq._;
  influenced by human sacrifices offered to the dead, i. 472-476,
  ii. 518;
  by the mutilations and self-bleedings of mourners, i. 476, ii. 547;
  by knowledge of religious truth, ii. 132-134, 719-721,
  725-727;
  by the treatment of the dead person's corpse, ii. 238, 521-523,
  546, 548, 694, 704;
  by offerings made to the dead, ii. 400-404, 517, 518, 524, 539,
  692, 700, 701, 704, 708;
  by alms given on behalf of the dead, ii. 550-552;
  by prayer on behalf of the dead, ii. 552;
  by curses, ii. 692, 693, 708, 709, 715 _sq._;
  by rank, ii. 698;
  by magical practices, ii. 700, 701, 706, 709, 710, 712;
  by vicarious expiation, ii. 719 _sq._;
  by divine election, ii. 719 _sq._;
  by faith, ii. 719-721, 725-727;
  by sacramental grace, ii. 719 _sq._, by baptism, ii. 721-723


GENERALITY, the moral emotions characterised by a flavour of, i.
104, 105, 107, 117-123

Generosity, charity and, ch. xxiii. (i. 526-569)

Gifts, blessings pronounced by recipients of, i. 561-565;
  the danger of accepting, i. 593 _sq._

Girls, at puberty, ii. 307 _sq._

Gluttony, ii. 290 _sq._

Goat-dung, a means of purification, i. 376

-----flesh, abstinence from, ii. 322, 332

"God," definition of the term, ii. 602

Goddesses, jealous of the chastity of their priests, ii. 414

Gods, duties to, ch. xlviii. _sq._ (ii. 602-662);
  as guardians of morality, chs. l.-lii. (ii. 663-737);
  punish innocent persons in consequence of the sins of the
  guilty, i. 48-72, ii. 660;
  punish unchastity, i. 49, ii. 675;
  curses personified {847} and elevated to the rank of
  supernatural agents or, i. 60, 379, 482, 561, 585, 623, 624, 626,
  ii. 68, 116, 715, 732;
  human sacrifices offered to, i. 62, 63, 65, 66, 339, 434-472,
  ii. 295, 296, 419, 559, 562, 563, 579, 651, 697;
  reward undeserving persons in consequence of the merits of
  others, i. 96-99, ii. 660;
  connection between the severity of punishment and the belief
  in, i. 193-198;
  disobedience to, i. 194-198, ii. 659 _sq._;
  revengeful feelings attributed to, i. 194, 198, 438-440, 471
  _sq._, ii. 660, 661, 667, 668, 702, 714;
  attach undue importance to the outward aspect of conduct, i.
  227-231, 233-235, ii. 714;
  judge upon human actions without much regard to their motives,
  i. 299-302;
  punish homicide, i. 378-380, ii. 669, 672, 676, 684, 686, 700,
  714, 717, 732;
  curses transformed into attributes of, i. 379, 561, 562, 585,
  624, ii. 68, 116, 715;
  blood pollution shunned by, i. 380-382;
  enjoin or approve of charity, i. 549-558. 561-569, ii. 669,
  672, 699, 705, 711, 717, 718, 725, 726, 732;
  appealed to in curses or oaths, i. 561, 564 _sq._, ii. 66, 67,
  120-123, 658, 686-690, 699, 731 _sq._;
  in blessings, i. 562, 564 _sq._, ii. 686, 731;
  enjoin hospitality, i. 578-580, ii. 669, 711, 714, 717, 718,
  726, 732;
  exposed to the curses of men, i. 585, ii. 618-624, 636, 638,
  656-659, 700;
  protect refugees, i. 585, ii. 629-633, 636, 638, 714;
  enjoin regard for parents, i. 610, 624, ii. 711, 714, 717, 732;
  punish abandoning of old persons, i. 620;
  punish disrespect for chiefs, i. 626;
  women shunned by, i. 664-666;
  guardians of property, ii. 59-69, 669, 675-677, 679, 684, 686,
  699, 700, 705, 714, 717, 732;
  guilty of falsehood, ii. 94, 95, 98;
  guardians of truth and good faith, ii. 96, 114-123, 128, 129,
  669, 672, 675-677, 684, 686, 699, 700, 703-705, 707, 711, 714,
  717, 726, 732;
  perjury regarded as an offence against, ii. 122, 122 _sq._ n. ^10;
  perjury punished by, ii. 123 n. ^1, 684, 686, 714;
  condemn pride, ii. 144 _sq._;
  different, fused into one, ii. 225 _sq._;
  approve of suicide, ii. 236, 244, 261;
  suicide offensive to, ii. 237, 243, 245-249, 251-254, 260, 263;
  agriculture pleasing to, ii. 275, 277;
  commend industry, ii. 275, 280, 281, 675, 705;
  require pure sacrifices, ii. 295 _sq._;
  prohibit the eating of certain foods, ii. 326, 330, 335 671;
  disapprove of abstinence from intoxicating drink, ii. 339;
  disapprove of drunkenness, ii. 342;
  demand ceremonial cleanliness, ii. 352, 353, 700 n. ^5, 705,
  718, 726;
  punish ablutions, ii. 355;
  self-mortification pleasing to, ii. 356-361, 421;
  exciting the compassion of, ii. 361;
  envious of men, ii. 361, 714, 716;
  punish incest, ii. 375, 376, 671;
  women married to, ii. 412-414;
  sexual **pollution shunned by, ii. 418;
  addicted to homosexual practices, ii. 472, 474;
  eating of, ii. 563 _sq._, see Totem;
  the tendency to make them more and more perfect, ii. 599, 600,
  730, 731, 733 _sq._;
  not necessarily immortal, ii. 602 _sq._;
  killing of, ii. 602-610, 753 _sq._, see Totem;
  punished by men, ii. 610;
  subject to human needs, ii. 610 _sq._;
  sacrifices to, ii. 611-626, see Sacrifice;
  fear of, ii. 612-614, 725;
  malevolent, ii. 613, 665-667, 706, 707, 709, 714, 716, 728,
  729, 733;
  benevolent, ii. 613-615, 667-669, 697-708, 712, 713, 716, 725,
  728, 729, 731;
  assistance expected from, ii. 614-616;
  gratitude to, ii. 615 _sq._;
  property of, ii. 626 _sq._;
  self-regarding pride of, ii. 639-655;
  blasphemy against, ii. 639, 640, 719;
  taboos imposed upon the names of, ii. 640-643;
  intolerance of, ii. 643-647, 649, 650, 652;
  tolerance of, ii. 647-649, 652 _sq._;
  free from human weaknesses, ii. 652;
  prayers to, ii. 653-659, see Prayer;
  priests regarded as manifestations of, ii. 657, 709;
  the communal character of the relations between men and their,
  ii. 661;
  selection of, ii. 662, 729 _sq._;
  punish transgressions of custom, ii. 670, 728;
  punish bad behaviour towards old and sick persons, ii. 672, 675;
  punish adultery, ii. 675, 676, 684, 686, 700, 717;
  love justice, ii. 675, 684, 686, 699, 700, 703, 704, 732;
  approve of valour, ii. 679;
  fighting against evil {848} spirits, ii. 701, 702, 704-706, 729;
  invoked by thieves, ii. 733.
  See Guardian spirits, Religion, Supernatural beings, Supreme
  beings, Totem

"Golden rule, the," i. 102 _sq._

"Good," analysis of the concept, i. 145-147

"---- deeds," i. 299-302

Good faith, regard for truth and, ch. xxx. _sq._ (ii. 72-131)

Gratitude, i. 21, 42, 43, 93, 94, 318, 319, 538, 618, ii. 154-166;
  to gods, ii. 615 _sq._

Greetings, i. 590-592, ii. 146, 147, 149-151

Gregarious instinct, the, ii. 197 _sq._

Gregariousness, i. 94, 95, 113, ii. 195-197. 748

Grief, expressions of, ii. 283, 308, 316, 528

Group marriage, ii. 387, 392-396, 752

Guardian spirits, i. 373, 464 _sq._, ii. 210, 406, 528-531, 588,
666, 668, 669, 675, 676, 702


HABIT, the influence of, on moral ideas, i. 159, 160, 402, 533,
559, 646, ii. 52, 125-131, 146, 185, 272, 335, 343, 351, 392,
440, 441, 455, 471, 484, 509, 577, 578, 580;
  on the authority of the law, i. 163 _sq._

Hair, conditional curses seated in the, i. 57 _sq._

Handicraft, moral valuation of, ii. 273, 274, 278-280, 282 _sq._

Handshaking, ii. 150, 151, 623 _sq._

Happiness, regard for other persons' ch. xxxiii. (ii. 153-185);
  for one's own, ii. 265

Hares, abstinence from eating, ii. 333 _sq._

Head-hunting, i. 333, 373, 544

Heedlessness, i. 211, 305-310

Hell, notions about, ii. 60, 284, 417, 672, 674, 675, 677, 678,
683, 692, 706, 723, 724, 727

Heresy, ii. 646 _sq._;
  punishment of, i. 47, 50, 245, 493;
  considered a legitimate cause of war, i. 349-352, 359;
  judicial torture in cases of, i. 523;
  a bar to intermarriage, ii. 380 _sq._;
  homosexual practices associated with, ii. 486-489;
  the future state influenced by, ii. 721

Holiness, must not be defiled by curses or oaths, i. 58, 625, ii. 638;
  by blood, i. 380-382;
  by women, i. 664-666;
  by food, ii. 294-296;
  by certain kinds of food, ii. 322;
  by intoxicating drink, ii. 344 _sq._;
  by sexual pollution, ii. 415-420, 752;
  very susceptible to any polluting influence, ii. 352, 353,
  608-610;
  objects endowed with, must not be appropriated for ordinary
  purposes, ii. 627 _sq._;
  a god's, polluted by his name being mentioned in profane
  conversation, ii. 643;
  attributed to sacrificial victims, i. 63, 65, 69, 444-447, ii.
  563, 625, 658;
  its magic virtue transferred by contact, i. 63-65, 69, 444-446,
  ii. 605, 606, 625, 754;
  by eating, i. 446, ii. 562-564, 605, 625;
  by sexual intercourse, i. 593, ii. 444-446, 488;
  looked upon as a transferable entity, i. 586, ii. 607-610, 754;
  contact with, regarded as dangerous, ii. 538 n. ^2
  See Sacred places

Home, love of, ii. 167-169, 179 _sq._

Homestead, sanctity of the, i. 587, ii. 635 n. ^4

Homicide, in general, chs. xiv-xvi. (i. 327-382);
  punished with death i. 171, 172, 187, 189, 491, 492;
  considered polluting, i. 225, 232, 233, 375-382, ii. 256 _sq._
  n. ^2, 262, 714;
  stigmatised by religion, i. 345, 346, 378-380, 382, ii. 669,
  672, 676, 684, 686, 700, 705, 714, 716 n. ^2, 717, 732;
  the influence of rank on the criminality of, i. 430-433;
  duels in cases of, i. 501 _sq._
  See Blood-revenge, Compensation for homicide, Duel, Head
  hunting, Human sacrifice, Killing, Manslaughter, Manslayers,
  Punishment of Death, War

Homosexual love, ch. xliii. (ii. 456-489), 752 _sq._

Honey, abstained from after a death, ii. 301

Honour, duels of, i. 498-503, 507-510;
  respect for other men's, ii. 137-143

Hope, as an element in religion, ii. 614, 735;
  in rewards after death, ii. 735

Horses, stealing of, i. 187 _sq._, ii. 14;
  abstinence from the flesh of, ii. 322, 335

Hospitality, ch. xxiv. (i. 570-596); i. 333, 340, 540, 542, 543,
545, 548, 549, 555;
  enjoined by religion, i. {849} 578-580, ii. 669, 711, 714, 715,
  717, 718, 726, 732

Houses, stealing from, i. 187 _sq._, ii. 15, 16, 58, see
Burglary;
  asylums, i. 587, ii. 630, 635 n. ^4, 636 _sq._

Human effigies, sacrifice of, i. 468-470, 475

---- sacrifice, ch. xix. (i. 434-476); i. 26-28, 62, 63, 65-67,
339, 486, ii. 234, 295, 296, 419, 450, 451, 518, 579, 651, 697;
  the execution of blood-revenge a kind of, i. 476, 481 _sq._;
  suicide as a kind of, ii. 234-236;
  combined with cannibalism, ii. 559, 562 _sq._

Humility, ii. 144-146;
  sacrifice as a symbol of, ii. 625 _sq._

Hunting peoples, vegetable food provided by the women among, i.
634, ii. 273;
  the position of women among, i. 660 _sq._;
  slavery hardly known among, i. 672;
  social aggregates of, ii. 198-200;
  the form of marriage among, ii. 389 _sq._

Husbands, their power over their wives, ch. xxvi. (i. 629-669);
  wives punished if convicted of a design to kill their, i. 245;
  crimes committed by wives in the presence of their, i. 284;
  killing their wives, i. 418, 419, 631;
  wives killing their, i. 419 _sq._;
  wives sacrificed on the death of their, i. 472-474, ii. 450 _sq._;
  wives committing suicide on the death of their, i. 473 _sq._,
  ii. 232, 234, 235, 241, 242, 244, 247;
  inflicting bodily injuries upon their wives, i. 514-516, 631;
  their duty to protect and support their wives, i. 526-529, 532 _sq._;
  lending their wives to guests, i. 575, 593;
  living with their fathers-in-law, i. 601, 656 _sq._, ii. 202, 203;
  curses of, i. 626;
  selling their wives as slaves, i. 675. 684;
  belief in a mysterious bond of sympathy between wives and, ii. 205;
  wives fasting on the death of their, ii. 298-301;
  adultery committed by, ii. 397, 451-455;
  eating their wives, ii. 555.
  See Marital affection, Marriage, Widowers


IDIOTS, injuries committed by, i. 269-273, 275;
  objects of religious reverence, i. 270 _sq._;
  kindness to, i. 547

Idleness, ii. 268-277, 281 _sq._;
  a cause of uncleanliness, ii. 350 _sq._

Illegitimate children, rules of inheritance relating to, i. 47,
ii. 46, 48, 49, 56 _sq._;
  treatment of, i. 47, ii. 431, 439;
  sacrifice of, i. 467

Impartiality, apparent, a characteristic of the moral emotions,
i. 103, 104, 107, 117-122

Inanimate things, revenged upon or punished, i. 26, 27, 260-264, 308;
  retributive emotions evoked by, i. 26, 27, 260-264, 315, 318;
  conceived as animate, i. 27, 263, ii. 595;
  moral praise and blame not applied to, i. 319

Incantations, ii. 656-659

Incest, prohibition and horror of, i. 174. 175, 177, 197. 492,
ii. 364-378, 747-752;
  stigmatised by religion, ii. 375, 376, 671

Indemnification, i. 168, 169, 308 _sq._ See Compensation

Independence, love of national, ii. 170, 175

"Indifferent, the morally," i. 154-157

Industry, ii. 268-282;
  commended by religion, ii. 275, 280, 281, 675, 705;
  cleanliness promoted by, ii. 35

Infanticide, i. 378, 394-413, 633, ii. 562;
  supposed relationship between the social reaction against
  homosexuality and against, ii. 484, 485, 752 _sq._

Infants, exposure of, i. 406-412;
  a source of slavery, i. 689.
  See Infanticide

Inheritance, rules of, ii. 44-49, 53-57

Initiation ceremonies, instituted by the All-father, ii. 671

"Injustice," analysis of the concept, i. 141-145

Injustice, punished by the supreme being, ii. 675

"Instinct," the meaning of the word, ii. 374 n. ^2

Insults, i. 39, 502, 503, 509, 510, 524 _sq._, ii. 110,
138-143;
  to the dead, ii. 519;
  to gods, ii. 639-652

Intellectual disability, agents under, ch. x. (i. 249-282)

Intemperance, ii. 290 _sq._

Intentions, i. 204-206, 212 _sq._;
  punishment of bare, i. 244 _sq._

Intolerance, religious, ii. 643-653

{850} Intoxicants, religious, veneration of, ii. 591 _sq._
  See Drink, intoxicating; Drunkenness; Wine

Inversion, sexual, ii. 465-470, 752 _sq._


JEALOUSY, ii. 387, 389, 449, 450, 751

_Jinn_ (_jnûn_), i. 378, 379, 619, ii. 355, 493. 589, 593-594,
640, 642, 650

Joint family, the, i. 539 _sq._, ii. 213-216

"Judgment of God," war looked upon as a, i. 358, 360;
  the duel as a, i. 504-507.
  See Ordeals

_Jus primæ noctis_, ii. 395, 752

"Justice," analysis of the concept, i. 141-145

Justice, the sense of, among savages, i. 124, 126-129;
  loved by gods, ii. 675, 684, 686, 699, 700, 703, 704. 732


_Karma_, ii. 711

Killing, in self-defence, i. 288-290;
  of foreigners, i. 331-334, 337-34, 370, 371, 373;
  of enemies, i. 331-333, 373, ii. 693;
  of slaves, i. 378, 421-429, 696, 707;
  of infants by their parents, i. 378, 394-413, 633, ii. 562;
  of human embryos, i. 378, 408, 409, 413-417, ii. 705;
  of parents by their children, i. 383-386, 522, ii. 256 _sq._ n. ^2;
  or abandoning of aged parents, i. 386-390, 606, 607, 612, 620;
  or abandoning of sick persons, i. 391-393, ii. 542;
  of grown-up children by their parents, i. 393 _sq._, ii. 256
  _sq._ n. ^2;
  of wives by their husbands, i. 418, 419, 631;
  of women, i. 418-421;
  of husbands by their wives, i. 419 _sq._;
  of freemen by slaves, i. 429, 430, 491 n. ^5;
  of chiefs, i. 430;
  of the firstborn child, i. 458-460, ii. 562;
  of the firstborn son, i. 458-461;
  of departed souls, ii. 516 _sq._;
  of divine beings, ii. 602-610, 753 sq.;
  of disappointing magicians, ii. 609.
  See Blood-revenge, Compensation for homicide, Duel, Head
  hunting, Homicide, Human sacrifice, Manslaughter, Manslayers,
  Punishment of death, Suicide, War

Killing of animals, ch. xliv. (ii. 490-514);
  in consequence of harm done by them, i. 26, 27, 251-260;
  of sacred animals, i. 227, ii. 603-606, 609;
  of totem animals, ii. 210, 603, 604, 606;
  of vermin, i. 26, 27, 251;
  dogs, i. 381 n. ^6, ii. 501;
  monkeys, ii. 329, 490, 513;
  buffaloes, ii. 330;
  sheep, ii. 330;
  cattle, ii. 330, 493 _sq._;
  cows, ii. 330, 331, 497;
  the ploughing ox, **ii. 330, 331, 493. 494, 504;
  calves, ii. 331;
  bees, ii. 490;
  pigeons, ii. 490;
  storks, ii. 490;
  swallows, ii. 490;
  ravens, ii. 491;
  toads, ii. 491;
  fish, ii. 497 _sq._
  See Sacrifice

King, the, tied by custom, i. 161 _sq._;
  the poor and the weak protected by, i. 180 _sq._;
  the right of pardon a prerogative of, i. 192, 196, 226;
  an object of religious veneration, i. 194, ii. 606-610, 754;
  homicide committed by the command of, i. 285;
  strangers protected by, i. 338;
  homicide regarded as an injury inflicted upon, i. 374;
  sacrificed, i. 443, 466;
  human sacrifices offered for the purpose of saving the life of,
  i. 454-457, 466;
  proprietary rights of, ii. 33;
  loyalty to, ii. 180, 182;
  suicide regarded as an offence against, ii. 240, 263 n. ^1;
  taboos imposed upon, ii. 287 _sq._, 407, 418;
  the custom of shutting up doors used by, ii. 538 n. ^2;
  cannibalism as a duty incumbent upon, ii. 558;
  killing of, ii. 606-610, 753 _sq._;
  his burial place an asylum, ii. 630;
  his house an asylum, ii. 636;
  his person an asylum, ii. 636 _sq._;
  swearing on the life of, ii. 637;
  criminals prevented from cursing, ii. 637;
  curses pronounced by, ii. 703

Kinship, mutual assistance imposed as a duty by, i. 538-540;
  the social influence of, ii. 198, 201-206, 220, 224, 227, 748.
  See Descent

Knots, magic, ii. 585, 619, 652

Knowledge, regard for, ii. 131-136;
  of religious truth, influencing the future state, ii. 132-134,
  719-721, 725-727

Known concomitants of acts, i. 212-214, 249


LABOUR, ii. 268-283;
  the division of, between the sexes i. 633-637, ii. 271;
  property acquired by, ii. 41-43, 53, 69-71;
  suspension of, {851} on various occasions, ii. 283-289;
  temporarily forbidden to men who have eaten human flesh, ii. 575

_L-[(]ahd_, ii. 623 _sq._

Lamentations at funerals, ii. 524, 528, 541 _sq._

Landmarks, removing of, i. 186, ii. 60, 61, 67-69, 703, 714, 717

Language, as a communicator of moral emotions, i. 115-117;
  as an expression of moral concepts, i. 131-133;
  the influence of a common, ii. 167, 170, 181;
  as an emblem of nationality, ii. 224 _sq._

_L-[(]âr_, i. 57, 58, 566, 586, 587, 591, ii. 584-586, 618-620,
623, 638

Laws, customs and, as expressions of moral ideas, ch. vii. (i.
158-201);
  their relations to customs, i. 163-166

Lent fast, ii. 295, 308 _sq._

Levirate, the, i. 528

_Lex talionis_. See Equivalence, the rule of

Libel, i. 522, ii. 96, 141

Lightning, persons struck by, i. 26, ii. 239, 544, 549, 697 _sq._

Likings, disinterested, i. 117, ii. 16, 58, 185, 227, 261, 262,
266, 267, 744-746

_Limbus_, ii. 722

Lions, their fear of strange phenomena, ii. 583

Love. See Affection, Free love, Homosexual love

Loyalty, ii. 180, 182

Lunacy, attributed to demoniacal possession, i. 270, 274 _sq._,
ii. 593;
  to malignant magical agency, i. 317, ii. 531 _sq._;
  regarded as a divine punishment, i. 274 _sq._;
  as a punishment inflicted by a saint, ii. 628

Lunatics, injuries committed by, i. 189, 269-277, 298, 299, 316,
317, 319;
  objects of religious reverence, i. 270 _sq._, ii. 590;
  burned as witches, i. 273

Luxury, ii. 266

Lying. See Truth, regard for

Lynching, i. 91


MADNESS. See Lunacy

Magic, regarded as a cause of death, i. 24, 29, ii. 534, 651;
  as a cause of lunacy, i. 317, ii. 531 _sq._;
  expertness in, attributed to strangers, i. 584;
  to old persons, i. 619 _sq._;
  to women, i. 620, 666-668;
  the position of slaves influenced by the dread of, i. 716;
  fasting in connection with, ii. 293 _sq._;
  definitions of, ii. 584, 753;
  attitude of religion towards, ii. 649, 650, 652, 753;
  its influence on moral ideas, ii. 696;
  supposed to influence the future state of men, ii. 700, 701,
  706, 709, 710, 712.
  See Blessings, Blood, Charms, Cross, Cross-roads, Curses,
  Evil eye, Knots, _L-[(]ahd_, _L-[(]âr_, Magicians, Oaths,
  Ordeals, Prayer, Purificatory ceremonies, Sacrifice, Sexual
  intercourse (as a magical or religious rite), Spitting,
  Transference, Witchcraft

----, hom[oe]opathic, ii. 446 n. ^7, 753

----, sympathetic, i. 589 _sq._, ii. 204, 205, 209 n. ^5, 546,
566, 643

Magicians, curses of, i. 563;
  sexual intercourse with, i. 593 n. ^1;
  abstain from certain foods, ii. 322, 327;
  purificatory ceremonies of, ii. 352;
  celibacy compulsory on, ii. 405 _sq._;
  conjugal faithfulness compulsory on persons who wish to become,
  ii. 419;
  addicted to homosexual practices, ii. 458, 459, 465, 472, 477,
  484, 486 _sq._;
  treatment of the dead bodies of, ii. 527;
  cannibalism of, ii. 564;
  killing of disappointing, ii. 609;
  their residences asylums, ii. 631.
  See Witches; _cf._ Priests

Males, the sexual impulse of, i. 657

Mammals, paternal care among, ii. 189 _sq._;
  maternal care among, ii. 190;
  the duration of conjugal unions among, ii. 192

Man-gods, eating of, ii. 563 _sq._;
  killing of, ii. 606-610, 753 _sq._

Mankind at large, duties to. See Cosmopolitanism

Manslaughter, distinguished from murder, i. 294-298, ii. 633

Manslayers, regarded as unclean, i. 225, 232, 233, 375-382, ii.
256 _sq._ n. ^2;
  adoption of unintentional, i. 484;
  refuge denied to, ii. 632 _sq._

Marital affection, i. 113, 532 _sq._, ii. 190-193.
  See Conjugal affection

Marriage, ch. xl. (ii. 364-398);
  as a compensation for homicide, i. 484;
  the father's consent required for a daughter's, i. 599, 609,
  611, 613, 615 _sq._, ii. 383;
  for a son's, i. 609, 613, 615 _sq._;
  the parents' {852} consent required for a child's, i. 607, 608,
  617, 618, 624 _sq._;
  slaves prohibited from contracting a legal, i. 693, 697, 706 _sq._;
  prohibition of, between white and coloured persons, i. 714;
  between relations by adoption, ii. 369, 374, 375, 748-750, 752;
  regarded as a duty, ii. 399-405;
  enjoined by religion, ii. 399-404;
  between dead persons, ii. 400;
  forbidden to persons whose function it is to perform religious
  or magical rites, ii. 405-409, 412-414, 418-421;
  considered impure, ii. 410-412;
  between a god and a woman, ii. 412-414;
  avoidance of, between cannibals and their non-cannibal
  neighbours, ii. 571;
  the contracting of a second, forbidden to widows, i. 475, ii. 450 _sq._;
  to priests, ii. 412;
  considered improper for widowers, ii. 451.
  See Divorce, Group marriage, Incest, Levirate

Marriage by capture, ii. 382 _sq._

---- by purchase, i. 421, 599, 632 _sq._, ii. 382-385, 751;
  a hindrance to polygyny, ii. 389;
  the marriage tie strengthened by, ii. 397;
  the standard of female chastity raised by, ii. 436, 437, 440

---- portion, ii. 385 _sq._;
  the marriage tie strengthened by the, ii. 397

Maternal affection, i. 405, 529-531, ii. 186-190, 193, 748

---- duties, i. 526, 533, **ii. 748

---- rights, ch. xxv. (i. 597-628), **ii. 748

Matter, regarded as impure, ii. 362 _sq._

Meat, manslayers prohibited from eating, i. 375;
  abstained from before the offering of a sacrifice, ii. 296;
  after a death, ii. 301, 302, 304 _sq._
  See Vegetarianism

----, fresh, abstained from after a death, ii. 300 _sq._;
  by girls at puberty, ii. 307 _sq._

Medicines, religious veneration of, ii. 591, 641

Men, the occupations of, i. 633-637;
  the sexual impulse of, i. 657;
  forbidden to eat certain foods, ii. 321 _sq._;
  extra-matrimonial intercourse of, ii. 422-434, 436-455;
  the preference given to virgin brides by, ii. 434-437, 440;
  homosexual practices between, ch. xliii. (ii. 456-489), ii. 752 _sq._

"Merit," analysis of the concept, i. 150-152

Merits, i. 86, ii. 360 _sq._, common enjoyment of, i. 96-99;
  the conferring of, upon the dead, ii. 550-552

Midsummer customs, i. 56 _sq._

Milk, prohibition of boiling, i. 197;
  offered to strangers, i. 590 _sq._;
  abstinence from, ii. 325 _sq._;
  after a death, ii. 301

Miracles, ii. 590 _sq._

Modesty, ii. 144 _sq._

Monkeys, the feeling of revenge in, i. 37 _sq._;
  self-regarding pride in, i. 39, ii. 138;
  sympathetic resentment in, i. 112;
  credited with a conscience, i. 249;
  adoption of young among, ii. 189;
  abstinence from eating, ii. 328 _sq._;
  aversion to killing, ii. 329, 490, 513. See Apes

Monks, sexual intercourse forbidden to, ii. 409, 412;
  addicted to homosexual practices, ii. 462, 467

Monogamy, ii. 192, 387-392

Monotheism, intolerance of, ii. 644-647, 649, 650, 652;
  its tendency to attribute the most exalted qualities to the
  deity, ii. 734

Moon, abstinence from work in connection with changes in the, ii.
284-287, 747;
  fasting in connection with changes in the, ii. 296, 297.
  309-313

---- gods, appealed to in oaths, ii. 121, 122, 699;
  regarded as judges, ii. 699, 703 _sq._

Moral approval, the nature of, i. 21, 93-107;
  the origin of, i. 108-111, 117-123, 129 _sq._;
  moral concepts springing from, i. 145-154;
  only indirectly expressed in custom, i. 160;
  hardly at all expressed in law, i. 166 _sq._;
  the resemblance between the phenomena which give rise to
  gratitude and those which call forth, i. 318 _sq._

"---- axioms," i. 12

---- concepts, based on moral emotions, ch. i. (i.
4-20);
  analysis of the principal, ch. vi (i. 131-157);
  among non-European peoples, i. 131-133

---- disapproval, the nature of, i. 21-93, 100-107;
  the origin of, i. {853}108-129;
  moral concepts springing from, i. 134-145;
  expressed in customs and laws, ch. vii. (i. 158-201);
  the resemblance between the phenomena which give rise to
  non-moral resentment and those which call forth, i. 315-319

Moral emotions, the moral concepts based on, chs. i. (i. 4-20),
vi. (i. 131-157);
  the nature of the, chs. ii.-iv. (i. 21-107);
  the origin of the, ch. v. (i. 108-130);
  expressed in customs and laws, ch. vii. (i. 158-201);
  the resemblance between the phenomena which give rise to
  non-moral retributive emotions and those which call forth, i.
  314-319;
  not determined by the cognition of free-will, i. 321-326

---- evolution, general characteristics of, ii. 743-746

---- ideals, i. 153 _sq._

---- judgments, the emotional origin of, ch. i. (i. 4-20);
  the assumed objectivity of, i. 6-20, 104 _sq._;
  the general nature of the subjects of, chs. viii.-xii. (i.
  202-313);
  why conduct and character form the subjects of, i. 314-320;
  the relation between free-will and, i. 320-326;
  the innate character the proper subject of, i. 326

---- law, the authoritativeness attributed to the, i. 14-17

"---- reason," i. 7 _sq._

"---- truth," i. 17 _sq._

Morbid impulses, injuries committed under the influence of, i.
298 _sq._

Morning gift, ii. 385

_Mos_, i. 119, 122

Mother, children's affection for their, i. 534-538, 618, 659, ii.
194, 748;
  descent traced through the, i. 597 598, 655 _sq._, ii. 44-46,
  54, 202, 203, 205, 206, 211, 220;
  committing suicide on the death of her only son, ii. 244 n. ^3.
  See Maternal affection, duties, rights; Parents

Motives, ch. xi. (i. 283-302); i. 207-209, 316, 318

Mourners, delicate state of, ii. 283, 307;
  considered polluted, ii. 306, 307, 545;
  purificatory ceremonies of, ii. 354

Mourning costume, ii. 524, 545, 547

---- customs, ii. 283, 284, 298-308, 520, 524, 526, 528, 541,
542, 544-548;
  forbidden in the case of suicide, ii. 247.
  See Death

Murder, manslaughter distinguished from, i. 294-298, ii. 633.
  See Homicide

Mutilation, as a punishment, i. 192, 195. 311, 312, 513, 518-523.
ii. 8, 9, 12, 13, 74, 84, 123 n. ^1, 143 n. ^1, 447, 449 _sq._

Mutton, abstinence from, ii. 322, 327

Mutual aid, i. 538-569


NAMES, certain superstitions relating to, i. 460, ii. 369;
  social influence of, ii. 203 _sq._;
  their influence on exogamy, ii. 369, 748;
  prohibition of mentioning dead persons', ii. 524, 545-547, 550;
  of mentioning supernatural beings', ii. 640-643

National conceit, ii. 170-174

Nationalism, i. 367-369, ii. 184, 185, 224 _sq._

Nationality, the feeling of, ii. 183-185.
  See Patriotism

Negative commandments, why more prominent than positive
commandments, i. 303

Negligence, i. 210, 211, 303-305

Negro slavery, i. 428, 429, 516-518, 683, 704-714, ii. 32 _sq._

Negroes, not accepted as witnesses against white persons, i. 429;
  antipathy to, i. 713 _sq._;
  injuries inflicted upon white persons by, i. 713 _sq._;
  white persons prohibited from marrying, i. 714

New, fear of anything, i. 462 _sq._

Nuns, sexual intercourse forbidden to, ii. 409, 412


OATHS, materialistic conception of, i. 58-61, 233 _sq._;
  the taking of, forbidden to the high priest, i. 58, ii. 638;
  to priestesses, ii. 638;
  contained in ordeals, i. 505 _sq._, ii. 687-690;
  taken upon arms, i. 506, ii. 119-121;
  upon tent-poles, i. 588 n. ^5;
  in connection with theft, ii. 62, 63, 66, 68;
  sworn by the eldest sister, i. 606;
  on the life of the king, ii. 637;
  supernatural beings appealed to in, ii. 67, 68, 120-123,
  686-690, 699, 731 _sq._;
  prohibition of taking, ii. 99, 124;
  not considered binding if contrary to the good of the Church,
  ii. 100;
  methods of adding supernatural {854} energy to, ii.
  118-122;
  taken upon blood, ii. 118-121, 621, 622, 687-689;
  blood-covenants accompanied by, ii. 208, 209, 567.
  See Perjury

Obedience, to parents, ch. xxv. (i. 597-628);
  to husbands, ch. xxvi. (i. 629-669);
  slaves, to their masters, ch. xxvii (i. 670-716);
  to rulers, i. 194-196;
  to gods, i. 194-198, ii. 659 _sq._;
  to the dead, ii. 519, 520, 541

Occupation, acquisition of property by, ii. 35-39, 51, 52, 54 _sq._

Occupations of life, divided between the sexes, i. 633-637, ii. 271

Offerings to the dead, ii. 302, 303, 400-404, 517, 518, 524, 539,
547, 550, 692, 700, 701, 704, 708;
  connection between almsgiving and, ii. 550-552

---- to gods. See Sacrifice

Offspring, man's desire for, i. 533, ii. 388, 391, 400-404, 423, 440;
  the future state of persons who have died without, ii. 400-404

Old age, criminal responsibility affected by, i. 266 _sq._;
  the future state of persons who have died of, i. 390, ii. 235,
  238 n. ^3, 698

---- persons, killing or abandoning of, i. 386-390, 606, 607,
612, 620;
  eaten by their relatives, i. 390, ii. 554, 568 _sq._;
  kind treatment of, i. 540, 546, 625 _sq._, ii. 672;
  respect for, i. 603-605, 614, 615, 619-621, ii. 194, 675;
  supposed to be versed in magic, i. 619 _sq._;
  curses and blessings of, i. 622, 626;
  suicide committed by, ii. 232, 235, 236, 247 _sq._

Omissions, i. 210-212, 303-305, 317

_Opera supererogativa_, i. 86, 98 _sq._ See Merits

Opinions, moral judgments relating to, i. 215 _sq._

Ordeals, ii. 686-690, 732;
  duels as, i. 504-507

"Ought," analysis of the concept, i. 134-137

Outlawry, i. 46, 47, 172, 173, 311

Owls, prohibition of eating, ii. 321

Oxen, prohibition of killing ploughing, ii. 330, 331, 493, 494, 504


PARDON, the right of, as a prerogative of the Crown, i. 192, 196, 226

Parental affection. See Maternal, Paternal affection

Parents, their authority over their children, ch. xxv. (i. 597-628);
  curses or blessings of, i. 58, 538, 621-627, ii. 703, 715, 716
  n. ^2, 732;
  children punished if convicted of a design to kill their, i. 245;
  killing their infant children, i. 378, 394-413, 633, ii. 562,
  752 _sq._;
  children killing their, i. 383-386, 522, ii. 256 _sq._ n. ^2, 749;
  children killing or abandoning their aged, i. 386-390, 606,
  607, 612, 620;
  eaten by their children, i. 390, ii. 554, 568 _sq._;
  killing their grown up children, i. 393 _sq._, ii. 256 _sq._ n. ^2;
  exposing their new-born children, i. 406-412, 689;
  children sacrificed to save the lives of their, i. 455, 456,
  459-461;
  sacrificing their children, i. 455-461;
  eating their children, i. 458 _sq._, ii. 554, 555. 562, 568 _sq._;
  daughters committing suicide on the death of their, i. 473;
  inflicting corporal punishment upon their children, i. 513-515,
  607, 610;
  children using violence against their, i. 513, 624 _sq._, ii. 677;
  their duty of taking care of their children, i. 526-533;
  children's duty of taking care of their, i. 533-538;
  children's respect for their, i. 534-538, 600, 601, 607-613,
  616-628, ii. 194;
  children's affection for their, i. 534-538, 618, 659, ii. 194, 748;
  religion emphasising children's duties to their, i. 536, 537,
  608, 610, 612, 613, 616, 617, 620-627, ii. 711, 714, 715, 716 n.
  ^2, 717, 732;
  children cursing their, i. 564;
  selling their children as slaves, i. 599, 607, 609, 611, 612,
  615, 675, 681, 682, 684, 685, 689, 691 _sq._;
  children telling a falsehood in the presence of their, ii. 96;
  children addressing abusive language to their, ii. 142;
  their duties to their children, ii. 166, 748;
  children's duties to their, ii. 166, 748;
  committing suicide on the death of their children, ii. 232, 244
  n. ^3;
  fasting after the death of their children, ii. 298-300;
  children fasting after the death of their, ii. 298-301;
  children punished after death for {855} inflicting injuries
  upon their, ii. 715.
  See Maternal, Paternal affection

Parricide. See Parents

_Parricidium_, i. 384 _sq._

Pastoral life, supposed connection between the custom of
ultimogeniture and a, ii. 48 n. ^4, 56 n. ^5

---- peoples, vegetable food provided by the women among, i. 634,
ii. 273;
  the position of women among, i. 660 _sq._;
  slavery among, i. 672, 673, 681;
  social aggregates of, ii. 201;
  their sympathy for their domestic animals, ii. 506

Passing-bell, the, ii. 524, 544

Passover, the, i. 459, 470, ii. 296

Paternal affection, i. 401, 402, 405, 529-533. ii. 187-190, 193, 748;
  its influence on the duration of marriage, ii. 397

Patriotism, ii. 167-185

Peace, perpetual, i. 334, 337, 367

---- Societies, i. 369

_Peculium_, of slaves, i. 690, 697, ii. 31-33;
  of sons, ii. 28;
  of women, ii. 29

Pederasty. See Homosexual love

Penance, ii. 356-361, 363, 708, 735;
  fasting as a form of, ii. 246, 315-318, 406

Perjury, considered contagious, i. 58-61;
  considered sinful though committed unconsciously, i. 229, 231,
  233 _sq._;
  punished by custom or law, i. 505, 521 _sq._, ii. 123 n. ^1;
  regarded as an offence against the deity, i. 507, ii. 122, 122
  _sq._ n. ^10;
  no civil punishment affixed to, ii. 123 n. ^1;
  believed to incur divine punishment, ii. 123 n. ^1, 684, 686, 714;
  to cause misery after death, ii. 715 _sq._

Phratry, the, ii. 217, 218, 222 _sq._

Pigeons, prohibition of killing, ii. 490;
  eating of, ii. 737

Pilgrimage, ii. 314, 416, 538 n. ^2, 725

"Pious fraud," ii. 100, 104, 112

Pocket-picking, i. 187, 243

Politeness, i. 160, ii. 146-152

Pollution, of sin, i. 52-57, 61-65, 70, 71, 85, 86, 407, ii. 256
n. ^2, 654 _sq._;
  of curses, i. 57-61, 70, 233, 234, 624 _sq._, ii. 583, 584, 703;
  of blood, i. 225, 232, 233, 375-382, ii. 256 _sq._ n. ^2, 262, 714;
  of women, i. 663-666, ii. 538 n. ^2;
  of self-inflicted death, ii. 257 n. ^5 262;
  of death, ii. 283, 302-307, 416, 536-539, 544 _sq._;
  of natural death, ii. 416, 609;
  of food, ii. 294-296;
  of wine, ii. 344 _sq._;
  sexual, ii. 414-420, 752;
  caused by partaking of human flesh, ii. 538, 575 _sq._;
  holiness very susceptible to, i. 58, 380-382, 625, ii. 294-296,
  322, 344, 345. 352, 353, 415-420, 608-610, 638, 643, 752

Polyandry, ii. 387, 395

Polygyny, ii. 387-392, 395;
  connection between illegitimate children's right to inheritance
  and, ii. 57;
  a cause of homosexual practices, ii. 466

Polytheism, tolerance of, ii. 647-652

Pork, abstinence from, ii. 321, 322, 326-330, 335

Positive commandments, i. 303-305, 310

Possession, acquisition of property by continued, ii. 39-41, 52

Potatoes, abstinence from, after a death, ii. 301

Poverty, estimation of, i. 556, ii. 280 _sq._;
  a cause of uncleanliness, ii. 351;
  monogamy associated with, ii. 392

Prayer, ii. 653-659;
  for remission of sin, i. 49, 54, 55, 228 _sq._, ii. 654, 655.
  72, 707;
  purification preparatory to, i. 380 _sq._, ii. 352, 353, 358,
  359, 415. 416, 418 _sq._;
  development of a curse or a blessing into a, i. 564 _sq._, ii.
  66-68, 120-123, 658, 686-690, 731;
  almsgiving connected with, i. 567 _sq._;
  forbidden to women, i. 664, 667 n. ^1;
  used as greeting, ii. 150;
  fasting an appendage to, ii. 316 _sq._;
  magic efficacy ascribed to, ii. 353, 418, 419, 656-659, 706, 712;
  continence a preparation for, ii. 417-419

Preparation, acts of, i. 243-246

Prescription, ii. 40, 41, 52 _sq._

Pride, condemnation of, ii. 144 _sq._
  See Self-regarding pride

Priestesses, forbidden to marry or to have intercourse with men,
ii. 406-408, 412-414, 420;
  continence compulsory on women who wish to become, ii. 419;
  prostitution of, ii. 443 _sq._;
  asylums, ii. 637 _sq._;
  prohibited from taking an oath, ii. 638

Priests, forbidden to take an oath, i. 58, ii. 638;
  to engage in warfare, {856} i. 348, 381;
  to shed human blood, i. 381 _sq._;
  to take part in a capital charge, i. 381, 382, 493;
  to engage in hunting, ii. 506;
  the law of torture relating to, i. 523 _sq._;
  curses of, i. 563;
  enslaving of children of incontinent, i. 700;
  certain foods forbidden to, or rejected by, ii. 322, 329, 333, 338;
  forbidden to marry and to have intercourse with women, ii.
  405-409, 412, 414, 418-421;
  eunuch, ii. 408, 414, 488 n. ^6;
  forbidden to contract a second marriage, ii. 412;
  to marry widows, ii. 412, 420;
  to marry harlots or divorced wives, ii. 420;
  taboos imposed upon, ii. 417 _sq._;
  continence compulsory on persons who wish to become, ii. 419;
  temporary continence compulsory on, ii. 419 _sq._;
  the punishment of unchastity in the daughters of, ii. 420;
  represented as corrupters of domestic virtue, ii. 432;
  their celibacy a cause of homosexual practices, ii. 467;
  boys kept as, ii. 473;
  used as temple prostitutes, ii. 473, 488;
  cannibalism of, ii. 563, 574;
  their residences asylums, ii. 630, 634, 637;
  opposing sorcery, ii. 652;
  regarded as manifestations of gods, ii. 657, 709;
  encouraging the belief in the magic efficacy of prayer, ii. 658
  _sq._
  See Benefit of Clergy; _cf._ Magicians

Primogeniture, ii. 45, 46, 48, 55 _sq._

Promiscuity, the theory of, ii. 396

Promises. See Good faith

Property, the right of, ch. xxviii. _sq._ (ii. 1-71);
  forfeiture of, as a punishment, i. 47, ii. 254;
  acquired by a successful duel, i. 498, 503, ii. 9;
  of wives, i. 632, 637-641, 643, 645, 661, ii. 28-31, 41;
  of women, i. 661, ii. 28-30, 41;
  of slaves, i. 677, 684, 688, _cf._ _Peculium_ of slaves;
  of the dead, i. 399, ii. 44, 518, 539 _sq._, see Inheritance, Wills;
  of supernatural beings, ii. 626 _sq._;
  supernatural beings as guardians of, ii. 59-69, 669, 675-677,
  679, 684, 686, 699, 700, 705, 714, 717, 732

Prostitution, i. 608, ii. 428-431, 437, 439-446;
  religious, ii. 443-446, 488;
  of men, ii. 459-462, 463, 476, 478, 488

Provocation, i. 290-298, 311, 316 _sq._

Prudence, i. 560, 581, 715, ii. 52, 59, 114, 124, 176, 185,
265-268, 331, 332, 334. 335, 342, 428, 497, 539, 547, 548, 660

Puberty, girls at, ii. 307 _sq._

Public approval, the prototype of moral approval, i. 9, 122, 129

---- disapproval, the prototype of moral disapproval, i. 9, 119-122

Pulse, abstinence from, ii. 322, _cf._ ii. 430 _sq._

Punishment, inflicted on others than the culprit, i. 43-48, 69 _sq._;
  restricted to the culprit, i. 70-72;
  essentially an expression of the moral indignation of the
  society which inflicts it, i. 79, 89-91, 169, 185, 198-201;
  theories as to the proper object of, i. 79-91;
  regarded as a means of eliminating the criminal, i. 80-82;
  as a deterrent, i. 80-84, 88-91;
  as a means of reforming the criminal, i. 80-91;
  defined, i. 82, 169 _sq._;
  the limited efficiency of, as a deterrent, i. 90 n. ^1;
  a source of moral disapproval, i. 115;
  the relation between indemnification and, i. 168 _sq._;
  among savages, i. 170-177;
  transition from revenge to, i. 180-185;
  the opinion that determent actually is or has been the chief
  object of, i. 185-200;
  the increasing severity of, i. 186-198;
  inflicted on criminals in public, i. 191 _sq._;
  of unintentional injuries, i. 219, 221-226, 231, 232, 235-240;
  of attempts to commit crimes, i. 241-247, 374;
  of acts of preparation, i. 243-246;
  of bare intentions, i. 245;
  inflicted on animals, i. 253-260, 264, 308;
  on inanimate things, i. 261-264, 308;
  of injuries committed by children, i. 265-269;
  by old persons, i. 266 _sq._;
  by lunatics, i. 271-277, 298 _sq._;
  by idiots, i. 273;
  in drunkenness, i. 279-282;
  inflicted upon the offending member, i. 311, 312, 513, 518,
  519, 521 _sq._, ii. 9, 13, 74, 84, 123 n. ^1, 143 n. ^1;
  from a deterministic point of view, i. 320 _sq._;
  influenced by rank, i. 430-433, 491, 518, 519, 524, ii. 19, 20,
  58, 142, 143, 448-450;
  corporal, i. 520-525;
  suicide committed out of fear of, ii. 233;
  redeems the sufferer from {857} punishment in a future
  existence, ii. 360;
  inflicted on gods, ii. 610.
  For various kinds of punishment see Banishment, Cannibalism
  (as a punishment), Emasculation, Mutilation, Outlawry, Property
  (forfeiture of), Serfdom (as a punishment), Shame (putting
  offenders to), Slavery (as a punishment)

Punishment in a future existence. See Future life

---- of death, i. 491-496;
  among savages, i. 188-190, 195-197;
  as a kind of human sacrifice, i. 440, 471 _sq._;
  suicide as an alternative to, ii. 243;
  inflicted for a variety of crimes, i. 44-46, 171, 172, 174,
  177, 186-197, 253, 254, 287, 306, 311, 312, 331, 383-386, 404,
  407, 409, 412, 416, 419, 420, 423, 424, 429-433, 439, 440, 491,
  492, 495, 496, 508, 509, 513, 516, 518, 685, ii. 4, 5, 7-9,
  12-15, 19, 96, 140-142, 256 n. ^2, 276, 331, 366-368, 378,
  406-408, 420, 424-426, 428, 429, 431, 442, 447-450, 453, 474, 475
  n. ^10, 477-482, 497, 558, 640, 647, 650-652

Purificatory ceremonies, i. 53-57, 69, 233, 375-377, 379-381,
625, ii. 256 _sq._ n. ^2, 257 n. ^5, 294, 295, 328, 352-354, 358,
359, 415, 416, 472 n. ^7, 476, 538, 545, 726


RAIN, human sacrifices offered for the purpose of producing, i.
449-451;
  certain other methods of procuring, ii. 315, 361

Rama[d.]ân, the fast of, i. 271, ii. 313-315, 725

Rank, influencing customs or laws relating to homicide, i. 34,
35, 178, 430-433, 491;
  to capital punishment, i. 491;
  to bodily injuries, i. 518, 519, 524;
  to corporal punishment, i. 522-524;
  to torture, i. 523 _sq._;
  to theft, ii. 19, 20, 58;
  to sincerity, ii. 103;
  to insults, i. 142 _sq._;
  to politeness, i. 151 _sq._;
  to suicide, i. 243;
  to marriage, ii. 379, 380, 384;
  to chastity, ii. 428, 433 _sq._;
  to rape, ii. 437 _sq._;
  to adultery, ii. 448-450;
  to the disposal of the dead, ii. 527, 549;
  to cannibalism, ii. 573 _sq._;
  supposed to influence the efficacy of curses, i. 626 _sq._;
  to influence men's state in the other world, ii. 698

Rape, i. 187, 188, 311, 521, ii. 437, 438, 476, 633, 679;
  self-defence in the case of, i. 290

Rashness, i. 211, 305-310

Ravens, fear of killing, ii. 491

Reason, the theory according to which moral judgments are
ultimately based on, i. 7-17

Reception ceremonies, i. 590-592

Reflection, its influence on moral estimates, i. 10, 11, 70, 216,
237, 247, 248, 251, 283, 303, 310, 312-314, ii. 111, 136, 267,
268, 274, 283, 405, 512-514, 580, 581, 744-746;
  on non-moral resentment, i. 315, 316, 318

Reflex action, i. 22

Regalia, regarded as wonder-working talismans, ii. 608 n. ^4, 753 _sq._

Regret, the similarity between remorse and, i. 123 _sq._

_Religio_, the meaning of the word, ii. 584-586

Religion, belief in supernatural being an essential element in,
ch. xlvii., (ii. 582-601);
  duties to gods inculcated by, ch. xlviii. _sq._ (ii. 602-662);
  relations between morality and, chs. l.-lii. (ii. 663-737), 745 _sq._;
  custom stronger than, i. 164;
  enjoins abstinence from work on certain days, i. 187, ii. 284-289, 718;
  the severity of punishment increased by, i. 193-198;
  enjoins fasting, i. 271, ii. 246, 292-298, 308-318, 358, 406, 725;
  a source of war, i. 339, 349-352, 359;
  attitude of, towards war, i. 339, 341, 342, 345-366, 369
  _sq._, ii. 711;
  condemns homicide, i. 345, 346, 378-380, 382, ii. 669, 672,
  676, 684, 686, 700, 705, 714, 716 n. ^2, 717, 732;
  condemns the killing or exposure of infants, i. 407, 411 _sq._;
  condemns feticide, i. 414-417, ii. 705;
  attitude of, towards slavery, i. 424, 426, 516, 683-689,
  693-700, 711-713, ii. 711;
  gives support to capital punishment, i. 496;
  influences the right to bodily integrity, i. 520;
  inculcates filial duties, i. 536, 537, 608, 610, 612, 613, 616,
  617, 620-627, ii. 711, 714, 715, 716 n. ^2, 717, 732;
  enjoins charity, i. 549-558, 561-569, ii. 669, 672, 699, 705,
  711, 717, 718, 725, 726, 732;
  enjoins hospitality, i. 578-580, ii. 669, 711, 714, {858} 715,
  717, 718, 726, 732;
  influences the treatment of old persons, i. 620 _sq._, ii. 672, 675;
  influences the position of women, i. 663;
  regards women as unclean, i. 663-666;
  attitude of, towards serfdom, i. 703 _sq._;
  the right of property sanctioned by, ii. 59-69, 669, 675-677,
  679, 684, 686, 699, 700, 705, 714, 717, 732;
  the regard for truth and good faith sanctioned by, ii. 96,
  114-124, 128, 129, 669, 672, 675-677, 684, 686, 699, 700,
  703-705, 707. 711, 714, 717, 726, 732;
  leads to "pious fraud," ii. 100, 104, 112;
  condemns pride, ii. 144 _sq._, its relation to national feeling
  and patriotism, ii. 174, 175, 178 _sq._;
  as a social tie, ii. 209-213, 225-227, 725;
  the opinions as regards suicide influenced by, ii. 234, 236,
  237, 242-254, 260, 261, 263;
  the moral ideas relating to self-regarding conduct influenced
  by, ii. 267 _sq._;
  commends agriculture, ii. 275;
  attitude of, towards labour, ii. 275, 280-289, 675, 705, 747;
  commends poverty, ii. 280-282;
  requires ceremonial cleanliness, ii. 294, 295, 352-354, 358,
  359, 415-420, 700 n. ^5, 705, 718, 726;
  enjoins pilgrimage, ii. 314, 725;
  imposes various restrictions in diet, ii. 322-338, 671;
  encourages drunkenness, ii. 339;
  enjoins sobriety or total abstinence from intoxicating liquors,
  ii. 341-345;
  a cause of uncleanliness, ii. 354-356;
  leads to various forms of asceticism, ii. 355-363;
  stigmatises incest, ii. 375, 376, 671;
  enjoins various forms of endogamy, ii. 378-382;
  a bar to inter-marriage, ii. 380-382;
  enjoins monogamy, ii. 392;
  prohibits divorce, ii. 397;
  enjoins marriage, ii. 399-404;
  enjoins celibacy or continence, ii. 406-421;
  regards marriage as impure, ii. 410-412;
  condemns second marriages, ii. 412, 451;
  enjoins sexual cleanliness, ii. 415-420, 736, 752;
  requires chastity of unmarried women, i. 49, ii. 427 _sq._;
  condemns extra-matrimonial intercourse, ii. 431-433, 439, 675;
  prostitution connected with, ii. 443-446, 488;
  condemns adultery, ii. 447, 448, 450, 453-455, 675, 676, 684,
  686, 700, 717;
  homosexual practices connected with, ii. 458, 459, 472-474,
  484, 486-489, 752;
  stigmatised by, ii. 475, 476, 479-482, 485-489, 705;
  inculcates regard for the lower animals, ii. 497-504, 705;
  looks down upon the lower animals, ii. 505-508;
  cannibalism in connection with, ii. 562 _sq._;
  definitions of, ii. 584, 753;
  born of fear, ii. 612-614;
  hope an element in every, ii. 614-616;
  attitude of, towards magic, ii. 649, 650, 652, 753;
  the communal character of, ii. 661.
  See Asylums, Atheism, Baptism, Blasphemy, Blood (effusion of,
  as a religious rite), Eucharist, Flagellation, Future life, Future
  state, "God," Goddesses, Gods, Guardian spirits, Hell, Heresy,
  Holiness, Human sacrifice, Intolerance, Monotheism, Oaths, Ordeals,
  Penance, Perjury, Pilgrimage, Polytheism, Prayer, Priestesses,
  Priests, Purificatory ceremonies, Sacred places, Sacrifice,
  Sacrilege, Saints, Self-mortification, Self-mutilation (as a
  religious rite), Sin, Supreme beings, Tolerance, Totem, Totemism,
  Unbelief

Remorse, i. 105-107, 123-125, 136;
  absence of, in criminals, i. 90 n. ^1;
  a cause of suicide, i. 106, ii. 233

Repentance, i. 105-107, 123-125;
  as a ground for forgiveness, i. 84-88, 99, 311, 318, ii. 360, 735;
  adequate, deemed impossible in the case of blasphemy, ii. 640

Repetition of an offence, i. 186, 187, 189, 257, 306, 311, 312,
318, ii. 7

Reptiles, aversion to eating, ii. 324

Requisitions, military, ii. 27

Resentment, i. 21-93;
  towards animals, i. 26, 27, 251-260, 264, 308, 316;
  towards inanimate things, i. 26, 27, 260-264, 315;
  the phenomena which call forth, i. 315-318

----, sympathetic, i. 111-116, 169, 179, 180, 185, 372, 373, 429,
433, 524, 533, 559, 560, 659, 714 _sq._, ii. 52, 109, 112, 113,
140, 166, 176, 185, 262, 266, 496, 528, 580, 661;
  in animals, i. 112, ii. 52

Rest, ii. 283-289, 747

Retaliation, moral valuation of, i. 73-79. See Punishment, Revenge

Retributive emotions, i. 21-99;
  the phenomena which call forth, i. {859} 314-319;
  not determined by the cognition of free-will, i. 322, 326

Retributive kindly emotion, i. 21, 93-99;
  in animals, i. 94;
  the phenomena which call forth, i. 318 _sq._;
  sympathetic, i. 117, 129

Revenge, taken upon animals, i. 26, 27, 251-253, 255, 256, 258;
  upon inanimate things, i. 26, 27, 260-263;
  regarded as a duty, i. 73 _sq._;
  condemned, i. 73-79;
  demanded by public opinion, i. 176 _sq._;
  regulated by the rule of equivalence, i. 177-180;
  succeeded by punishment, i. 180-185;
  believed to be taken by animals upon men, i. 252, 258, ii. 491,
  497. 500, 502, 504, 603;
  taken upon offenders caught _flagrante delicto_, i. 290-294,
  ii. 8, 13, 17, 429, 447;
  not to be taken upon a guest, i. 576, 587 _sq._;
  taken for injuries inflicted upon guests, i. 577 _sq._;
  suicide as a method of taking, ii. 233, 234, 242-245;
  supposed to be taken by the dead upon the living, ii. 530, 531,
  548, 576;
  taken by the living upon the dead, ii. 692 _sq._;
  supposed to be taken by ghosts upon other ghosts, ii. 693 _sq._
  See Blood-revenge

----, the feeling of, its nature and origin, i. 21-42;
  in animals, i. 37 _sq._;
  appeased by repentance, i. 87, 88, 318;
  attributed to gods, i. 194, 198, 438-440, 471 _sq._, ii. 660,
  661, 667, 668, 702, 714;
  to the souls of murdered persons, i. 232, 372, 375, 376, 378
  379, 406, 476, 481 _sq._, ii. 559 _sq._;
  to the dead, ii. 530, 531, 534;
  a motive for committing suicide, ii. 233, 234, 242-245;
  a motive for cannibalism, ii. 557-559

Rewards, vicarious, i. 96-99;
  a source of moral approval, i. 117;
  public, i. 166 _sq._;
  in a future existence, see Future life

Rice, abstinence from, after a death, ii. 301

"Right," analysis of the concept, i. 137-139;
  the relation between "good" and, i. 146 _sq._

"Rights," analysis of the concept, i. 139-141

Rivers, human sacrifices offered to, i. 452-454

Robbery, i. 187-189, ii. 1-27, 57-69;
  distinguished from theft, ii. 16, 17, 58;
  of tombs, ii. 518, 519, 540 _sq._;
  of temples, ii. 627;
  refuge denied to persons guilty of, ii. 633.
  See Stealing


SABBATH, the Jewish, i. 187, ii. 286-289, 718, 747;
  originally a fast-day, ii. 310 _sq._

Sacramental grace, considered necessary for salvation, ii. 719 _sq._

Sacred places, polluted persons prohibited from entering, i. 58,
ii. 294, 415 _sq._;
  shedding of human blood prohibited in, i. 380, ii. 635;
  women excluded from, i. 664 _sq._;
  sexual intercourse prohibited in, ii. 416, 752;
  fear of disturbing the peace in, ii. 635 _sq._
  See Asylums

Sacrifice, ii. 611-626;
  transference of evil combined with a, i. 62-65;
  vicarious expiatory, i. 65-70, 438-440;
  purification preparatory to, i. 380, ii. 294, 352, 353, 358,
  359, 415;
  connection between alms giving and, i. 565-569, ii. 550-552;
  as a means of transferring curses, i. 586 _sq._, ii. 618-624, 658;
  as a reception ceremony, i. 591, ii. 621;
  women prohibited from offering a, i. 664 _sq._;
  fasting in connection with, ii. 294-298;
  fasting the survival of an expiatory, ii. 316-318;
  asceticism in some other instances the survival of an earlier,
  ii. 359;
  oaths taken in connection with a, ii. 621 _sq._;
  connected with prayer, ii. 655 _sq._;
  importance of, ii. 705, 707-712, 714, 716, 718.
  See Human sacrifice, Offerings to the dead

Sacrificial victims, magic virtue ascribed to, i. 63, 65, 69,
444-447, ii. 563, 625, 658;
  looked upon as guardian spirits, i. 464 _sq._;
  as messengers, i. 465 _sq._, ii. 618;
  privilege granted to, i. 585 n. ^1;
  must be free from pollution, ii. 295, 296, 419

Sacrilege, punished with death, i. 188, 197, 439, 492;
  refuge denied to persons guilty of, ii. 633;
  if committed by foreigners, ii. 648

Sago, abstinence from, after a death, ii. 301

Saints, oaths taken at the shrines of, i. 59 _sq._, ii. 120;
  diseases cured by contact with, i. 63;
  lunatics regarded as, i. 270 _sq._;
  curses pronounced by, i. 563, 622;
  _l-[(]âr_ (implying {860} the transference of a conditional curse)
  made upon, i. 566, ii. 584, 585, 618, 619, 636, 638;
  robbed of their holiness, i. 586, ii. 608;
  compacts made at the shrines of, i. 587, ii. 623 _sq._;
  old men regarded as, i. 619;
  looked upon as guardians of property, ii. 67 _sq._;
  the saliva of, ii. 322;
  ceremonial cleanliness required of those who approach the
  shrines of, ii. 416, 418, 752;
  sexual intercourse with, ii. 444, 488;
  places of striking appearance associated with, ii. 589, 627;
  miracles performed by, ii. 590-592;
  gifts offered to, ii. 619;
  offerings to, participate in their sanctity, i. 445 _sq._, ii. 625;
  sacredness of the shrines of, ii. 627, 628, 635;
  lunacy attributed to the resentment of, ii. 628;
  their shrines asylums, ii. 628, 635, 636, 638;
  persons attached to the shrines of, ii. 635;
  unconcerned about the worldly morality of their devotees, ii. 669;
  invoked by thieves, ii. 669

Salmon, abstinence from eating, after a death, ii. 306 _sq._

Salutations, i. 590-592, ii. 146, 147, 149-151

Sanctuary, the right of. See Asylums

Scalping, i. 333, 375, ii. 525

Scape-goats, i. 53-55, 61-65

Scientific research, ii. 133-136

Scourging, as a religious rite, ii. 294, 357-359

Sea, human sacrifices offered to the, i. 452-454

Self-approval, i. 105-107, 123

-----defence, i. 288-290;
  lying in, ii. 92, 94, 97-101, 103-106, 112

-----mortification, ii. 281, 315-318, 355-363, 421

-----mutilation, after a death, i. 26, 27, 476, ii. 524, 528,
544, 545, 547;
  as a religious rite, i. 470 _sq._, ii. 357

Self-regarding duties and virtues, ii. 265-268

-----regarding pride, respect for other men's, ch. xxxii. (ii.
137-152);
  in men, i. 23, 24, 30, 38-40, 94, 179, 315, ii. 110, 137-140;
  a cause of suicide, ii. 73, 139, 140, 231-233, 243;
  in animals, i. 39, ii. 137 _sq._;
  attributed to the dead, ii. 519;
  to gods, ii. 639-655

-----reproach, i. 105-107, 123-125

-----respect, ii. 265

Self-sacrifice, i. 213, 214, 565, ii. 154, 265, 359

Seniority, respect for, i. 605, 606, 614, 615, 619, 626, ii. 703

Sensuous pleasures, condemnation of, ii. 291, 292, 361-363

Sentiment, i. 110 n. ^3

Separation, judicial, ii. 397, 455

Serfdom, i. 701-704;
  as a punishment, ii. 19;
  strangers reduced to, ii. 24;
  shipwrecked persons reduced to, ii. 25

Serfs, bodily injuries inflicted upon, i. 524 n. ^3;
  proprietary rights or in capacities of, i. 701 _sq._, ii. 32;
  intermarriage between freewomen and, ii. 379

Serpents, worship of, ii. 590.
  See Snakes

Seven, the number, ii. 311 _sq._

Seventh day, the, ii. 286-289. See Sabbath

Sexual impulse, the, in males, i. 657, ii. 435 _sq._;
  in females, i. 657 _sq._, ii. 435;
  connection between religious feelings and, ii. 375 n. ^3;
  regarded as sinful in the unmarried, ii. 432;
  associated with affection, ii. 439 _sq._, see Conjugal affection

---- intercourse, between man and beast, i. 253 _sq._, ii. 409, 749;
  manslayers temporarily prohibited from, i. 375, 377;
  abstinence from, with women who are pregnant or who suckle a
  child, i. 399, ii. 388, 391;
  with strangers, i. 575, 593, ii. 444-446;
  with holy persons, i. 593 n. ^1, ii. 444, 488;
  abstained from after a death, ii. 306;
  abstained from during the month of Rama[d.]ân, ii. 313;
  abstinence from, a means of propitiating or pleasing the deity,
  ii. 358, 420 _sq._;
  as a magical or religious rite, ii. 395, 443-446, 488;
  between a man and a married woman, ii. 397, 447-455;
  between a married man and a woman, ii. 397, 451-455;
  forbidden to priests and priestesses, ii. 405-409, 412-414, 418-421;
  to monks and nuns, ii. 409, 412;
  considered impure, ii. 410, 411, 414-420, 752;
  regarded as a consequence of Adam's sin, ii. 411;
  supposed to have been originally free from all carnal desire,
  ii. 411 n. ^4;
  supposed to take place between gods and women, ii. 412 _sq._;
  the future state of persons {861} who have refrained from, ii.
  414 _sq._;
  danger attributed to, ii. 415, 446;
  prohibited in sacred places, ii. 416, 752;
  abstained from in connection with religious observances, ii.
  416-420, 736, 752;
  admission into priesthood preceded by abstinence from, ii. 419;
  regarded as a transmitter of hereditary sin, ii. 421;
  between unmarried persons, ii. 422-446, 675, 747;
  between persons of the same sex, ch. xliii. (ii. 456-489), 752 _sq._;
  between animals of the same sex, ii. 456, 466, 475 n. ^2;
  temporarily forbidden to men who have eaten human flesh, ii. 575.
  See Adultery, Incest, _Jus primæ noctis_, Sodomy

Sexual inversion, congenital, ii. 465-467;
  acquired, ii. 467-470

Shame, putting offenders to, i. 170;
  a cause of suicide, ii. 233

Shaving, as a means of purification, ii. 294 _sq._

Sheep, stealing of, i. 187 _sq._, ii. 14;
  abstinence from killing, for food, ii. 330.
  See Mutton

Shipwrecked persons, sacrifice of, i. 467;
  treatment of, ii. 25, 37 _sq._

Sick persons, killing or abandoning of, i. 391-393, ii. 542;
  kind treatment of, i. 546-548;
  suicide committed by, ii. 232;
  unkindness to, punished by the supreme being, ii. 672.
  See Disease

Sin, collective responsibility in the case of, i. 48-57, 61-72;
  prayers for remission of, i. 49, 54, 55, 228 _sq._, ii. 654,
  655, 702, 707;
  materialistic conception and transference of, i. 52-57, 61-65,
  70, 71, 85, 86, 407, ii. 256 n. ^2, 654 _sq._;
  committed accidentally or unknowingly, i. 227-231, 233-235;
  the sense of, ii. 361;
  sexual intercourse regarded as a transmitter of hereditary, ii. 421

Sister, the elder, respect for, i. 605, 606, 614;
  swearing by, i. 606;
  curses of, i. 626, ii. 703

Slander, ii. 96, 98, 140-142, 700

Slavery, ch. xxvii. (i. 670-716);
  as a punishment for crime, i. 45, 46, 494, 518, 675, 676, 681,
  682, 685, 688-691, ii. 7, 8, 12, 13, 74;
  a cause of suicide, ii. 233, 235, 241;
  produces contempt for manual labour, ii. 272, 273, 278

Slaves, sacrificed to gods, i. 66, 452, 455, 456, 467 _sq._;
  to dead persons, i. 472, 474, 486, ii. 234;
  killing of, i. 378, 421-429, 696, 707;
  of free men by, i. 429, 430, 491 n. ^5;
  refuge denied to, i. 427;
  granted to, i. 690, 692, 696, ii. 637;
  not allowed as witnesses, i. 429, 697;
  bodily injuries inflicted upon, i. 515-518, 524, 677, 707;
  upon freemen by, i. 516-518;
  corporal punishment inflicted upon, i. 522-524;
  children sold as, by their parents, i. 599, 607, 609, 611, 612,
  615, 675, 681, 682, 684, 685, 689, 691 _sq._;
  curses of, i. 716;
  proprietary rights and incapacities of, i. 677, 684, 688, 690,
  697, ii. 28, 31-33, 57;
  rules of inheritance relating to, i. 679, ii. 46 _sq._;
  addicted to falsehood, ii. 113, 129 _sq._;
  insults offered by, ii. 142 _sq._;
  offered to, ii. 143;
  marriages between free men and, ii. 379;
  treatment of the dead bodies of, ii. 527, 549;
  eaten, ii. 559 567;
  cursed by their masters, ii. 703

Snakes, abstinence from eating, ii. 324.
  See Serpents

Social affection, i. 94, 95, 112-114, 559, ii. 197, 198, 226-228

---- aggregates, the evolution of, ii. 198-226

Socialism, ii. 69-71

Society, the birthplace of the moral consciousness, i. 117-123

Sodomy, i. 188, ii. 460, 465 n. ^2, 474-476, 479-483, 486-489.
  See Homosexual love

Solstices, fasting at, ii. 309 _sq._
  See Midsummer customs

_Soma_, ii. 591, 592, 707 _sq._

Son, sacrificed to save the life of his father, i. 455 _sq._;
  the parents' or father's consent required for the marriage of
  the, i. 607-609, 613, 615-618, 624 _sq._;
  mother committing suicide on the death of her only, ii. 244 n. ^3;
  allowed to eat only certain foods after the death of his
  father, ii. 301 _sq._
  See Children, Firstborn, Primogeniture, Ultimogeniture

Sorrow expressions of, ii. 283, 308, 316, 528

Soul, the immateriality of the, ii. 595 _sq._
  See Annihilation, Dead, Future Life, Future state, Transmigration

{862} Spiders, prohibition of killing white, ii. 490

Spirits, evil. See Evil spirits

"Spiritual relationship," a bar to inter-marriage, ii. 369, 377

Spitting, superstitions relating to, i. 588, 594, ii. 65, 151,
209, 322, 546 n. ^2, 636 _sq._

State, the, as a social unit, ii. 221-226;
  its influence on the smaller units of which it was composed, i.
  627 _sq._, ii. 222 _sq._;
  suicide regarded as a wrong against, ii. 248, 253, 259, 263;
  celibacy regarded as a wrong against, ii. 404

Stealing, ii. 1-27, 57-69;
  of horses**, cattle, or sheep, i. 187 _sq._, ii. 14;
  from houses, i. 187 _sq._, ii. 15, 16, 58, see Burglary;
  of letters, i. 188;
  of food, i. 286, 287, 676, ii. 14, 15, 57 _sq._;
  at night, i. 289, ii. 16, 58;
  self-defence in the case of, i. 289 _sq._;
  persons who are caught, i. 293. 294. 311, ii. 8, 13, 17-19, 58;
  punishment inflicted on the offending member in the case of, i.
  311, 312, 521 n. ^1, ii. 9, 13;
  from relatives, ii. 53 _sq._ n. ^4;
  punished by supernatural beings, ii. 59-69, 669, 675-677, 679,
  684, 686, 699, 700, 705, 714, 717, 732;
  curses pronounced to punish or prevent, ii. 62-69, 703;
  adultery regarded as a form of, ii. 449 _sq._;
  from tombs, ii. 518, 519, 540 _sq._;
  of property belonging to gods, ii. 626 _sq._

Stimulants, religious veneration of, ii. 591

Storks, abstinence from killing, ii. 490

Strangers, protected by the chief or king, i. 180, 181, 338;
  killing of, i. 331-334, 337-34, 370, 371, 373;
  sacrificed, i. 467 _sq._;
  infliction of bodily injuries upon, i. 519;
  kindness to, i. 556-558, see Hospitality;
  blessings of, i. 581-584, ii. 446;
  regarded as semi-supernatural beings, i. 583 _sq._;
  supposed to be versed in magic, i. 584;
  the evil eye of, i. 584, 591-593;
  curses of, i. 584-594, ii. 715, 732;
  reception of, i. 590-592, ii. 621;
  gifts of, i. 593 _sq._;
  sexual intercourse with, i. 593, ii. 444-446;
  enslaving of, i. 674, 675, 689, 690, 691, 714 _sq._;
  respect for the proprietary rights of, ii. 2, 11, 59;
  robbery committed upon, ii. 20-25, 58 _sq._;
  reduced to serfdom, ii. 24;
  rules of inheritance relating to, ii. 49;
  deceiving of, ii. 87, 88, 90, 94, 97, 112, 126-129;
  politeness to, ii. 152;
  duties to, ii. 166;
  despised, ii. 171-174, 532;
  disregard of their interests, ii. 176;
  antipathy to, ii. 227;
  marriages with, ii. 378, 381 _sq._;
  treatment of departed, ii. 525, 548 _sq._;
  eaten, ii. 554;
  sacrilege committed by, ii. 648.
  See Hospitality

Stratagems, ii. 106, 107, 112

Suicide, ch. xxxv. (**ii. 229-264);
  punished with forfeiture of property, i. 47, ii. 254;
  prompted by remorse, i. 106, ii. 233;
  of daughters, i. 473;
  of widows, i. 473 _sq._, ii. 232, 234, 235, 241, 242, 244, 247;
  caused by wounded pride, ii. 73, 139, 140, 231-233,
  243;
  the future state of persons who have committed, ii. 235-239,
  242-244, 246, 253, 262, 694, 710

Sun, fasting in connection with the, ii. 309, 310, 312 _sq._

---- gods, appealed to in oaths, ii. 121 _sq._;
  regarded as judges, ii. 698, 699, 703

Sunday, as a day of rest, ii. 288 _sq._;
  a cause of drunkenness, ii. 343 _sq._

Supernatural, the, ii. 582-584

---- beings, the belief in, ch. xlvii. (ii. 582-601);
  disease supposed to be caused by, i. 392 _sq._, ii. 593;
  curses personified and elevated to the rank of, i. 60, 379,
  482, 561, 585, 623, 624, 626, ii. 68, 116, 715, 732;
  fear of mentioning the names of, ii. 640-642;
  distinction between offences committed against gods and
  offences against other, ii. 661 _sq._
  See Animals (killing of sacred), Erinyes, Evil spirits,
  Goddesses, Gods, Guardian spirits, _Jinn_, Saints, Supreme beings,
  Totem

"Superobligatory, the," i. 151-154

Suppliants. See Asylums, _L-[(]âr_

Supreme beings in savage beliefs, ii. 670-687

Swallows, prohibition of killing, ii. 490

Sympathetic feelings springing from association, i. 109 _sq._

---- magic. See Magic, sympathetic

{863} Sympathetic resentment. See Resentment, sympathetic

---- retributive kindly emotion. See Retributive kindly emotion,
sympathetic

Sympathy, i. 109-111;
  for animals, ii. 494-506, 510-514.
  See Affection, Altruistic sentiment


TABOO, i. 197, 233, ii. 63-66, 583, 584, 675

Talion. See Equivalence, the rule of

Testation, ii. 43, 53. See Wills

Thank offerings, i. 441, ii. 615 _sq._

Theft. See Stealing

Thrift, ii. 265

Throne, the Royal, regarded as holy, ii. 608, 754

Thunder, religious veneration of, ii. 587, 592

Tigers, abstinence from the flesh of, ii. 321;
  their fear of strange phenomena, ii. 583

Toads, fear of killing, ii. 491

Tobacco, religious veneration of, ii. 591

Tolerance, religious, ii. 647-653

Tombs, theft or violation committed at, ii. 518, 519, 525, 540 _sq._;
  places of refuge, ii. 630

Tomb-stones, ii. 544, 546

Tortoises, prohibition of eating, ii. 321

Torture, infliction of death by, i. 186-188, 190;
  judicial, i. 523 _sq._

Totem, eating of the, i. 227, ii. 210, 211, 323, 324, 606;
  killing of the, ii. 210, 603, 604, 606;
  regardful treatment of the, ii. 490

Totemism, as a social tie, ii. 210-213;
  represented as the source of the prohibition of incest, ii.
  376, 376 _sq._ n. ^7, 377 n. ^1, 747;
  believed to be instituted by the All-father, ii. 671

Tournaments, i. 354 _sq._

Trade, moral valuation of, ii. 274, 276, 278-280, 282

Transference, of blessings, see Blessings;
  of curses, see Curses;
  of disease, see Disease;
  of evil, see Evil;
  of holiness, see Holiness;
  of the holiness temporarily seated in the ruling sovereign, ii.
  607-610, 753 _sq._;
  of magic virtue ascribed to sacrificial victims, i. 69,
  444-447, ii. 563, 624 _sq._;
  of magic virtue, by sexual intercourse, i. 593, ii. 444-446, 488;
  by eating or by contact, ii. 562-564, 605, 606, 625;
  of merits, see Merits;
  of qualities inherent in animals, men, or man-gods, by eating
  their flesh or drinking their blood, ii. 320, 333, 334, 560-564;
  of sin, see Sin;
  of the souls of divine kings, ii. 606, 607, 753 _sq._;
  of virtue, see Virtue

Transmigration of human souls, into animals, ii. 324, 328, 338,
490, 496, 500, 504, 516, 517, 693, 709 _sq._;
  into trees, ii. 516

Treason, punishment of, i. 45-48, 187-189, 492, ii. 558;
  judicial torture in cases of, i. 523

Trees, revenge taken upon, i. 26, 27, 260-263;
  transmigration of human souls into, ii. 516

Tribe, the, ii. 202, 217-219, 222 _sq._

Tribes, associations of, ii. 220 _sq._

Tribunals among savages, i. 173-175

Truce of God, the, i. 356 _sq._

Truth and good faith, regard for, ch. xxx. _sq._ (ii. 72-136);
  gods as guardians of, ii. 96, 114-123, 128, 129, 669, 672,
  675-677, 684, 686, 699, 700, 703-705, 707, 711, 714, 717, 726, 732

Turtle, abstinence from eating, ii. 319, 333

Twilight, prohibition of eating, travelling, and sleeping during,
ii. 309

Twins, i. 395, 396, 408, 460


ULTIMOGENITURE, ii. 46, 48, 56

Unbelief, ii. 644-646, 705;
  as a subject of moral judgment, i. 216;
  considered a legitimate cause of war, i. 339, 349-352, 359;
  the right to bodily integrity influenced by, i. 520;
  a cause of uncharitableness, i. 557, 696;
  a ground for enslaving captives, i. 686, 695;
  the valuation of theft or robbery influenced by, ii. 20, 25;
  does not justify breach of faith, ii. 93;
  a legitimate ground for deceiving an enemy, ii. 94;
  a bar to intermarriage, ii. 380 _sq._;
  homosexual practices associated with, ii. 486-489;
  the right to life influenced by, ii. 705;
  the future state influenced by, ii. 719-721, 725-727

Unchastity, ch. xlii. _sq._ (ii. 422-489);
  of unmarried persons, supposed to incur divine punishment, i.
  49, ii. 675;
  forbidden to priests and priestesses, ii. 406-409, 412-414, 419 _sq._;
  to monks and nuns, ii. {864} 409, 412;
  to persons who wish to become priests or priestesses, ii. 419;
  supposed to injure the harvest, ii. 417, 747;
  celibacy a cause of, ii. 432

Uncle, children in the power of their maternal, i. 597 _sq._

Uncleanliness, ii. 348-356

Uncleanness. See Pollution

Unearned income, ii. 70 _sq._

Unintentional injuries, i. 217-240, 315, 316, 319, ii. 714;
  benefits, i. 318 _sq._

Unnatural love. See Homosexual love

_Usucapio_, ii. 40


VAMPIRES, i. 476, ii. 564, 709

Veal, considered unwholesome, ii. 332

Vegetarianism, ii. 335-338, 499

Venison, abstinence from, ii. 320

Veracity. See Truth, regard for

Vermin, revenge taken upon, i. 26, 27, 251;
  regard for, ii. 492, 493, 498 _sq._

Vestal virgins, i. 439, 453, ii. 407, 408, 637 _sq._

"Vice," analysis of the concept, i. 134

Village communities, ii. 200-202, 213, 214, 216, 219

Violent death, the future state of persons who have died a, i.
481 _sq._, ii. 237-239, 242

Virginity, required of priestesses, ii. 406-408;
  religious veneration of, 409-411, 429;
  not required of a bride, ii. 422-424, 440, 441, 444-446;
  required of unmarried women, ii. 424-442;
  the preference given by men to, ii. 434-437, 440

"Virtue," analysis of the concept, i. 147-150

Virtue, transference of, i. 98

Vivisection, ii. 510, 512, 514

Volitions, as subjects of moral judgments, i. 202-210;
  as a source of non-moral retributive emotions, i. 314-319

---- absence of, a subject of moral judgment, i. 210-214;
  a cause of non-moral retributive emotions, i. 317-319


WAGER of battle, i. 306, 504-507

War, i. 331-382;
  provoked by a homicide, i. 33;
  humanity towards enemies in, i. 335, 336, 342-344, 369, 370,
  558, ii. 711;
  private, i. 355-358;
  human sacrifices offered in, i. 440, 441, 447 n. ^5, 449;
  ending in a duel, i. 497 _sq._;
  destruction of property in, ii. 25 _sq._;
  seizure of property in, ii. 26, 27, 38, 58 _sq._;
  deceit in, ii. 94, 106-108, 112;
  the future state of persons who have fallen in, ii. 237, 521,
  694, 697, 704, 708;
  burial of persons who have fallen in, ii. 239;
  considered a nobler occupation than labour, ii. 272-274, 278, 282;
  fasting after a reverse in, ii. 315;
  a cause of polygyny, ii. 389, 391;
  prevalence of homosexual love among peoples addicted to, ii.
  467, 479, 752

War, prisoners of, treatment of, i. 336, 343, 422;
  sacrificed to gods, i. 339, 441, 450, 452, 467;
  to the dead, i. 472, 474;
  bodily injuries inflicted upon, i. 519 _sq._;
  enslaved, i. 674, 675, 677, 681-686, 688-691, 695, 701, 715;
  ransom accepted for, i. 701;
  eaten, ii. 554, 561, 578

Water, human sacrifices offered for the purpose of getting
drinking, i. 451 _sq._

White men, atrocities committed by, among coloured peoples, i.
370 _sq._;
  coloured persons not accepted as witnesses against, i. 429;
  their demoralising influence upon savages, i. 548, 549, 571
  _sq._, ii. 2, 126-129, 424, 735;
  injuries inflicted by coloured persons upon, i. 713 _sq._;
  prohibited from marrying coloured persons, i. 714;
  looked down upon by savages, ii. 171 _sq._;
  taken for spirits, ii. 590

Widowers, suicide committed by, ii. 232, 233, 235 _sq._;
  fasting of, ii. 299-301;
  second marriages of, prohibited or condemned, ii. 412, 451

Widows, sacrifice of, i. 472-474, ii. 450 _sq._;
  suicide committed by, i. 473 _sq._, ii. 232, 234, 235, 241,
  242, 244, 247;
  prohibited from remarrying, i. 475, ii. 450 _sq._;
  rules of inheritance relating to, ii. 45, 47 55 _sq._;
  fasting of, ii. 298-301;
  priests forbidden to marry, ii. 412, 420

Will, the, as the subject of moral judgment, ch. ix. (i.
217-248), i. 214-216, 310-314;
  as a cause of non-moral retributive emotions, i. 315, 319.
  See Free-will

{865} Wills, ii. 43, 53;
  the sacredness attached to, ii. 519, 541, 552

Wine, superstitious notions concerning, i. 278, 281, ii. 344,
345, 591 _sq._;
  prohibition of, ii. 341-345;
  after a death, ii. 302, 305;
  in honour of the sun, ii. 312

Wishes, deliberate, as subjects of moral judgments, i. 206 _sq._

Witchcraft, ii. 649-652;
  punishment of, i. 45, 189, 190, 492, ii. 650-652.
  See Magic

Witches, lunatics burned as, i. 273;
  old women regarded as, i. 620;
  addicted to homosexual practices, ii. 484 n. ^1;
  the custom of swimming, ii. 690.
  See Witchcraft

Wives, the subjection of, ch. xxvi. (i. 629-669);
  punished if convicted of a design to kill their husbands, i. 245;
  crimes committed by, in the presence of their husbands, i. 284;
  husbands killing their, i. 418, 419, 631;
  killing their husbands, i. 419 _sq._;
  acquired by duels, i. 499, 500, 503;
  husbands inflicting bodily injuries upon their, i. 514-516, 631;
  the duty of husbands to protect and support their, i. 526-529,
  532 _sq._;
  lending of, to guests or others, i. 575, 593, ii. 752;
  cursed by their husbands, i. 626;
  sold as slaves by their husbands, i. 675, 684;
  proprietary rights and incapacities of, i. 632, 637-641, 643,
  645, 661, ii. 28-31, 41, 57;
  belief in a mysterious bond of sympathy between husbands and,
  ii. 205;
  suicide committed by husbands on the death of their, ii. 232,
  233, 235 _sq._;
  fasting of husbands on the death of their, ii. 299-301;
  adultery committed by, ii. 397, 447-455;
  of gods, ii. 412-414;
  priests forbidden to marry divorced, ii. 420;
  exchange of, ii. 752;
  eaten by their husbands, ii. 555.
  See Conjugal affection, Marriage, Widows

Wizards. See Magicians

Wolf's flesh, abstinence from, ii. 320, 322, 327

Women, the position of, ch. xxvi. (i. 629-669);
  rape committed upon, i. 187, 188, 290, 311, 521, ii. 437, 438,
  633, 679;
  punished by being burned alive, i. 188;
  treatment of, in war, i. 335, 336, 342, 343, 369 _sq._;
  killing of, i. 418-421;
  not allowed to be beaten, i. 514;
  the evil eye of, i. 592;
  regarded as versed in magic, especially when old, i. 620, 666-668;
  the occupations of, i. 633-637;
  the sexual impulse of, i. 657 _sq._, ii. 435;
  ideas held about, i. 661-669, ii. 192;
  the future state of, i. 662 _sq._, ii. 673;
  of such as have died in child-birth, ii. 238 n. ^3, 678;
  menstruous, i. 663; ii. 307 n. ^2, 538 n. ^2, 586;
  regarded as unclean, i. 663-666, ii. 538 n. ^2;
  forbidden to enter sacred places, i. 664, 665, **ii. 752;
  to offer sacrifices, i. 664 _sq._;
  to pray, i. 664, 667 n. ^1;
  curses of, i. 668;
  serving as asylums, i. 668 _sq._;
  proprietary rights and incapacities of, i. 661, ii. 28-30, 41, 57;
  rules of inheritance relating to, ii. 44, 45, 47, 48, 55;
  addicted to falsehood, ii. 76, 113;
  to suicide, ii. 232;
  politeness to, ii. 152;
  certain foods forbidden to, ii. 320 sq.;
  celibacy and continence of religious, ii. 406-414, 419-421;
  married to gods, ii. 412-414;
  chastity of unmarried, i. 49, ii. 422-446, 675;
  coyness of, ii. 435 _sq._;
  homosexual practices between, ii. 464, 465, 752;
  the lack of accessible women a cause of homosexual practices
  between men, ii. 466 _sq._;
  their mental inferiority a cause of pederasty, ii. 470 _sq._;
  treatment of the dead bodies of, ii. 526, 527, 549;
  forbidden to eat human flesh, ii. 554, 555 n., 573, 575;
  refuge denied to kidnappers of, ii. 633.
  See Daughters, Mother, Wives, Widows

Work. See Labour

World, renunciation of the, ii. 361-363

"Wrong," analysis of the concept, i. 134


YOUNG PERSONS, certain foods forbidden to, ii. 319 _sq._
  See Children, young


THE END


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY R. CLAY AND SONS, LTD.,
BRUNSWICK STREET, STAMFORD STREET, S.E., AND BUNGAY,
SUFFOLK.




The Origin and Development
of the
Moral Ideas

BY EDWARD WESTERMARCK, PH.D., LL.D.


_SOME PRESS OPINIONS ON VOL. I._

ATHENÆUM.--

"The first attempt to deal with the subject of the evolution of
human morality in the concrete on a scale at all corresponding to
its complexity and sheer bulk. . . . This book remains an
achievement unsurpassed in its own kind, a perpetual monument of
the courage, the versatility, and the amazing industry of its
author."


R. R. Marett, in MIND.--

"Dr. Westermarck's work fills me with profound admiration. . . .
There is no book in any language that deals concretely with the
evolution of morality on so grand a scale or in so authoritative
a way."


Havelock Ellis, in THE JOURNAL OF MENTAL SCIENCE.--

"Throughout marked by an extraordinary degree of erudition which
never becomes pedantic, by an invariably fair-minded and
well-balanced attitude towards difficult problems, and by a power
of broad and lucid presentation which recalls Buckle."


Q. C. Wheeler, in REVUE DE DROIT INTERNATIONAL.--

"Une des contributions les plus importantes à la sociologie qui
aient été produites pendant les dernières années. . . . Cet
ouvrage aura pour effet de rendre presque impossible toute étude
scientifique de la morale sur les anciennes bases."


Franz Oppenheimer, in DAS BLAUBUCH.--

"Ein neues Buch von Edward Westermarck bedeutet ein
soziologisches Ereignis. Westermarck, das heisst: profundestes
ethnographisches Wissen, meisterhaft beherrscht durch ordnenden
Verstand und durchleuchtet von schürfster Kritik und
spürkräftigster Psychologie. Wie seine 'Geschichte der Ehe' ein
_standard work_ der Gesellschaftslehre bleiben wird, als
dasjenige Buch, das zum erstenmal eines der schwierigsten Gebiete
des menschlichen Zusammenlebens auf brietester Grundlage
schilderte und erklärte, so wird auch dieses zweite mächtige
Werk, dessen erster Band uns jetzt vorliegt, auf lange Zeit
hinaus zu den Grundsteinen der werdenden Wissenschaft von
Menschen gehören."


PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW.--

"Altogether it is perhaps safe to say that the work is the most
important contribution to ethical literature within recent years."


W. R. Sorley, in THE BOOKMAN.--

"Dr. Westermarck is the only writer who can claim to have
systematically examined the whole of the evidence, and to have
produced a comprehensive treatise on the development of men's
ideas of good and evil. . . . He is to be congratulated on having
produced a standard work on a subject of first-rate importance.
It is distinguished alike by breadth of view and mastery of
detail, by skilful marshalling of evidence and by sound judgment."


NATURE.--

"The readers of his 'History of Human Marriage'--all of them his
debtors--were doubtless prepared for the vast array of footnotes,
the excellent way in which long series of facts are arranged, the
clearness of the style, the sanity and reasonableness of a work
which certainly was needed to keep ethical theory abreast of
anthropological research, and which will add greatly to its
author's reputation. . . . The account of the moral emotions, the
treatment of punishment (in which subtle arguments are offered
against determent as a sufficient guiding principle), the
discussion of the various distinctions suggested by terms like
act, agent, motive, intention, the detailed examination of the
facts advanced by such authorities as Lord Avebury, Dr. J. G.
Frazer, Dr. Steinmetz, are all excellent."


NORTHERN WHIG.--

"For learning and research the book is simply a marvel. . . . It
will be an authoritative book for many a day on the subjects with
which it deals."


L. T. Hobhouse, in TRIBUNE.--

"It has remained for Dr. Westermarck, a Finn writing in English,
to give to the English-speaking world the first comprehensive and
systematic account of the genesis of moral ideas on the basis of
a detailed survey of the customs of mankind. . . . It is not too
much to predict that it will mark the beginning of a new era in
the study of general sociology."


GUARDIAN.--

"This work, by the author of 'The History of Human Marriage,'
will undoubtedly take its place, and that a foremost place,
amongst the standard works on the subject of ethics. . . . The
width and depth of his learning will be recognised by every
reader, and will be utilised by many generations of
students."


DAILY NEWS.--

"A perfect graveyard of the hasty generalisations of his
predecessors."


CAMBRIDGE REVIEW.--

"The purpose of the present work is to arrange and examine all
the available evidence regarding the nature of men's moral
judgments and the kind of objects which they approve or condemn.
No one could be found more competent than Dr. Westermarck to
carry this great undertaking to a successful issue."


EXPOSITORY TIMES.--

"One of the greatest contributions of recent years to the study
of Comparative Religion."


S. Alexander, in THE SPEAKER.--

"Dr. Westermarck's book is without doubt of the first importance,
whether it be regarded as a philosophical treatise on ethics or
as a history of moral institutions. Neither of these descriptions
singly does justice to it, for its merit lies in its blending of
the analytical with the historical method, so that the long
history which begins in the second half of this volume and is to
be completed in the next volume, constitutes a continuous
verification of his main ethical thesis that moral disapprovals
und approvals arise from and express social indignation and
social gratitude. . . . I conclude by expressing my unqualified
admiration of Dr. Westermarck's work, which is worthy of the
years of labour he has bestowed upon it. Besides its scientific
importance it is recommended to readers by the unfailing interest
and lucidity of its manner."


UNIVERSITY REVIEW.--

"Dr. Westermarck belongs to no accepted school of moralists. He
endorses neither the humanist nor the religious views of society.
He is neither a utilitarian nor an intuitionalist. He is both an
anthropologist and a historian; he is also a sociologist and a
traveller. In neglected lands where he might escape from European
prejudices he has lived and studied the problems of the human
heart and mind, accumulating at first hand a mass of material
which throws much light on the origin and development of peculiar
customs and beliefs. This, added to a remark able erudition, a
scientific temper, a felicity and abundance of illustration, and
a clear and vigorous style, gives us a contribution to ethics,
psychology, and sociology which is undoubtedly of the first rank,
and, in our opinion, the most comprehensive and luminous work
which has yet been written on the subject."


GLOBE.--

"Both by the clarity and the philosophical insight of its
arguments, and the wide range of its investigations and
illustrative details, it will claim securely to rank among those
epoch-marking works which define the steady progress of mankind
in the study and understanding of its sociological developments."


PALL MALL GAZETTE.--

"The fuller consideration of Dr. Westermarck's book as a
philosophic treatise must wait; meanwhile we can only
congratulate him and the Duchy, of which he is so conspicuous an
ornament, on the production of a book that is really epoch-marking."


SCOTSMAN.--

"One of its prime characteristics is the skill with which it
traces out the historical connection between moral opinions and
magic and religious beliefs."


YORKSHIRE POST.--

"In Dr. Westermarck's hands a subject which might be impossibly
abstruse becomes almost as attractive as a romance. . . . In pure
philosophy he is to some extent a pioneer, and will have the
noble satisfaction of the pioneer in arousing doubt, interest,
and admiration."

       *       *       *       *       *


LONDON: MACMILLAN & CO., LTD.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note

This text combines the two separate volumes of Westermarck's
book into one file.

Footnotes have been renumbered sequentially through each chapter
and placed below the paragraph in which they occur.

Conventions for transcription of foreign languages, etc.

Page numbers

Page numbers are preserved in the text, and are placed inside curly
brackets with a space on each side, even if that means breaking some
other PG transcription guideline. Pages without a printed number (such
as initial pages of chapters) are left unmarked, even though the table
of contents etc. may refer to those particular pages.

Greek alphabet

Greek expressions are transliterated in normal PG style (upsilon always
as "u"), except that accents are marked thus, with symbols following
the Greek letter:
  acute /
  grave \
  circumflex ^

Breathings are marked thus, with symbols following the Greek letter:
  rough (
  smooth )

Other Non-English alphabetic symbols

The oe-ligature is written [oe].

Again, other non-standard symbols not in the basic ASCII range are
marked as usual in PG: the transcription is placed in square brackets;
marks above the basic letter are symbolised with a character preceding
the basic character, those beneath the letter with a character
following the basic character:
  Acute accent (or a similar mark on consonants) is marked with '
  Circumflex with ^
  Macron (long mark) with =
  Breve above a vowel (short mark) with )
  Inverted circumflex/breve below with v
  Dot with .

Westermarck uses some other unusual letters: this text uses "(" for the
transcription left half ring for Arabic ayin and for something like a
rough breathing above "w" in the name "E[(w]e".

Corrected text

Corrected text is marked with "**" preceding the correction (except for
volume 2, p. 234, footnote 31 where ** is the original text).

Corrections to the text:

Page                  Text of 2nd edition        Correction
ch. 2, p. 32 n. 57    Obaralbanien               Oberalbanien
ch. 7, p. 181 n. 89   _Du Boys_                  Du Boys
ch. 7, p. 195 n. 186  slove                      slave
ch. 9, p. 232         neglected                  neglectful
ch. 10, p. 260 n. 60  pr[oe]mio                  præmio
ch. 10, p. 262 text for n. 81 has no initial "
ch. 16, p. 381        has                        hast
ch. 18, p. 427 n. 65  Communtarii                Commentarii
ch. 18, p. 432        larcency                   larceny
ch. 19, p. 437 text for n. 28 has no final "
ch. 19, p. 451        Anthenians                 Athenians
ch. 19, p. 468 text for n. 251 has no final "
ch. 21, p. 502 text for n. 21 has no final "
ch  22, p. 517 n. 45  abuse                      abused
ch. 22, p. 521        memtioned                  mentioned
ch. 23, p. 531 n. 42  Magazin                    Magazine
ch. 23, p. 558 n. 254 Law is not italicised
ch. 24, p. 572 n. 11  the Discovery              Discovery
ch. 25, p. 601 text for n. 33 has no initial "
ch. 26, p. 634 n. 39  Globus is not italicised
ch. 29, p. 35 n. 3    tibes                      tribes
ch. 30, p. 74         text for n. 6 has no final "
ch. 30, p. 99 n. 256  100                        110
ch. 33, p. 166        m-dash                     .
ch. 35, p. 248 n. 151 Phædro                     Phædo
ch. 35, p. 257 n. 211 everbody                   everybody
ch. 35, p. 261        m-dash                     .
ch. 37, p. 301, n. 80 .                          ,
ch. 39, p. 349, n. 21 ,                          .
ch. 42, p. 422        text for n. 2 has no final "
ch. 43, p. 459 n. 6.  .                          ,
ch. 43, p. 487 n. 209 italics omitted from Sacred Books etc.
ch. 44, p. 498        n.,*                       n. *,
ch. 46, p. 553 n. 1                              ,
ch. 46, p. 555        If                         It
ch. 48, p. 618 n. 85  i                          1
ch. 51, p. 727        wordly                     worldly
ch. 52, p. 734        wordly                     worldly
Authorities, p. 786   Indan                      Indian
Authorities, p. 798   mosaich                    mosaisch
Authorities, p. 800   Reisin                     Reisen
Authorities, p. 826   Museun                     Museum
Authorities, p. 828   Soceity                    Society
Index, p. 828         London 1839                London, 1839
Index, p. 842         514                        515
Index, p. 844         n. ^2                      n. ^8
Index, p. 847         polution                   pollution
Index, p. 850         i.                         ii.
Index, p. 852 (twice)                            ii.
Index, p. 862         ;                          ,
Index, p. 862         i.                         ii.
Index, p. 865                                    ii.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Origin and Development of the
Moral Ideas, by Edward Westermarck

