CHAPTER XIII.

Sophereus discourses on the Nature and Origin of the Human Mind.


SOPHEREUS, in fulfillment of his intention expressed at their
last meeting, reads to the scientist the following


DISCOURSE ON THE NATURE AND ORIGIN OF THE HUMAN MIND.

I regard the mind as an organism, capable of anatomical examination, as
the body is, but of course by very different means. In the anatomical
examination of an animal organism we use our eye-sight to acquire
a knowledge of its component parts, its organs, and its structure,
by dissection of a dead or inspection of a living subject. But, in
studying the anatomy of mind, we have a subject that is beyond our
visual perception. It is not, however, beyond our examination. We carry
on that examination by means of the introspection which consciousness
enables us to have of our own minds, and by observing and comparing the
phenomena of mind as manifested in other persons. If these respective
means of investigation enable us to reach the conviction that in each
individual of the human race there is an existence of a spiritual
nature and another existence of a corporeal or physical nature, we
shall have attained this conclusion by observing the difference between
the two organisms. The fact that we can not detect the bond that unites
them while they are united should not lead us to doubt their distinct
existence as organisms of different natures, but made for a temporary
period to act on and with each other.

Before entering further into the subject, I will refer to some of the
terms which we are obliged to use in speaking of the nature of mind as
an organism, when contrasted with the nature of the physical organism.
We speak, for example, and from the want of another term we are obliged
to speak, of the substance of mind. But, while we thus speak of mind
in a term of matter, there is no implication that the subject of which
we speak is of the same nature as that which constitutes the physical
organism; nor is there any danger of the incorporation of materialistic
ideas with our ideas of the fabric of mind. On the contrary, the
very nature of the inquiry is whether that which constitutes mind is
something different from that which constitutes body; and, although in
speaking of both we use the term substance, we mean in the one case
organized matter, and in the other case organized spirit. There is a
very notable instance of a corresponding use of terms in the passage
of one of St. Paul's epistles, where he discourses on the doctrine
of the resurrection. According to my universal custom when I refer
to any of the writings regarded by the Christian world as sacred,
or inspired, I lay aside altogether the idea of a person speaking
by divine or any other authority. I cite the statement of St. Paul,
in its philosophical aspect, as an instance of the use of the term
body applied to each of the distinct organisms. His statement, or
assertion, or assumption--call it what you please--is, "If there is
a natural body, there is also a spiritual body";[139] he uses the
term _body_ in speaking of that which is natural, or of the earth,
earthy, and of that which is spiritual, or heavenly. Without following
him into the nature of the occurrence which he affirms is to take
place in the resurrection, the question is whether he was or was not
philosophically correct, in speaking of two kinds of organisms, one
composed of matter, and liable to corruption and dissolution, and the
other composed of spirit, indestructible and imperishable.

In order to be understood, he was obliged to use the term _body_ in
reference to both of these organisms, just as we are obliged to use the
term _substance_ when we speak of the subject of contemplation as a
physical or as a spiritual organism. Can this distinctness of nature be
predicated of the body and the mind of man before what we call death?

The peculiar occurrence which St. Paul so vigorously and vividly
describes as what is to happen at the resurrection, is a prophecy in
which he mingles with great force philosophical illustrations and the
information which he claims to have received from inspiration; or
things revealed to him by the Almighty through the Holy Spirit. He
expresses himself in terms level to the apprehension of those whom he
is addressing; and in this use of terms he does just what we do when we
speak of a natural body and a spiritual body. He puts the existence of
the natural body hypothetically:

"_If_ there is a natural body, there is also a spiritual body."[140]
Paraphrased as the whole passage may be, he says, "You well know that
there is a natural body, and I tell you that there is also a spiritual
body." Laying aside the mode in which the spiritual body is to be
manifested at and after the resurrection, we have to consider whether,
during this life, there is a bodily organism and a mental organism,
distinct in their natures, but united for a time by a bond which is
hidden from our detection.

I have used the term anatomy of the mind, from the same necessity which
compels me to speak of the substance of mind. You will understand
that, when I speak of anatomical examination of the mind, I mean
that analysis of its structure which we can make by the use of the
appropriate means, and which enables us to conceive that it is an
organized structure of a peculiar character.

The grand difficulty with Mr. Spencer's "Psychology" is, that after he
has made what he calls "the proximate components of mind" to consist
of "two broadly contrasted kinds--feelings and the relations between
feelings," which are mere impressions produced on the nerve-center by
molecular changes in the fluid or semi-fluid substance of the nerves,
he has not approached to a solution of the question whether there is or
is not a something to which these feelings and the relations between
them suggest ideas, and which holds ideas continuously for future use.

Thus he makes consciousness to consist in passing groups of feelings
and their relations, and not in a conscious subject. He denies that
there is any _ego_, in the sense in which every person is conscious
of a self, and maintains that the only substantive existence is the
unknown ligament which holds together the ever-changing states of
feelings and impressions produced in the nerve-center. There is a far
better method of investigation. It is to inquire into the fabric of the
mind as an organism, by determining whether mental phenomena justify
us in the conclusion that it is an organism. In this way we may reach
a satisfactory conclusion that the mind is a substantive existence,
possessing a uniform structure, of a character, however, fundamentally
different from the bodily structure; and in this way we may be able to
explain, wholly or in part, how the mind and the body act on and with
each other so long as the connection is maintained.

I am entirely free to acknowledge that, when I speak of the
substance of mind, or speak of it as an organism, I am and must
remain ignorant of the nature of its substance beyond the point where
its self-manifestations cease. But the question is, whether we are
not under an irresistible necessity of adopting as a postulate the
existence of a something which has certain inherent powers, and whether
the mental phenomena, the self-manifestations of those powers, do not
necessarily lead us to the conception and conviction that mind is a
substantive existence. I can not talk or think of consciousness apart
from a conscious subject, or of feelings without a subject that feels.
A thread of consciousness, or a series of feelings, conveys no meaning
to me, apart from a being who has the consciousness and perceives the
feelings.[141]

One very important question to be considered in all such investigations
is, Whether our experience does not teach us that we are mentally so
constituted that certain conceptions are necessary to us? Our mental
nature is placed under certain laws, as our physical or corporeal
nature is placed under certain other laws. One of these necessary
conceptions, which are imposed on us, as it seems to me, by a law of
our mental constitution, is a conception of the fundamental difference
between matter and spirit. In what way is it forced upon us that there
is a natural world and a spiritual world? The phenomena of matter
and the phenomena of mind are essentially different. In ourselves
they occur in conjunction, and they occur in disjunction. They are
manifested synchronously, and they are manifested separately in point
of time. The normal action of all the functions of the body is not
necessary to the action of the mind. The body may be prostrated by
disease, and the moment of its death may be at hand; yet the mind,
to the last moment of the physical life, may be unclouded, and its
manifestations may be as perfect as they ever were in the full health
and activity of the vital functions of the body. No one who stands at
a death-bed where this phenomenon occurs, and observes how completely
the mind is master of itself; how it holds in consciousness the past
and the present; how it essays to grasp the future for those whom it is
to leave and for itself, can easily escape the conviction that death
is nothing but the dissolution of the bond which has hitherto held
together the two existences that constituted the human being, one of
which is to be dissolved into its elemental and material substances,
and the other of which is to go elsewhere, intact and indestructible.

Let me now refer to what is taking place while I am writing this essay.
I have said that the phenomena of our bodily organism and the phenomena
of our mental organism may occur synchronously in the same individual.
The act of writing an original composition is an instance of this. The
action of certain organs of the body and the action of the mind are
simultaneous. In time, they can not be separated. In themselves, they
are separable and separate. The thought springing up in the mind may be
retained there, or may flow into language and be written by the hand
upon the page. No one can detect in himself any instant of time when
the mental formation of a sentence, or any clause of a sentence, as
he writes, is separable from the physical act of writing. In that not
very common, but still possible, feat of dictating to two amanuenses,
at what appears to be the same time, on two distinct subjects, there
is undoubtedly an appreciable interval, in which the mind passes from
one subject to the other, and then back again, with great rapidity.
But, when one is one's own amanuensis, when the act of thinking and
formulating the thought, and the act of writing it down in words, is
performed by the same person, there is a simultaneous action of that
which originates the thought and clothes it in words, and the act of
the bodily organ which inscribes the words upon paper. How is this
phenomenon to be explained? And to what does it lead? Is there anything
in the whole range of Mr. Spencer's "Psychology" that will interpret
this familiar experience? May it not be interpreted by an anatomical
examination of the mind as an organism?

I do not now refer to cases where a thought is completely formulated
before the pen begins to be moved over the paper, and is then recalled
by an effort of the memory and written down. I am referring to what
I suppose is the habit of many persons in writing, namely, the
origination and formulation of the thought as the hand moves the pen,
a habit of which most practiced writers are perfectly conscious. The
same thing occurs in what is truly called extemporaneous speaking,[142]
when oral discourse is not a mere repetition, _memoriter_, of thoughts
and sentences which had been previously formulated, but, as the
word extemporaneous implies, when the thought and the language flow
from the vocal organs _eo instanti_ with their conception. In these
and the similar cases of improvisation and animated conversation,
in which there is a synchronous action of the mind and the bodily
organs, it would be impossible for us to have that action if mind were
constituted as Mr. Spencer supposes it to be. If there were no mind in
the sense of an organized entity, conceiving a thought and clothing
it in the language needful to give it written or oral expression,
"if the _ego_ were nothing more than the passing group of feelings
and ideas"--if an "idea lasts (only) while the nerves of molecular
motion last, ceasing when they cease"--if that which remains is (only)
the "set of plexuses"--how could we originate any new thought? The
very illustration to which Mr. Spencer resorts, when he likens the
automatic human being to the non-automatic piano, and makes them
analogous in their action, in order to show that passing ideas do not
have a continual existence in the mind, but that the actual existence
is the physical structure which, under like conditions, again evolves
like combinations, reduces us at once to the level of the piano,
and precludes the potentiality of a new and original idea which is
not a combination of former ideas, and is produced under different
conditions. The assertion or argument that each set of plexuses is
capable of entering into countless combinations with others, and so
renders possible future ideas, does not advance us one step to the
solution of what takes place when we conceive a new thought, clothe it
in language, and write it down on paper, or give it oral expression.

In justification of this criticism, let me now refer to that
intellectual process which is called "invention," in its application
to the mechanic arts. I do not mean to suggest or to claim that this
kind of invention is an act which is to be referred to a distinct and
peculiar faculty of certain minds, in the possession of which one
man may differ from another. But I shall endeavor to describe what
takes place when one conceives the intellectual plan of a certain new
combination of mechanical devices, and embodies that plan in a machine
which differs from all other previous machines in its characteristic
method of operation. For convenience, I shall speak of the person who
produces such a machine as the inventor, which is the same as speaking
of him as the maker, as the poet is the maker of a poem. This act of
invention, or the making of some concrete new thing, is an act of
creation. The inventor, then, may be supposed to have learned all
that empirical and all that scientific mechanics could teach him; to
have had any quantity of passing groups of ideas pass through his
consciousness; to be possessed of any number of plexuses capable of
entering into countless combinations with others. These plexuses, or
networks of transitory ideas, consisting of former impressions in the
nerve-center, must, it is said, be recalled under the like conditions
which produced them. But the conditions for the inventor are not the
same. Something is to be produced into which the old ideas do not
enter. There is to be a new arrangement of old mechanical devices;
a new combination is to be made, which will possess a method of
operation and accomplish a result never before seen or obtained.
A new concrete thing, a new machine, is to be created. That the
conception must be formed, that the objective point, to which the whole
intellectual effort is to aim, must be seen, is manifest. A tentative
intellectual process may have to be gone through before the full
conception is reached, just as a tentative experimental process may be
necessary in finding out how the practical embodiment of the conception
is to be reached in building the structure. These processes may go on
simultaneously or separately; but, when they are both completed, when
the new machine stands before us, we see at once that the plan is an
intellectual conception, perfectly original, and the physical structure
is a new arrangement of matter effected by the hand of the inventor
or by the hands of others, which he uses as his instruments in doing
the physical work. I do not know, therefore, how this phenomenon is
to be explained upon the theory that the only _ego_ is the body and
its functions, which lies behind and determines ever-changing states
of consciousness. I know not how else to interpret the phenomenon of
invention, excepting to adopt the postulate that there is a mind, a
substantive existence, which, while its consciousness holds ideas
suggested by former conditions, has the inherent power to originate
ideas that did not form a part of any previous state of consciousness.

I have spoken of mind as an organism and as a substantive existence.
This is a deduction to be drawn from the manifestations of mental
phenomena. In order to guard against an objection that may possibly
be interposed in the way of this method of investigation, I will
anticipate and answer it. It will be said that we can not define or
describe the substance of mind; can not tell whether it is a unit,
in itself, or an aggregate of units; we know and can know nothing
more than its approximate components, and all that we know of these
does not justify us in assuming to speak of the substance of mind. I
have more than once suggested, in our former conferences, that our
inability to define and to describe the substance of any supposed
existence is no proper objection to the hypothesis that there is such
an existence. When we undertake to define matter, or to describe the
substance of that which we call matter, we find that we soon reach a
point where precise definition or description ceases. Yet we do not
for that reason refrain from deducing the existence of matter from the
manifestations of certain phenomena and from our experience with them.
It is perfectly true that we know matter only by the manifestations of
certain physical phenomena; that we can not define the nature of its
substance. All we can do, by the most minute analysis, is to arrive at
the perception of the ultimate particles or units of matter; and the
nature of the substance of which these units are composed is incapable
of any further description. "Matter"[143] is one of the words in the
English language which are used in a great variety of senses, exact and
inexact, literal and figurative. In its philosophical sense, meaning
the substance of which all physical bodies are composed, the efforts of
lexicographers to give a definition, descriptive of the nature of what
is defined, show that definition is, strictly speaking, impossible.
All that can be said is that matter is "substance extended"; or that
which is visible or tangible, as "earth, wood, stone, air, vapor,
water"; or "the substance of which all bodies are composed." But these
efforts at definition express only what is needful to be expressed in
contrasting matter with that other existence which is called "spirit."
This is another word which is used in very different senses, but of
which no more exact definition can be given, when it is used in its
philosophical sense, than can be given of "matter." Lexicographers
have defined "spirit," in one of its meanings, as "the _soul_ of man;
the intelligent, immaterial, and immortal part of human beings"; and in
another of its meanings, more broadly, as "an immaterial, intelligent
substance." In these definitions they have followed the metaphysicians,
and the uses of the word in the English translation of the Bible.
When we turn to the definition of "soul," we find it given as "the
spiritual and immortal substance in man, which distinguishes him from
brutes; that part of man which enables him to think and reason, and
which renders him a subject of moral government." We also have it
defined as "the understanding, the intellectual principle." Undoubtedly
these definitions involve certain assumptions, such as the existence
of a substance called spirit, and the existence of an intellectual
principle, of which "soul," "spirit," and "intellect" are mere names.
But there is no difficulty in the way of our knowing what is meant when
these terms are used. The difficulty of giving a definition without
a circuitous use of terms, explaining the one by the other, and then
explaining the last by the first, does not prevent us from having a
definite conception of the thing spoken of. When we speak of mind,
soul, or intellect, what we think of is the something in ourselves
of which we are conscious, and whose manifestations we observe in
other beings like ourselves; and what we have to do is to examine the
evidence which may bring home to our convictions the existence of this
something that perceives, thinks, acts, originates new ideas; holds
former ideas in consciousness, is connected with and acts upon and
is acted on by bodily organs, and is at the same time more than and
different from those organs.

I have referred to some of the mental phenomena which have the
strongest tendency to prove the existence of the mind as an organized
entity. These are the phenomena which occur in our waking hours,
when the intellectual faculties and the bodily organs are in the full
exercise of their normal functions respectively. There is another class
of mental phenomena which may be said to be abnormal, in this, that
the intellectual faculties and the bodily organs do not preserve the
same relations to each other in all respects that they do when we are
fully awake. These are the phenomena that occur during sleep--a class
of mental phenomena of great consequence to be observed and analyzed in
any study of psychology. They are of an extraordinary variety, complex
in the highest degree, and dependent on numerous causes of mental and
physical disturbance; but it is quite possible to extract from some of
them certain definite conclusions.

Sleep, properly regarded, when it is perfect, is a state of absolute
rest and inactivity of all the organs and functions of the body
save the digestion of food and the circulation of the blood, and of
all the mental faculties. Perfect sleep, sleep in which there is
absolutely no consciousness, is more rare than those states in which
there is more or less consciousness. But it is often an actual state
of both body and mind, and it was evidently designed to renew the
vigor of both, and to prevent the wear and tear of unbroken activity.
Between absolute unconsciousness induced by perfect sleep and the
full consciousness of our waking moments, there are many intermediate
states; and the phenomena of these intermediate states present very
strong proofs of the existence of the mind as a special and spiritual
entity, capable in greater or less degree of acting without the aid
of the physical organs. I do not except even the organ of the brain
from this suspension of action during certain states when the mind
is in more or less of activity; for I am convinced that in some
of the mental phenomena to which I shall advert and which I shall
endeavor to describe, the brain is in a state of perfect sleep, and
that in the production of those phenomena it takes no part. In other
mental phenomena, which occur during sleep, the brain or some part
of it is evidently acted upon by the mind, as in the somnambulistic
condition, when the nerves of motion, responding to the action of the
mind, communicate action to the muscles, and the body walks about and
performs other external acts.

There are other mental phenomena occurring during very profound sleep
of the body and its organs, when the mind does not appear to derive
its action from the brain, or to be dependent on the brain for its
activity; when it is exceedingly active, and when it communicates
action to none of the bodily organs; when, for example, it carries on
long trains of thought, composes sentences, invents conversations,
makes poetry and prose, and performs other intellectual processes.
Distributed into classes, the most important mental phenomena occurring
during sleep are the following:

First, and presenting perhaps the strongest proof of the mind's
independence of all the bodily organs, is that whole class of mental
phenomena in which, during profound sleep of the body, we carry on
conversations, compose original matter in the form of oral or written
discourse, which we seem to ourselves to be producing, and solve
intellectual difficulties which have baffled us when awake, or imagine
that we receive from an unexpected source important information that we
are not conscious of having previously received.

The phenomena of conversations, to which we appear to ourselves to be
listening during sleep, or in which we appear to ourselves to be taking
part, are, when analyzed, most remarkable occurrences, for it is the
mind of the sleeper which originates the whole of what appears to be
said by different persons. These conversations are as vivid, as much
marked by different intellectual and personal characteristics, sudden
and unexpected turns, apt repartee, interchange of ideas between two or
more persons, as are the real conversations which we overhear, or in
which we take part, when we are awake. Yet the whole of what is said,
or appears to us to be said, is the invention of the one mind, which
appears to itself to be listening to or talking with other minds, and
all the while the body is wrapped in profound sleep. This extraordinary
intellectual feat, so familiar to us that it scarcely attracts our
attention unless we undertake to analyze it, is closely akin to the
action of the mind when the body and the mind are neither of them
asleep, and when we invent a conversation between different persons.
But this occurrence is marked by another extraordinary peculiarity:
for it happens, during sleep, to persons who could not, when awake,
invent and write such conversations at will, and who in their waking
hours have very little of the imaginative faculty needed for such
productions. I account for this phenomenon by the hypothesis that when
the mind is free from the necessity of depending on the bodily organs
for its action, as it is during profound sleep of the body, when its
normal relations with the body are completely suspended and it is left
to its independent action, it has a power of separate action. This, I
think, accounts for a kind of mental action which, when compared with
that which occurs in conjunction with the action of the bodily organs,
may be called abnormal. Under the impulse of its own unrestrained and
uncorrected activity, the mind goes through processes of invention,
the products of which are sometimes wild and incoherent, sometimes
exceedingly coherent, sensible, and apt. Let the person to whom this
occurs be thoroughly awakened out of one of these states, and the mind
becomes immediately again subjected to the necessity of acting along
with, and under the conditions of its normal relations to the body.

Akin to this mental feat of inventing conversations, during a sleep of
the body, is the power of composing, during such sleep, oral discourse
of one's own, or the power of composing something which we appear
to ourselves to be writing. I suppose this is an occurrence which
happens to most persons who are much accustomed to writing or to public
speaking. It is often an involuntary action of the mind; that is to
say, it is sometimes accompanied with a distinct consciousness that
it is a process that ought to be arrested because it is a dangerous
one, and yet it can not be arrested before full waking consciousness
returns. On goes the flow of thought and language, apparently with
great success; we seem to be speaking or writing with even more than
our usual power, and all the while in the style that belongs to us;
but, until we are fully restored to the normal relation of the mind
and the body, we can not at will arrest this independent action of
the mind, but must wait until our bodily senses are again in full
activity. I do not suppose that this phenomenon ought to be explained
by the hypothesis that there are certain parts or organs of the brain
which are specially concerned in the work of original composition of
intellectual matter, and that these organs are not affected by the
sleep that is prevailing in other parts of the brain. While it is
doubtless true that there are special systems of nerves which proceed
from or conduct to special parts of the brain, and by which action
is imparted to or received from the other organs of the body, and
while some of these special parts of the brain may be in the state
of absolute inactivity called sleep, and others are not, I know of
no warrant for the hypothesis that the intellectual operations or
processes are dependent upon any particular organ or organs of the
brain, as distinguished from those from and to which proceed special
systems of nerves. If any person, who is much accustomed to that kind
of intellectual activity which consists in original composition of
intellectual matter, will attend to his own consciousness, and probe
it as far as he may, he will not find reason, I apprehend, to conclude
that the power of thought and of clothing thought in language resides
in any special part of the brain. His experience and introspection
will be more likely to lead him to the conclusion that this power,
whether it is exerted when he is asleep or awake bodily, is a power
that inheres in the mind itself regarded as a spiritual existence and
organism, and that the action of the brain, or of any part of it, is
necessary to the exercise of this power only when it is necessary, as
it is in our waking moments, to use some of the bodily organs in order
to give the thought oral or written expression by giving it utterance
through the vocal organs or by writing it down on paper. Certain it
is that we conceive thoughts in more or less of connected sequence,
and clothe them intellectually in language of which we have entire
consciousness while the process is going on, without the action of any
part of the body.

It may be objected to this view that the intellectual products which
we seem to ourselves to be making when we are asleep would, if they
could be repeated by an effort of the memory, word for word, just as
they seem to have occurred, be found to be of the same incoherent,
senseless stuff of which all dreams are made; and that this test would
show that the brain is at such times not absolutely and completely in
the condition which is called sleep, but that it is only partially in
that condition; that it is performing its function feebly, imperfectly,
and not as it performs that function when the whole body is awake. In
reference to this hypothesis, I will repeat an anecdote which I have
somewhere read, which is equally valuable whether it was an imaginary
or a real occurrence.

A gentleman of literary pursuits, who was a very respectable poet, was
subject to this habit of composition during sleep. One night he awoke
his wife and informed her that he had composed in his dream some of
the best and most original verses that he had ever written. He begged
her at once to get a candle, pen, ink, and paper, and let him dictate
to her the new composition that appeared to him so striking. When they
read together the new poem on the next morning, it turned out to be
nonsensically puerile. But occurrences of this kind, if they could be
multiplied, would prove only that we are liable to illusions in sleep,
in regard to the comparative merits of our intellectual products,
which we imagine ourselves to be creating when we are in that state,
as we are in regard to other things. We are under a delusion when we
imagine in our dreams that we encounter and converse with another
person, living or dead. We are perhaps deluding ourselves when in sleep
we compose or seem to compose an original poem. But what is it that
deludes itself, either in respect to the interview with another person,
or in respect to the new composition? Is it the brain, or is it the
mind? Is it a person, or a bodily organ that has the false impression,
in the one case or the other? There must be a something that is subject
to an illusion, before there can be an illusion. If both brain and
mind are in profound sleep, absolute suspension of all action, there
can be no illusion about anything. If the brain is absolutely asleep
and the mind is not, the illusion is in the mind and not in the brain.
That the latter is what often occurs, the experience of the illiterate
and uncultivated makes them aware, as well as the experience of the
lettered scholar and the practiced writer.[144]

Under the same head, I will now refer to those strange but familiar
occurrences which take place when there come to us, in sleep, solutions
of difficulties which we had not overcome by all our efforts while
awake, and which appeared to us utterly dark when we lay down to rest.
These mental phenomena are almost innumerably various. They take place
in regard to all kinds of subjects, to lines of conduct and action, to
everything about which our thoughts are employed; and they are a class
of phenomena within everybody's experience. There is scarcely any one
to whom it has not happened to lie down at night with a mind distressed
and perplexed about some problem that requires a definite solution,
and to rise in the morning, usually after a night of undisturbed
rest, with his mind perfectly clear on the subject, and with just the
solution that did not come to him when he devoted to it all his waking
thoughts. What is the explanation of this phenomenon? If the mind
is an independent entity, a spiritual organism, capable of its own
action without the aid of the body under certain circumstances, this
phenomenon can be explained. If the mind is not a spiritual organism,
capable, under any circumstances, of acting without the aid of the
bodily organs, this phenomenon can not be explained.

The most probable explanation is this: When we are awake, and devote
our thoughts to a particular subject that is attended with great
difficulties, we go over the same ground repeatedly--the mind travels
and toils in the same ruts. Nothing new occurs, because we look at the
subject in the same way every time we think of it. We are liable to be
kept in the same beaten path by the associations between our thoughts
and the bodily states in which we have those thoughts--associations
which are exceedingly powerful. But let these associations be dissolved
as they are during perfect sleep--let the mind be in a condition to act
without being dependent on the brain or any other bodily organ for aid,
or exposed to be hampered by the conditions of the body, and there will
be a mental activity in which ideas will be wrought out that did not
occur to us while we were awake. The memory, too, may recall a fact
which we had learned while awake, and yet we may be unable to recollect
how it came to our knowledge. At such times, the fact is recalled; but
as the mind is acting in a condition which is abnormal when compared
with the waking condition, and is liable to delusions about some
things, we imagine that the fact is revealed to us in some wild and
supernatural way, as by a person who is dead and who has come to us to
communicate it. There is a well-authenticated account of an occurrence
of this kind, given by Sir Walter Scott in one of the notes to his
"Antiquary," and on which he founds an incident related by one of the
personages in his story. The real occurrence was this: A gentleman in
Scotland was involved in a litigation about a claim asserted upon his
landed estate. He had a strong conviction that his father had bargained
and paid for a release of the claim, but he could find no such paper.
Without it he was sure to be defeated in the suit. Distressed by this
prospect, but utterly unable to see any way out of his misfortune, he
lay down to sleep, on the night before he was to go into Edinburgh to
attend the trial of the cause. He dreamed that his father appeared to
him, and told him that the claim had been released, and that the paper
was in the hands of a lawyer in a neighboring town, whose name the
paternal shade mentioned.

Before going into Edinburgh on the next day, the gentleman rode to
the place which his father had indicated, and found the lawyer, of
whose name he had been previously unconscious. This person turned out
to be an old man, who had forgotten the fact that he had transacted
this piece of business for the gentleman's father; but on being
told of the fact that his client had paid his fee in a foreign coin
of a peculiar character--which was one part of the story which the
father's apparition related to the son--he recalled the whole of the
circumstances, searched for the paper, and found it. The gentleman's
estate was saved to him; but he became very superstitious about dreams,
and suffered much from that cause, as was quite natural. Sir Walter's
solution of the whole affair is of course the correct one: "The dream
was only the recapitulation of information which Mr. R---- had really
received from his father while in life, but which at first he merely
recalled as a general impression that the claim was settled. It is not
uncommon for persons to recover, during sleep, the thread of ideas
which they have lost during their waking hours."[145] Sir Walter makes
another observation which is worthy of being repeated--that in dreams
men are not surprised by apparitions. Why are we not? Because the mind
is in a state of abnormal activity, in which everything that occurs to
it seems perfectly natural. The delusion in regard to the mode in which
the very important fact was communicated to Mr. R---- in his dream, was
substituted in the place of the actual communication made to him by
his father during life. The latter he had wholly forgotten, and he had
forgotten the circumstance of payment of the lawyer's fee in a peculiar
coin, which had also been mentioned to him by his father when living.
This remarkable incident, which might doubtless be paralleled by many
similar occurrences, proves one of two things: either that the exercise
of the memory is wholly dependent upon a waking condition of the brain,
or that there may be an abnormal and imperfect act of memory while
the brain is in profound sleep, in the course of which a fact becomes
mixed with a delusion about the mode in which we are told of the fact.
What happened to Mr. R---- was that his mind recalled the fact, but
imagined that he then learned it for the first time from an apparition.
I do not know how such a phenomenon can be explained, excepting by the
hypothesis that the mind is a special existence, which acts during
sleep of the body upon facts that are lodged in the memory, but mixes
them with imaginary and delusive appearances, so that the mode in which
the fact was actually learned is obliterated from the memory, and some
supernatural mode of communication takes its place. On the return of
waking consciousness, the mode in which the fact was actually learned
is still shut out from recollection, and, if the person to whom this
kind of delusion has occurred is of a superstitious turn, he will act
on what he has imagined was told him by the apparition, because he has
no other means of rescuing himself from an evil.

In regard to the mental phenomena which occur without delusions or
apparitions, where the thoughts on a difficult subject become clearer
and more satisfactory to us when we awake from sleep than they ever
were during our waking hours, I suppose the explanation is this: During
profound sleep of the body, including the brain, there is an entire
suspension of every bodily function excepting the digestion of food and
the circulation of the blood. If there is excited in some of the other
organs an action of a peculiar kind, by an excitation of the nerves
connected with those organs, it is proof that the condition of perfect
sleep is not prevailing in all parts of the brain. The state to which I
now refer supposes a complete inactivity of the whole bodily organism
save in the digestive function and the circulation of the blood. In
such a state, the mind, that which thinks and reasons, does not act
upon the brain, and is not acted upon by it. It is capable of thinking
on any subject which has employed its thoughts during the waking hours;
and while, in some cases, it is visited by apparitions and subject
to delusions, it is in other cases engaged in ideas that involve no
delusive appearances. Freed from all the associations of these ideas
with the feelings prevailing in the body when we think of the subject
during our waking hours, we are able to perceive relations of the
subject which have not before occurred to us. When we pass from the
condition of sleep to the full consciousness of our bodily and mental
organism, we are intellectually possessed of these new relations of the
subject, which we have brought with us out of the state in which we
acquired them, and they furnish us with new materials for the solution
of the problem that we had not solved when we lay down to rest. It
is not, I am persuaded, because the mind was at rest during sleep,
and when we become awake is by reason of that rest better able to
grapple with the difficulties of the subject, that we do grapple with
them successfully; for in the case supposed, which is a very common
experience, the thoughts are actually employed on the subject, while
the body and the brain are in the absolute rest and inactivity of all
the organic functions excepting those of digestion and circulation of
the blood. I do not know that it is possible to detect, in a person
sleeping, an increased circulation of the blood to any part of the
brain which may be supposed to be concerned in the act of thinking,
and at the same time to know that thinking is going on, unless such an
observation could be made of a person in the state called somnambulism,
which is not the state of which I am now speaking. But reasoning upon
the phenomenon which I have now described, according to all that we can
learn from our own experience or from observation of others, I reach
the conclusion that the mind, the thinking and reasoning entity, can
and does, in profound sleep of the body and the brain, employ itself
upon a subject that has occupied us when awake, and can perceive new
relations of that subject, which had not before occurred to us, without
the activity of any portion of the nerve-center which is called the
brain. Does this hypothesis assume that our thoughts when asleep are
more valuable than our waking thoughts? It does, to a certain extent
and under certain circumstances, for experience proves that in sleep
we acquire ideas which we did not have before we fell asleep, and which
we bring with us out of that condition.

That I have now given the true explanation of this familiar experience
will appear, I think, from this consideration: There are very few
nights when we do not in sleep have many thoughts. The states of
perfect unconsciousness are comparatively rare. If the brain were never
entirely asleep, if it were always engaged in the physical work of
thinking--whatever that work may be--it would be worn out prematurely.
But if the brain is perfectly at rest, while the mind is actively
employed, the brain undergoes no strain and suffers no exhaustion; and
the mind suffers no strain or exhaustion because it is in its nature
incapable of wear and tear. It is only when the mind acts on the brain
that exhaustion takes place. I speak now of what happens in states of
ordinarily good health.[146]

I shall now refer to some of the very peculiar phenomena of
somnambulism; and in illustration of their various phases I shall
resort to Shakespeare's picture of the sleep-walking of Lady Macbeth,
which, although purely imaginary, is a most accurate exhibition of
nature. Treating it, as we are entitled to treat it, as if it were a
real occurrence at which we ourselves were witnesses, with a knowledge
of her character and history, an analysis of the situation in which she
was placed when the habit of somnambulism came upon her, and of the
mode in which her mind acted upon her body, will enable us to see the
phenomena in their true philosophical aspect. We may suppose ourselves
present, with the doctor and the gentlewoman of her bedchamber, when
she comes forth in her night-dress and with a candle in her hand, and
we witness the impressive scene of a disturbed mind overmastering the
body while the body is asleep. It seems that, after the murder of
Duncan, when she imbrued her own hands with his blood in smearing the
faces of his sleeping grooms, the habit of sleep-walking had come
over her. As we stand by the side of the awe-stricken witnesses, and
hear their whispered conversation, we get the first description of
her actions since the new king, Macbeth, her husband, whom she had
instigated to murder the old king, went into the field. These first
actions of hers, as described by the gentlewoman to the doctor, do not
necessarily exhibit the working of a guilty conscience. They exhibit
a mind oppressed and disturbed by cares of business and of state;
and they are a distinct class of the phenomena of somnambulism. The
gentlewoman tells the doctor that "since his Majesty went into the
field, I have seen her rise from her bed, throw her night-gown upon
her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon it, read
it, afterward seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while in
a most fast sleep." This is merely a description of what the witness
has seen, and it might occur to any person of strong intellectual
faculties, disturbed by great cares, without the action of a guilty
conscience. It makes the situation real when the doctor recognizes
the fact of this "great perturbation in nature! to receive at once
the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching." As they are
whispering together, the doctor trying to make the gentlewoman tell
him what at such times she has heard her say, which the loyal servant
refuses to tell, Lady Macbeth moves forward, with the taper in her hand.

Here we may pause upon the first exhibition of the phenomenon called
sleep-walking, which we get by description only, and analyze the nature
of the action. It is perfectly apparent that what the poet accepted
as true, is the power of the mind to move the body while the body is
asleep, so as to make it perform many acts. Experience makes this
assumption perfectly correct. I presume it will not be questioned that
this phenomenon is described by Shakespeare with entire accuracy,
and it is explicable only upon the hypothesis that the mind has some
control over the body while the body is asleep. Actions as minute and
as much premeditated as those performed by Lady Macbeth "in a most fast
sleep," have been witnessed in persons who were undoubtedly asleep,
and whose eyes were open for some purposes, but, as in her case, their
sense was shut for other purposes.

We now pass to the more awful exhibition of a mind worked upon by a
guilty conscience. Lady Macbeth comes out of her bedroom fast asleep,
but with a light in her hand. The gentlewoman who interprets her
state to the doctor informs him that she has a light by her bedside
continuously; and we thus learn that her nights are so disturbed
that she can not bear darkness. They notice that her eyes are open,
but "their sense is shut." Then begin the terrific manifestations of
the control of a guilty conscience over both mind and body, when the
memory, alive to certain terrible facts, plays fantastic tricks with
itself, and mingles delusions with realities. As she approaches, with
the taper in her hand, she performs an action which the gentlewoman
says she has repeatedly seen her go through, for a quarter of an hour
at a time, endeavoring to rub a spot of blood off from one of her
hands. Her hands have been clean, physically, since the time when she
first washed them on the fatal night; but the delusion that is upon her
is that there is blood on them still. She goes on rubbing them, and her
first exclamation is, "Out, damned spot! out, I say!" Yet it will not
out. That little hand wears what she imagines to be an indelible stain.
After her first exclamation, the memory rushes back to the moment
before the murder. She thinks she hears, perhaps does hear, the clock
strike--"one, two"; and then, as if speaking to her husband, she says,
"Why, then 'tis time to do't." Then there is a pause, and out comes
the reflection, "Hell is murky!" This seems to indicate that darkness,
in which she and her husband are whispering together just before
the murder, is a hell, and so very fit for what is about to be done.
Hell is murky, as this chamber is. Then she remembers her husband's
reluctance, and fancying that she is still talking with him and
bracing him up to the deed, she says: "Fye, my lord, fye! a soldier,
and afeard? What need we _fear_ who knows it, when none can call our
_power_ to account?" Presently she is looking back upon the deed, and
exclaims, "Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much
blood in him!" Then she recurs to herself as if she were another: "The
thane of Fife had a wife; where is _she_ now?" Again she thinks of her
stained hands: "What, will these hands _ne'er_ be clean?" Are they to
wear this horrible stain forever? Instantly she is again at the door
of Duncan's chamber, speaking to her husband: "No more o' that, my
lord, no more o' that: you mar all with this starting!" Then her hands
again, her poor hands; they _smell_ of the blood: "Here's the smell
of the blood still: all the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this
little hand! Oh, oh, oh!" Then, after another pause, she is speaking
to her husband, when the deed has been done: "Wash your hands, put on
your night-gown; look not so pale!" In another instant she is thinking
of Banquo's murder, which occurred after Duncan's, and she says to her
husband: "I tell you yet again, Banquo's _buried_; he can not come out
of his _grave_!" Once more she is back at the door of Duncan's chamber,
in the darkness, and the murder has been committed. Speaking to her
husband, she says: "To bed, to bed; there's knocking at the gate. Come,
come, come, come, give me your hand. What's done can not be undone. To
bed, to bed, to bed!" Then she goes quickly toward her chamber and to
bed, believing that Macbeth is with her and that she is holding his
hand.

How mixed, how wild, how fantastic, how coherent and incoherent are
these phantoms of the imagination! If she were awake, things would
not thus present themselves to her. Every event in the dreadful story
would stand in its true relations, and, however she might be suffering
the pangs of a guilty conscience, she would not mix up the scenes
through which she had passed, but every fact would stand in its due
order. She would be conscious that there was no blood upon her hands,
and that they did not need the perfumes of Arabia to sweeten them.
She would know that Duncan had been murdered, and would not enact the
murder over again. She would remember that Banquo's murder had not been
distinctly made known to her, and that she had only surmised it, when
at the banquet Macbeth fancied that the ghost of Banquo rose and sat
at the table--an apparition which neither she nor any one else saw.
But, in that strange scene, it flashed across her mind that Banquo was
dead, and to herself she interpreted truly what was passing in her
husband's mind, and instantly explained his conduct to the company as
the recurrence of an old malady to which he was subject.

If we go back to what had actually happened before the banquet, and
then go forward to the condition in which she is seen by the doctor and
her attendant, we shall understand how her mind was working, not upon
a fact that she knew, but upon a fact which she had truly surmised.
In her somnambulistic state, she says to her husband: "_I tell you
yet again_, Banquo's buried; he can not come out of his grave." Had
she said this to him before? According to the course of the story, as
the text of the play gives it to us, she had not. In the second scene
of the third act, where, after Duncan had been murdered and Macbeth
had become king, they are preparing for the banquet, to which Banquo
was expected as one of the guests, Macbeth and his wife are talking
together, and she is trying to get him out of the contemplative and
conscience-stricken mood in which he looks back upon what they have
done. He concludes one of his mixed and melancholy reflections with
these words:

                Duncan is in his grave;
    After life's fitful fever he sleeps well;
    Treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison,
    Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing
    Can touch him further!

Then she says to him:

   _Lady Macbeth._ Come on;
  Gentle my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks;
  Be bright and jovial 'mong your guests to-night.

   _Macbeth._ So shall I, love; and so, I pray, be you;
  Let your remembrance apply to _Banquo_;
  _Present him eminence_,[147] _both with eye and tongue_:
  Unsafe the while, that we
  Must lave our honors in these flattering streams;
  And make our faces vizards to our hearts,
  Disguising what they are.

Just at this moment, therefore, he is not thinking of killing Banquo,
but wishes him to be received with all honor. But, in answer to his
last reflection on the hypocritical part that they must act, she says
to him:

  You must leave this.

Then bursts forth the terrific oppression of his soul:

   _Macb._ Oh, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!
  Thou know'st that Banquo, and his Fleance, _lives_.
   _Lady M._ _But in them nature's copy's not eterne._[148]
   _Macb._ There's comfort yet; they _are_ assailable;
  Then be thou jocund: ere the bat hath flown
  His cloistered flight; ere, to black Hecate's summons,
  The shard-borne beetle, with his drowsy hums,
  Hath rung night's yawning peal, there shall be done
  A deed of dreadful note!

She affects not to understand him--perhaps does not--and she asks:

  _What's_ to be done?
   _Macb._ Be innocent of the _knowledge_, dearest chuck,
  Till thou applaud the _deed_. Come, seeling night,
  Skarf up the tender eye of pitiful day;
  And, with thy bloody and invisible hand,
  Cancel, and tear to pieces, that great bond
  Which keeps me pale!--Light thickens; and the crow
  Makes wing to the rooky wood;
  Good things of day begin to droop and drowse;
  While night's black agents to their prey do rouse.
  Thou marvel'st at my words: but hold thee still;
  Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill:
  So, prithee, go with me.                     [_Exeunt._

In the next scene, the murderers, previously engaged by Macbeth,
waylay Banquo in the park as he is approaching the castle, and kill
him, his son Fleance and a servant escaping. Then follows the banquet,
Macbeth himself moving about at first, and then he takes a seat at
the table lower down. One of the murderers comes in and whispers to
him what has been done. The stage direction is, "The ghost of Banquo
rises and sits in Macbeth's place." As no one at the table but Macbeth
sees this apparition, it might be inferred that it is the force of
his imagination which presents the spectacle to him, as Lady Macbeth
supposes, when she says to him:

                        O proper stuff!
    This is the very painting of your fear:
    This is the air-drawn dagger, which, you said,
    Led you to Duncan.

But the stage direction must be taken as a literal appearance of the
ghost, so as to make it visible to the audience, while it is invisible
to all at the table excepting Macbeth himself.

If, now, we go forward to the night when Lady Macbeth is walking in her
sleep, and remember what had occurred previous to and at the banquet,
we see how, without any actual previous knowledge that her husband
intended to have Banquo killed, and with only the surmise that he had
been killed, which comes to her at the banquet, she came to say to her
husband, in her dream:

  I tell you yet again, Banquo's buried; he can not come out of his grave.

Here we have a fact lodged in the mind during the waking hours, and
in sleep wrought into a strange mixture with the killing of Duncan,
with which it had in reality no connection, having transpired
afterward. This is very strong proof of the capacity of the mind to
act during sleep without the action of the brain. The mind of the
guilty sleep-walker is filled with horrible memories, which it can not
shut out, but with which it can not deal in their actual order and
true relations, because the sequences of thought, during sleep, are
abnormal. Those whose experience has never involved any such workings
of conscience are perfectly aware of the fact that in dreams ideas
that are separately lodged in the consciousness become entangled with
each other in the most fantastic manner. Lady Macbeth at one moment
even thinks of herself as if she were some one else, and asks, Where
is the woman now who was the wife of the thane of Fife? Every one has
experienced in sleep the same projection of one's self out of one's own
consciousness; so that we seem to be contemplating ourselves as if we
were a different person.

The phenomena that occur during the delirium of fever, where the
normal consciousness is lost for the time being, are in some respects
analogous to and in some respects different from those which occur
during the somnambulistic condition. Delirium occurs when the body
and the brain are not in the condition of sleep; but the senses of
perception convey false impressions to the mind, and the mind itself
has temporarily lost its power of correcting its own action by its
former experience. The nearest friends who are around the bedside
are not recognized by the sufferer; they appear to be strangers,
and the patient talks to them as if both they and he were not their
real selves. It would seem that we can safely infer from the state
of delirium a suspension of the direct and normal connection between
the brain and the mind; that neither of them can act, in relation to
the other, as they both act when there is no such disturbance: but
that this condition, so far from proving or tending to prove that the
mind is not an independent spiritual existence, has a strong tendency
to prove that it is. Insanity, on the other hand, is probably a
derangement of the mental organism akin to derangement of the physical
organism, but not necessarily connected with or induced by the latter,
for the bodily health of the insane is often entirely sound while
the mind is in an entirely unsound and irrational condition. But the
phenomena of insanity are too various and multiform, and too much
dependent on both physical and moral causes, to afford any satisfactory
proofs of the postulate which I propound in this essay. The safest
line of investigation is that which I suggested in the first instance,
namely, to regard the mind as an organism, and to ascertain whether
it is susceptible of anatomical examination in a sense analogous
to anatomical examination of the bodily organism. All that I have
hitherto said is useful by way of preliminary illustration of my main
hypothesis. It has a strong tendency to show that the mind, instead
of consisting, as some philosophers now suppose, of the products of
a material organism, is itself an organized being with a definite
structure and capable of living a life of its own, although at present
dwelling in a corporeal organism which affects it in various ways
while the connection lasts. The theory that all mental phenomena are
products of our corporeal organism is one that appears to derive
great support from examinations of the structure of the brain and of
the whole nervous system. The physical anatomy of man exhibits very
striking illustrations of the influence of corporeal changes upon the
mental state, as the mental changes show corresponding influences upon
the corporeal state. But, then, there are undoubtedly phenomena that
are purely and exclusively mental; and therefore when we undertake to
solve these mental phenomena by the materialistic hypothesis we find a
sense of inadequate causation confronting us so directly that we are
compelled to look for a solution elsewhere. It is certain that things
take place in the inner recesses of our minds, in the production of
which the bodily senses not only render no aid, but in which they
have no part whatever. It is necessary, therefore, to carry our
investigations into a class of mental phenomena in which all physical
causation ceases to afford an adequate guide to a conclusion.

It will not be denied that the products of material organisms can be
proved to consist of matter and of nothing else. Their presence can
be detected by some physical test. For example, if it be true that
all animals have been evolved from protoplasm, the organisms are
simply changes in the form of a certain portion of matter. If, in an
individual organism having a highly developed nervous structure, there
are actions produced by an excitation of the nerves of sensation,
those actions are simply molecular changes in the matter comprising
the sensitive and easily moved substance of the nerve-fibers. However
far and into whatever minutiæ we carry our investigations into
organized matter, we find that its products remain material, and that
they consist only of changes in the material substance of a material
organization. But, when we pass from such material products into
the domain of purely mental phenomena, are we warranted in saying
that, although the latter are not, properly speaking, _products_ of
the material organization, they are _effects_ corresponding to and
dependent upon the excitation of the nerves of sensation? This last
hypothesis must assume one of two things: either that there is a
distinction between those corporeal feelings which do not and those
which do produce mental changes or mental effects, or, if there are
corporeal feelings which produce corresponding mental states and
mental action, there must be a something on which the effects can
be wrought, and this something must be an independent organism. It
is doubtless true that there are many corporeal feelings which are
followed by no very important mental effects, especially during a
sound state of bodily health. But it is equally true that, if there
are corporeal feelings which influence our mental action, there must
be an organism which is capable of being so influenced; and our
experience and consciousness teach us that there is such a difference
between corporeal feelings and mental phenomena that the probability
of a difference in the originating causes becomes very great. We know
that the mind can and does act with great force when bodily suffering
is extreme; that it has an energy of its own which enables it to rise
above all the power of physical pain to restrain or influence it. I
must therefore follow out, as I had originally projected, my anatomical
analysis of the mind as an independent spiritual organism.

In order to arrive at a correct conclusion concerning the structure
of mind, we must first observe that there are four special corporeal
organs by which the capability of the mind to receive impressions
from matter is acted upon. It is through these means that the
properties of matter, or those properties which can make themselves
known to us, become known to us. The senses, as they are usually
called, are sight, hearing, smell, and taste. The external organ of
each of these senses is furnished with a set of nerves, the function
of which is to transmit from that organ a wave of molecular motion
along the fluid or semi-fluid substance inclosed in the nerve-tubes
to the great nerve-center the brain, the central recipient of all
such motions. Such, at least, is the theory, which may be accepted
as a fact. But, then, the question remains, What is the intellectual
perception or mental cognition of the idea suggested by one of these
supposed transmissions of a wave of molecular motion? Is there a
being, a person, a spiritual entity, conceiving the idea or having an
intellectual perception of it? Or is there no such being, and while we
attribute to the office of the nervous system the function of producing
certain feelings or sensations in the brain, do these sensations or
feelings constitute all that there is of consciousness?

It is impossible for me to conceive of consciousness as anything but an
intuitive sense of his own existence, experienced by a being capable of
such an experience, because endowed with such a faculty. It is certain
that when we so regard consciousness we are not deceiving ourselves;
for if any one will consider what would happen to him if he should
lose this faculty of being sensible of his own existence, he will see
that in the event of that loss he could neither distinguish himself
from other persons, nor have any control over his own actions, or any
cognition whatever. For this reason, the theory on which I made some
criticisms in one of our late conversations is the one with which
I contrast my conception of mind. If that theory fails to satisfy
a reflecting person in regard to the nature of consciousness, as
certified to him by his own experience, the hypothesis that the mind is
an extended and organized being, of which a conception can be formed,
and not an unextended and unorganized something of which no conception
can be formed, must be accepted as the alternative.

I explained in our former discussion my understanding of Mr. Spencer's
theory of the only _ego_ that can be scientifically recognized; and,
in order to encounter it by my own hypothesis, I will here restate its
substantial position in a condensed form.

By the _ego_ of which he treats, I understand him to mean all that
we can arrive at by an analysis of what takes place in the body
and its functions, and of "what is given in consciousness." This
phrase--"what is given in consciousness"--reveals to us his purpose to
reduce consciousness from a self-conviction and cognition of one's own
existence to a mere passing group of feelings, which constitute "the
ever-changing states of consciousness" that we "_call_ mind." So that,
when we speak of mind, we mean and can mean nothing more than certain
states of feeling produced in our brains by perpetually changing
impressions. We do not and can not mean that there is a person who
perceives and holds ideas suggested by external objects through the
action of his nervous system. All that we know about any _ego_, any
mental I, is that there is a physical structure, pervaded by certain
physical forces, that produce "consecutive states," which Mr. Spencer
calls "mental _states_"; and the aggregate of the feelings and ideas
which thus constitute the _mental states_ is the only _ego_ of which
any continued existence can be predicated. But even these aggregates of
feelings and ideas have, according to this philosopher, no principle
of cohesion holding them together as a whole; and, therefore, all
that we can assume as having any continuously surviving and durable
existence is the changing _states_ produced by the action through us
of a certain unknowable power, statically conditioned in our nervous
organism, which is pervaded by a dynamically conditioned portion of
that unknowable power which is operating everywhere in nature, and is
called "energy."[149]

So far as this theory is based upon the existence of a physical
organism, whose functions liberate from the food supplied to it certain
forces, which are distributed by the activities of the organism, we may
accept it as a statement of what actually takes place in the form of
physical phenomena. But when we follow the physical phenomena of the
diffused energy into its action upon the brain, by the transmission
of an impulse, we must stop with the effect of that impulse upon a
corporeal organ, or we must go further and find a something which
receives into itself and appropriates to itself the idea the elements
of which the impulse has transmitted. The presence of that something
in ourselves may be illustrated by its absence from a mechanism in
which we know that it does not exist, but which appears superficially
to be animated by an intelligent principle possessing volition. We
stand, for example, before one of those automatic machines which
perform actions that seem to be guided by a living spirit. They are
mere physical organisms, constructed without the principle of life
that inhabits animal organisms, but they are so admirably contrived
for the production of certain limited but complex movements that they
suggest the presence of a spiritual being acting as we ourselves act.
But the least reflection upon what we see makes us aware that there is
nothing before us but a mechanical organism, in which the artisan who
made it has availed himself of certain forces of nature and properties
of matter, whereby he uses a portion of the energy that pervades the
universe. There is nothing within the machine to which this energy
communicates ideas that are to be the subject of its future voluntary
operation. All is comprehended in a fixed mechanical operation of
certain machinery, and, when we have analyzed and understood the
physical phenomena, we can follow them no further, because there is
no translation of the physical energy into mental phenomena. But in
ourselves there is such a translation, and we must follow it into the
mental phenomena. So following it, we find ourselves in the presence
of a something which has a self-conscious individuality, and which, by
a mysterious bond of connection, is so united with a physical organism
that it is capable of receiving, appropriating, and preserving the
ideas which the physical organism was designed to produce in it.

My objection to Mr. Spencer's system of psychology may be summed up in
what I shall now say upon his chief position, which is that "an idea
is the psychical side of what, on its physical side, is an involved
set of molecular changes, propagated through an involved set of
nervous plexuses." Translated into what I take to be his meaning, the
assertion, or hypothesis, is this: An idea is the mental cognition of
an external object, as, for example, a tree. When we are looking at
or thinking of a tree, we have a mental cognition of a tree; and this
idea of a tree is said to be the psychical side of that which on its
physical side has been transmitted to our brain by molecular changes
through our visual nerves. The idea of the tree is the psychical
correlative of a wave of molecular motion diffused through our organs
of vision; and the conception of a tree thus becomes a possible
conception. But why did not the learned philosopher follow the wave
of molecular motion until he found the impression of the object which
the visual organs have transmitted to the brain, or the nerve-center,
translated into a thought by an intelligent being, capable, by its own
organization, of having that thought? Why does he speak of an idea
as the psychical side of what, on its physical side, is one and the
same thing? Obviously, because he meant to ignore the psychical or
mental existence as an independent existence, or as any existence at
all. Now, there is no way in which the psychical side and the physical
side can be bridged over, excepting by the hypothesis that the mind
is an entity of a peculiar nature, different in structure from the
bodily organism, but capable, by the connection between them, of
receiving and transmuting into thought the impressions which the waves
of molecular motion transmit to the brain from the external object.
To say that the set of plexuses, or networks, which hold together
the waves of molecular motion, constitute the potentiality of the
idea and make possible future ideas like it, explains nothing. The
potentiality of the idea, or the possibility of ideas like it, depends
upon the existence of a something which is capable of conceiving
the idea, holding it, and reproducing it to itself, after the waves
of molecular motion cease. I call this a process of translation, or
transmutation, because there is no other convenient term for it. It is
a process analogous to the physical assimilation of food by the organs
of physical digestion, with this difference, however, that the action
of the mental organism in the assimilation of ideas is the action of
a spiritual and intellectual organism upon materials that are brought
within its reach by the means of communication with the external world
afforded by the physical senses and the nervous system. The image of
the tree produced upon the retina of the eye by the lines of light
that proceed from every point of that object is the food which the
mind assimilates and transmutes into the idea of the tree; and this
may remain as a permanent mental perception or cognition, although
the object itself may have been seen but once. If seen many times,
the various aspects in which it has been seen are transmuted into so
many distinct ideas. If many kinds of trees, of different shapes
and dimensions, have been seen, the varieties become a part of our
consciousness in the several degrees of their precise resemblances
and differences which we happen to have observed, when the different
impressions were produced upon the retina. Can there be any doubt that
this is the process by which the infant begins to acquire ideas of
external objects, and that, as adolescence goes on and the powers of
sense expand with the growth and exercise of the physical organs, there
is a corresponding growth and expansion of the mental powers?

This hypothesis of the progress of mental growth, _paris passibus_ with
the growth of the physical organism, brings me to the consideration of
one of those specimens of Mr. Spencer's peculiar logic, in a passage
in which he undertakes to disprove the existence of mind as anything
more than what he calls the psychical side of physical impressions. He
is treating of the impossibility of our "knowing" anything about the
substance of mind; and he propounds this impossibility in the following
logical formula:

 ...To know anything is to distinguish it as such or such--to class
 it as of this or that order. An object is said to be but little
 known when it is alien to objects of which we have had experience;
 and it is said to be well known when there is great community of
 attributes between it and objects of which we have had experience.
 Hence, by implication, an object is completely known when this
 recognized community is complete; and completely unknown when there
 is no recognized community at all. Manifestly, then, the smallest
 conceivable degree of knowledge implies at least two things between
 which some community is recognized. But, if so, how can we know the
 substance of mind? To know the substance of mind is to be conscious
 of some community between it and some other substance. If, with
 the idealist, we say that there exists no other substance, then,
 necessarily, as there is nothing with which the substance of mind can
 be even compared, much less assimilated, it remains unknown; while, if
 we hold with the realist that being is fundamentally divisible into
 that which is present to us as mind, and that which, lying outside of
 it, is not mind, then, as this proposition itself asserts a difference
 and not a likeness, it is equally clear that mind remains unclassable
 and therefore unknowable.

The answer to this supposed insuperable dilemma may be made by
determining what we mean when we speak of knowing a thing. Definition
of knowing is here essential, and the first inquiry we have to make
is whether, in order to know mind, it is necessary to find and
recognize some community between the substance of mind and some other
substance? The statement is, on the one hand, that there exists no
other substance with which the substance of mind can be compared, much
less assimilated, and therefore there is no aid to be derived from
resemblance; or, on the other hand, that, if being is fundamentally
divisible into something which is mind and something which is not
mind, we depend for a knowledge of mind on a difference, and not on a
likeness, and we have no means of knowing that difference. Upon either
proposition, mind remains unclassable and therefore unknowable.

It may be conceded that our knowledge of the properties and forms of
matter consists in recognizing a community or a difference between
things which belong to the same class, so that there is a comparison
between things which are of the same substance. But what is to prevent
us from classifying the substance of mind, when the fundamental idea
of its substance is that it is something which resembles no other
substance, but constitutes a class or description of being that stands
entirely by itself, and in which, for a knowledge of its properties we
distinguish its properties from those of any other substance? The only
difficulty that arises here springs from the fact that we have but one
word--substance--by which to speak of the two existences that we call
mind and matter; just as we can only speak of an organism when we speak
of the natural body and the spiritual body. But this use of the same
term to express things which in our consciousness stand fundamentally
opposed to each other does not prevent us from discriminating between
the means by which we become conscious of the two things, or from
classifying the knowledge which we have of mind as something distinct
from the knowledge which we have of matter.

We must discriminate between the means by which the properties of
matter become known to us and the means by which the properties of
mind become known to us. In both cases there is knowledge, but it is
knowledge of a different kind; it is obtained by different means;
and we must therefore recognize a fundamental difference between
the substance of mind and the substance of matter. It is true that
our knowledge of the properties of matter and our knowledge of the
properties of mind are alike in this, that in both cases it is
knowledge by one and the same person; but the distinction is that, in
the one case, I have knowledge of objects external to myself, and, in
the other case, I have knowledge of myself as the person possessing
knowledge of external objects. The knowledge that we have of ourselves
is what most persons mean by consciousness, and it is what we should
scientifically understand by that term, although consciousness is
often used as synonymous with mental cognition of things external to
ourselves, and as cognition of ourselves also.

I shall now quote from the chapter in which Mr. Spencer makes a special
synthesis of reason, and in which he denies the existence of the
commonly assumed _hiatus_ between reason and instinct, maintaining that
the former is the continuation of the latter, because, as he thinks,
the highest forms of psychical activity arise little by little out of
the lowest and can not be separated from them. The passage which I
shall now analyze is this:

"Here seems to be the fittest place for pointing out how the general
doctrine that has been developed supplies a reconciliation between the
experience-hypothesis as commonly interpreted and the hypothesis which
the transcendentalists oppose to it.

"The universal law, that, other things equal, the cohesion of psychical
states is proportionate to the frequency with which they have followed
one another in experience, supplies an explanation of the so-called
'forms of thought,' as soon as it is supplemented by the law that
habitual psychical successions entail some hereditary tendency to such
successions, which, under persistent conditions, will become cumulative
in generation after generation. We saw that the establishment of those
compound reflex actions called instincts is comprehensible on the
principle that inner relations are, by perpetual repetition, organized
into correspondence with outer relations. We have now to observe that
the establishment of those consolidated, those indissoluble, those
instinctive mental relations constituting our ideas of space and time,
is comprehensible on the same principle.

"For, if, even to external relations that are often experienced
during the life of a single organism, answering internal relations
are established that become next to automatic--if such a combination
of psychical changes as that which guides a savage in hitting a bird
with an arrow becomes, by constant repetition, so organized as to
be performed almost without thought of the processes of adjustment
gone through--and if skill of this kind is so far transmissible that
particular races of men become characterized by particular aptitudes,
which are nothing else than partially organized psychical connections;
then, if there exist certain external relations which are experienced
by all organisms at all instants of their waking lives--relations
which are absolutely constant, absolutely universal--there will
be established answering internal relations that are absolutely
constant, absolutely universal. Such relations we have in those of
space and time. The organization of subjective relations adjusted to
these objective relations has been cumulative, not in each race of
creatures only, but throughout successive races of creatures; and such
subjective relations have, therefore, become more consolidated than
all others. Being experienced in every perception and every action of
each creature, these connections among outer existences must, for this
reason, too, be responded to by connections among inner feelings that
are, above all others, indissoluble. As the substrata of all other
relations in the _non-ego_, they must be responded to by conceptions
that are the substrata of all other relations in the _ego_. Being the
constant and infinitely repeated elements of thought, they must become
the automatic elements of thought--the elements of thought which it is
impossible to get rid of--the 'forms of intuition.'

"Such, it seems to me, is the only possible reconciliation between the
experience-hypothesis and the hypothesis of the transcendentalists,
neither of which is tenable by itself. Insurmountable difficulties
are presented by the Kantian doctrine (as we shall hereafter see);
and the antagonist doctrine, taken alone, presents difficulties that
are equally insurmountable. To rest with the unqualified assertion
that, antecedent to experience, the mind is a blank, is to ignore the
questions: Whence comes the power of organizing experiences? Whence
arise the different degrees of that power possessed by different races
of organisms, and different individuals of the same race? If, at birth,
there exists nothing but a passive receptivity of impressions, why
is not a horse as educable as a man? Should it be said that language
makes the difference, then why do not the cat and the dog, reared in
the same household, arrive at equal degrees and kinds of intelligence?
Understood in its current form, the experience-hypothesis implies
that the presence of a definitely organized nervous system is a
circumstance of no moment--a fact not needing to be taken into account!
Yet it is the all-important fact--the fact to which, in one sense, the
criticisms of Leibnitz and others pointed--the fact without which an
assimilation of experiences is inexplicable.

"Throughout the animal kingdom in general the actions are dependent
on the nervous structure. The physiologist shows us that each reflex
movement implies the agency of certain nerves and ganglia; that a
development of complicated instincts is accompanied by complication
of the nervous centers and their commissural connections; that the
same creature in different stages, as larva and imago, for example,
changes its instincts as its nervous structure changes; and that,
as we advance to creatures of high intelligence, a vast increase in
the size and in the complexity of the nervous system takes place.
What is the obvious inference? It is that the ability to co-ordinate
impressions and to perform the appropriate actions always implies
the pre-existence of certain nerves arranged in a certain way. What
is the meaning of the human brain? It is that the many _established_
relations among its parts stand for so many _established_ relations
among the psychical changes. Each of the constant connections among
the fibers of the cerebral masses answers to some constant connection
of phenomena in the experiences of the race. Just as the organized
arrangement subsisting between the sensory nerves of the nostrils and
the motor nerves of the respiratory muscles not only makes possible a
sneeze, but also, in the newly born infant, implies sneezings to be
hereafter performed, so, all the organized arrangements subsisting
among the nerves of the infant's brain not only make possible certain
combinations of impressions, but also imply that such combinations
will hereafter be made, imply that there are answering combinations in
the outer world, imply a preparedness to cognize these combinations,
imply faculties of comprehending them. It is true that the resulting
compound psychical changes do not take place with the same readiness
and automatic precision as the simple reflex action instanced; it is
true that some individual experiences seem required to establish them.
But, while this is partly due to the fact that these combinations are
highly involved, extremely varied in their modes of occurrence, made
up, therefore, of psychical relations less completely coherent, and
hence need further repetitions to perfect them, it is in a much greater
degree due to the fact that at birth the organization of the brain is
incomplete, and does not cease its spontaneous progress for twenty or
thirty years afterward. Those who contend that knowledge results wholly
from the experiences of the individual, ignoring as they do the mental
evolution which accompanies the autogenous development of the nervous
system, fall into an error as great as if they were to ascribe all
bodily growth and structure to exercise, forgetting the innate tendency
to assume the adult form. Were the infant born with a full-sized and
completely constructed brain, their position would be less untenable.
But, as the case stands, the gradually increasing intelligence
displayed throughout childhood and youth is more attributable to
the completion of the cerebral organization than to the individual
experiences--a truth proved by the fact that in adult life there is
sometimes displayed a high endowment of some faculty which, during
education, was never brought into play. Doubtless, experiences received
by the individual furnish the concrete materials for all thought.
Doubtless, the organized and semi-organized arrangements existing
among the cerebral nerves can give no knowledge until there has been
a presentation of the external relations to which they correspond.
And, doubtless, the child's daily observations and reasonings aid the
formation of those involved nervous connections that are in process of
spontaneous evolution, just as its daily gambols aid the development
of its limbs. But saying this is quite a different thing from saying
that its intelligence is wholly _produced_ by its experiences. That is
an utterly inadmissible doctrine--a doctrine which makes the presence
of a brain meaningless--a doctrine which makes idiocy unaccountable.

"In the sense, then, that there exist in the nervous system certain
pre-established relations answering to relations in the environment,
there is truth in the doctrine of 'forms of intuition'--not the truth
which its defenders suppose, but a parallel truth. Corresponding to
absolute external relations, there are established in the structure
of the nervous system absolute internal relations--relations that are
potentially present before birth in the shape of definite nervous
connections, that are antecedent to, and independent of, individual
experiences, and that are automatically disclosed along with the first
cognitions. And, as here understood, it is not only these fundamental
relations which are thus predetermined, but also hosts of other
relations of a more or less constant kind, which are congenitally
represented by more or less complete nervous connections. But these
predetermined internal relations, though independent of the experiences
of the individual, are not independent of experiences in general: they
have been determined by the experiences of preceding organisms. The
corollary here drawn from the general argument is that the human brain
is an organized register of infinitely numerous experiences received
during the evolution of life, or, rather, during the evolution of that
series of organisms through which the human organism has been reached.
The effects of the most uniform and frequent of these experiences have
been successively bequeathed, principal and interest; and have slowly
amounted to that high intelligence which lies latent in the brain
of the infant--which the infant in after-life exercises and perhaps
strengthens or further complicates, and which, with minute additions,
it bequeaths to future generations; and thus it happens that the
European inherits from twenty to thirty cubic inches more brain than
the Papuan. Thus it happens that faculties, as of music, which scarcely
exist in some inferior human races, become congenital in superior ones.
Thus it happens that out of savages unable to count up to the number of
their fingers, and speaking a language containing only nouns and verbs,
arise at length our Newtons and Shakespeares."[150]

The learned philosopher has here dealt with two hypotheses, neither
of which he considers tenable by itself. The first is that the
individual mind, anterior to experience, is a blank; that at birth
there exists nothing but a passive receptivity of impressions, which
become organized into intelligence by experience. The other hypothesis
is that of the transcendental school, which attributes the growth of
intelligence wholly to implanted intuitions, which become expanded by
the increase of mental power. His argument is put thus: If at birth the
mind of the individual is a blank, and it becomes capable of thought
or possessed of intelligence by experience, beginning with a passive
receptivity of impressions, and going on to their organization into
intelligence by the repetition of experiences and their increasing
complexity--why, he asks, is not a horse as educable as a man? Why
do not the cat and the dog, reared in the same household and hearing
human beings use language every moment of their lives, arrive at equal
degrees and kinds of intelligence? In the first place, as a matter
of fact, many animals are educable beyond their natural capacity of
intelligence, or beyond the point at which they would arrive without
such education, to a very remarkable degree. I have heard a credible
description of a dog which would ascend to a chamber and bring down
an article that he had been told to bring. Many repetitions of the
command and the performance had taught the animal to associate the
name of the article which he was to bring down with the act which he
was to perform. While I am writing, a bear beneath my window is going
through performances, at the word of command, of very considerable
varieties; actions which he would not do if he had not been trained
to do them. The trained war-horse knows the meaning of the different
airs played on the bugle upon the battle-field or the parade-ground,
and instantly charges or wheels about, without waiting to be prompted
by the bit or the spur. Insects can be trained, to some extent, in the
same way; birds to a much greater extent. Is the explanation of these
capacities to be found in a definitely organized nervous system as the
all-important fact without which an assimilation of experiences is
inexplicable? Grant that, as we advance from creatures of very low to
creatures of very high intelligence, we find a vast increase in the
size and complexity of the nervous system taking place through the
series, until we arrive at its highest and most complex development
in man. What is the hypothesis which explains the difference in
mental power between man and all the other creatures below him in the
capability of co-ordinating impressions and performing the appropriate
actions? It is, according to Mr. Spencer, that the capability implies
the existence of certain nerves arranged in a certain way; that where
this arrangement does not exist the capability is not found; and where
it exists in only a low degree the capability exists only in the same
degree. As two parallel and concurring facts these may be conceded. But
why are not these facts entirely consistent with another hypothesis,
namely, that to each creature, along with its specially organized
nervous system, there has been given by divine appointment a certain
degree of innate mental power, to explain which we must follow the
impressions produced in the nervous system into their transmutation
into intelligence, until we arrive at the limit of that intelligence?
Mr. Spencer's answer to this inquiry is twofold: first, that the
experience-hypothesis, in the case of the individual creature, or the
constant repetition of the impressions and the appropriate actions, is
insufficient to account for what takes place, without recognizing the
fact that the actions are dependent on the nervous structure, without
which the impressions would not be followed by the actions; second,
that the nervous structure in the different races of animals has come
to be what it is in each race by gradual modifications and increments
through the process of evolution of organisms out of one another, and
that these accumulations have resulted in the human brain, which has
the highest power of co-ordinating the impressions and performing the
appropriate actions. Then he puts, with an air of final solution, the
question, "What is the human brain?" which he answers in his own way.

His mode of answering this question is that the brain is an organ
with established relations among its parts, which stand for so many
established relations among the psychical changes. I understand this
to mean, that as the human brain, in the process of animal evolution,
has come to have certain constant connections among the fibers of the
cerebral masses, each of these connections answers to some constant
connection of phenomena in the experiences of the race. His corollary
is that the human brain is an organized register of infinitely numerous
experiences received by the race during the evolution of life, or
during the evolution of that series of organisms through which the
human organism has been reached. Each infant of the human race, to
whom has descended this improved and perfect brain, has latent in that
organ a high capacity for intelligence. This it begins to exercise and
strengthen and further complicate as life goes on, and at the end of
twenty or thirty years the individual brain is fully developed, and
this development, or capacity for development, the individual bequeaths
with minute additions, principal and interest, to future generations.
In different races of men the cubic bulk of the brain varies greatly,
according to the size transmitted from ancestors; and so certain
faculties which scarcely exist in some races become congenital in
others; and whereas the remote ancestors of all of us were savages,
incapable even of conceiving of numbers, and possessing but the rudest
elements of language, there have at length arisen our Newtons and
Shakespeares.

This hypothesis leads me to ask a question and to state a fact. The
question is, What is it in the infant of the most developed and
cultivated race that constitutes the high intelligence which is said
to lie latent in his brain? In other words, is there nothing in that
infant, or in the adult which he becomes, but a brain and a nervous
system of a highly organized and complex physical structure adapted
to receive impressions on itself from without? Are the experiences
which have been enjoyed by the progenitors of the human infant or by
preceding organisms registered in his brain, and is his capacity of
intelligence dependent on his having inherited the same or nearly the
same volume of brain as that which was possessed by his progenitors?
And does the intelligence consist, in degree or in kind, in nothing
but a repetition of the same experiences as those through which his
progenitors were carried, or is there a something in him to which his
individual experiences contribute the mental food by which the mind is
nourished and by the assimilation of which its individual intellectual
growth becomes possible?

It is not necessary to question the fact that individuals of great
intellect, the Newtons and the Shakespeares, have had or may have
had large brains; or the fact that, as between races of men, the
most intelligent have brains of greater cubic measure than the less
intelligent. But it has not always been found that individuals of
superior intellect have had comparatively larger brains than other
individuals, nor that those who have had very large brains have
transmitted them to their children. The important fact to which I meant
to advert is that, since we have known much about the human brain and
the nervous system connected with it, it has not been found that, in
its several parts and in the action of the nerves connected with it,
it has been differently organized and acted upon in the lowest savages
from what we know of it in the European and the most civilized races.
There is a difference in volume, but not in the organization or the
office of the brain in different races of men, as there is in different
individuals of the same race. The fact that all men, since they became
a completed type of animal, however they originated and became men,
have possessed a capacity to become in different degrees intelligent
and thinking beings, points strongly to the conclusion that while in
each individual there is a nervous system so organized as to transmit
impressions from external objects to the central physical organ called
the brain, there must be another existence in that individual, of a
spiritual and intellectual nature, of a substance that is not physical,
to which the brain supplies the materials of thought, thought being
mental cognition of an idea. If I am asked for the proof of such an
existence, I answer that the proof is consciousness, as I define it,
and this I conceive is the highest kind of proof.

One may appeal to the convictions of mankind for an answer to the
question, What is the highest and most satisfactory kind of knowledge
that any of us possess? The most intelligent man may be mistaken in
that part of self-knowledge that relates to his own character or
motives. Others may see him very differently from the light in which
he sees himself, and they may be right and he may be wrong. He may
think, too, that he knows a great deal that he does not know; but no
intelligent man is mistaken or in any way deluded when he believes in
his own existence. No man in his waking moments and in his right mind
ever confounded his own identity, as we have seen that Lady Macbeth
did when she was walking in her sleep, with the identity of another
person. No man in his right mind loses the constant, ever-present
sense of himself as a being and as one distinct from all other beings.
The reason is that his own existence is certified to him by the most
unerring of witnesses, one who can not lie, because the fact of one's
own existence is the fact of which that witness must speak. Of all
other facts the witness may speak falsely. The mind can not speak
falsely when it speaks to us of our own existence, for the witness who
speaks and the person spoken to are one and the same. The falsehood, if
there could be a falsehood, would be instantly detected.

As the mind certifies to itself its own existence by the most direct
and the highest kind of proof, so it certifies to itself the powers
with which it is endowed; and this brings me to the anatomical
examination of the structure of the mind. I shall not make this
analysis a very minute one, but shall confine it to those distinct
elementary powers which are constituted by systems, as the powers of
the bodily organism are constituted by systems distinguishable by the
functions which they perform. In the bodily organism we recognize the
digestive system, the system of circulation of the blood, the muscular
system, the nervous system, the sensory system, which is distributed
into the different organs of sense, the male and female systems of
sexual generation, and the female system of gestation. These several
systems, acting together as one complex mechanism endowed with the
mysterious principle of life, form in each human being of either sex
the physical existence of the individual. Acting in each individual of
either sex simultaneously and with mutual involved interdependencies,
they form a whole which, in its several parts and their functions, may
be likened to the several parts and functions in one of those machines
which we ourselves construct--with this difference, however, that
in one life is present and in the other it is not. The fundamental
question is whether this complex animal mechanism, thus constituted
of certain physical systems, also constitutes during this life the
entire individual. If so, the individual existence is a unit, and, when
the physical organism perishes by what we call death, the individual
existence ceases. If, on the contrary, we have satisfactory proof
that there is, during this life, in each individual an organized and
extended entity, composed, like the systems of the bodily organisms,
of certain systems of its own but of a substance that is not material,
then the existence of each individual is a dual existence; and one of
the two existences now associated and acting together may be dissolved
into its original material elements, while the other, composed of a
different substance, may be indissoluble and have an endless life.
There is no middle ground that I can perceive between these two
hypotheses. One or the other of them is absolutely true, independent of
the inquiry as to the mode in which mind came to exist; for after going
through with all the reasoning and all the proofs that are supposed to
show its origin by the process called evolution, we must still come
back to the question of what mind is after it has come into existence;
must determine on which side lies the preponderating probability of its
continuance after the death of the body; and must accept the conclusion
of its destruction or cessation when the body dies, or the other
conclusion that it is unlike the body in its substance, and therefore
indestructible by the means which destroy the body. For this reason we
must examine the mind for proof that it is an organism of a special
nature because composed of a special substance, and this proof is to be
reached by an analysis of the systems of which the mind is composed. I
select, of course, for the purposes of this analysis, any individual
whose physical and mental faculties have had the average development
into the condition that is called a sound mind in a sound body--_mens
sana in corpore sano_. I shall treat incidentally of the condition of
idiocy.

We may classify the distinct systems of the mind, with their several
functions, as easily as we can classify the distinct systems of our
physical structure and their functions. I have seen the systems of
the mind distributed into five; and although I do not adopt the whole
analysis made by the writer to whom I refer, or make use of the same
terminology, I shall follow his classification because it is one which
any thinking person must recognize as a description of mental powers
of which he is conscious.[151] We are all aware that we possess the
following mental systems in which inhere certain elementary powers that
are mental powers:

1. A sensory system, by which the mind takes impressions from matter.

2. A system of intellectual faculties, such as reason, imagination,
reflection, combination of ideas, discrimination between different
ideas.

3. A system of emotions, or susceptibilities to pleasure or pain, of a
moral and intellectual nature as distinguished from the pleasurable or
painful excitation of our nerves.

4. A system of desires, which prompt us to wish for and acquire some
good, or to avoid some evil.

5. A system of affections, which prompt us to like or dislike persons,
things, situations, and whatever is attractive or unattractive, as the
case may be.

A little further analysis of each of these systems will explain why
they are respectively to be thus classified as distinguishable organic
powers or functions of the human mind:

_First._ The mind is placed as a recipient in correspondence with the
material universe through the nerves of sensation and the special
corporeal organs, whereby the properties of matter become to some
extent known to us. As the power of the physical senses to obtain for
us a knowledge of the properties of matter is limited, even when our
senses are in the utmost state of their normal capacity, there may be
properties of matter which will never become known to us in our present
existence. But certain of its properties do become known to us, and we
are perfectly aware that this takes place through our physical organs
of sense, which convey to our mental reception certain impressions.
This power of the mind, therefore, to receive such impressions, to
retain and transmute them into thought, is to be recognized as a power
exerted by means of an organic physical contrivance and an organic
mental structure, the two acting together, the resultant being the
mind's faculty for receiving ideas from the external world. Let us
suppose, then, that the bodily senses are impaired by the partial
destruction of their organs. It does not follow that the knowledge
which has been derived from them, when they were in full activity,
is destroyed; all that happens is that we acquire no more of such
knowledge by the same means, or do not acquire it so readily and
completely. If the destruction of the physical senses is so complete
as it becomes when death of the whole body takes place, the materials
derived from the impressions conveyed to the mind from external objects
during life have been transmuted into ideas and thoughts, and, as
that which holds the ideas and the thoughts is of a substance unlike
in nature to the substance of the physical organs which conveyed the
impressions, the rational conclusion is that the ideas and thoughts
will continue to be held by it, after the dissolution of the body, as
they were held while the body was in full life.

_Second._ I recognize in the mind a system of intellectual faculties.
Of intellect, I should say that the ascertainment of truth is its
primary function; and hence I should say that the power of retaining
permanent possession of truth already ascertained is the means by
which we maintain continued ascertainment, or the utilization of
truth already ascertained.[152] For the exercise of this power of
ascertaining, holding, applying, and expressing truth--the processes
of intellect--we have three recognized faculties. These are the
intuitive faculty; the faculty of association or combination; and
the introspective faculty, or the capacity to look inward upon the
processes of our own minds. The philosophers who maintain that all
our knowledge is derived from experience admit neither the intuitive
faculty nor the fact of intuition. On the other hand, the philosophers
who maintain, as Mr. Spencer does, that the brain of every infant is
an organized register of the experiences of his ancestors, do not
allow of the existence of any intuitions as facts in the individual
life of the infant, because they regard the individual experiences
of the infant as mere repetitions of former experiences that took
place in its progenitors. But rightly regarded the true meaning of
the intuitive faculty is this: that at the instant when a new sensory
impression is received by the infant, or the adult, there is an innate
and implanted power which comes into play, by which is asserted the
reality of that from which the sensory impression is received. This
power, the intuitive faculty, is infallible. It was ordained as the
means by which a sensory impression becomes to us a reality. We are so
constructed, mentally, that we must believe those primary facts which
the sensory impressions certify to us to be facts. On the veracity of
this certification we are absolutely dependent, because we can not
contradict the affirmations of reality which causation makes to our
intuitive mental perceptions. On this veracity we risk our lives; we
could not be safe if we were not subjected to this belief. Intuition,
therefore, is something anterior to experience; it is that power by
which the first experience and the last become to us the means of
belief in a reality. This is a power that can belong to and inhere
in a spiritual organism alone. We must, therefore, recognize in the
infant this original implanted endowment, the capacity to be mentally
convinced of realities; and while, in order to meet the first exercise
of this capacity there must be a physical organism which will conduct
the sensory impressions to the brain and a brain that will receive
them, the capacity of the infant to have its first conviction of the
reality certified to it by the sensory impression is at once the
capacity of an intellectual being, and a necessity imposed upon him by
the law of his existence. Idiocy, when complete, is the absence of this
capacity, by reason of some failure of connection between the brain, as
the central recipient of sensory impressions, and the mind which should
receive and transmute those impressions into thought. We are scarcely
warranted in regarding the idiot as a human animal possessed of no mind
whatever. The absolute idiot should be defined as a human creature whom
we can not educate at all--in whom we can awaken no intelligence; but
we are not therefore authorized in believing that there is no provision
whatever for the development of intelligence after the mere physical
life of the body is ended. Absolute idiocy, or what, from our as yet
imperfect means of developing intelligence in such unfortunate persons
we must regard as at present absolute, is probably very rare. Between
human creatures so born and those vast multitudes in whom average
intelligence is developed by surrounding influences, whatever they may
be, there are various degrees of the capacity for development; and what
happens in these intermediate cases proves that there are different
degrees in which the connection between the physical and the mental
organism is established at birth, so that in some the connection may
be said to be abnormal and imperfect, while in the enormous majority
it is at least so nearly normal and complete that intelligence may be
developed.

Here, then, is the place to advert to Mr. Spencer's assertion that
the doctrine that intelligence in the human being is wholly produced
by experience is utterly inadmissible; that it makes the presence
of a brain meaningless, and idiocy unaccountable. A doctrine which
imputes the development of intelligence _wholly_ to the experience of
the individual is of course untenable. There must be a brain and a
nervous system; but we are not warranted, in the case of the idiot, in
assuming that he has a differently organized brain and nervous system
from those of his parents or others of the human race, as Mr. Spencer
appears to me to assume. What we are warranted in believing is that
while the brain and nervous system of the idiot child may be just
as complete in his structure as in those of the parents, there has
somehow occurred, from some cause, antecedent in some cases to birth,
but operating after birth in other cases, a failure of the adequate
connection between the brain and the mind, so that intelligence can
not be developed at all, or can be developed but partially. The
individual may have inherited just as good an "organized register" of
the experience of his ancestors--just as good a natural brain as his
brothers and sisters who are perhaps highly intelligent from their
birth, or capable of becoming intelligent. Yet he lacks the ability
to co-ordinate impressions and to perform the actions appropriate
to those impressions, because there has failed to be established in
him the necessary connection between the impressions and the sensory
intellectual system which constitutes one organic part of the mind. The
experiences, however often repeated, of the impressions produced by
his physical senses on his brain, remain there as corporeal feelings.
They reach no further. They do not become transmuted into ideas,
and so intelligence can not be developed, or is developed but to a
very feeble extent. Instead of saying that "the gradually increasing
intelligence displayed throughout childhood is more attributable to
the completion of the cerebral organization than to the individual
experiences," I should say that it is most attributable to the presence
of an established connection between the function of the cerebral
organization and the mental receptivity of impressions, which is
not merely passive, but is incessantly active because incessantly
receiving, and that, where this connection is wanting, the receptivity,
although it may exist, can not become active, and so intelligence
can not be developed in this life. But there may be another state of
existence, in which the mind of the idiot, no longer dependent on a
physical organization of brain and nervous system for the reception
of ideas and for intellectual growth, but retaining its capacity for
mental development, may begin and carry on such development by other
means; whereas, if the brain and the nervous system constitute all
there is of any human being, whether born an idiot or born capable of
intellectual growth through his individual experiences, he can have no
future after that brain and nervous system are destroyed, unless we
suppose that mind is something that has been developed out of matter
into a spiritual existence--a supposition which is to me inconceivable.

The second of the intellectual faculties is the associative, or
that intuitive power by which ideas are combined and associated or
held in disjunction and separation. I regard this as an intuitive
faculty, because, as our observation teaches us, its presence and
power, manifested at the first dawning of infantile intelligence, are
attested by every exercise of the organs through which the external
world reaches our minds, to the last moment of our mortal existence.
Experience is, of course, necessary to the first action of this
intuitive faculty. This is only another way of saying that there must
occur a sensory impression upon the brain which becomes transmuted
into the idea of the external object, and then a repetition of that
impression produces a repetition of the idea, and the associative
faculty combines or disjoins them. But unless there exists an intuitive
power, inherent in the intellective system, whereby the first idea and
the second can be associated and compared, there can be no knowledge,
no acquisition of truth, because the sensory impressions will stop
in the brain as so many feelings excited through the nervous system,
instead of being transmuted into thought.

The introspective faculty, on the other hand, does not deal solely
with sensory impressions, or with the ideas which they have suggested.
It is that power of the mind by which it can look inward upon itself.
This is seemingly a paradox; but nevertheless, the existence of such a
faculty is a necessary hypothesis, not only because we are conscious
of it, but because without it we could have no means of analyzing
our own mental structure, although we could make some very partial
analysis of the mind of another individual by studying his actions. As
regards ourselves, it is as if our visual organs possessed the power
of looking at the process by which an image of an external object is
impressed upon the retina and is thence transmitted to the brain, where
the sensory impression is produced. This, of course, is a physical
impossibility. All we can do is to examine the physical structure of
the eye, with its wonderful provision of lenses and other means for
the reception and the effect of light, and to reason upon what we can
discover that the process of what is called seeing must be thus or
thus. But that process itself we can not see by the same organs by
which it is carried on. In the case of the mind, however--and herein
is one of the remarkable proofs of its unlikeness as an organism to
the bodily organism--there is a power to witness, to observe, to
be sensible of its own operations. This power, like all the other
mental powers, may be very feeble in some individuals, for want of
exercise, but in others, from long and frequent exercise, it may become
exceedingly vigorous, and be the means of advancing mental philosophy
if its observations are preserved and recorded. It is one of the
systems which, as a whole, constitute the spiritual organism to which
we give the name of mind. Such a capacity can not be predicated of a
physical organism. It is impossible for us to conceive of a machine
standing and looking upon its own operations, speculating upon their
improvement, or thinking of the relation of its mechanism to the human
author of its being. It is equally impossible for us to think of the
body of man contemplating its own existence, or being sensible of it;
but it is perfectly easy to conceive of its being known to the mind
that inhabits it, which takes cognizance both of its own operations
and of the operations of the physical organism, reflects upon them
separately or in their action upon one another, and spontaneously
refers both to an author.

_Third._ I have placed third in the category of mental systems the
system of emotions or susceptibilities to mental pleasure or pain, as
distinguished from the pleasurable or painful excitation of our nervous
system. No one can doubt that, however powerful may be the influence
upon our mental states of physical pain or physical sensations that
are pleasurable, there is such a thing as mental pain and mental
pleasure, satisfaction or dissatisfaction, wholly unconnected with
and in no way dependent upon our corporeal feelings, present or past.
It is from this susceptibility to mental pain or pleasure that we
come to have the idea of goodness or badness, which is originally a
classification of the qualities of external things as good or bad;
the good being those which affect us pleasurably, and the bad those
which affect us painfully. By our mental organization we are placed
in such correspondence with the material universe, that things apart
from ourselves affect us agreeably or disagreeably; sights, sounds,
odors, and tastes give us pleasure or pain. We are also placed in
correspondence with the spiritual universe, and thereby certain acts,
relations, and traits of character give us pleasure, or the reverse.
In process of time, the youth whose mental systems are in the course
of expansion comes to perceive that his own acts give him pleasure or
pain, and hence he derives the perception of good or bad qualities
in himself. Moral goodness in ourselves--goodness of disposition,
of intention, of volition, of habit--is found to be distinct from
physical and intellectual goodness; and thus the consciousness of moral
goodness becomes the intellectual faculty to which moral commands can
be addressed, with a prospect that the connection between obedience
and happiness will be perceived. This susceptibility to mental pain
or pleasure, from the qualities of external things, from the acts and
dispositions of other persons, and from our own, is one that can inhere
in a mental organization, but it can not possibly inhere in a physical
organism. The physical organism is undoubtedly the means by which the
mental susceptibility to pleasure or pain is reached from the external
universe; but, unless there is a mental organism to feel the pleasure
or the pain, the action of the physical organization is nothing but the
excitation of the nervous system. I, therefore, make a distinct class
among the mental systems, and assign to it the faculty of experiencing
mental pleasure or mental pain as a capacity distinct from the
pleasurable or painful excitation of our nerves.

_Fourth._ In the category of mental systems may be placed those desires
which lead us to wish for and strive to obtain some good or to avoid
some evil. This, surely, is not to be regarded as anything but an
intellectual perception of what is to us a good or an evil. It is a
structural capacity of the soul which, after an experience of that
which we learn to be good for us, or the reverse of good, is always
prompting us to take the steps or to perform the acts which will insure
a repetition of that experience, in the acquisition of further good
or the avoidance of further evil. Its operations may be perverted.
We may, from bad habits or erroneous ideas of good and evil, pursue
objects that are pernicious. But whether we strive for that which is
truly good, or is deceptively regarded as a good, we are perpetually
acting under the impulse of a desire that is implanted in us, and
that operates as a desire whether its objects are worthy or unworthy,
beneficial or injurious, noxious or innoxious to our moral health.

_Fifth_, and lastly, we may classify the affections as one of the
structural systems of our spiritual existence. It is that part of
our natures that makes us like or dislike both persons and things;
and, in regard to the former, it is the capacity for love in its high
distinction from the physical appetite of sexual passion. The range
of its operation is most various and multiform, but throughout all of
its operations it is a spiritual capacity, implanted in us for our
happiness as spiritual beings.

If it is objected that this is an arbitrary classification--that as
an analysis of structural systems in our mental organization it bears
no analogy to the anatomical exploration and classification of the
structural systems of our physical organism--the answer is, that in
regard to the latter we make the examination by the exercise of our
corporeal senses, chiefly by the visual organs, as we do in the case of
all other organized matter. In analyzing the structural organization
of our minds, we are examining a subject that is not laid bare to the
inspection of any of our corporeal organs; the scalpel in the hand
of the dissector can afford us no aid in this investigation, but the
inspection must be carried on by turning the eye of the mind inward
upon itself. This we are mentally constituted to do. While, therefore,
it may be true that the classification which I have made, or which may
have been made by others, of the structural mental systems, is in one
sense arbitrary, and while in any method of describing them they may
run into or overlap one another in a complex organism, it will always
remain true that the mind is capable of such examinations, and that the
analysis, however given, is useful to the comprehension of the mind
as an organized and extended entity. No one can carry on this mental
examination without perceiving that he is examining a something which
has an independent existence and a life of its own, whether he supposes
it to have been evolved out of organized matter, or embraces the idea
of its distinct and special creation by an exercise of the Divine Will.

The two main hypotheses concerning the origin of mind may now be
contrasted. In the long process of development of animal organisms
out of one another there come to be, it is said, higher and higher
degrees of intelligence, as the nervous system becomes more and more
capable of complex impressions, until we arrive at the consummate
physical organization and the supreme intelligence of the human race.
The physical organization is open to our examination, and we find the
human brain divided into cerebral masses, with ganglia of sensory
nerves extending to the external sensory organs. Intelligence is the
faculty of comprehending by previous preparation the combinations of
impressions made on the brain through the sensory nerves. The brain
being an organized register in which the experiences of progenitors
have accumulated a high degree of this faculty, each human infant born
into the world comes into it with a prepared capacity to acquire the
combinations of impressions produced in his individual experience.
Transmitted from generation to generation, this inherited capacity
becomes the means by which each individual manifests and enjoys what
we call intelligence; and the resulting aggregate of all the faculties
thus called into exercise is what we denominate mind. It must be
observed, however, that this theory or explanation of the origin of
mind, rejecting the hypothesis of its special creation as a being
of a spiritual nature, assumes it to be a something which has been
developed out of the growth and improvement of a physical organism.
When you inquire whether the nature of this something is supposed to
be a product of a different substance from matter, although developed
out of matter, you are left without an answer; and when you press the
inquiry whether a spiritual existence can be conceived as having grown
out of the action of a physical organism, you are told that there are
no means of determining what a spiritual existence is, because there
is nothing with which you can compare it so as to ascertain what it
resembles or what it does not resemble. Or if there are some who
accept the evolution theory of the origin of mind, and who think it
possible that a spiritual existence can owe its origin to the action of
matter without any intervention of a creating power purposely giving
existence to a spiritual essence, you have to ask a question to which
you can only get this answer: that it has pleased the Almighty Being
to establish a system by which a spiritual in contradistinction to a
physical existence has been developed in countless ages out of the
action of material substances organized into definite systems and
endowed with the principle of life. Those who assume this hypothesis
must necessarily assume also that the spiritual existence is, after it
has come into being, an existence distinct from the physical organism,
although generated out of it, and then they must encounter the further
inquiry as to the probability of the supposed method of production
resorted to by the Supreme Being.

More than once in the course of our colloquies I have had occasion to
say that, in all our inquiries of this nature, whether in regard to the
origin of our physical organism or that of our mental existence, we
must constantly bear in mind the unbounded capacity of the Creator to
adopt any method of production whatever; that it is just as much within
his power to call things of the most opposite natures into existence
by a single word as it is to establish methods by which they shall be
developed through innumerable ages of what we call time. That the Being
who is supposed to preside over the universe and to hold this unlimited
power is an hypothesis I readily admit; but I affirm that his existence
and attributes are necessary postulates, without which there can be no
reasoning concerning the origin of anything. Whether that Being exists
and possesses the attributes which we impute to him I have all along
said is a matter of which we must be satisfied by independent proofs
before we undertake to investigate his probable methods.

The hypothesis of the origin of mind which I now mean to contrast
with that of the evolutionists may be stated as follows: It is a
rational deduction, from all that we know of our physical organism,
that procreation of new individuals of that organism by the sexual
union of male and female was established as the means of continuing
the species of animal known as man. When or how established is not a
material part of the inquiry that I now make. It may have been that
the division of the sexes came about by a very slow process, or it
may have been by the aboriginal creation of a completed pair, male
and female. However or whenever it came to exist, there came to be
one uniform method of bringing into existence new individuals of a
peculiar and perfectly distinguishable animal type. If we confine our
attention to the physical organism of man, it is perfectly apparent
that when procreation and gestation take place they happen because of
the established law that a new individual of this species of animal
shall be produced by the sexual union of two other individuals, male
and female, and that the new individual shall have the same physical
organism as the parents. A new physical life thus springs out of two
other physical lives by a process the secret of which we can not
detect, although we can trace it through some of its stages so far as
to see that there is a secret process by which two physical organisms
give existence to another physical organism of the same type and having
the same principle of life.

As the new individual animal grows into further development, we find
that along with his animal organism and united with it by a tie which
we can not see, but about which we can reason, there is apparently
present a kind of life that is something more than the life of the
body. The further we carry our investigations of the phenomena which
indicate the existence of this mental life, the more we become
convinced that it is the life of a spiritual organism. As the Creator
had the power to give existence to the corporeal organism, why had he
not an equal power to give existence to a spiritual organism? If he
established the law of sexual union between a male and a female in
order to perpetuate the type of animal to which they belong--the law
which gives existence to a new individual of that animal type every
time that a new conception and a new birth take place--why should he
not have established the collateral law that every time there is a
new birth of an infant there shall come into existence a spiritual
entity which shall be united to the corporeal organism for a time,
thus constituting in that infant a dual existence which makes his
whole individuality during this life? If we suppose that the physical
organism of our double natures was left to be worked out by a very
slow process, by which physical organisms are developed out of one
another--or by which we theoretically suppose them to have been so
developed--why is it necessary to suppose that our spirits or souls
have been developed in the same way or by an analogous method? What
reason have we to believe that the Creator works by the same methods in
the spiritual world, or by methods that are of the same nature as those
which we think we can discover to be his methods in giving existence
to corporeal organisms? The two realms of spirit and matter are so
completely unlike that we are not compelled to believe that the methods
by which creation of organisms of the two kinds are effected by the
Almighty are necessarily or probably the same.

In order to be clearly understood I will now repeat my hypothesis
in a distinct form. I assume the existence of a pair of animals of
the human type, male and female, endowed with the power of producing
new individuals of the same type. In their physical organisms is
established the law of procreation, and in the female counterpart of
that organism is established the concomitant law of conception and
parturition. Thus far provision is made for the production of a new
individual physically organized like the parents. In those parents
there is also established another law, by the operation of which the
same process which results in the production of the new individual
animal organism brings into existence a spiritual organism, which is
united with and becomes the companion of the physical organism so
long as the latter shall continue to live. These laws established
in the first pair and in every succeeding pair continue to operate
through every succeeding generation. Perhaps it will be said that
this attributes the production of a spiritual organism to a physical
process; but, in truth, it does no more than to assert the simultaneous
production of the two existences. It is not necessary to assume that
the fœtus which becomes at birth the human infant is before birth
animated by a soul; for it is not necessary to suppose, nor is it
apparently true, that the physical organism is complete until birth
takes place and the breath of life enters the lungs, thus constituting
a new life other than that of the fœtus or the unborn child, although
the one is a continuation of the other. At whatever point of time the
complete animal organism is in a condition to be observed so that we
can say here is a living child, at that point we begin to perceive a
capacity to receive impressions from the external world without the
connection that has theretofore existed between the unborn child and
the maternal system. This capacity must either be attributed to the
individual experience of the infant, so that without experience of
his own he can not begin to be possessed of a growing intelligence,
or it must be imputed to an innate and implanted power resident in
a spiritual organism that comes into exercise whenever the physical
organism has begun to draw the breath of life.

The evolution hypothesis of the origin of the human mind necessarily
leaves its nature in an indeterminate state that will not satisfy the
requirements of sound reasoning. In one mode of stating and reasoning
upon this hypothesis it is assumed that there is not now and never was
a mental existence that was created in each individual of the race
at his birth; but that at some very remote period in the history of
successive animal organisms there was produced an animal of a highly
developed nervous structure, capable of intelligence by reason of a
superior power of receiving physical impressions and co-ordinating
them into states of consciousness which correspond to the physical
feelings; and to the perpetually recurring series of these states of
consciousness we give the name of mind. This capacity of intelligence
is transmitted from parents to offspring, the experiences of the former
being registered in the brain of the latter; but however complete may
be the inherited nervous structure, and however great the capacity
for intelligence, mind in each individual of the race is evidenced by
nothing but a constant succession and variation of certain states of
feelings produced in the nervous structure.

Against this view we may place what we know from constant observation.
We know that it has been ordained, as a consequence of the sexual union
of two individuals of opposite sex, there shall come into existence a
new individual of the same physical organism as the parents. Of the
interior process by which this product is effected we must remain
ignorant, but about the fact there can be no doubt. That fact is,
that by the union of certain vesicles contributed by each of the
parents there results a new individual organism. We know further
that simultaneously with the complete production of the new physical
organism, there comes into being, and is incorporated with it, an
existence that we are compelled by the phenomena which it manifests to
regard as a non-physical and a spiritual organism. Of the process by
which this distinct existence is effected, we must remain as ignorant
as we are of the process by which the physical organism was made to
result from the sexual union of the parents. But of the fact there can
be no more doubt in the one case than in the other. In every instance
of a new birth of a perfect infant, we know that there results a dual
existence in the same individual; the one manifested by physical, the
other by mental phenomena. To argue that the mental and spiritual
existence grew out of an improved and improving physical organism
in long-past ages, and became an adjunct to that organism after it
had attained a certain development, without any intervention of the
creating power at each new birth of an individual infant, is to limit
the power of the Creator in a realm wherein the subject of his creating
power is essentially unlike the subject with which he deals when he
deals with physical organisms. In all reasoning upon the origin and
nature of the human mind, the boundless power of the Creator must be
assumed. In judging of the probabilities of his methods of action, it
is the safest course to be guided by what we can see takes place at
every new birth of a human infant. The physical organism results from
the operation of a certain law. The mental organism results, it is
alike rational to presume, from the operation of a certain other law.
How either of these laws operates we are not permitted to know, but
we can as safely infer the one as the other, from what is open to our
observation.

I shall now touch briefly upon another argument, the foundation of
which is to be tested by historical facts into the truth of which I
shall not here inquire, because they must, for the purposes for which
I use them, be assumed. The immortality of the human soul is said to
have been proved by a Divine revelation. This great fact is supposed
to be established by evidence of a character quite different from that
which convinces us of the existence and attributes of the Almighty.
But, assuming revelation to be a fact, it has an important bearing
upon the subject of this essay, because the question arises, for what
conceivable reason the Almighty should have made to us a revelation of
our immortality, through the direct testimony of a competent witness,
if we are not spiritual beings. Information of a fact supposes that
there was a person to be informed. Concurrently with the consciousness
which assures us of our personality, we have the assurance of our
immortality certified to us by a messenger expressly authorized to give
us the information. If the mind, or that part of our individuality
which we call the soul, is in its origin and nature nothing but what
the evolution theory supposes, what was there to be informed of
immortality, or of anything else? The possibility and certainty of
an existence after the death of the body is a conviction that must
exercise great influence over the conduct of men in this life. It is
consistent with the whole apparent scheme of the revelation to suppose
that it was made for a twofold purpose: first, to cause men to lead
better lives in this world than they might have led without this
information and conviction; and, secondly, to form them for greater
happiness in another world. The first of these purposes might have
been effectuated by causing men to believe in their own immortality,
notwithstanding the belief might be a delusion because there is no
being capable, in fact, of any existence after the life of the body
is ended. But such a method of action is hardly to be imputed to the
Creator and Supreme Governor of the universe, according to the ideas
of his character which natural religion alone will give us. It is not
in accordance with rational conceptions of his attributes to suppose
that he deludes his rational creatures with assurances or apparent
proofs of something that is not true for the sake of making them act
as if it were true. When we find ourselves running into a hypothesis
of this kind, we may be pretty sure that we are departing from correct
principles of reasoning. In regard to the second of the supposed
purposes for which the revelation of immortality was made--to form
men for greater happiness in another state of existence--it is quite
obvious that the supposed scheme of the revelation is a mere delusion,
if we are not beings capable of a continued spiritual existence after
the death of our bodies. It is therefore a matter of great consequence
to determine what the evolution theory of the origin and nature of the
human mind makes us out to be.

I have never seen any statement of that theory that does not lead to
the conclusion that man is a highly developed animal organism, whose
mental existence is not something created in each individual of the
race, and of a substance and organized structure different from the
physical organism, but whose mental phenomena are merely exhibitions
and effects of occurrences taking place in the physical system, and
assuming the shape of what for distinctness is called thought. In
whatever form this theory has been stated by its most distinguished
professors, it leaves only an interval of degree, and not an interval
of kind, between the mind of man and that which, in some of the other
animals, is supposed to be mind. The evolution doctrine, taken in one
of its aspects, supposes one grand chain of animal organisms, rising
higher and higher in the scale of animal life, but connected together
by ordinary generation, so that they are of one kindred throughout; but
that, as each distinct species grows out of predecessors, by gradual
improvements and increments, forming more and more elaborate organisms,
man is the consummate product of the whole process. But when we ask
at what point or stage in the series of developing animal organisms
the mind of man was produced, or what it was when produced, we get no
satisfactory answer. To the first question, it can only be answered,
as Darwin himself answers, that there must be a definition of man
before we can determine at what time he came to exist. To the second
question, we have answers which differ materially from each other.
First, we have whatever we can extract from such a system of psychology
as Mr. Spencer's, which ignores the capability of the mind to exist
independent of the nervous structure and the brain, because it excludes
the idea of any ego, any me, any person, and makes consciousness to
consist of a connected series of physical feelings, to which there are
corresponding psychical equivalents that he calls mental states. It
would seem to follow, therefore, that when there is no longer remaining
for the individual any nervous structure and any brain, the mental
states, or psychical side of the physical impressions, must cease; or,
in other words, that the only existing ego has come to an end.

On the other hand, I have seen an ingenious hypothesis which it is well
to refer to, because it illustrates the efforts that are often made
to reconcile the doctrines of evolution with a belief in immortality.
This hypothesis by no means ignores the possibility of a spiritual
existence, or the spiritual as distinguished from the material world.
But it assumes that man was produced under the operation of physical
laws; and that after he had become a completed product--the consummate
and finished end of the whole process of evolution--he passed under the
dominion and operation of other and different laws, and is saved from
annihilation by the intervention of a change from the physical to the
spiritual laws of his Creator. Put into a condensed form, this theory
has been thus stated: Having spent countless æons in forming man, by
the slow process of animal evolution, God will not suffer him to fall
back into elemental flames, and be consumed by the further operation of
physical laws, but will transfer him into the dominion of the spiritual
laws that are held in reserve for his salvation.

One of the first questions to be asked, in reference to this
hypothesis, is, Who or what is it that God is supposed to have spent
countless æons in creating by the slow process of animal evolution? If
we contemplate a single specimen of the human race, we find a bodily
organism, endowed with life like that of other animals, and acted upon
by physical laws throughout the whole period of its existence. We
also find present in the same individual a mental existence, which is
certified to us by evidence entirely different from that by which we
obtain a knowledge of the physical organism. As the methods employed
by the Creator in the production of the physical organism, whatever
we may suppose them to have been, were physical laws operating upon
matter, so the methods employed by him in the production of a spiritual
existence must have operated in a domain that was wholly aside from
the physical world. Each of these distinct realms is equally under the
government of an Omnipotent Being; and while we may suppose that in the
one he employed a very slow process, such as the evolution of animal
organisms out of one another is imagined to have been, there is no
conceivable reason why he should not, in the other and very different
realm, have resorted to the direct creation of a spiritual existence,
which can not, in the nature of things, have required to be produced by
the action of physical laws. When, at the birth of each individual of
the human race, the two existences become united, when, in consequence
of the operation of that sexual union of the parents which has been
ordained for the production of a new individual, the physical and the
spiritual existence become incorporated in the one being, the fact that
they remain for a certain time mutually dependent and mutually useful,
co-operating in the purposes of their temporary connection, does not
change their essential nature. The one may be destructible because the
operation of physical laws may dissolve the ligaments that hold it
together; the other may be indestructible, because the operation of
spiritual laws will hold together the spiritual organism that is in its
nature independent of the laws of matter.

I can therefore see no necessary connection between the methods
employed by the Almighty in the production of an animal and the methods
employed by him in the production of a soul. That in the birth of
the individual the two come into existence simultaneously, and are
temporarily united in one and the same being, only proves that the two
existences are contemporaneous in their joint inception. It does not
prove that they are of the same nature, or the same substance, or that
the physical organism is the only ego, or that the psychical existence
is nothing but certain states of the material structure, to whose
aggregate manifestations certain philosophers give the name of mind,
while denying to them personal individuality and the consciousness of a
distinct being.

And now, in bringing this discussion to a close, I will only add that
the great want of this age is the prosecution of inquiry into the
nature of the human mind as an organic structure, regarded as such.
It seems to me that the whole mission of Science is now perverted by
a wrong aim, which is to find out the external to the neglect of the
internal--to make all exploration terminate in the laws of the physical
universe, and go aside from the examination of the spiritual world.
It is no reproach to those who essay the latter inquiry that they
are scoffed at as "the metaphysicians." It matters not what they are
called, so long as they pursue the right path. It is now in regard to
the pursuit of science as it was formerly in regard to the writing of
history. That philosophical French historian, M. Taine, has luminously
marked the change which has come over the methods and objects of
historical studies in the following passage:

"When you consider with your eyes the visible man, what do you look
for? The man invisible. The words which salute your ears, the gestures,
the motions of his head, the clothes he wears, visible acts and deeds
of every kind, are expressions merely; somewhat is revealed beneath
them, and that is a soul--an inner man is concealed beneath the outer
man; the second does not reveal the first; ... all the externals are
but avenues converging toward a center; you enter them simply to reach
that center, and that center is the genuine man--I mean that mass of
faculties and feelings which are the inner man. We have reached a new
world, which is infinite, because every action which we see involves
an infinite association of reasonings, emotions, sensations new and
old, which have served to bring it to light, and which, like great
rocks deep-seated in the ground, find in it their end and their level.
This under-world is a new subject-matter proper to the historian....
This precise and proved interpretation of past sensations has given
to history, in our days, a second birth; hardly anything of the sort
was known to the preceding century. They thought men of every race and
country were all but identical--the Greek, the barbarian, the Hindoo,
the man of the Renaissance, and the man of the eighteenth century--as
if they had all been turned out of a common mold, and all in conformity
to a certain abstract conception which served for the whole human
race. They knew man, but not men; they had not penetrated to the soul;
they had not seen the infinite diversity and complexity of souls; they
did not know that the moral constitution of a people or an age is as
particular and distinct as the physical structure of a family of plants
or an order of animals."[153]

In the same way psychology needs a new birth, like the new birth of
history. If we would know the mind, we must reach the conviction that
there is a mind: and this conviction can be reached only by penetrating
through all the externals, through the physical organism, through the
diversities of race, through the environment of matter, until we have
found the soul. If history, like zoölogy, has found its anatomy, mental
science must, in like manner, be prosecuted as an anatomical study. So
long as we allow the anatomy of zoölogy to be the predominant and only
explanation, the beginning and the end of the mental manifestations,
so long we shall fail to comprehend the nature of man, and to see the
reason for his immortality.


 FOOTNOTES:

 [139] Corinthians, revised version.

 [140] In the "authorized" version the passage is rendered thus: "There
 is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body." Sophereus quotes
 the late revised version. The meaning is the same. St. Paul assumes
 the existence of a natural body, and then asserts that there is
 likewise a spiritual body.

 [141] I have met, by the kindness of the author, with a little
 treatise which contains a great deal of sound mental philosophy, with
 which in the main I concur, and to which I am indebted for some very
 valuable suggestions. This modest little book is entitled "The Heart
 of Man: An Attempt in Mental Anatomy." The author is Mr. P. P. Bishop,
 a resident of San Mateo, in Florida. It was printed at Chicago, by
 Shepard & Johnson, for the author, in 1883. I know not if it is on
 sale. I suppose that Mr. Bishop was led to send me his interesting
 treatise by the publication, in the "Manhattan Magazine," at New York,
 in 1884, of the substance of the first three chapters of the present
 work. I take this opportunity of expressing my high appreciation
 of his treatise, and of explaining the meaning of its title. As I
 understand him, he uses the term "Heart of Man" as synonymous with
 structure of the mind, and not as referring to what is figuratively
 called "the human heart." He has explained "Mental Anatomy" as
 follows: "The method of investigation, which I have employed in making
 my way to the conclusions set forth in this discussion, I call 'The
 Anatomical Method,' because it is based on the conception of mind as
 an organized being, and aims to discover the structure of that being."
 ... "At the risk," he adds, "of appearing egotistical, I think it best
 to relate an experience." He did not need to deprecate the appearance
 of egotism, for his method of investigation, based on his own mental
 experience, was the very best that he could have followed. It were to
 be wished that we could have more of this kind of self-analysis by
 persons competent to make it, and less of theoretical reasoning from
 premises more or less arbitrarily assumed.

 I have endeavored to make my imaginary philosopher, Sophereus, avoid
 the method of reasoning which I thus condemn, and to keep him within
 the bounds of experience.

 [142] "Extemporaneous," Latin, _ex_, from; and _tempus_, time, at the
 same time, or from the same time. Extemporaneous discourse is when the
 thought and the expression in which it is clothed occur at the time
 it is uttered, or without premeditation of both thought and language.
 "Improvisation" means the same thing, but it is specially applied
 to the act of making poetry or performing music extemporaneously,
 that is, without prevision of what one is to say or sing. Rapid
 conversation is of the same nature. So is an instantaneous and
 unpremeditated answer to a question.

 [143] Webster's Dictionary--"Matter."

 [144] "And it shall be as when a hungry man dreameth, and behold, he
 eateth: but he awaketh, and his soul is empty; or as when a thirsty
 man dreameth, and behold, he drinketh: but he awaketh, and behold, he
 is faint, and his soul hath appetite."--ISAIAH.

 [145] Scott's "Antiquary," note v.

 [146] If it is objected that I have allowed Sophereus to overstate
 the power of the mind to deal better with difficulties after "a good
 night's sleep," as we say, than it had dealt with them before, I will
 cite the testimony of one of the most prolific of writers and one
 of the most self-observing of men, Sir Walter Scott, whose greatest
 success was achieved in the field of poetical and prose fiction. This
 is a department in which inventive genius is the main reliance, and
 is put to its greatest tasks. In that part of Scott's "Diary" which
 covers the year 1826--the period when he was writing "Woodstock"--he
 says:

 "The half-hour between waking and rising has all my life proved
 propitious to any task which was exercising my invention. When I got
 over any knotty difficulty in a story, or have had in former times
 to fill up a passage in a poem, it was always when I first opened my
 eyes that the desired ideas thronged upon me. This is so much the
 case that I am in the habit of relying upon it and saying to myself
 when I am at a loss, 'Never mind, we shall have it at seven o'clock
 to-morrow morning.' If I have forgot a circumstance, a name, or a copy
 of verses, it is the same thing.... This morning I had some new ideas
 respecting 'Woodstock' which will make the story better." (Lockhart's
 "Life of Scott," vol. viii, chap. lxviii.)

 This, it is true, was the experience of a man of extraordinary genius,
 whose facility of invention was as marvelous as the ease and rapidity
 with which he wrote. But his experience was a very common one. It has
 been shared by persons of much more humble faculties. I am sure that
 persons in my own profession, who have been engaged in pursuits very
 different from those of the poet or the novelist, will, from their
 own experience, confirm what is assumed by Sophereus as a well-known
 mental phenomenon. I could describe in detail many instances in which
 I have gone through with the same fruition of new ideas, resulting
 from the acquisitions obtained during sleep, or following from the
 benefits of sleep. For example, when having to do with a complex state
 of facts, needing orderly arrangement and analysis, it has repeatedly
 happened to me to rise in the morning after a night of undisturbed
 sleep, with the whole of an entangled skein unraveled, whereas before
 retiring to rest the mass of facts lay in some confusion in the mind.
 In like manner the mind can often deal with a legal question of a
 new and difficult character. The rule that ought to be applied to a
 particular case has to be extracted from many precedents, and perhaps
 none of them exactly cover the case in hand. On such occasions, if
 one refrains from pushing the study of his subject while awake to the
 severest analysis, and postpones the effort until the next morning,
 the experience of Sir Walter is very likely to be repeated. "It was
 always," he says, "when I first opened my eyes that the desired ideas
 thronged upon me." I am persuaded, therefore, that although in the
 study of any subject omission to master all its elements and details,
 when alone one can accumulate them, is not to be recommended, there is
 undoubtedly much to be gained by relieving the mind from the continued
 effort, and allowing some hours of sleep to intervene, during which
 the mind can act independently of all the bodily organs.

 The question is, then, as above suggested, whether there come to us
 during sleep acquisitions of new ideas with or without a simultaneous
 consciousness that we are thinking of the subject, or whether the
 new ideas follow from the benefits of sleep as a state of absolute
 rest and inactivity of the brain, and of the intellectual faculties,
 so that when we awake both the brain and the mental powers are in
 greater vigor. The expression used by Scott in describing his own
 experience is that as soon as he awoke the desired ideas _thronged_
 upon him. This might happen upon the hypothesis that the desired ideas
 came because the brain and the mental powers, refreshed by sleep,
 were in greater vigor. But I incline to believe that his meaning was
 the reverse of this. At all events, it seems to me that the true
 explanation of the phenomenon is that during sound and undisturbed
 sleep of the body, including the brain, we do unconsciously think of
 the subject on which our waking thoughts had been previously employed;
 that in these states there are acquisitions of new ideas which we
 bring with us out of the state in which they were acquired, or, as Sir
 Walter expressed it, which _throng_ upon us as soon as we open our
 eyes. While, therefore, it may be said that this hypothesis assumes
 the existence of the mind as a spiritual or intellectual entity
 capable of action as a thinking being without any action of the bodily
 organs, the question is, on the other hand, whether the phenomena
 here considered have not a very strong tendency to prove that the
 mind is such a substantive and independent existence. When it is
 remembered how common is the experience here referred to, how various
 the phenomena are, how they are manifested on all kinds of subjects,
 in regard to lines of conduct, and to everything about which we are
 perplexed, and when we add these peculiar phenomena to the other
 evidence which tends to establish the same belief in the existence
 of the mind as something entirely apart from all its physical
 environment, it seems to me that the argument becomes very strong,
 and that I have not made my imaginary philosopher press it beyond its
 legitimate bounds.

 [147] Do him every honor.

 [148] By some commentators, this hint, given with female subtilty, is
 explained to mean that their copy-hold, or lease, by which Banquo and
 his son hold their lives, is not eternal. The more probable meaning is
 that, if they are cut off, nature will produce no more copies of their
 race. But in either meaning the hint that she gave was the same, and
 it included both Banquo and his son.

 [149] When the unknowable power ceases to pulsate through our physical
 organism, this "mental state" ceases--nothing survives--continuity is
 ended.

 [150] "Principles of Psychology," i, § 208, pp. 465-471.

 [151] I have allowed Sophereus to follow in the main the writer to
 whom I have already referred in the note on page 471--Mr. Bishop, of
 Florida.

 [152] Bishop.

 [153] Introduction to Taine's "History of English Literature,"
 translated by H. Van Laun. New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1885.




    GLOSSARY
    OF
    SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL TERMS USED IN THIS WORK.


 [The following definitions marked with an asterisk are borrowed from
 the glossary annexed to Darwin's "Origin of Species." The remainder of
 the definitions are taken from Webster's Dictionary.]

 =*Aberrant.= Forms or groups of animals or plants which deviate in
 important characters from their nearest allies, so as not to be easily
 included in the same group with them, are said to be aberrant.

 =*Abnormal.= Contrary to the general rule.

 =*Aborted.= An organ is said to be aborted when its development has
 been arrested at a very early stage.

 =Aërate= (Zoöl.). To subject to the influence of the air by the
 natural organs of respiration; to arterialize; especially used of
 animals not having lungs.

 =Agnostic= (_a._). Professing ignorance; involving no dogmatic
 assertion; leaving a question or problem still in doubt; pertaining to
 or involving agnosticism.

 =Agnostic= (_n._). One who professes ignorance, or refrains from
 dogmatic assertion; one who supports agnosticism, neither affirming
 nor denying the existence of a personal Deity.

 =Agnosticism.= That doctrine which, professing ignorance, neither
 asserts nor denies; specifically, in theology, the doctrine that the
 existence of a personal Deity can be neither asserted nor denied,
 neither proved nor disproved, because of the necessary limits of the
 human mind (as sometimes charged upon _Hamilton_ and _Mansel_), or
 because of the insufficiency of the evidence furnished by psychical
 and physical data, to warrant a positive conclusion (as taught by the
 school of _Herbert Spencer_); opposed alike to dogmatic skepticism and
 to dogmatic theism.

 =Allantois=, =Allantoid=. A thin membrane, situated between the
 chorion and amnion, and forming one of the membranes which invest the
 fœtus.

 =*Analogy.= That resemblance of structures which depends upon
 similarity of function, as in the wings of insects and birds. Such
 structures are said to be _analogous_, and to be _analogues_ of each
 other.

 =Anthropomorphism.= The representation of the Deity under a human
 form, or with human attributes.

 =*Articulata.= A great division of the animal kingdom, characterized
 generally by having the surface of the body divided into rings, called
 segments, a greater or less number of which are furnished with jointed
 legs (such as insects, crustaceans, and centipeds).

 =Articulation= (Anat.). The joining or juncture of the bones of a
 skeleton.

 =Ascidians.= A class of acephalous mollusks, having often a leathery
 exterior.

 =Biology.= The science of life; that part of physiology which treats
 of life in general, or of the different forces of life.

 =Brain.= The upper part of the head. 1. (Anat.) The whitish, soft mass
 which constitutes the anterior or cephalic extremity of the nervous
 system in man and other vertebrates, occupying the upper cavity of
 the skull; and (_b_) the anterior or cephalic ganglion in insects and
 other invertebrates.

 2. The organ or seat of intellect; hence, the understanding.

 3. The affections; fancy; imagination.

=*Branchiæ.= Gills, or organs for respiration in water.

=*Branchial.= Pertaining to gills or branchiæ.

=*Canidæ.= The dog family, including the dog, wolf, fox, jackal, etc.

=Cell.= A minute, inclosed space or sac, filled with fluid, making
up the cellular tissue of plants, and of many parts of animals, and
originating the parts by their growth and reproduction; the constituent
element of all plants and animals (though not universal for all parts
of such structure), much as a crystalline molecule is the element of a
crystal. In the simplest plants and animals (as the _infusoria_), one
single cell constitutes the complete individual, such species being
called _unicellular_ plants or animals.

=Cephalopod= (Fr. _céphalopode_, from Gr., head and foot). (Zoöl.) An
animal of the sub-kingdom _Mollusca_, characterized by a distinct head,
surrounded by a circle of long arms or tentacles, which they use for
crawling and for seizing objects. See MOLLUSK.

=*Cetacea.= An order of Mammalia, including the whales, dolphins, etc.,
having the form of the body fish-like, the skin naked, and only the
fore-limbs developed.


=Chaos.= 1. An empty, infinite space; a yawning chasm.

 2. The rude, confused state, or unorganized condition, of matter
 before the creation of the universe.

=Consciousness.= 1. The knowledge of sensations and mental operations,
or of what passes in one's own mind; the act of the mind which makes
known an internal object.

 2. Immediate knowledge of any object whatever.

=*Crustaceans.= A class of articulated animals having the skin of the
body generally more or less hardened by the deposition of calcareous
matter, breathing by means of gills. (_Examples_, crab, lobster,
shrimp, etc.)

=Dynamically.= In accordance with the principles of dynamics or moving
forces.

=*Embryo.= The young animal undergoing development within the egg or
womb.

=*Embryology.= The study of the development of the embryo.

=Ethics.= The science of human duty; the body of rules of duty drawn
from this science; a particular system of principles and rules
concerning duty, whether true or false; rules of practice in respect to
a single class of human actions; as political or social ethics.

=*Fauna.= The totality of the animals naturally inhabiting a certain
country or region, or which have lived during a given geological period.

=Fetichism=, =Feticism=. One of the lowest and grossest forms of
superstition, consisting in the worship of some material object, as a
stone, a tree, or an animal, often casually selected; practiced among
tribes of lowest mental endowment, as certain races of negroes.

=*Flora.= The totality of the plants growing naturally in a country or
during a given geological period.

=*Fœtal.= Of or belonging to the fœtus, or embryo in course of
development.

=Fœtus=, same as =Fetus=. The young of viviparous animals in the womb,
and of oviparous animals in the egg, after it is perfectly formed,
before which time it is called _embryo_.

=*Ganoid Fishes.= Fishes covered with peculiar enameled bony scales.
Most of them are extinct.

=Genus= (Science). An assemblage of species possessing certain
characters in common, by which they are distinguished from all others.
It is subordinate to _tribe_ and _sub-tribe_; hence, a single species
having distinctive characters that seem of more than specific value may
constitute a genus.

=*Germinal Vesicle.= A minute vesicle in the eggs of animals, from
which the development of the embryo proceeds.

=Gravitation= (Physics). That species of attraction or force by
which all bodies or particles of matter in the universe tend toward
each other; called also _attraction of gravitation_, _universal
gravitation_, and _universal gravity_.

=Gravity= (Physics). The tendency of a mass of matter toward a center
of attraction; especially the tendency of a body toward the center of
the earth, terrestrial gravitation.

=Gyrus=, pl. =Gyri= (Anat.). A convolution of the brain.

=*Habitat.= The locality in which a plant or animal naturally lives.

=Heredity.= The transmission of the physical and psychical qualities of
parents to their offspring; the biological law by which living beings
tend to repeat themselves in their descendants.

=Homologous.= Having the same relative proportion, position, value, or
structure; especially--(_a_) (Geom.) Corresponding in relative position
and proportion. (_b_) (Alg.) Having the same relative proportion or
value, as the two antecedents or the two consequents of a proportion.
(_c_) (Chem.) Being of the same chemical type or series; differing
by a multiple or arithmetical ratio in certain constituents, while
the physical qualities are wholly analogous, with small relative
differences, as if corresponding to a series of parallels; as, the
species in the group of alcohols are said to be _homologous_. (_d_)
(Zoöl.) Being of the same typical structure; having like relations to
a fundamental type of structure; as, those bones in the hand of man
and the fore-foot of a horse are _homologous_ that correspond in their
structural relations--that is, in their relations to the type-structure
of the fore-limb in vertebrates.

=Homology.= That relation between parts which results from their
development from corresponding embryonic parts, either in different
animals, as in the case of the arm of a man, the fore-leg of a
quadruped, and the wing of a bird; or in the same individual, as in the
case of the fore and hind legs in quadrupeds, and the segments or rings
and their appendages of which the body of a worm, a centiped, etc., is
composed. The latter is called _serial homology_. The parts which stand
in such a relation to each other are said to be _homologous_, and one
such part or organ is called the _homologue_ of the other. In different
plants the parts of the flower are homologous, and in general these
parts are regarded as homologous with leaves.

=Hypothesis.= 1. A supposition; a proposition or principle which
is supposed or taken for granted, in order to draw a conclusion or
inference for proof of the point in question; something not proved, but
assumed for the purpose of argument.

 2. A system or theory imagined or assumed to account for known facts
 or phenomena.

=Imago.= The perfect (generally winged) reproductive state of an insect.

=Implacenta= (_n._). A mammal having no placenta. (_a._) Without a
placenta, as certain marsupial animals.

=Insectivorous.= Feeding on insects.

=Instinct= (_n._). Inward impulse; unconscious, involuntary, or
unreasoning prompting to action; a disposition to any mode of action,
whether bodily or spiritual, without a distinct apprehension of the end
or object which Nature has designed should be accomplished thereby;
specifically, the natural, unreasoning impulse in an animal, by which
it is guided to the performance of any action, without thought of
improvement in the method.

=Invertebrata=, or =Invertebrate Animals=. Those animals which do not
possess a backbone or spinal column.

=Isomeric= (from Gr., equal and part). (Chem.) Having the quality of
isomerism; as _isomeric_ compounds.

=Isomerism= (Chem.). An identity of elements and of atomic proportions
with a difference in the amount combined in the compound molecule, and
of its essential qualities; as in the case of the physically unlike
compounds of carbon and hydrogen, consisting one of one part of each,
another of two parts of each, and a third of four of each.

=Kangaroo.= A ruminating marsupial animal of the genus _Macropus_,
found in Australia and the neighboring islands.

=Larva= (plural =Larvæ=). The first condition of an insect at its
issuing from the egg, when it is usually in the form of a grub,
caterpillar, or maggot.

=Lemuridæ.= A group of four-handed animals, distinct from the monkeys,
and approaching the insectivorous quadrupeds in some of their
characters and habits. Its members have the nostrils curved or twisted,
and a claw instead of a nail upon the first finger of the hind hands.

=Lepidosiren.= An eel-shaped animal covered with rounded scales, having
four rod-like members, and breathing water like a fish. It is found in
ponds and rivers of intertropical Africa and South America. By some it
is regarded as a fish, and by others as a batrachian.

=Mammal.= Belonging to the breast; from _mamma_, the breast or pap. An
animal of the highest class of vertebrates, characterized by the female
suckling its young.

=Mammalia.= The highest class of animals, including the ordinary hairy
quadrupeds, the whales, and man, and characterized by the production of
living young, which are nourished after birth by milk from the teats
(_mammæ_, _mammary glands_) of the mother. A striking difference in
embryonic development has led to the division of this class into two
great groups: in one of these, when the embryo has attained a certain
stage, a vascular connection, called the _placenta_, is formed between
the embryo and the mother; in the other this is wanting, and the
young are produced in a very incomplete state. The former, including
the greater part of the class, are called _placental mammals_; the
latter, or _aplacental mammals_, include the marsupials and monotremes
(_ornithorhynchus_).

=Marsupials.= An order of Mammalia in which the young are born in a
very incomplete state of development, and carried by the mother, while
sucking, in a ventral pouch (_marsupium_), such as the kangaroos,
opossums, etc. (see MAMMALIA).

=Molecule.= A mass; one of the invisible particles supposed to
constitute matter of any kind.

=Mollusk.= An invertebrate animal, having a soft, fleshy body (whence
the name), which is inarticulate, and not radiate internally.

=Monkey.= See SIMIA.

=Monogamy.= A marriage to one wife only, or the state of such as are
restricted to a single wife, or may not marry again after the death of
a first wife.

=Monotheism.= The doctrine or belief that there is but one God.

=Morphology.= The law of form or structure independent of function.

=Nascent.= Commencing development.

=Nexus.= Connection; tie.

=Nictitating Membrane.= A semi-transparent membrane, which can be drawn
across the eye in birds and reptiles, either to moderate the effects of
a strong light or to sweep particles of dust, etc., from the surface of
the eye.

=Noumenon= (Metaph.). The of itself unknown and unknowable rational
object, or _thing in itself_, which is distinguished from the
_phenomenon_ in which it occurs to apprehension, and by which it is
interpreted and understood; so used in the philosophy of Kant and his
followers.

=Opossum.= An animal of several species of marsupial quadrupeds of the
genus _Didelphys_. The common species of the United States is the _D.
Virginiana_. Another species, common in Texas and California, is _D.
Californica_, and other species are found in South America.

=Organism.= An organized being, whether plant or animal.

=Ovule.= An egg. (Bot.) The rudimentary state of a seed. It consists
essentially of a nucleus developed directly from the placenta.

=Parasite.= An animal or plant living upon or in, and at the expense
of, another organism.

=Pelvis.= The bony arch to which the hind-limbs of vertebrate animals
are articulated.

=Placentalia=, =Placentata=, or =Placental Mammals=. See MAMMALIA.

=Protozoa.= The lowest great division of the Animal Kingdom. These
animals are composed of a gelatinous material, and show scarcely any
trace of distinct organs. The infusoria, foraminifera, and sponges,
with some other forms, belong to this division.

=Phenomenon.= 1. An appearance; anything visible; whatever is
presented to the eye; whatever, in matter or spirit, is apparent
to, or is apprehended by, observation, as distinguished from its
ground, substance, or unknown constitution; as _phenomena_ of heat or
electricity; phenomena of imagination or memory.

 2. Sometimes a remarkable or unusual appearance whose cause is not
 immediately obvious.

=Plexus.= Any net-work of vessels, nerves, or fibers.

=Polygamy.= A plurality of wives or husbands at the same time, or the
having of such plurality; usually the condition of a man having more
than one wife.

=Polytheism.= The doctrine of a plurality of gods or invisible beings
superior to man, and having an agency in the government of the world.

=Proteine= (_n._ Lat., _proteinum_, from Gr., _first_--to be the
first--the first place, chief rank, because it occupies the first
place in relation to the albuminous principles). (Chem.) A substance
claimed by Mulder to be obtained as a distinct substance from albumen,
fibrine, or caseine, and considered by him to be the basis of animal
tissue and of some substances of vegetable origin.

 The theory of proteine can not be maintained.--_Gregory._

 The theory of Mulder is doubted and denied by many chemists, and also
 the existence of _proteine_ as a distinct substance.

=Psychology.= A discourse or treatise on the human soul; the science of
the human soul; specifically, the systematic or scientific knowledge of
the powers and functions of the human soul, so far as they are known by
consciousness.

=Quadrumane.= An animal having four feet that correspond to the hands
of a man, as a monkey.

=Race.= 1. The descendants of a common ancestor; a family, tribe,
people, or nation, believed or presumed to belong to the same stock; a
lineage; a breed.

 2. A root.

=Retina.= The delicate inner coat of the eye, formed by nervous
filaments spreading from the optic nerve, and serving for the
perception of the impressions produced by light.

=Rotifer= (_n._ Lat. _rotifer_, from Lat. _rota_, a wheel, and _ferro_,
to bear. Fr. _rotifère_). (Zoöl.) One of a group of microscopic
crustaceans, having no limbs, and moving by means of rows of cilia
about the head or the anterior extremity.

=Rudiment= (Nat. Hist.). An imperfect organ, or one which is never
fully formed.

=Sacral.= Belonging to the sacrum, or the bone composed usually of two
or more united vertebræ to which the sides of the pelvis in vertebrate
animals are attached.

=Sacrum.= The bone which forms the posterior part of the pelvis. It is
triangular in form.

=Secularize.= To convert from spiritual to secular or common use; as to
secularize a church, or church property.

=Segments.= The transverse rings of which the body of an articulate
animal or annelid is composed.

=Simia= (plural =Simiadæ=) (Lat., an ape, from _simus_, flat-nosed,
snub-nosed). (Zoöl.) A Linnæan genus of animals, including the ape,
monkey, and the like; a general name of the various tribes of monkeys.

=Species= (Nat. Hist.). A permanent class of existing things or beings,
associated according to attributes or properties which are determined
by scientific observation.

=Spinal Cord.= The central portion of the nervous system in the
vertebrata, which descends from the brain through the arches of the
vertebræ, and gives off nearly all the nerves to the various organs of
the body.

=Statical.= To stand. 1. Pertaining to bodies at rest, or in
equilibrium.

 2. Resting; acting by mere weight without motion; as _statical_
 pressure.

=Sulcus.= A fissure of the brain, separating two convolutions, or
_gyri_.

=Teleology= (Fr., _téléologie_, from Gr., the end or issue, and
discourse). The science or doctrine of the final causes of things; the
philosophical consideration of final causes in general.

=Variety= (Nat. Hist., Bot., and Zoöl.). Any form or condition of
structure under a species which differs in its characteristics from
those typical to the species, as in color, shape, size, and the like,
and which is capable either of perpetuating itself for a period, or of
being perpetuated by artificial means; also, any of the various forms
under a species meeting the conditions mentioned. A form characterized
by an abnormity of structure, or any difference from the type that is
not capable of being perpetuated through two or more generations, is
not called a variety.

=Vascular.= Containing blood-vessels.

=Vertebrata=; or =Vertebrate Animals=. The highest division of the
animal kingdom, so called from the presence in most cases of a
back-bone composed of numerous joints or _vertebræ_, which constitutes
the center of the skeleton, and at the same time supports and protects
the central parts of the nervous system.

=Vesicle.= A bladder-like vessel; a membranous cavity; a cyst; a cell;
especially (_a_) (Bot.) a small bladder-like body in the substance of a
vegetable, or upon the surface of a leaf.--_Gray._ (_b_) (Med.) A small
orbicular elevation of the cuticle containing lymph, and succeeded by
a scurf or laminated scab; also, any small cavity or sac in the human
body; as the umbilical vesicle.

=Vortices= (_verto_, to turn). 1. A whirling or circular motion of any
fluid, usually of water, forming a kind of cavity in the center of
the circle, and in some instances drawing in water or absorbing other
things; a whirlpool.

 2. A whirling of the air; a whirlwind.

 3. (_Cartesian system._) A supposed collection of particles of very
 subtile matter, endowed with a rapid rotary motion around an axis.
 By means of these _vortices_ Descartes attempted to account for the
 formation of the universe.




INDEX.


  Advocacy, maxim of, 132.

  Affections, structural system of, 532.

  Agnosticism, as defined by Huxley, 274.

  Allantois, the, office of, 236 _et seq._, 245.

  Almagest. See PTOLEMAIC SYSTEM.

  Amphibians in the Darwinian pedigree of man, 71, 96, 98.

  Amphioxus. See LANCELET.

  Amputation before or after birth, 129, 130.

  Anatomy, modern, great advance of, 40, 41.
    Plato's knowledge of, 38.

  Anatomy of the mind, 470.

  Animals, origin of, according to Plato, 57 _et seq._
    origin of, according to Darwin, 60 _et seq._

  Anthropomorphic attributes not necessary to the conception of God, 293
  _et seq._

  Anthropomorphism, meaning, 293.

  Antichthon, or counter-earth, invented by the Pythagoreans, 36.

  Apes, varieties of, 71.
    anthropomorphous, 100.

  Apparitions, facts communicated by, 486-488.

  Aquatic worm, 94.

  Areas, effect of change of, 248.

  Articulata, likeness of structure in, 205 _et seq._

  Ascidians, larvæ of, 94.

  Assassination, once employed with impunity, 165.

  Associative faculty, what it is, 528.

  Athenian, the, compared with a savage, 73, 74.

  Authority, as affecting belief, 3.
    ecclesiastic and scientific, 22, 23.
    in science, 21.

  Automatic machines, analysis of, 505.


  Baboons, how different from monkeys, 71, _note_.

  Belief, foundations of, 1-3.
    antiquity of, how to be regarded, 132 _et seq._
    grounds of, 274-277.

  Birds, origin of, according to Plato, 57.
    sexual selection among, 67, _note_.

  Bishop, P. P., "The Heart of Man," 471, _note_.

  Blood, similarity in the composition of, 122.
    great change in, 122.

  Body, natural and spiritual, 468.

  Brain of men and apes compared, 191.
    human, 518.
    office of, 196.

  Breaks in the organic chain, 103-106.

  Buffon, accepted Mosaic account of creation, 368, 369.


  Causation, ultimate, 386.

  Cell, hypothesis of the single, 371, _note_.

  Chaos, Plato's conception of, 45.

  Classification, how it supports evolution, 200, 203.

  Common stock, hypothesis of descent from, 209.

  Composition, what occurs in, 473, 474.

  Comte, Auguste, one of his suggestions, 387, 388.

  Conduct, Spencer's view of, 427 _et seq._

  Consciousness, what it is, 470, 471, 503.

  Constitutions, political, supposed growth of, 168.

  Conversations invented during sleep, 480, 481.

  Conversion of organs, 67.

  Copernicus, system of, 32.

  Creation, special, contrasted with evolution, 1 _et seq._
    absolute, unknown to the Greeks, 45.
    influence of the belief in, 164, 165.
    man's power of, 144.
    Mosaic account of, 23.
    poetical, 140, 141.
    what it is, 136 _et seq._, 139, 140, 223.

  Creator, the, postulate of, 115.
    honoring or dishonoring the, not the question, 160 _et seq._
    method of, 207.

  Creator, methods of, in the two realms of spirit and matter, 537.
    power of, boundless, 224, 232, 535.

  Crosses not permissible between distinct species, 372.


  Darwin, Charles, his theory of evolution, 7.
    bearing of his theory on man's immortality, 12, 13.
    candor and accuracy of, 101.
    difference of, from Spencer, 43, 225.
    his pedigree of man, 70-72, 87.
    his view of human dignity, 10.
    on primeval man, 375.
    on the belief in God, 60, 61.
    rejects an aboriginal pair, 406.
    tabulated form of his pedigree of man, 93.

  Dekad, the perfect number of the Pythagoreans, 35.

  Delirium, explanation of, 499, 500.

  Demiurgus, the, constructor of Plato's Kosmos, 46.

  Descartes, his theory of vortices, 33.

  Descent, must be unbroken, 211.

  Design, when hypothesis of, necessary, 214.

  Desires, mental system of, 532.

  Domestic animals, breeding of, 89.

  Distribution in space, how it affects evolution, 203, 247.
    in time, 251.

  Dreams, phenomena of, 479-490.


  Earth. See SOLAR SYSTEM.

  Economy of Nature, meaning of, 116, 126.

  Elements, the four, in the Platonic Kosmos, 45, 46.

  Eliphaz and Zophar. See JOB.

  Embryonic development, resemblances in, 111, 120.

  Embryology, cautions respecting, 241.
    how it supports evolution, 229.

  Emotions, system of, 530-532.

  Energy. See POWER, CAUSATION.

  Evidence, rules of circumstantial, 14-17.
    applicable to scientific investigation, 17, 18.
    missing links in chain of, 18-20.
    process of, 67, 68.

  Evil, rational explanation of, 148 _et seq._

  Evolution, assumptions in the theory of, 18-20.
    general reasons for, 102.
    law of, limited, 210.
    of man, 373.
    principle of, 377.
    process reversed, 252-256.

  Experts, true office of, 21, 22.

  Extemporaneous speaking, what is, 474.

  Eye, the, formation of, 68-70, 83, 84.


  Faunas of different areas, 247.

  Fetichism. See SPENCER.

  Fishes, origin of, according to Plato, 58.
    most lowly organized, 95.
    shell, the lowest form of, 58.

  Fœtus, growth of the, 234 _et seq._


  Galen, mistakes of, in anatomy, 39, 40.
    how he differed from Plato, 39.

  Galileo, confirms and rectifies Kepler's laws, 32.
    Papal condemnation of, 20, 21, _note_.

  Ganoids, description of, 96.

  Genealogical trees of no value in zoölogy, 202, _note_.

  General laws and special creations, 127, 128.

  Germ, ante-fœtal, how formed, 234.

  Gladiatorial shows, part of Roman civilization, 164.

  God, existence of, how proved, 11, 12.
    a necessary postulate, 402.
    a personal, denied by Spencer, 433.
    consciousness of, how to be lost, according to Spencer, 285 _et seq._
    existence and attributes of, how deduced, 300 _et seq._
    his dealing with Abraham, 425.
    probable methods of, 63, 64, 82-85, 102.
    unlike Plato's Demiurgus, 85.

  Gods, the, origin of, among the Greeks, 50.
    genesis of, according to Plato, 46, 48-50, _note_.
    office of, in the formation of Plato's Kosmos, 49.

  Gravitation, law of, how deduced, 20.

  Greek philosophy, account of, 24 _et seq._
    encounters monotheism at Alexandria, 287.
    how hampered by the mythology, 138.
    schools of, before Plato, 28.

  Grote, his Plato cited and followed, 27-40, 287, 288, 290.


  Harvey discovers the circulation of the blood, 40.

  Heat, origin of, 386, 387.

  Hebrews receive divine commands, 418.

  Heredity, law of, limited, 225.

  Homologous organs, meaning of, 97.
    See SWIM-BLADDER AND LUNG.
    meaning of, 215, _note_.

  Human life, peculiar sacredness of, 164-166.

  Huxley, Professor, on the brain of man and apes, 192.

  Huxley, Professor, quoted, 121.


  Ideal persons, are creations, 140, 141.

  Ideal plan, objection to, 114, 118.

  Ideas in Plato's system, coeval with primordial matter, 45, 46.
    how acquired, 506-508.

  Idiocy, absolute, probably does not exist, 526.
    what it is, 526-528.

  Idiot. See IDIOCY.

  Immortality, what is proof of, 41, 540.
    belief in, 61, 62.
    fanciful explanation of, 543.

  Improvisation, what is, 474.

  Infinite goodness consistent with the existence of suffering, 156.

  Instinct, genesis of, according to Plato, 60.
    genesis of, according to Darwin, _ib._

  Intellectual faculties, system of, 525.

  Interbreeding. See SPECIES.

  Introspective faculty, power of the, 529.

  Intuitive faculty, office of, 525, 526.

  Invention in mechanics, 475.

  Invention is creation, 142.


  Job and his friends, 25 _et seq._


  Kangaroos, structure of, 98.

  Kepler, his laws of the planetary motions, 32.

  Knowledge not limited to scientific demonstration, 392.
    of ourselves, 520, 521.

  Kosmos, the. See PLATO.


  Lancelet, visual organ of the, 68.

  Languages, origin of, 168, 397, 398.

  Lemuridæ in the Darwinian pedigree of man, 71.
    characteristics of, 99.

  Logic, abuse of, 136 _et seq._
    right use of, 220.
    use and misuse of its forms, 145.

  Lung in vertebrates, supposed homologue with a swim-bladder, 67.
    conversion of, from swim-bladder, 97.


  Macaulay, Lord, his depreciation of natural theology, 24 _et seq._

  Macbeth, Lady, her sleep-walking analyzed, 491-499.

  Man, dignity of, how to be treated, 9, 10.
    bodily structure of, 109.
    common ancestor of, and the apes, 71, 100.
    constructive faculty of, 346.
    immortality of, 12, 13.
    liability to certain diseases, 110.
    moral accountability of, 9, 10.
    origin of, 348.
    pedigree of, according to Darwin, 70-72.
    rank of, in scale of being, 101.

  Marriage, scientific view of, 381.

  Marsupials in the Darwinian pedigree of man, 71.
    ancient, 98.

  Matter, primordial, according to Plato, 45.

  Matter and spirit contrasted, 477.

  Medium, effect of change of, 248, 249.

  Mind, origin of, 8, 9.
    a created being, 407 _et seq._
    a spiritual creation, 401-404.
    contrasted theories of, 533 _et seq._
    evolution origin of the, 538.
    evolution theory of origin of, 394 _et seq._
    is an organism, 476.
    of animals below man, 80, 81.
    origin and nature of, 467-546.
    origin of, according to Darwin, 78.
    origin of, according to Plato, 79, 80.
    structure of, 502.
    substance of, 509.
    systems of, 523 _et seq._
    the human, placed under certain laws, 389, 390.

  Miracles, meaning of, 129.

  Miraculous interposition not necessary, 163.

  Modern civilization, what it owes to belief in special creation,
  164-166.

  Monkeys, two great stems of, 71.
    Catarrhine, or Old-World, 100.

  Monotheism, its influence on philosophy, 138.
    origin of, 342.

  Monotremata, division of the mammalian series, 98.

  Moral injunctions, sacred origin of, 418.

  Moral injunctions, Spencer's denial of, 427 _et seq._, 433.

  Moral law, capacity of human beings to receive, 420.
    scientific view of the, 420 _et seq._

  Moral purposes in the phenomena of nature, 387, 388.

  Moral sense, origin of, 86.

  Morphology, how it supports evolution, 202.

  Mosaic account of creation, rationality of, 366 _et seq._

  Murder, punishment of, moral foundation for, 166.

  "Music of the spheres," origin of the phrase, 37.


  Nascent organs, meaning of, 111, 112.

  "Natural," meaning of, 214.

  Natural theology, progress of, from Thales to Plato and Aristotle, 28,
  29.
    importance of, 43.

  Nervous organization, Spencer's view of, 409 _et seq._

  Newton, Sir Isaac, discovers the law of universal gravitation, 33.
    deduces a personal God from nature, 331, _note_.
    his General Scholium, 332.

  Noumenon, an invented word, 269.

  Number. See DEKAD, and PYTHAGORAS.


  Opossums, structure of, 98.

  Orthodoxy, Plato's idea of, as suggested in his "Republic," 296, 297.

  Oviparous animals, 98.


  Pairs, of animals, opposite views of, 405.

  Pairs, assumed existence of, 537.

  Parasites, how to be viewed, 151 _et seq._

  Pattern of structure, argument concerning, 204.

  Pedigree, rule for tracing, 185-187.

  Pedigree of man, Darwinian, 70 _et seq._

  Phenomenon and noumenon, 268.

  Philolaus as quoted by Grote, 35.

  Philosophy, modern and ancient compared, 24 _et seq._

  Physicians in Plato's time, 40.

  Placental mammals, 99.

  Plato, period of, 28, _note_.
    as given in "Timæus," 298.
    his Demiurgus, 287, 288.
    his genealogy of the gods, 298, _note_.
    his Kosmos and Darwin's hypothesis compared, 44-86.
    his origin of religious beliefs as given in "Republic," 296.
    his triplicity of souls, 39.
    his view of rudiments, 74, 75.
    originality of, 289, 290.

  Polytheism, origin of, 342.

  Power, distinct from substance, 226, 233, _note_; 339 _et seq._
    an attribute of mind, 386.
    of nature, limited, 343-345.

  Primitive beliefs, not necessarily wrong, 132 _et seq._

  "Principle" of construction, 106, 107.

  Probability, force of, in reasoning, 7.

  Psychology, needs a new birth, 546.

  Ptolemaic system, description of, 31.

  Pyramids, why referable to mind, 390, 391.

  Pythagoras, school of, 34 _et seq._


  Quadrumana, in the Darwinian pedigree of man, 71.
    and other mammals, 99.


  Races, what are, 372.

  Raphael, created images, 143.

  Religion, what is, 11, 12.
    natural, 23.
    when in conflict with science, 11-13, 399.

  Religious consciousness, Spencer's origin of, 284.

  Reproduction, two grand systems of, 107, 108.

  Reproductive process, parallel in the, 110.

  Reptiles, Plato's origin of, 58.

  Resurrection, St. Paul's doctrine of the, 468.

  Revelation, how treated in this work, 23.
    purpose of, 540.

  Roman civilization, lacked belief in creation, 164.
    law, slavery under, 165.

  Rudiments, Plato's view of, 74, 75.
    instances of, 111-114, 124, 125.


  Sacrum, analysis of the human, 215.
    structure of the female, 220.

  Savages, beliefs of, 60, 61.

  Science, domain of, 391, 392.
    present tendency of, 352.
    tendencies of, 127.
    values of, 291.
    when in conflict with religion, meaning of, 11, 12.
    wrong aims of, 545.

  Scott, Sir Walter, his reliance on thoughts obtained during sleep,
  490, _note_.

  Secularization of morals discussed, 434 _et seq._

  Segments. See ARTICULATA; VERTEBRATES.

  Selection, natural, 65, 72, 89.
    limitations to, 91.
    office of, 72.
    sexual, 66, 72, 89.

  Senses, the corporeal, 503.

  Sexes, origin of, in Plato's Kosmos, 55.
    in Nature, 221, 354 _et seq._, 378.

  Sexual love, in men and brutes, 379.
    moral and social phenomena of, 382.

  Sexual union, operation of, 234 _et seq._

  Sexual unions, purpose of, 384, 385.

  Shakespeare, created imaginary persons, 140, 141.

  Simiadæ, general term for monkeys, 99.

  Simonides, poetical theologies of, 24 _et seq._

  Sixteenth century, intellectual habits in the, 21.

  Sin, how to be viewed, 148, _note_.

  Slavery, under the Roman law, 165.

  Sleep, phenomena of, 479 _et seq._
    better thoughts during, 489.

  Society, phenomena of, 334 _et seq._

  Solar system, how viewed by the Greeks, 31 _et seq._
    origin of, 168, 172, 301.

  Somnambulism, phenomena of, 491.

  Soul, meaning of, 478.

  Souls, of men, genesis of, in Plato's Kosmos, 51, 76, 77.
    transmigration of, 78.
    triplicity of, 51, 76, 77.

  Space, illimitable, concepts of, 260 _et seq._

  Species, finality of, 157 _et seq._
    meaning of, 372 _et seq._

  Spencer, Herbert, his theory of animal evolution, 7, 8.
    answers to his objections, 145 _et seq._
    attacks "the current creed," 434.
    creation is something made out of nothing, 136.
    creation incapable of being conceived, 136.
    creation not supported by any proof, 135.
    his agnosticism examined, 257 _et seq._
    his argument from parasites, 151 _et seq._
    his denial of the possibility of knowing mind, 508.
    his doctrine of evolution, 131.
    his ethical system, 427 _et seq._
    his ghost-theory, 284 _et seq._
    his origin of man, 348-351, 357.
    his psychological system, 408 _et seq._
    his psychology criticised, 470, 504.
    his theory of mind, 510-516.
    his theory of the moral sense, 418, 423.
    his treatment of the divine attributes, 293.
    his "unknown cause," 163, 166.
    how his theory differs from Darwin's, 225.
    on the evolution of mind, 64.
    on the evolution of animals, 179.
    on universal law of evolution, 167.
    special creations presumptively absurd, 132 _et seq._

  St. Paul, his doctrine of the resurrection, 468.

  Struggle for existence, meaning of, 88.

  Substance, distinct from power, 233.
    of mind, 469.

  Substitution and suppression of organs, 236 _et seq._

  "Supernatural," meaning of, 214.

  "Survival of the fittest," meaning of, 65, 66.

  Swim-bladder, supposed homologue of a lung, 67.
    conversion of, 96.


  Taine, M., his views of the objects of history, 545.

  Telescope, formation of the, 68-70.

  Thales, philosophy of, 24, 27, 28.
    period of, 28, _note_.

  Theology, the current, not to be considered, 145.

  Time, beginning of, in Plato's Kosmos, 48.
    conception of endless, 262 _et seq._

  Transmigration, from animal to animal, 54-59.

  Typical plan, concealed in the ante-fœtal germ, 238.


  Uniformity. See PATTERN.


  Varieties, what are, 372.

  Vertebral column, analysis of, 215.

  Voltaire, saying of, 25.

  Von Baer, his embryologic law, 229.

  Vortices. See DESCARTES.


  Women, origin of, in Plato's Kosmos, 55.


    THE END.




BY GEORGE TICKNOR CURTIS.


 =LIFE OF DANIEL WEBSTER.= By GEORGE TICKNOR CURTIS. Illustrated with
 Steel Portrait and Woodcuts. Two vols., 8vo. Cloth, $4.00; sheep,
 $6.00; half morocco, $10.00.

A most valuable and important contribution to the history of American
parties and politics, and to the best class of our literature. It is a
model biography of a most gifted man, wherein the intermingling of the
statesman and lawyer with the husband, father, and friend, is painted
so that we feel the reality of the picture.

 "We believe the present work to be a most valuable and
 important contribution to the history of American parties and
 politics."--_London Saturday Review._

 "Of Mr. Curtis's labor we wish to record our opinion, in addition
 to what we have already said, that, in the writing of this book,
 he has made a most valuable contribution to the best class of our
 literature."--_New York Tribune._

 "This 'Life of Webster' is a monument to both subject and author, and
 one that will stand well the wear of time."--_Boston Post._

 "Mr. Curtis, it will be remembered, was one of the literary executors
 named by Mr. Webster, in his will, to do this work; and owing to the
 death of two of the others, Mr. Everett and President Felton, and the
 advanced age of Mr. Ticknor, Mr. Curtis has prepared the biography
 himself, and it has passed under Mr. Ticknor's revision. We believe
 the work will satisfy the wishes of Mr. Webster's most devoted
 friends."--_Boston Journal._


 =THE LAST YEARS OF DANIEL WEBSTER.= A MONOGRAPH. By GEORGE TICKNOR
 CURTIS. 8vo. Paper, 50 cents.

 "Laying aside, so far as I may be able, the partiality of a friend and
 biographer, I shall subject to the scrutiny of reason and good sense
 the accusation that, in Mr. Webster's later years, for the sake of
 attaining the Presidency, by bidding for the political support of the
 Southern States, he renounced the principles which he had professed
 all his life on the subject of slavery."--_The Author._


 =McCLELLAN'S LAST SERVICE TO THE REPUBLIC=, together with a Tribute to
 his Memory. By GEORGE TICKNOR CURTIS. With a Map showing the Position
 of the Union and Confederate Forces on the Night of November 7, 1862.
 12mo. Paper, 30 cents.

 "Every statement of a fact, contained in these pages, which was not
 founded on General McClellan's official report of his campaigns, or
 derived from some other public source, was given to me by the General
 in the spring of 1880, and was written down by me at the time. At my
 request he superintended the preparation of the map which shows his
 position and that of the Confederate troops on the 7th and 8th of
 November, 1862, and compared it with the military maps issued by the
 Government after the close of the civil war."--_From the Author's
 Prefatory Note._


    New York: D. APPLETON & CO., 1, 3, & 5 Bond Street.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

 Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
 in spelling, punctuation, accents and hyphenation remain as in the
 original.

 In Chapter 12, Page 526, the sentence: "This is a power that
 can belong to and inhere in a spiritual organism alone. We must,
 therefore, recognize in the infant this original implanted endowment,
 the capacity to be mentally convinced of realities; and while, in
 order to the first exercise of this capacity there must be a physical
 organism which will conduct the sensory impressions to the brain ..."

 Has been amended to read "... in order to meet the first exercise of this
 capacity ..."

