NOTES ON MAN A MACHINE.

1. "Matter may well be endowed with the faculty of thought." Although
La Mettrie attempts to "avoid this reef," by refraining from the use
of these words, yet he asserts throughout his work that sensations,
consciousness, and the soul itself are modifications of matter
and motion.

The possibility of matter being endowed with the faculty of thought,
is denied by Elie Luzac, the publisher of "L'homme machine," in his
work "L'homme plus que machine." In this work he tries to disprove the
conclusions of "L'homme machine." He says: "We have therefore proved
by the idea of the inert state of matter, by that of motion, by that
of relations, by that of activity, by that of extension, that matter
can not be possessed of the faculty of thinking".... "To be brief,
I say, that if, by a material substance, we understand that matter
which falls under the cognizance of our senses, and which is endowed
with the qualities we have mentioned, the soul can not be material:
so that it must be immaterial, and, for the same reason, God could
not have given the faculty of thinking to matter, since He can not
perform contradictions." [58]

2. "How can we define a being whose nature is absolutely unknown to
us?" La Mettrie uses this as an argument against the belief in a soul,
and yet he later admits that the "nature of motion is as unknown to
us as the nature of matter." It is difficult then to see why there
is more reason to doubt the existence of spirit, than to doubt the
existence of matter. Locke makes this point very well. "It is for want
of reflection that we are apt to think that our senses show us nothing
but material things. Every act of sensation, when duly considered,
gives us an equal view of both parts of nature, the corporeal and
spiritual." [59]... "If this notion of immaterial spirit may have,
perhaps, some difficulties in it not easy to be explained, we have
therefore no more reason to deny or doubt the existence of such
spirits, than we have to deny or doubt the existence of body because
the notion of body is cumbered with some difficulties, very hard and
perhaps impossible to be explained or understood by us." [60]

3. "Author of the 'Spectacle de la nature.'" Noel Antoine Pluche
(1688-1761) was a Jansenist author. He was Director of the College
of Laon, but was deprived of his position on account of his refusal
to adhere to the bull "Unigenitus." Rollin then recommended him to
Gasville, intendant of Normandy, who entrusted him with his son's
education. He finally settled in Paris. His principal works are:
"Spectacle de la nature," (Paris, 1739); "Mécanique des langues et
l'art de les enseigner," (Paris, 1751); "Harmonie des Psaumes et de
l'Evangile," (Paris, 1764); "Concorde de la géographie des différents
ages," (Paris, 1765). [61]

La Mettrie describes Pluche in the "Essais sur l'esprit et les beaux
esprits" thus: "Without wit, without taste, he is Rollin's pedant. A
superficial man, he had need of the work of M. Réaumur, of whom he
is only a stale and tiresome imitator in the flat little sayings
scattered in his dialogues. It was with the works of Rollin as with
the 'Spectacle de la Nature,' one made the fortune of the other:
Gaçon praised Person, Person praised Gaçon, and the public praised
them both." [62]

This quotation from La Mettrie occurs in Assézat's edition of La
Mettrie's "L'homme machine," which was published as the second
volume of the series "Singularités physiologiques" (1865). Assézat
was a French publisher and writer. He was at one time Secretary of
the Anthropological Society, and collaborated with other writers
in the publication of "La Revue Nationale," "La Revue de Paris,"
and "La Pensée nouvelle." His notes to "L'Homme Machine" show great
knowledge concerning physiological subjects. He intended to publish a
complete edition of Diderot's works, but overwork on this undermined
his health, so that he was unable to complete it. [63]

4. Torricelli was a physicist and mathematician who lived from 1608
to 1647. He was a disciple of Galileo, and acted as his amanuensis
for three months before Galileo's death. He was then nominated
as grand-ducal mathematician and professor of mathematics in the
Florentine Academy. In 1643, he made his most famous discovery. He
found that the height to which a liquid will rise in a closed tube,
depends on the specific gravity of the liquid, and concludes from this
that the column of liquid is sustained by atmospheric pressure. This
discovery did away with the obscure idea of a fuga vacui, and laid
bare the principle on which mercurial barometers are constructed. For
a long time the mercurial thermometer was called the "Torricellian
tube," and the vacuum which the barometer includes is still known as a
"Torricellian vacuum." [64]

5. "Only the physicians have a right to speak on this subject." Luzac
says: "'Tis true that if the materiality of the soul was proved,
the knowledge of her would be an object of natural philosophy, and
we might with some appearance of reason reject all arguments to the
contrary which are not drawn from that science. But if the soul is not
material, the investigation of its nature does not belong to natural
philosophy, but to those who search into the nature of its faculties,
and are called metaphysicians." [65]

6. "Man is ... a machine." This is the first clear statement of this
theory, which as the title of the work indicates, is the central
doctrine of this work. Descartes had strongly denied the possibility
of conceiving man as a machine. "We may easily conceive a machine
to be so constructed that it emits vocables, and even that it emits
some correspondent to the action upon it of external objects which
cause a change in its organs,... but not that it should emit them
variously so as appositely to reply to what is said in its presence,
as men of the lowest grade of intellect can do." [66]

7. "Let us then take in our hands the staff of experience." La
Mettrie repeatedly emphasizes the belief that knowledge must come from
experience. Moreover he confines this experience to sense experience,
and concludes "L'histoire naturelle de l'âme" with these words:
"No senses, no ideas. The fewer senses there are: the fewer ideas. No
sensations experienced, no ideas. These principles are the necessary
consequence of all the observations and experiences that constitute
the unassailable foundation of this work."

This doctrine is opposed to the teaching of Descartes, who insists
that "neither our imagination nor our senses can give us assurance of
anything unless our understanding intervene." [67] Moreover Descartes
believes that the senses are fallacious, and that the ideal method
for philosophy is a method corresponding to that of mathematics. [68]
Condillac and Holbach agree with La Mettrie's opinion. Thus, Condillac
teaches that man is nothing more than what he has become by the use
of his senses. [69] And Holbach says: "As soon as we take leave of
experience, we fall into the chasm where our imagination leads us
astray." [70]

8. "Galen (Galenus) Claudius, 130 to circa 210 A. D. An eminent
Greek physician and philosopher. Born at Pergamus, Mysia, he studied
both the Platonic and Peripatetic systems of philosophy. Satyrus
instructed him in anatomy. He traveled extensively while young to
perfect his education. About 165 A. D. he moved to Rome, and became
very celebrated as a surgeon and practising physician, attending
the family of Marcus Aurelius. He returned to Pergamus, but probably
visited Rome three or four times afterwards. He wrote in philosophy,
logic, and medicine. Many, probably most, of his works are lost. He
was the one medical authority for thirteen centuries, and his services
to logic and to philosophy were also great." [71]

9. The author of "L'histoire de l'âme" is La Mettrie himself.

10. Hippocrates is often termed the "father of medicine." He was
born in Cos in 460 B. C. He studied medicine under his father,
Heraclides, and Herodicus of Selymbria; and philosophy under Gorgias
and Democritus. He was the first to separate medicine from religion
and from philosophy. He insisted that diseases must be treated by
the physician, as if they were governed by purely natural laws. The
Greeks had such respect for dead bodies that Hippocrates could not
have dissected a human body, and consequently his knowledge of its
structure was limited, but he seems to have been an acute and skilful
observer of conditions in the living body. He wrote several works on
medicine, and in one of them showed the first principles on which the
public health must be based. The details of his life are hidden by
tradition, but it is certain that he was regarded with great respect
and veneration by the Greeks. [72]

11. "The different combinations of these humors...." Compare this
with Descartes's statement that the difference in men comes from the
difference in the construction and position of the brain, which causes
a difference in the action of the animal spirits. [73]

12. "This drug intoxicates, like wine, coffee, etc., each in its own
measure, and according to the dose." Descartes also speaks of the
effect of wine. "The vapors of wine, entering the blood quickly, go
from the heart to the brain, where they are converted into spirits,
which being stronger and more abundant than usual are capable of
moving the body in several strange fashions." [74]

13. The quotation from Pope is from the "Moral Essays," published
1731 to 1735, Epistle I, 1, 69.

14. Jan Baptista Van Helmont (1578-1644) was a Flemish physician and
chemist. He is noted for having demonstrated the necessity of the
balance in chemistry, and for having been among the first to use the
word "gas." His works were published as "Ortus Medicinae," 1648. [75]

15. The author of "Lettres sur la physiognomie" was Jacques Pernety
or Pernetti. He was born at Chazelle-sur-Lyon, was for some years
canon at Lyons, and died there in 1777. [76]

16. Boerhaave. See Note 78.

17. Pierre Louis Moreau de Maupertuis (1698-1759) was a French
mathematician, astronomer and philosopher. He supported the Newtonian
theory against the Cartesians. In 1740 he became president of the
Academy of Berlin. He was the head of the expedition which was sent
by Louis XV to measure a degree of longitude in Lapland. Voltaire
satirized Maupertuis in the "Diatribe du Docteur Akakia." [77]

18. Luzac sums up the preceding facts by saying: "Here are a great
many facts, but what is it they prove? only that the faculties of the
soul arise, grow, and acquire strength in proportion as the body does;
so that these same faculties are weakened in the same proportion as
the body is.... But from all these circumstances it does not follow
that the faculty of thinking is an attribute of matter, and that all
depends on the manner in which our machine is made, that the faculties
of the soul arise from a principle of animal life, from an innate
heat or force, from an irritability of the finest parts of the body,
from a subtil ethereal matter diffused through it, or in a word,
from all these things taken together." [78]

19. "The diverse states of the soul are therefore always correlative
with those of the body." This view is in diametrical opposition to
the teaching of Descartes, who says: "The soul is of a nature wholly
independent of the body." [79] Yet Descartes also states that there is
an intimate connection between the two. "The Reasonable Soul ... could
by no means be educed from the power of matter ... it must be expressly
created; and it is not sufficient that it be lodged in the human body,
exactly like a pilot in a ship, unless perhaps to move its members,
but ... it is necessary for it to be joined and united more closely to
the body, in order to have sensations and appetites similar to ours,
and thus constitute a real man." [79]

Holbach later emphasizes this close connection between body and soul,
which is so insisted upon by La Mettrie. "If freed from our prejudices
we wish to see our soul, or the moving principle which acts in us, we
shall remain convinced that it is part of our body, that it can not
be distinguished from the body except by an abstraction, that it is
but the body itself considered relatively to some of the functions
or faculties to which its nature and particular organization make
it susceptible. We shall see that this soul is forced to undergo
the same changes as the body, that it grows and develops with the
body.... Finally we can not help recognizing that at some periods it
shows evident signs of weakness, sickness, and death." [80]

20. "Peyronie (François Gigot de la), a French surgeon, born in
Montpellier, the fifteenth of January, 1678, died the twenty-fifth
of April, 1747. He was surgeon of the hospital of Saint-Eloi de
Montpellier and instructor of anatomy to the Faculty; then, in 1704,
served in the army. In 1717 he became reversioner of the position of
first surgeon to Louis XV; in 1731, steward of the Queen's palace;
in 1735, a doctor of the King; in 1736, first surgeon of the King,
and chief of the surgeons of the kingdom. The greatest merit of
La Peyronie is for having founded the Academy of Surgery in Paris,
and for having gained special protection for surgery and surgeons in
France. He wrote little." [81]

21. "Willis, Thomas (1621-1675), English physician, was born at Great
Bedwin, Wiltshire, on 27th January, 1621. He studied at Christ Church,
Oxford; and when that city was garrisoned for the king he bore arms
for the Royalists. He took the degree of bachelor of medicine in 1646,
and after the surrender of the garrison applied himself to the practice
of his profession. In 1660, shortly after the Restoration, he became
Sedleian professor of natural philosophy in place of Dr. Joshua Cross,
who was ejected, and the same year he took the degree of doctor of
physic.... He was one of the first members of the Royal Society, and
was elected an honorary fellow of the Royal College of Physicians in
1664. In 1666, ... he removed to Westminster, on the invitation of
Dr. Sheldon, Archbishop of Canterbury.... He died at St. Martin's on
11th November, 1675, and was buried in Westminster Abbey." [82]

22. "Fontenelle, Bernard le Bovier de. Born at Rouen, France,
February 11, 1657; died at Paris, January 9, 1757. A French advocate,
philosopher, poet, and miscellaneous writer. He was the nephew (through
his mother) of Corneille, and was 'one of the last of the Précieux, or
rather the inventor of a new combination of literature and gallantry
which at first exposed him to not a little satire' (Saintsbury). He
wrote 'Poésies pastorales' (1688), 'Dialogues des morts' (1683),
'Entretiens sur la pluralité des mondes' (1686), 'Histoire des oracles'
(1687), 'Eloges des académiciens' (delivered 1690-1740)." [83]

23. "In a word, would it be absolutely impossible to teach the ape a
language? I do not think so." Compare with this Haeckel's statement
of the relation between man's speech and that of apes. "It is of
especial interest that the speech of apes seems on physiological
comparison to be a stage in the formation of articulate human
speech. Among living apes there is an Indian species which is musical;
the hylobates syndactylus sings a full octave in perfectly pure
harmonious half-tones. No impartial philologist can hesitate any
longer to admit that our elaborate rational language has been slowly
and gradually developed out of the imperfect speech of our Pliocene
simian ancestors." [84]

24. Johann Conrad Amman was born at Schaffhausen, in Switzerland,
in 1669. After his graduation at Basle, he practised medicine at
Amsterdam. He devoted most of his attention to the instruction of deaf
mutes. He taught them by attracting their attention to the motion of
his lips, tongue, and larynx, while he was speaking, and by persuading
them to imitate these motions. In this way, they finally learned to
articulate syllables and words, and to talk. In his works "Surdus
Loquens," and "Dissertatio de Loquela," he explained the mechanism of
speech, and made public his method of instruction. From all accounts
it seems that his success with the deaf mutes was remarkable. He died
about 1730. [85]

25. "... the great analogy between ape and man...." Compare Haeckel:
"Thus comparative anatomy proves to the satisfaction of every
unprejudiced and critical student the significant fact that the body of
man and that of the anthropoid ape are not only peculiarly similar, but
they are practically one and the same in every important respect." [86]

26. Sir William Temple was born in London in 1628. He attended the
Puritan College of Emmanuel, Cambridge, but left without taking
his degree. After an extensive tour on the continent, he settled
in Ireland in 1655. His political career began with the accession
of Charles II in 1660. He is particularly noted for concluding "The
Triple Alliance" between England, the United Netherlands, and Sweden,
and for his part in bringing about the marriage of William and Mary,
which completed the alliance of England and the Netherlands. Temple
was not as successful in political work at home as abroad, for he was
too honest to care to be concerned in the intrigues in English affairs,
at that time. He retired from politics and died at Moor Park in 1699.

Temple wrote several works on political subjects. His "Memoirs" were
begun in 1682; the first part was destroyed before it was published,
the second part was published without his consent, and the third part
was published by Swift after Temple's death. His fame rests more on
his diplomatic work than on his writings. [87]

27. "Trembley (Abraham) a Swiss naturalist, born in Geneva, the third
of September, 1700, died in Geneva, the twelfth of May, 1784. He
was educated in his native city, and in the Hague, where he became
tutor of the son of an English resident, and later the tutor of
the young duke of Richmond, with whom he traveled in Germany and
Italy. In 1760, he obtained the position of librarian at Geneva,
and gained a seat in the council of the 'Two Hundred.' His admirable
works on the fresh-water snake procured for him his election as
member of the Royal Society of London, and as correspondent of the
Academy of Sciences in Paris. From 1775 to 1782 he published several
works on natural religion, and articles on natural history in the
'Philosophical Transactions,' 1742-57. His most important work is
'Mémoires pour servir à l'histoire d'un genre de polype d'eau douce'
(Leyden, 1744; Paris, 2 volumes)." [88]

28. "What was man before the invention of words and the knowledge
of language? An animal." Compare this with the statement of Hobbes:
"The most noble and profitable invention of all others was that of
Speech, consisting of names or appellations, and their connexion,
... without which there had been amongst men neither commonwealth,
nor society, nor contract, nor peace, no more than amongst lions,
bears, and wolves." [89]

29. Fontenelle. See note 22.

30. "All the faculties of the soul can be correctly reduced to
pure imagination." Compare with this La Mettrie's statement in
"L'histoire naturelle de l'âme": "The more one studies all the
intellectual faculties, the more convinced one remains, that they
are all included in the faculty of sensation, upon which they all
depend so essentially that without it the soul could never perform
any of its functions." [90] This resembles Condillac's doctrine of
sensation: "Judgment, reflexion, desires, passions, etc., are nothing
but sensation itself which is transformed in diverse ways." [91]
Helvetius also says: "All the operations of the mind are reducible
to sensation." [92]

31. "See to what one is brought by the abuse of language, and
by the use of those fine words (spirituality, immateriality,
etc.)." Compare Hobbes, "Though men may put together words of
contradictory signification, as spirit and incorporeal; yet they can
never have the imagination of anything answering to them." [93]

32. "Man's preëminent advantage is his organism." Luzac says: "This
no more proves that organization is the chief merit of man, than
that the form of a musical instrument constitutes the chief merit
of the musician. In proportion to the goodness of the instrument,
the musician charms by his art, and the case is the same with the
soul. In proportion to the soundness of the body, the soul is in
better condition to exert her faculties." [94]

33. "Such is, I think, the generation of intelligence." Luzac argues
against this statement thus: "But if thought and all the faculties
of the soul depended only on the organization as some pretend, how
could the imagination draw a long chain of consequences from the
objects it has embraced?" [95]

34. Pyrrhonism is "the doctrine of Pyrrho of Elis which has been
transmitted chiefly by his disciple Timon. More generally, radical
Scepticism in general." [96]

35. Pierre Bayle was born at Carlat in 1647. Although the child
of Protestant parents, he was converted by the Jesuits. After his
reconversion to Protestantism, he was driven out of France, and
took refuge first in Geneva, and then in Holland. In 1675 he became
professor of philosophy at the Protestant College of Sedan, and in
1681 professor of philosophy and history at Rotterdam. In 1693 he was
forced to resign from his position on account of his religious views.

Bayle was one of the leading French sceptics of the time. He was a
Cartesian, but questioned both the certainty of one's own existence,
and the knowledge derived from it. He declared that religion is
contrary to the human reason, but that this fact does not necessarily
destroy faith. He distinguished religion not only from science, but
also from morality, and vigorously opposed those who considered a
certain religion necessary for morality. He did not openly attack
Christianity, yet all that he wrote awakened doubt, and his work
exerted an extensive influence for scepticism.

His principal work is the "Dictionnaire historique et critique,"
published 1695-1697, and containing a vast amount of knowledge,
expressed in a piquant and popular style. This fact made the book
widely read both by scholars and by superficial readers.

36. Arnobius the Elder was born at Sicca Venerea in Numidia, in the
latter part of the third century A. D. He was at first an opponent of
Christianity, but was afterwards converted, and wrote "Adversus Gentes"
as an apology for Christianity. In this work, he tries to answer the
complaints made against Christians on the ground that the disasters
of the time were due to their impiety; vindicates the divinity of
Christ; and discusses the nature of the human soul. He concludes
that the soul is not immortal, for he believes that the belief in
the immortality of the soul would have a deteriorating influence
on morality. For translation of his work compare Vol. XIX of the
"Ante-Nicene Christian Library." [97]

37. "There exists no soul or sensitive substance without
remorse." Condillac had said: "There is something in animals besides
motion. They are not pure machines: they feel." [98] La Mettrie also
attributed remorse to animals, but believed that they are none the
less machines. Luzac said in comment: "What renders these systems
completely ridiculous, is, that the persons who pronounce men machines,
give them properties which belie their assertion. If beings are but
machines, why do they grant a natural law, an internal sense, a kind
of dread? These are ideas which can not be excited by objects which
operate on our senses." [99]

38. "Nature has created us solely to be happy." This is a statement of
the doctrine, which La Mettrie develops in his principal ethical work
"Discours sur le Bonheur." He teaches that happiness rests upon bodily
pleasure and pain. In "L'histoire naturelle de l'âme," La Mettrie
states that all the passions can be developed from two fundamental
passions, of which they are but modifications, love and hatred, or
desire and aversion. [100] Like La Mettrie, Helvetius makes corporeal
pleasure and pain the ruling motives for man's conduct. Thus he writes:
"Pleasure and pain are and always will be the only principles of action
in man." [101]... "Remorse is nothing more than a foresight of bodily
pain to which some crime has exposed us." [102] He definitely makes
happiness the end of human action. "The end of man is self-preservation
and the attainment of a happy existence.... Man, to find happiness,
should save up his pleasures, and refuse all those which might change
into pains.... The passions always have happiness as an object: they
are legitimate and natural, and can not be called good or bad except
on account of their influence on human beings. To lead men to virtue,
we must show them the advantages of virtuous actions." [103] Holbach,
finally, goes further than La Mettrie or Helvetius, and makes purely
mechanical impulses the motives of man's action. "The passions are
ways of being or modifications of the internal organs, attracted or
repulsed by objects, and are consequently subject in their own way
to the physical laws of attraction and repulsion." [104]

39. "Ixions of Christianity." Ixion, for his treachery, stricken
with madness, was cast into Erebus, where he was continually scourged
while bound to a fiery wheel, and forced to cry: "Benefactors should
be honored."

40. "Who can be sure that the reason for man's existence is not
simply the fact that he exists?" Luzac opposes this by saying:
"If the reason of man's existence was in man himself, this existence
would be a necessary consequence of his own nature; so that his own
nature would contain the cause or reason of his existence. Now since
his own nature would imply the cause of his existence, it would also
imply his existence itself, so that man could no more be considered
as non-existent than a circle can be considered without radii or a
picture without features or proportions.... If the existence of man
was in man himself, he would then be an invariable being." [105]

41. "Fénelon (François de Salignac de la Mothe-Fénelon), born at
Château de Fénelon, Dordogne, France, August 6, 1651, died at Cambrai,
France, January 7, 1715. A celebrated French prelate, orator, and
author. He became preceptor of the sons of the dauphin in 1689,
and was appointed archbishop of Cambrai in 1695. His works include
'Les aventures de Télémaque' (1699), 'Dialogues des morts' (1712),
'Traité de l'éducation des filles' (1688), 'Explication des maximes
des saints' (1697), etc. His collected works were edited by Leclère
(38 vols., 1827-1830)." [106]

42. "Nieuwentyt (Bernard), a Dutch mathematician, born in
West-Graftdijk the tenth of August 1654, died at Purmerend the
thirtieth of May, 1718. An unrelenting Cartesian, he combated the
infinitesimal calculus, and wrote a polemic against Leibnitz,
concerning this subject. He wrote a theological dissertation
translated into French under the title "L'existence de Dieu
démontrée par les merveilles de la nature" (Paris, 1725)." [107]

43. "Abadie, James (Jacques), born at Nay, Basse-Pyrénées, probably in
1654; died at London, September 25, 1725. A noted French Protestant
theologian. He went to Berlin about 1680 as minister of the French
church there, and thence to England and Ireland; was for a time
minister of the French church in the Savoy; and settled in Ireland as
dean of Killaloe in 1699. His chief work is the 'Traité de la vérité
de la religion chrétienne' (1684), with its continuation 'Traité de
la divinité de nôtre Seigneur Jesus-Christ' (1689)." [108]

44. "Derham (William), English theologian and scholar, born in
Stoughton, near Worcester, in 1657, died at Upminster in 1735. Pastor
of Upminster in the county of Essex, he could peacefully devote
himself to his taste for mechanics and natural history. Besides
making studies of watch-making, and of fish, birds, and insects,
published in part in the Transactions of the Royal Society, he
wrote several works on religious philosophy. The most important,
which was popular for a long time and was translated into French
(1726), has as title 'Physico-Theology, or the Demonstration of the
Existence and the Attributes of God, by the Works of His Creation'
(1713). He wrote as complement, in 1714, his 'Astro-Theology, or the
Demonstration of the Existence and Attributes of God by the Observation
of the Heavens.'" [109]

45. Rais, or Cardinal de Retz (1614-1679), was a French politician
and author. From his childhood he was intended for the church. He
took an active part in the movement against Cardinal Mazarin, and
later became cardinal, but lost his popularity, and was imprisoned
at Vincennes. After escaping from there he returned to France and
settled in Lorraine, where he wrote his 'Mémoires,' which tell of
the court life of his time. [110]

46. Marcello Malpighi (1628-1694) was a renowned Italian anatomist
and physiologist. He held the position of lecturer on medicine at
Bologna in 1656, a few months later became professor at Pisa, was made
professor at Bologna in 1660, went from there to Messina, though he
later returned to Bologna. In 1691 he became physician to Pope Innocent
XII. Malpighi is often known as the founder of microscopic anatomy. He
was the first to see the marvelous spectacle of the circulation of the
blood on the surface of a frog's lung. He discovered the vesicular
structure of the human lung, the structure of the secreting glands,
and the mucous character of the lower stratum of the epidermis. He
was the first to undertake the finer anatomy of the brain, and he
accurately described the distribution of grey matter, and of the fibre
tracts in the cord. His works are: "De pulmonibus" (Bologna, 1661),
"Epistolae anatomicae narc. Malpighi et Car. Fracassati" (Amsterdam,
1662), "De Viscerum Structura" (London, 1669), "Anatome Plantarum"
(London, 1672), "De Structura Glandularum conglobatarum" (London,
1689). [111]

47. Deism is a system of thought which arose in the latter part
of the seventeenth century. Its most important representatives in
England were Toland, Collins, Chubb, Shaftsbury, and Tindal. They
insisted on freedom of thought and speech, and claimed that reason
is superior to any authority. They denied the necessity of any
supernatural revelation, and were consequently vigorously opposed by
the church. Partly because of this opposition by the church, many of
them argued against Christianity, and tried to show that an observance
of moral laws is the only religion necessary for man. They taught that
happiness is man's chief end, and that, since man is a social being,
his happiness can best be gained by mutual helpfulness. Although
they declared that nature is the work of a perfect being, they had
a mechanical conception of the relation of God to the world, and did
not, like later theists, find evidence of God's presence in all the
works of nature. [112]

48. "Vanini, Lucilio, self-styled Julius Cæsar. Born at Taurisano,
kingdom of Naples, about 1585; burned at the stake at Toulouse, France,
February 19, 1619. An Italian free thinker, condemned to death as an
atheist and magician. He studied at Rome and Padua, became a priest,
traveled in Germany and the Netherlands, and began teaching at Lyons,
but was obliged to flee to England, where he was arrested. After his
release he returned to Lyons, and about 1617 settled at Toulouse. Here
he was arrested for his opinions, condemned, and on the same day
executed. His chief works are: 'Amphitheatrum aeternae Providentiae'
(1615), 'De admirandis naturae reginae deaeque mortalium arcanis'
(1616)." [113]

49. Desbarreaux (Jacques Vallée). A French writer, born at Paris
in 1602, who died at Chalon-sur-Saône the ninth of May, 1673. He
wrote a celebrated sonnet on penitence, but was rather an unbeliever
and sceptic than a penitent. Guy Patin, hearing of his death, said:
"He infected poor young people by his licence. His conversation was
very dangerous and destructive to the public." [114]

50. Boindin (Nicolas), French scholar and author, born the twenty-ninth
of May 1676 at Paris, where he died the thirtieth of November 1751. He
was in the army for a while, but retired on account of ill health. He
then gave himself up to literature, and wrote several plays. In
1706 he was elected Royal censor and associate of the Academy of
Inscriptions. His liberty, or, as it was then called, license of mind,
shut the doors of the French Academy to him, and would have caused
his expulsion from the Academy of Inscriptions if he had not been so
old. He died without retracting his opinions. [115]

51. Denis Diderot (1713-1784) was one of the leaders of the
intellectual movement of the eighteenth century. He was at first
influenced by Shaftsbury, and was enthusiastic in his support of
natural religion. In his "Pensées philosophiques" (1746) he tries to
show that the discoveries of natural science are the strongest proofs
for the existence of God. The wonders of animal life are enough to
destroy atheism for ever. Yet, while he opposes atheism, he also
opposes vigorously the intolerance and bigotry of the church. He
claims that many of the attributes ascribed to God are contrary to
the very idea of a just and loving God.

Later, Diderot was influenced by La Mettrie and by Holbach, and became
an advocate of materialism which he set forth in "Le rêve d'Alembert"
and in the passages contributed to the "Système de la nature." Diderot
was the editor of the "Encyclopédie." [116]

52. Trembley. See note 27.

53. "Nothing which happens, could have failed to happen." An
enunciation of the doctrine so insisted upon by Holbach. "The whole
universe ... shows us only an immense and uninterrupted chain of cause
and effect." [117]... "Necessity which regulates all the movements
of the physical world, controls also those of the moral world." [118]

54. "All these evidences of a creator, repeated thousands ... of times
... are self-evident only to the anti-Pyrrhonians." La Mettrie holds an
opinion contrary not only to that of Descartes and Locke, but also to
that of Toland, Hobbes, and Condillac. Descartes, for instance, says:
"Thus I very clearly see that the certitude and truth of all science
depends on the knowledge alone of the true God." [119] Hobbes asserts:
"For he that from any effect he seeth come to pass should reason to
the next and immediate cause thereof, and from thence to the cause
of that cause, ... shall at last come to this, that there must be,
as even the heathen philosophers confessed, one first mover, that is
a first and an eternal cause of all things, which is that which men
mean by the name of God." [120] Toland's words are: "All the jumbling
of atoms, all the Chances you can suppose for it, could not bring the
Parts of the Universe into their present Order, nor continue them in
the same, nor cause the Organization of a Flower or a Fly.... The
Infinity of Matter ... excludes ... an extended corporeal God,
but not a pure Spirit or immaterial Being." [121] Condillac writes:
"A first cause, independent, unique, infinite, eternal, omnipotent,
immutable, intelligent, free, and whose providence extends over all
things: that is the most perfect notion of God that we can form in
this life." [122] Locke declares: "From what has been said it is plain
to me we have a more certain knowledge of the existence of a God than
of anything our senses have not immediately discovered to us. Nay I
presume I may say, that we more certainly know that there is a God,
than that there is anything else without us." [123]

55. "Lucretius (Titus Lucretius Carus). Born at Rome, probably about
96 B.C., died October 15, 55 B.C. A celebrated Roman philosophical
poet. He was the author of 'De rerum natura,' a didactic and
philosophical poem in six books, treating of physics, of psychology,
and (briefly) of ethics from the Epicurean point of view. He committed
suicide probably in a fit of insanity. According to a popular but
doubtless erroneous tradition, his madness was due to a love-philter
administered to him by his wife." [124]

56. "Lamy (Bernard) was born in Mans in the year 1640. He studied
first in the college of this city. He later went to Paris, and
at Saumar studied philosophy under Charles de la Fontenelle,
and theology under André Martin and Jean Leporc. He was at length
called to teach philosophy in the city of Angers. He wrote a great
many books on theological subjects. His philosophical works are:
'L'art de parler' (1675), 'Traité de méchanique, de l'équilibre, des
solides et des liqueurs' (1679), 'Traité de la grandeur en général'
(1680), 'Entretiens sur les sciences' (1684), 'Eléments de géométrie,'
(1685)." [125]

57. "The eye sees only because it is formed and placed as it is." La
Mettrie doubts whether there is any purpose in the world. Condillac, on
the other hand, teaches that purpose and intelligence are shown forth
in the universe. "Can we see the order of the parts of the universe,
the subordination among them, and notice how so many different things
compose such a permanent whole, and remain convinced that the cause
of the universe is a principle without any knowledge of its effects,
which without purpose, without intelligence, relates each being to
particular ends, subordinated to a general end?" [126]

58. "Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites." Vergil, Eclogue
III, line 108.

59. "The universe will never be happy unless it is atheistic." Although
La Mettrie calls this a "strange opinion" it is clear that he
secretly sympathizes with it. Holbach affirms this doctrine very
emphatically. "Experience teaches us that sacred opinions were the
real source of the evils of human beings. Ignorance of natural causes
created gods for them. Imposture made these gods terrible. This idea
hindered the progress of reason." [127] "An atheist ... is a man who
destroys chimeras harmful to the human race, in order to lead men
back to nature, to experience, and to reason, which has no need of
recourse to ideal powers, to explain the operations of nature." [128]

60. "The soul is therefore but an empty word." Contrast this with
Descartes's statement: "And certainly the idea I have of the human
mind ... is incomparably more distinct than the idea of any corporeal
object." [129] Compare this doctrine, also, with Holbach's assertion:
"Those who have distinguished the soul from the body seem to have only
distinguished their brains from themselves. Truly the brain is the
common center, where all the nerves spread in all parts of the human
body, terminate and join together.... The more experience we have,
the more we are convinced that the word 'spirit' has no meaning even
to those who have invented it, and can be of no use either in the
physical or in the moral world." [130]

61. William Cowper (1666-1709) was an English anatomist. He was
drawn into a controversy with Bidloo, the Dutch physician, by
publishing under his own name Bidloo's work on the anatomy of human
bodies. His principal works are: "Myotamia reformata" (London, 1694)
and "Glandularum descriptio" (1702). [131]

62. William Harvey (1578-1657), an English physician and physiologist,
is renowned for his discovery of the circulation of the blood. He was
educated at Canterbury and Cambridge, and took his doctor's degree at
Cambridge in 1602. During his life he held the position of Lumleian
lecturer at the College of Physicians, and of physician extraordinary
to James I. His principal works are: "Exercitatio de motu cordis
et sanguinis" (1628), and "Exercitationes de generatione animalium"
(1651). [132]

63. Francis Bacon (1551-1626) was one of the first to revolt
against scholasticism and to introduce a new method into science
and philosophy. He claimed that to know reality, and consequently
to gain new power over reality, man must stop studying conceptions,
and study matter itself. Yet he did not himself know how to gain
a more accurate knowledge of nature, so that he could not put into
practice the method which he himself advocated. His works are full
of scholastic conceptions, though many of the implications of his
system are materialistic. Lange claims, [133] indeed, that if Bacon
had been more consistent and daring, he would have reached strictly
materialistic conclusions. The account of the motion of the heart
of the dead convict is found in "Sylva Sylvarum." [134] This book,
published in 1627, a year after Bacon's death, contains the account
of Bacon's experiments, and of his theories in matters of physiology,
physics, chemistry, medicine, and psychology.

64. Robert Boyle, one of the greatest natural philosophers of his age,
studied at Eton for three years, and then became the private pupil of
the rector of Stalbridge. He traveled through France, Switzerland,
and Italy, and while at Florence, studied the work of Galileo. He
decided to devote his life to scientific work, and in 1645 became
a member of a society of scientific men, which later grew into the
Royal Society of London. His principal work was the improvement of
the air-pump, and by that the discovery of the laws governing the
pressure and volume of gases.

Boyle was also deeply interested in theology. He gave liberally for
the work of spreading Christianity in India and America, and by his
will endowed the "Boyle Lectures" to demonstrate the Christian religion
against atheists, theists, pagans, Jews, and Mohammedans. [135]

65. Nicolas Sténon was born at Copenhagen, 1631, and died at Schwerin
in 1687. He studied at Leyden and Paris, and then settled in Florence,
where he became the physician of the grand duke. In 1672 he became
professor of anatomy at Florence, but three years later he gave up
this position and entered the church. In 1677 he was made Bishop
of Heliopolis and went to Hanover, then to Munster, and finally
to Schwerin. His principal work is the "Discours sur l'anatomie du
cerveau" (Paris, 1669). [136]

66. La Mettrie's account of involuntary movements is much like that of
Descartes. Descartes says: "If any one quickly passes his hand before
our eyes as if to strike us, we shut our eyes, because the machinery
of our body is so composed that the movement of this hand towards
our eyes excites another movement in the brain, which controls the
animal spirits in the muscles that close the eyelids." [137]

67. "The brain has its muscles for thinking, as the legs have muscles
for walking." Neither Condillac nor Helvetius go so far. Helvetius
explicitly states that it is an open question whether sensation is
due to a material or to a spiritual substance. [138]

68. Giovanni Alfonso Borelli (1608-1670) was the head of the so-called
iatro-mathematical sect. He tried to apply mathematics to medicine in
the same way in which it had been applied to the physical sciences. He
was wise enough to restrict the application of his system to the motion
of the muscles, but his followers tried to extend its application and
were led into many absurd conjectures. Borelli was at first professor
of mathematics at Pisa, and later professor of medicine at Florence. He
was connected with the revolt of Messina and was obliged to leave
Florence. He retired to Rome, where he was under the protection of
Christina, Queen of Sweden, and remained there until his death in
1679. [139]

69. "For one order that the will gives, it bows a hundred times to
the yoke." Descartes, on the other hand, teaches that the soul has
direct control over its voluntary actions and thoughts, and indirect
control over its passions. [140] La Mettrie goes further than to
limit the extent of the will, and questions whether it is ever free:
"The sensations which affect us decide the soul either to will or
not to will, to love or to hate these sensations according to the
pleasure or the pain which they cause in us. This state of the soul
thus determined by its sensations is called the will." [141] Holbach
insists on this point and contends that all freedom is a delusion:
"[Man's] birth depends on causes entirely outside of his power; it
is without his permission that he enters this system where he has
a place; and without his consent that, from the moment of his birth
to the day of his death, he is continually modified by causes that
influence his machine in spite of his will, modify his being, and
alter his conduct. Is not the least reflexion enough to prove that
the solids and fluids of which the body is composed, and that the
hidden mechanism that he considers independent of external causes,
are perpetually under the influence of these causes, and could not act
without them? Does he not see that his temperament does not depend
on himself, that his passions are the necessary consequences of his
temperament, that his will and his actions are determined by these same
passions, and by ideas that he has not given to himself?... In a word,
everything should convince man that during every moment of his life,
he is but a passive instrument in the hands of necessity." [142]

70. The theory of animal spirits, held by Galen and elaborated by
Descartes, is that the nerves are hollow tubes containing a volatile
liquid, the animal spirits. The animal spirits were supposed to
circulate from the periphery to the brain and back again, and to
perform by their action all the functions of the nerves.

71. Berkeley uses the fact that the color of objects varies, as one
argument for his idealistic conclusion. [143]

72. It is hard to tell what Pythagoras himself taught, but it is
certain that he taught the kinship of animals and men, and upon
this kinship his rule for the abstinence from flesh was probably
based. Among the writings of the later Pythagoreans we find strange
rules for diet which are plainly genuine taboos. For example they are
commanded "to abstain from beans, not to break bread, not to eat from
a whole loaf, not to eat the heart, etc." [144]

73. Plato forbade the use of wine in his ideal republic. [145]

74. "Nature's first care, when the chyle enters the blood, is to
excite in it a kind of fever." Thus, warmth is the first necessity
for the body. Compare with this, Descartes's statement: "There is a
continual warmth in our heart, ... this fire is the bodily principle
of all the movements of our members." [146] This is one of the many
instances in which La Mettrie's account of the mechanism of the body
is similar to that of Descartes.

75. "Stahl (George Ernst), born at Ansbach, Bavaria, October 21, 1660;
died at Berlin, May 14, 1734. A noted German chemist, physician of the
King of Prussia from 1716. His works include: 'Theoria medica vera'
(1707), 'Experimenta et observationes chemicae' (1731), etc." [147]

76. Philip Hecquet (1661-1737) was a celebrated French physician. He
studied at Rheims, and in 1688 became the physician of the nuns of Port
Royal des Champs. He returned to Paris in 1693 and took his doctor's
degree in 1697. He was twice dean of the faculty of Paris. In 1727
he became the physician of the religious Carmelites of the suburb of
Saint Jacques, and remained their physician for thirty-two years. [148]

77. The quotation: "All men may not go to Corinth," is translated from
Horace, Ep. 1, 19, 36. "Non cuivis homini contigit adire Corinthum."

78. Hermann Boerhaave was born at Voorhout near Leyden, on December 31,
1668. His father, who belonged to the clerical profession, destined
his son for the same calling and so gave him a liberal education. At
the University of Leyden, he studied under Gronovius, Ryckius and
Frigland. At the death of his father, Boerhaave was left without any
provision and supported himself by teaching mathematics. Vandenberg,
the burgomaster of Leyden, advised him to study medicine, and he
decided to devote himself to this profession. In 1693 he received his
degree and began to practice medicine. In 1701 he was made "Lecturer
on the Institutes of Medicine" at the University of Leyden. Thirteen
years later he was appointed Rector of the University, and the same
year became Professor of Practical Medicine there. He introduced into
the university the system of clinical instruction. Boerhaave's merit
was widely recognized, and his fame attracted many medical students
from all Europe to the University of Leyden. Among these was La Mettrie
whose whole philosophy was profoundly influenced by the teaching of
Boerhaave. In 1728 Boerhaave was elected into the Royal Academy of
Sciences of Paris, and two years later he was made a member of the
Royal Society of London. In 1731 his health compelled him to resign
the Rectorship at Leyden. At this time he delivered an oration, "De
Honore, Medici Servitute." He died after a long illness on April 23,
1738. The city of Leyden erected a monument to him in the Church of
St. Peter, and inscribed on it: "Salutifero Boerhaavii genio Sacrum."

Boerhaave was a careful and brilliant student, an inspiring teacher,
and a skilful practitioner. There are remarkable accounts of his skill
in discovering symptoms, and in diagnosing diseases. His chief works
are: "Institutiones Medicae" (Leyden, 1708); "Aphorismi de cognoscendis
et curandis Morbis" (Leyden, 1709), "Libellus de Materia Medica et
Remediorum Formulis" (Leyden, 1719), "Institutiones et Experimentae
Chemicae" (Paris, 1724). [149]

79. Willis. (See Note 21.)

80. Claude Perrault (1613-1688) was a French physician and
architect. He received his degree of doctor of medicine at Paris
and practised medicine there. In 1673 he became a member of the
Royal Academy of Sciences. Although he never abandoned his work in
mathematics, in the natural sciences, and in medicine, he is more noted
as an architect than as a physician or scientist. He was the architect
of one of the colonnades of the Louvre, and of the Observatory. [150]

81. "Matter is self-moved." In "L'histoire naturelle de l'âme" La
Mettrie claims that motion is one of the essential properties of
matter. See "L'histoire naturelle de l'âme," Chap. V.

82. "The nature of motion is as unknown to us as that of
matter." Unlike La Mettrie, Toland holds that it is possible to
know the nature of matter, and declares that motion and matter can
not be defined, because their nature is self-evident. [151] Holbach,
resembling La Mettrie, teaches that it is futile to seek to know the
ultimate nature of matter, or the cause for its existence. "Thus
if any one shall ask whence matter came, we shall say that it has
always existed. If any one ask, whence came movement in matter, we
shall answer that for this same reason matter must have moved from
eternity, since motion is a necessary consequence of its existence,
its essence, and of its primitive properties, such as extent, weight,
impenetrability, shape, etc.... The existence of matter is a fact;
the existence of motion is another fact." [152]

83. Huyghens (Christian) was born at The Hague, 1629, and died there
in 1695. He was a Dutch physicist, mathematician, and astronomer. He is
celebrated for the invention of the pendulum clock which could measure
the movements of the planets, for the improvement of the telescope,
and for the development of the wave-theory of light. His principal
work is "Horologium Oscillatorium" (1673). [153]

84. Julien Leroy (1686-1759) was a celebrated French watchmaker. He
excelled in the construction of pendulums and of large clocks. Some
have attributed the construction of the first horizontal clock to him,
but this is doubtful. Among many other inventions and improvements
of clocks, he invented the compensating pendulum which bears his
name. [154]

85. Jacques de Vaucanson (1709-1782) was a French mechanist. From his
childhood he was always interested in mechanical contrivances. In 1738
he presented to the French Academy his remarkable flute player. Soon
after, he made a duck which could swim, eat, and digest, and an asp
which could hiss and dart on Cleopatra's breast. He later held the
position of inspector of the manufacture of silk. In 1748 he was
admitted to the Academy of Sciences. His machines were left to the
Queen, but she gave them to the Academy, and in the disturbances which
followed the pieces were scattered and lost. Vaucanson published:
"Mécanisme d'un flûteur automate" (Paris, 1738). [155]

86. "[Descartes] understood animal nature; he was the first to prove
completely that animals are pure machines." Contrast this with
La Mettrie's former reference in "L'histoire naturelle de l'âme"
to "this absurd system 'that animals are pure machines.' Such a
laughable opinion," he adds, "has never gained admittance among
philosophers.... Experience does not prove the faculty of feeling any
less in animals than in men." [156] It is evident that La Mettrie's
opposition to this 'absurd system' was based upon his insistence on
the similarity of men and animals. In "L'homme machine" he argues
from the same premiss, that animals are machines, that men are like
animals, and that therefore men also are machines.




