CHAPTER VI. CONCERNING THE SENSITIVE FACULTY OF MATTER.


We have spoken of two essential attributes of matter, upon which
depend the greater number of its properties, namely extension and
moving force. We have now but to prove a third attribute: I mean the
faculty of feeling which the philosophers of all centuries have found
in this same substance. I say all philosophers, although I am not
ignorant of all the efforts which the Cartesians have made, in vain,
to rob matter of this faculty. But in order to avoid insurmountable
difficulties, they have flung themselves into a labyrinth from which
they have thought to escape by this absurd system "that animals are
pure machines."{89}

An opinion so absurd has never gained admittance among philosophers,
except as the play of wit or as a philosophical pastime. For this
reason we shall not stop to refute it. Experience gives us no less
proof of the faculty of feeling in animals than of feeling in men....

There comes up another difficulty which more nearly concerns our
vanity: namely, the impossibility of our conceiving this property as a
dependence or attribute of matter. Let it not be forgotten that this
substance reveals to us only ineffable characters. Do we understand
better how extension is derived from its essence, how it can be moved
by a primitive force whose action is exerted without contact, and a
thousand other miracles so hidden from the gaze of the most penetrating
eyes, that (to paraphrase the idea of an illustrious modern writer)
they reveal only the curtain which conceals them?

But might not one suppose as some have supposed, that the feeling
which is observed in animated bodies, might belong to a being distinct
from the matter of these bodies, to a substance of a different nature
united to them? Does the light of reason allow us in good faith to
admit such conjectures? We know in bodies only matter, and we observe
the faculty of feeling only in bodies: on what foundation then can
we erect an ideal being, disowned by all our knowledge?

However, we must admit, with the same frankness, that we are ignorant
whether matter has in itself the faculty of feeling, or only the power
of acquiring it by those modifications or forms to which matter is
susceptible; for it is true that this faculty of feeling appears only
in organic bodies.

This is then another new faculty which might exist only potentially
in matter, like all the others which have been mentioned; and this was
the hypothesis of the ancients, whose philosophy, full of insight and
penetration, deserves to be raised above the ruins of the philosophy
of the moderns. It is in vain that the latter disdain the sources
too remote from them. Ancient philosophy will always hold its own
among those who are worthy to judge it, because it forms (at least
in relation to the subject of which I am treating) a system that is
solid and well articulated like the body, whereas all these scattered
members of modern philosophy form no system.








                               APPENDIX.

                          OUTLINES AND NOTES.

                       BY GERTRUDE CARMAN BUSSEY.


LA METTRIE'S RELATION TO HIS PREDECESSORS AND TO HIS SUCCESSORS.


I. The Historical Relation of La Mettrie to René Descartes (1596-1650).

The most direct source of La Mettrie's work, if the physiological
aspect of his system is set aside, is found in the philosophy of
Descartes. In fact it sometimes seems as if La Mettrie's materialism
grew out of his insistence on the contradictory character of the
dualistic system of Descartes. He criticises Descartes's statement
that the body and soul are absolutely independent, and takes great
pains to show the dependence of the soul on the body. Yet though La
Mettrie's system may be opposed to that of Descartes [17] from one
point of view, from another point of view it seems to be a direct
consequence of it. La Mettrie himself recognizes this relationship and
feels that his doctrine that man is a machine, is a natural inference
from Descartes's teaching that animals are mere machines. [18] Moreover
La Mettrie carries on Descartes's conception of the body as a machine,
and many of his detailed discussions of the machinery of the body
seem to have been drawn from Descartes.

It should be noted that La Mettrie did justice to Descartes, and
realized how much all philosophers owed to him. He insisted moreover
that Descartes's errors were due to his failure to follow his own
method. [19] Yet La Mettrie's method was different from that of
Descartes, for La Mettrie was an empiricist [20] without rationalistic
leaning. As regards doctrine: La Mettrie differed from Descartes in
his opinion of matter. Since he disbelieved in any spiritual reality,
he gave matter the attributes of motion and thought, while Descartes
insisted that the one attribute of matter is extension. [21] It
was a natural consequence of La Mettrie's disbelief in spiritual
substance that he could throw doubt on the existence of God. [22]
On the other hand the belief in God was one of the foundations of
Descartes's system. La Mettrie tried to show that Descartes's belief
in a soul and in God was merely designed to hide his true thought
from the priests, and to save himself from persecution. [23]




IIa. The Likeness of La Mettrie to the English Materialists, Thomas
Hobbes (1588-1679) and John Toland (1670-1721).

The influence of Descartes upon La Mettrie cannot be questioned but it
is more difficult to estimate the influence upon him of materialistic
philosophers. Hobbes published "The Leviathan" in 1651 and "De Corpore"
in 1655. Thus he wrote about a century before La Mettrie, and since
the eighteenth century was one in which the influence of England upon
France was very great, it is easy to suppose that La Mettrie had read
Hobbes. If so, he must have gained many ideas from him. The extent
of this influence is, however, unknown, for La Mettrie rarely if ever
quotes from Hobbes, or attributes any of his doctrines to Hobbes.

In the first place, both Hobbes and La Mettrie are thoroughgoing
materialists. They both believe that body is the only reality, and that
anything spiritual is unimaginable. [24] Furthermore their conceptions
of matter are very similar. According to La Mettrie, matter contains
the faculty of sensation and the power of motion as well as the
quality of extension. [25] This same conception of matter is held by
Hobbes, for he specifically attributes extension and motion to matter,
and then reduces sensation to a kind of internal motion. [26] Thus
sensation also may be an attribute of matter. Moreover Hobbes and
La Mettrie are in agreement on many smaller points, and La Mettrie
elaborates much that is suggested in Hobbes. They both believe that
the passions are dependent on bodily conditions. [27] They agree in
the belief that all the differences in men are due to differences
in the constitution and organization of their bodies. [28] They both
discuss the nature and importance of language. [29]

Hobbes differs from La Mettrie in holding that we can be sure that God
exists as the cause of this world. [30] However even though he thinks
that it is possible to know that God exists, he does not believe that
we can know his nature.

La Mettrie's system may be regarded as the application of a system like
that of Hobbes to the special problem of the relation of soul and body
in man; for if there is nothing in the universe but matter and motion,
it inevitably follows that man is merely a very complicated machine.

There is great similarity also between the doctrine of La Mettrie and
that of Toland. It is interesting to note the points of resemblance
and of difference. Toland's "Letters to Serena," which contain much
of his philosophical teaching, were published in 1704. There is
a possibility therefore that La Mettrie read them and gained some
suggestions from them.

The point most emphasized in Toland's teaching [31] is that motion
is an attribute of matter. He argues for this belief on the ground
that matter must be essentially active in order to undergo change,
[32] and that the conception of the inertness of matter is based
on the conception of absolute rest, and that this absolute rest
is nowhere to be found. [33] Since motion is essential to matter,
there is no need, Toland believes, to account for the beginning of
motion. Those who have regarded matter as inert have had to find some
efficient cause for motion, and to do this, they have held that all
nature is animated. But this pretended animation is utterly useless,
since matter is itself endowed with motion. [34] The likeness to
La Mettrie is evident. La Mettrie likewise opposes the doctrine of
the animation of matter, and the belief in any external cause of
motion. [35] Yet he feels the need of postulating some beginning
of motion, [36] and although he uses the conception so freely, he
does not agree with Toland that the nature of motion is known. He
believes that it is impossible to know the nature of motion, [37]
while Toland believes that the nature of motion is self-evident. [38]

Another point of contrast between Toland and La Mettrie is in
their doctrines of God. Toland believes that God, "a pure spirit
or immaterial being," is necessary for his system, [39] while La
Mettrie questions God's existence and insists that immateriality and
spirituality are fine words that no one understands.

It must be admitted, in truth, that La Mettrie and Toland have
different interests and different points of view. Toland is concerned
to discover the essential nature of matter, while La Mettrie's problem
is to find the specific relation of body and mind. On this relation,
he builds his whole system.




b. The Relation of La Mettrie to an English Sensationalist: John Locke
(1632-1704).

Locke's "Essay Concerning Human Understanding" was published in 1690,
and La Mettrie, like most cultured Frenchmen of the Enlightenment,
was influenced by his teaching. The main agreement between Locke
and La Mettrie is in their doctrine that all ideas are derived from
sensation. Both vigorously oppose the belief in innate ideas, [40]
teaching that even our most complex and our most abstract ideas are
gained through sensation. But La Mettrie does not follow Locke in
analyzing these ideas and in concluding that many sensible qualities
of objects--such as colors, sounds, etc.--have no existence outside
the mind. [41] He rejects Locke's doctrine of spiritual substances,
[42] and opposes Locke's theistic teaching, laying stress, on the
other hand, upon Locke's admission of the possibility that "thinking
being may also be material." [43]




IIIa. The Likeness, probable but unacknowledged, to La Mettrie, of
the French Sensationalists, Etienne Bonnot de Condillac (1715-1780)
and Claude Adrien Helvetius (1715-1771).

Condillac's "Traité des sensations" was published about ten years
after La Mettrie's "L'histoire naturelle de l'âme," and therefore it
is probable that Condillac had read this work, and gained some ideas
from it. Yet Condillac never mentions La Mettrie's name nor cites
his doctrines. This omission may be accounted for by the fact that
the works of La Mettrie had been so condemned that later philosophers
wished to conceal the similarity of their doctrines to his. Whether
the sensationalists were influenced by his teachings or not, there
is such a profound likeness in their teachings, that La Mettrie may
well be regarded as one of the first French sensationalists as well
as one of the leading French materialists of the time.

Condillac and La Mettrie agree that experience is the source of all
knowledge. As Lange suggests, [44] La Mettrie's development of reason
from the imagination may have suggested to Condillac the way to develop
all the faculties from the soul. La Mettrie asserts that reason is but
the sensitive soul contemplating its ideas, and that imagination plays
all the rôles of the soul, while Condillac elaborates the same idea,
and shows in great detail how all the faculties of the soul are but
modifications of sensation. [45]

Both La Mettrie and Condillac believe that there is no gulf between
man and the lower animals; but this leads to a point of disagreement
between the two philosophers, for Condillac absolutely denies that
animals can be mere machines, [46] and we must suppose that he
would the more ardently oppose the teaching that man is merely a
complicated machine! Condillac finally, unlike La Mettrie, believes
in the existence of God. A final point of contrast also concerns the
theology of the two writers. La Mettrie insists that we can not be sure
that there is any purpose in the world, while Condillac affirms that
we can discern intelligence and design throughout the universe. [47]

Like La Mettrie and Condillac, Helvetius teaches that all the faculties
of the mind can be reduced to sensation. [48] Unlike La Mettrie,
he specifically distinguishes the mind from the soul, and describes
the mind as a later developed product of the soul or faculty of
sensation. [49] This idea may have been suggested by La Mettrie's
statement that reason is a modification of sensation. Helvetius,
however, unlike La Mettrie, does not clearly decide that sensation
is but a result of bodily conditions, and he admits that sensation
may be a modification of a spiritual substance. [50] Moreover, he
claims that climate and food have no effect on the mind, and that the
superiority of the understanding is not dependent on the strength of
the body and its organs. [51]

La Mettrie and Helvetius resemble each other in ethical doctrine. Both
make pleasure and pain the ruling motives of man's conduct. They claim
that all the emotions are merely modifications of corporeal pleasure
and pain, and that therefore the only principle of action in man is
the desire for pleasure and the fear of pain. [52]




b. The Likeness to La Mettrie of the French Materialist, Baron Paul
Heinrich Dietrich von Holbach (1723-1789).

As Condillac and Helvetius emphasize the sensationalism taught by La
Mettrie, so Holbach's book is a reiteration and elaboration of the
materialism set forth in La Mettrie's works. The teaching of Holbach
is so like that of La Mettrie, that the similarity can hardly be
a coincidence.

La Mettrie regards experience as the only teacher. Holbach dwells
on this same idea, and insists that experience is our only source
of knowledge in all matters. [53] Holbach likewise teaches that man
is a purely material being. He disbelieves in any spiritual reality
whatsoever, and makes matter the only substance in the world. He lays
stress, also, on one thought which is a natural consequence of La
Mettrie's teaching. La Mettrie has limited the action of the will and
has insisted that the will is dependent on bodily conditions. Holbach
goes further and declares repeatedly that all freedom is a delusion,
and that man is controlled in every action by rigid necessity. [54]
This teaching seems to be the natural outcome of the belief that man
is a machine.

Holbach's atheistic theology is more extreme than his predecessor's,
for La Mettrie admits that God may exist, while Holbach vigorously
opposes the possibility. Moreover Holbach holds the opinion,
barely suggested by La Mettrie, that an atheistic doctrine would
ameliorate the condition of mankind. [55] He insists that the idea
of God has hindered the progress of reason and interfered with
natural law. Holbach is indeed the only one of the philosophers here
discussed, who frankly adopts a fatalistic and atheistic doctrine of
the universe. In these respects, his teaching is the culmination of
French materialism.








OUTLINE OF LA METTRIE'S METAPHYSICAL DOCTRINE.


                                                            PAGES [56]

I. Insistence on the Empirical Standpoint          16f.; 88f.; 72, 142

II. Arguments in Favor of Materialism:

    a. The "Soul" is Affected,
        1. By Disease                                        18f.; 90f.
        2. By Sleep                                          19f.; 91f.
        3. By Drugs                                             20; 92
        4. By Food                                          21f.; 93ff.
        5. By Age and Sex                                    23f.; 95f.
        6. By Temperature and Climate                       24f.; 96ff.
    b. There is No Sharp Distinction Between Men and Animals
       (Machines)              28f., 100ff.; 41ff., 113ff.; 75f., 142f.
    c. Bodily Movements are Due to the "Motive Power" of the
       Body                                               51ff., 129ff.

III. Conception of Matter.

    a. Matter is Extended                                         154f.
    b. Matter Has the Power of Motion                   70, 140; 156ff.
    c. Matter Has the Faculty of Feeling                         159ff.

IV. Conception of Man:

    a. Man is a Machine               17, 89; 21, 93; 56, 128; 69, 140f.;
                                                       73, 143; 80, 148
    b. All Man's Faculties Reduce to Sense and Imagination         35ff.,
    107ff.
    c. Man is Like Animals in Being Capable of Education        38, 110
    d. Man is Ignorant of His Destiny                           79, 147

V. Theological Doctrine:

    a. The Existence of God is Unproved and Practically
       Unimportant                                              50, 122
    b. The Argument from Design is Ineffective Against the
       Hypothesis of Mechanical Causality                  51ff., 124ff.
    c. Atheism Makes for Happiness                             55, 126f.








NOTES. [57]


NOTE ON FREDERICK THE GREAT'S EULOGY.

This translation is made from the third volume, pp. 159 ff. of "OEuvres
de Fréderic II., Roi de Prusse, Publiées du vivant de l'Auteur,"
Berlin, 1789.

La Mettrie was received at the court of Frederick the Great, when he
had been driven from Holland on account of the heretical teaching of
"L'Homme Machine," The "Eloge" was read by Darget, the secretary of
the king, at a public meeting of the Academy of Berlin, to which,
at the initiative of Frederick, La Mettrie had been admitted.

The careful reader will not fail to note that Frederick's arithmetic
is at fault, and that La Mettrie died at the age of forty-one, not
forty-three, years.

At a few points, perhaps, the Eloge demands elucidation. Coutances,
like Caen, is a Norman town. St. Malo lies, just over the border,
in Brittany. La Mettrie's military service was with the French in
the Silesian wars against Maria Theresa. The battle of Dettingen was
fought in Bavaria and was won by the Austrians through the aid given
by George II of England to Maria Theresa. The battle of Fontenoy in
the Netherlands was the only victory of the French in this war.


Other accounts of the life of La Mettrie are:

J. Assézat, Introduction to "L'Homme Machine," Paris, 1865.

F. A. Lange, "History of Materialism."

Ph. Damiron, "Histoire de la philosophie du dix-huitième siècle,"
Paris, 1858.

N. Quépat, "La philosophie matérialiste au XVIIIe siècle. Essai sur
La Mettrie, sa vie, et ses oeuvres." Paris, 1873.




