_The Well of Discipline_

SHERLOCK BRONSON GASS


The lapidary precedes the historian, and the sound of the mallet is
heard in the land chipping _Hic Jacet_ on the monuments which humanism
has erected, with an epitaph which runs blithely thus:

  “Humanism enjoyed four hundred years of prosperity in the later
  world and then gave way to Modernism. From Mid-Fifteenth to
  Mid-Nineteenth Century, Humanism traced the patterns of the
  Occident. Then, with a dramatic flourish comparable to that of the
  Renaissance, a new pattern was superimposed on the palimpsest of
  the West, based on the concepts and methods of Natural Science.”

Meantime, while the historian waits for a deeper perspective, I am
writing in the belief that there is more vitality in humanism than
the lapidaries have given it credit for. Humanity, at all events, is
perennial, and men are not likely to forget for long that science is
not ineluctable nature itself, but only human knowledge, and that all
knowledge, even knowledge of nature, is pursued at will for whatever
it is worth to them in their own esteem--that behind the pursuit of
natural science lies the authority of the evaluating mind.

The human worth of the sciences, I ardently echo, is beyond compare.
They have, it is true, played a sardonic trick on their pursuers,
and have seemed for the moment honestly to nullify any significant
worth in human existence. But men may still recollect that it is they
themselves who have made the nullifying discovery. They are worth at
least what that discovery implies--an intelligence, a power to think
and judge, and an impulse to act selectively on the basis of a sense
of values--or why have they pursued the sciences at all? With these
resources to start with, and science in their scrip, they may also have
the humour to see that there remains to them, as of old, the eternal
task of making the best of it--the very task to which science itself is
a contribution. When this perception shall have grown lively enough,
humanism will again come into its own.

Granted a will to return to humanism, however, the return itself will
not be simple. Something, we shall find, has been lost in the meantime.
Value and significance are not handed to us on a platter; they are
themselves products of thought. If life, then, has seemed to be emptied
of them by the findings of natural science, it is equally possible
to suppose that this bathos is due to a diluted capacity for thought
in precisely the field of thought where value and significance are
conceived.

This is the possibility that I have set out to examine. The broad
hint of it lies on the surface. If discipline of the mind has any
virtue--and modernism itself with its austere regimen is its current
champion--that virtue has been lifted from the field of thought where
human values are explicitly involved, to a field of thought from which
they are explicitly banned. By every calculation, therefore, the minds
thus affected should have lost something of their capacity to think in
the undisciplined area, and should have lost something of their powers
to conceive or discover the values that, under happier auspices, give
life its significance.


I

In imagination we dramatise the Renaissance as a sweeping revolution.
Whether humanists or modernists, we look upon it as a beginning,
or a resumption, at all events as the turning-point from which we
are the continuators in a straight line. Historians of philosophy,
of letters, of politics, of science all concur. More impressively
still the men of the Renaissance themselves were quite conscious of
the change--Bessarion, Aldus, Erasmus, da Vinci, Galileo, Bruno, to
take names at random. The shift of curiosity from the divine to the
secular, and the responsive shift of discipline from scholasticism to
humanism opened out new vistas to the voyaging mind. It would be hard
to exaggerate the almost theatric reversals which the times witnessed
and welcomed.

Sweeping as it was, however, the revolution of the Renaissance was
less radical than that of the second half of the nineteenth century.
In contrast to the latter the changes wrought by the Renaissance were
on the level of explicit ideas. The essential stuff of thought was
unchanged. New ideas were astir, but the elements of which they were
built were the old elements. Theology gave way to humanism; God as
the centre gave way to man as the centre. But after all, God had been
conceived as a father and man as a child of God, and, God or man,
their psychology was the same. The very literature which had laid the
premisses of mediæval thought--the Bible--permeated the consciousness
of the humanistic period yet more deeply.

The shift of discipline from sacred to profane letters, as a
consequence, made no profound break in the consciousness itself.
The major impulses of the two periods blended easily and naturally.
The religious impulse of the Middle Ages lent itself triumphantly
to literary expression; there was the _Divine Comedy_. The literary
impulse of the Renaissance lent itself no less triumphantly to
religious themes; there was _Paradise Lost_. Natural science, indeed,
began its modern course under the impulse of the Renaissance. Still,
from the fifteenth to the nineteenth century, while the common
discipline of the West was humanistic, natural science did not
profoundly alter the minds of men. It was an incident, a special play
of curiosity and thought on the part of men whose minds were formed and
informed in the medium of humane letters. Even Doctor Johnson had his
chemical apparatus.

Not until the latter half of the nineteenth century did the common
discipline of letters begin to give way. Up to that time, therefore,
there had been a basic continuity in the cultivated consciousness of
the West, not only from the Middle Ages but from high antiquity itself.
For the Renaissance was avowedly a resumption of the broken threads
of ancient thought. And its humanism, however loosely it spliced the
break, was evidence that here too the essential elements of its reason
were the same. What so intoxicated the Renaissance mind was the very
spontaneity of its grasp of ancient ideas. And this affinity has been
the mark of humanism ever since.

Now continuity is not necessarily a virtue. Nothing, alas, is so
persistent as error and evil. One aspect of the shift to modernism,
however, seems to me itself an evil, promising persistence--a rupture
at the basis of reason. Modernism, indeed, also had its dramatic
confrontations, its moments of intense self-consciousness. New
conceptions came into tragic conflict with old, yielding many a Robert
Elsmere, and many a family cleavage like that between the elder and the
younger Gosse. Such conflicts are disconcerting and painful, and for a
generation or two terribly impressive. It is not to such overt changes,
however, that I refer. They belong to the normal life of the mind.
It is the very function of intellect to incur and mediate them. One
is inclined to bid the intellect be a man and face the frank hazards
of the life of reason. I refer rather to a change, not in ideas, but
prior to ideas, among the ultimate premisses of thought, in the
discipline by which the powers of the mind and the fortunes of ideas
are themselves in a large measure disposed. And this change, it seems
to me, has proved a scotching of the goose that lays the golden egg.


II

Where is the bottom of the well into which discipline--vaunted so
highly by both humanist and modernist--is poured? Discipline, as
distinguished from any guise of propaganda, is a delicate affair. Its
concern is not for the specific ideas with which perforce it must do
its deed, and which it pours into the depths in an unremitting stream.
Its subtle task is to enrich and enhance the powers of thought and yet
leave them free--free to think, and free to judge even the ideas by
which they are enriched.

The bottom lies deeper, therefore, than the level at which the Huxleys,
the Spencers, the Eliots placed the controversy--the relative merits
of two sorts of knowledge, of Homer and Sophocles, of Plato’s Ideas
and Cæsar’s battles, of _Jerusalem Recovered_ and _Paradise Lost_,
as against the constitution of matter and the laws of nature. These
relative merits are themselves matters of judgment, as the controversy
witnesses. And it is precisely the quality of such judgment that is
momentously at stake.

Of course the Hellenist must know his Greek and the astronomer his
physics. They are specialists, and the question is not of them.
It is a question of that common humanity of which Hellenist and
astronomer, poet and chemist, man of leisure and man of affairs are
alike responsible members. As between humanist and modernist a sort of
official decision has already been rendered, and the common discipline,
together with the faith that animates it, has gone over to the
sciences. Is it ill-humoured to point out that the decision itself has
been arrived at and progressively confirmed in that field of judgment
from which discipline has been progressively withdrawn? At all events,
it is toward that deeper level that I am delving, to get at the roots
of that common humanity.

The Darwinian hypothesis of the descent of man is a biological way
of dealing with a reflection old in the tradition of humanism.
From Plato down, curiosity has toyed with theories of the origin
of language. Language is patently artificial, a device, a product
of human ingenuity. That a child is born without speech might mean
nothing, since there are instincts that emerge only in the course of
development. But language differs from language; every term in every
language is arbitrary; the child, whatever his blood, picks up the
speech of his community; individuals differ in the extent and character
of their deliberate acquisition. All these considerations point to its
artificiality. One speaks, indeed, before one’s mind is mature enough
to reflect upon the accomplishment. But that is the very point, as will
appear in a moment.

Whatever the theory, the origin of speech implies ancestors before
speech. And those ancestors--is it fantastic to identify them, in
a slightly modified version of our evolutionary history, with the
prehuman race of the Darwinian rendering? We should not, I think, have
called them men. For bound up with language is all that we think of
as human--the power of communication, the fixation and tradition of
thought, the comparison and criticism of ideas, co-operation on the
basis of common principles, all history and philosophy, all literature
and science, the very process of reason itself prior to its expression.

I say reason, not intelligence. Intelligence itself--a primary
mystery--is scarcely the monopoly of men. The cat here on the hearth
has a share of it, and the mouse of which she is apparently dreaming.
It is not intelligence that distinguishes the human species sweepingly
from the brute, but a particular deployment of it, a way of using it or
managing it, that we call _reason_.

To linger in imagination over this moment of evolution is to linger
over a transition from the dumb fluidity of animal consciousness to
its articulation by the use of language. Sheer animal consciousness
may alight, perhaps, upon any imaginable concept. Its rational defect
is its inability to return after departure to the same spot. Who by
taking pains could return again to precisely the number 91 but for the
articulating, identifying, stabilising symbol? The rational use of the
native intelligence thus hangs upon an ability to identify particles of
consciousness arbitrarily shaped, to quit them, and then to return. And
speech serves this end; so far as it is carried it precipitates fluid
consciousness into stable, negotiable blocks for the architectural
structures of thought.

Now it is true that what is original, what is new, what is invented or
discovered by the thinking mind itself emerges, not in the articulate
particles--they are perforce old stuff--but in the perception by the
intelligence of relations between them. This spontaneous perception
of relationships is the play of reason; thought is a sort of creative
miracle.

On the other hand--and this is the point I am driving at--just because
thought is the perception of relationships between particles of old
stuff, the particles themselves condition these perceptions. I see only
such relationships as hold between the particles I happen to possess;
certainly I can see none between such as I do not possess. And those I
have are none of my own creation. They are handed down to me. In this
sense the power of thought the “faculty” of reason, is a _tradition_.

In fancy I may picture a Romulus--abandoned on a hillside and suckled
by a wolf--inventing for himself a system of symbols with which to
articulate his own fluid consciousness, conning them into spontaneity,
and building them into thought. But in reality he would not--he could
not. The actual articulations with which one thinks are not native to
the consciousness. Who of us can count more than a stray one or two of
his own invention, even with the hint and model of a whole armory of
them already in possession? They are, on the contrary, a heritage. And
what one can think is conditioned by that heritage--such items of it as
through hap or care one has previously acquired.

All that I, for instance, can think in the field of chemistry is
sharply limited to what I can construe with the articulate particles in
that area of my consciousness. In my actual experience that area has
been poorly endowed. All that I can think there I could say in a bad
quarter of an hour. And what I can think there is cabined and cribbed
by the special particles I happen to possess.

This analysis, so obviously valid in any special field of thought in
which one is aware of one’s ignorance, holds no less, it seems to me,
for that universal ignorance in which all of us are born. If it does
hold there, it may stand as one version of the hypothesis of human
evolution--rational mind out of animal consciousness, man out of brute.
The change that effected this evolution was not accomplished, however,
once for all in some remote past. The outer device was transmissible,
and hence became a racial characteristic. But the change itself
must still be re-enacted in every growing child. Something of it is
re-enacted in the emergence of every idea in the rational mind. How far
it is carried and how complete the evolution depends upon deliberate
cultivation.

Intelligence is pure gift, the prior condition and animating agent
of all thought. Whether intelligence itself may be increased by
exercise is a matter of faith or doubt, as one chooses. In face of a
primary mystery one can only be humble and dumb. But of that ingenious
artifice, the arbitrary articulation of the consciousness into stable
particles, there can be no doubt. It is a human invention in human
hands. What can be done with these particles by way of thought depends
in a given mind upon their range, the richness of their substance,
their stability, and their clarity. And they can, with care, be
extended, enriched, stabilised, clarified.

That there are larger units, whole structures of thought, with which
discipline may be occupied goes without saying. Not all the heritage
of the civilised mind is deposited in these particles. But the larger
units are themselves built of the smaller, and what any mind makes of
them hangs on its prior possession of the elements of which they are
built, and the quality of those elements. In childhood one may have
read, say, _Gulliver_, or _Through the Looking Glass_, with delight,
and in maturity may still read them with delight. The outer symbols are
the same now as then, but the responsive thoughts are not. In response
to each symbol now there rises richer substance than the mind then
possessed, grounds for relationships which then escaped detection.

The two, indeed--particle and structure--are inseparable in practice.
It is in use that the particles have accumulated their substance
and quality; it is by finding them in use that the mind identifies
and enriches and clarifies them for itself. But it is they, I
think--the ultimate premisses of all thought and the basis of all
understanding--that lie at the bottom of the well into which discipline
is poured.

For in the first place they lie at the deepest level to which
discipline can go. That is something. But by a happy fortuity there,
at the very node between animal consciousness and rational thought,
they occupy a strategic position. Through them the fluid streams of
consciousness, rising from below, are articulated for thought--and
one thinks what he can with the shapes thus formed. And through these
same shapes come the chief enrichments of the consciousness from above.
For in reality what I apprehend of the thoughts of others is not
their thoughts but my own. It is what I build in my own mind with the
particles of my own consciousness called up by the symbols they have
used. They are the determinants, coming and going, and a discipline
that thickens and deepens and clarifies them enhances at one stroke
both the give and the take of the mind, its power to think and its
power to learn.

They lie at a strategic point, moreover, in another and no less
momentous transaction. They not only articulate the individual mind
for thinking; coming from a common tradition they tend, in the measure
in which that tradition is mastered, to articulate disparate minds
alike. Only so can two minds think the same thought. It is here that
mind comes together with mind--or forever fails to come together.
And situated between two realms of freedom--the wild realm of animal
consciousness and the cultivated realm of reason--they alone are
amenable to coercion. Arbitrary agreements, sheer conventions,
subsequent to all native idiosyncrasies and prior to all conflict of
prejudice or opinion, they are open to utter community. And since in
relation to all thinking they are the ultimate premisses, they afford
the unquestioned common grounds imperative for mutual understanding and
community of idea.

Discipline can thus bring its pressures to bear upon them with a clear
conscience, assured that here it can do its essential task without
violating its own principles--cultivate the individual judgment without
infringing upon its freedom, and bring mind into community with mind
without the weakness of assumption or the affront of dogmatism.
Assured, too, that in a sort of beneficent circle community itself
breeds both mind and further community. For given a broad community in
these particles, the common legacy comes the purer to its inheritors;
recurrence of each particle confirms and enriches and clarifies it in
the experience of each mind. In a community without community, on the
other hand, occurrence and recurrence tend rather to lead it astray and
confuse it; and though men talk in common symbols, they build them into
tacit obliquities of mutual incomprehension.

Is it too much to suggest, in passing, that the phenomenon of the
brilliant period, the curious clustering of great names in the
bead-roll of history, may be explained as a moment when by a community
of mind with mind, here at the basis of all thought, a fine individual
clarity and a lively spontaneity of mutual understanding have lifted
the current of ideas to a high level? At all events, by such community
the capacity of the mind both to think and to learn is heightened and
the ardour of thought is stimulated, expression meeting comprehension,
and comprehension quickening the impulse to think.


III

I have gone a long way about and brought up with a conclusion that
on its own showing should be as valid for modernism as for humanism.
That, indeed, is my own sense of it--that here is the organic economy
of thought in whatever field. And in fact, as I have intimated, its
application is likely to be most obvious in the sciences, which we
come upon after the mind is in some measure formed. Each science has a
special articulation and nomenclature outside our normal experience,
without which we can think but meagrely and vaguely in that area. The
part they play there is evident. To these articulate particles it gives
precise definition, at once for the sake of accuracy of calculation
and for the sake of mutual understanding and wide co-operation among
those who pursue it. Incidentally by its technology it escapes the
loose corruptions with which lay usage always threatens a vernacular.
The extraordinary results of the discipline which establishes these
articulations, these precisions, and these communities need no bush.

It is perhaps less obvious that discipline is even more imperative
in that other area which the casual, voluble experience of living
begins to articulate before we are aware, laying the premisses of that
common mind which we tend to take for granted as a native gift. Though
it is not a native gift, no man feels deficient in it, as Descartes
pointed out. What it yields him is life as he knows it; it is his
apprehension of reality. In one sense this trust is his intellectual
virtue. It marks his faith in the judgments of reason--the best reason
he knows. He may be aware of his ignorance in this or that field of
knowledge--know that he knows nothing of astronomy, of Homer, of
plumbing, of torts. But no one knows everything; these ignorances are
comparable to those of other men; by turning his mind to them he could
master them.

By turning his mind! This contrast between _mind_, on the one hand, and
on the other hand specific knowledge to which a _mind_ may be turned,
is the very heart of the conflict between humanist and modernist. To
the modernist, justifiably proud of his special methods, that mind
which comes to him unaware is a casual and amateur affair. As a process
of reason it is the way fools think, and asses, and the cohorts of
stupidity. Well, it is.

To the humanist, however, this liability is precisely its momentous
importance. Here is mind itself by which man becomes human out of
brute, mind in symmetry as it develops by confronting life and carrying
on the adventure. According to its competence it apprehends the scene,
the play, and the players, conceives the significance of the plot,
exercises its judgment, lays its guiding principles, and conducts
its affairs in wisdom or unwisdom, justice or injustice, harmony or
inharmony. That it may be the mind of a fool is always its tragic
possibility.

In shifting the basic common discipline from humane letters to natural
science, then, modernism has, in so far, _abandoned the mind_. I say
this in conscious enjoyment of hyperbole. There remains just so much
of mind as develops in casual experience--that corrupting casual
experience which science so sedulously avoids in its technology. But
the point at issue is one of discipline, the conscious extension of
mental competence beyond the limits of casual experience. Plainly the
discipline of natural science neglects much of the mind as irrelevant.

For natural science is an attempt to picture and understand the
material universe as it still would be if the knower were not in
it--things and their relations to each other. The virtue sought by the
man of science is the ability to ignore what he, by the accident of
his conscious existence, thrusts into the situation. Obviously this
discipline will articulate the consciousness for thought only here
within this field of knowledge--among things and their relations, to
the rigid exclusion of the knower and his affairs.

Humane letters, on the other hand, make no such exclusion. They too
deal with things and their relations. But they include what natural
science ignores--the knower and his responsive evaluation of what
he knows. Literature looks out from the common centre at which the
experience of life itself places us. It is an imaginative, reflective
extension of that experience. And it does directly what experience
itself does only indirectly if at all, for being articulate or
nothing--symbol and meaning forever hand in glove--it specifically
articulates the reader’s mind, enriching and clarifying the premisses
of consciousness with which in turn that mind thinks in the field of
common human responsibility. Here is the telling difference between the
literate and the empiric mind--not in intelligence, not in specific
knowledge, but in the substance and quality of the premisses of thought.

Literature uses the unprecise vernacular, it is true; but that is its
virtue. For the vernacular, in contrast with any and all technologies,
is the idiom of the mind itself, its fundamental humanising tradition.
It is the essential historic feat of any civilisation, not so much
perhaps to have conceived its guiding ideas--ideas change--as, in
conceiving them, to have slowly evolved the articulate elements by
which its heritors may conceive their own. Nature cares nothing for
them or for what is made of them. They are none of hers. We come by
them only through familiar contact with the tradition which has shaped
and accumulated them.

Here, then, is the great human task--now for the first time in the
history of the West abandoned to the mercies of casual experience. Man
is a social being in more than his habits and his institutions. His
humanity itself hangs on his sociability. Deprive him of his social
legacy of articulations and he is once again the sub-human animal.
It was the essence of humanism as a discipline that it attempted,
not to inculcate a doctrine, but to carry on and on this ultimate
humanising process. And in this it served three ends, distinct but
interdependent--mind, community, and the tradition on which both mind
and community depend.


IV

From Plato to Irving Babbitt humanists have been occupied with
the idea of leadership, since men are social beings, unhappy and
self-destructive in mutual hostility, happiest and greatest when
co-operating in community in the wisest available ideas. Whose ideas?
Plato proposed the leadership of philosophers. But he himself did all
that a philosopher can do. He was of the greatest; in one of the high
masterpieces of human thought he proposed a scheme for the salvation
of Greece--and while he wrote and Athens read, Greek civilisation
declined. Something had departed that but an age before had made of
Athens the supreme exemplar of what human existence may come to at its
best, in zest of life and ardour of co-operation, in brilliance and
profundity of thought, something that had created a society more lovely
than any other in recorded history, and produced a literature and a
full free current of ideas that are still the model and despair of all
our aspirations.

May this loss have been loss of disciplined community at the basis of
all thought? Each man thinks not what he will but what he can with
the articulate particles of his consciousness. Only by community here
can one mind think the same thoughts as another. In such community
minds will hold their common ideas with heightened ardour, as in
friendship a common thought rises to new vitality by being shared in
utter comprehension. It was not an accident that friendship played so
profound a part in Greek life, not an accident that thought and letters
so flourished. For expression had met understanding, and understanding
had enriched the common premisses of thought. One among them, at all
events, made the association.

“Not long afterwards,” says Thucydides, “nearly the whole Hellenic
world was in commotion. When trouble had once begun in the cities,
those who followed carried the revolutionary spirit further and
further.... _The meanings of words had no longer the same relations to
things_....” And he goes on to detail wherein the confused meanings
of terms unsettled the mutual comprehension upon which the harmony of
civilised life depends.

As for us, we are in something of a like predicament. The most striking
aspect of contemporary life is the contrast between the fruitfulness
of the scientific world, its vitality, its harmony, its world-wide
co-operation, and our frankly acknowledged moral bankruptcy--vigour
and fecundity in the area to which discipline has been shifted,
and futility and chaos in the area from which discipline has been
withdrawn. It is not that men have ceased to be concerned with moral
choice. So long as they pursue on reflection what seems to be good, so
long are they exercising their moral nature. Never, I dare say, has
there been a wilder play of reflection on what seems to be good.

If we are suffering a moral chaos it is not from the abandonment of
morals but from a helpless discrepancy, an incapacity to think the same
thoughts. Given another Plato, our only chance of accord under his
leadership would be such community with him and with each other in the
articulate elements of his utterance as would evoke the same living
thoughts in our various minds.

The task of creating such community is a subtle one, immeasurably more
difficult than the corresponding task of modernism. The particles of
consciousness with which we think here are quick with feeling--with
sentiment, impulse, passion, and desire, drawn in each individual from
his own native depths. They are neither such sheer conventions as the
units of measure that make up the syntax of scientific thought, nor
objective and tangible like the data of nature with which science
deals. They are the dynamic forces of life itself, spontaneous and
imperious, and they impel us whether or no. Whether they are to drive
us in anarchy or in harmony, however, depends upon our ability so to
channelise them, so to articulate and identify them for thought, as to
bring us into mutual understanding of those ideas in which they play a
part. The first service of the humanistic discipline was that it put
the individual mind into intimate contact with the tradition of humane
letters in which were embodied and shaped the articulate elements
of such ideas. It was the second and no less significant service of
this discipline that in clinging sedulously to the great tradition
of that literature it tended to give to all minds thus imbued _the
same_ elements filled with _the same_ substance, and so put mind into
community with mind. In abandoning the common discipline of this area
of the consciousness modernism has not only done something to dilute
our powers of thought there, but has left us, mind and mind, out of
community and in a moral confusion that lies, not in the open conflict
of ideas, but in tacit disparities of idea that never meet.

Modernism reaches its ultimate goal in a knowledge of nature. But
nature has no need of our knowledge. It is _we_ who need it, for our
own ends. In the measure in which, for the conception of those ends, we
lose our powers of thought, so precariously wrought in the long travail
of the past, and so dependent upon unremitting reconquest, we shall in
fact have killed the goose that lays the golden egg.




_Courage and Education_[74]

RICHARD LINDLEY BROWN


Diverse and variegated as the texture of our contemporary life and
literature is, a great part of it may be shown to have a fundamental
unity. That unity lies in a certain fear and hopelessness,--occasioned
by a mechanistic philosophy and ultimately owing, I think, to the
misapplied and ill-digested implications of a popular scientific
education. One meets everywhere some attempt to analyse and explain
the life and destiny of man solely on the basis of his physique or
environment, or on some other basis equally uncoloured by human
imagination and idealisation. This attitude is not universal with us,
nor is it even general, but it contains almost all that is original
with us, and if we consider what is original as also characteristic, we
can only postulate that the characteristic feature in our contemporary
literature is the interpretation of life as a phase of merely
animalistic existence.

Now, this admission that man in no way transcends the limits of purely
physical life is an act of cowardice to which no previous generation
has ever so thoroughly committed itself. This admission is directly
contrary to the general spirit of Ancient philosophy, impossible to
the serenity of the Middle Ages, repugnant to the exuberance of the
Renaissance, unnatural to the Romanticism, however defined, of the
early nineteenth century. And even during the faltering generations
just preceding our own, there were still eloquent humanists able to
show that whatever man’s circumstances may be, and whatever his origin
may have been, man was yet able to form for himself an intellectual
and spiritual life and destiny independent of origin and circumstance.

This courage of the past--this self-confidence of the past by which it
was enabled to broaden the scope of its life and pass on to us a social
and imaginative heritage by which every situation and relationship of
our lives is rendered more beautiful--was not the result of accident.
It was the result of long and untiring efforts in self-cultivation, and
the records of these efforts are to be found in the great literatures
which not only recorded, but inspired and motivated them. In those
times the staple of education was the study of literature; and, for my
present purposes, the important features of this study were, that it
was thorough and exact, that it neglected no labour which might aid in
the central purpose, and that, in requiring a certain common background
in all students, it was eminently a social and even international thing.

To attain the same degree of courage and self-confidence, it would
be necessary to us to make the same effort of self-cultivation. The
quality of contemporary literature suggests that we are not exerting
that effort; manners and excesses and failures in contemporary life
equally suggest that we are not. And if we examine the habitual methods
of contemporary teachers of literature, we find so many differences
between these methods and those of the past that it is plain that our
educators have all but lost sight of their central objects.

As early as 1882, in _Literature and Science_, Matthew Arnold set
forth a rather singular prophecy, describing with great exactness much
of our present situation. “As with Greek,” he said, “so with letters
generally: they will some day come, we may hope, to be studied more
rationally, but they will not lose their place. What will happen
will rather be that there will be crowded into education other
matters besides, far too many; there will be, perhaps, a period of
unsettlement and confusion and false tendency; but letters will not in
the end lose their leading place.”

It is essential to consider how far this prophecy has been realised,
for it penetrates the very heart of our problem; it suggests the entire
lack of a central emphasis which characterises even the literary
education of our day. American education might very well be said to
be passing through a period of unsettlement and confusion and false
tendency, but by no manner of means might it be said that in American
education letters had obtained or regained their leading place.
Although the colleges swarm with students of literature, the greater
part of these students have a more accurate knowledge of the problems
of the natural sciences or of economics than they have of the problems
and methods of literary study. As a plain matter of fact, a great many
undergraduates choose to specialise in literature, and particularly
in English literature, because they believe it a study easier than
any other. And through a smattering of all the ologies which has been
their education from early childhood, they interpret and condemn great
masterpieces of which they have never learned the true significance,
since they have never confronted soberly the old traditions that
illuminate and sustain those masterpieces. It is largely because our
education deals seriously with almost every subject except literature,
that literature has lost its leading place; and it is because
literature has lost its leading place that education has lost much
of its inspiring power, and our contemporary literary innovators are
characterised to such a degree by fear and hopelessness.

It is not unnatural, however, that popular opinion, which to-day
influences even the teaching of literature, should consider scientific
education so important, for the public sees its leaders in every
field profoundly influenced by science. The leader of our political
organisation, like most of our leaders, happens to be a scientist; most
of our philosophers are scientists, and our magazines deal monthly
with the concessions that our religious leaders are making to the new
implications of science. It is not unnatural that science should be
popularly considered an important study and the study of literature
the recreation of an idle day. And it follows just as naturally that
swarms of undergraduate students should have imposed upon the teaching
of literature much of the dilettantism which this popular view suggests
is inherent in it. The typical student of literature--of English
literature, for example--may be known by four characteristics,--a
fear of Spenser, a dislike of Milton, a hatred of Wordsworth, and
a suppressed desire to write a musical comedy. This is the type of
student that must be taught, and it easily follows that the teaching
of him should come to lack the thoroughness and exactness, the desire
to master ancillary subjects, and the common background, which I have
enumerated above as having once been the ideals of literary study.

The place of these ideals is taken by a dilettantism which displays
itself in two forms,--in individualism and in sciolism. The first,
a shallow type of individualism, is directed by the theory that a
student’s peculiar tastes are the ultimate criteria by which he
should make his judgments, and that he must be seduced into a liking
for literature by the application of whatever literary candy pleases
his palate. The thought that a man should be somewhat adapted to his
reading, and not his reading to him, is altogether alien to this
theory, and the existence of common social ideals, which, if they are
not present in the student, should be developed, is not suspected by
its propounders.

It is to the adoption of this principle by many secondary-school
teachers that we owe the presence in our colleges of the campus
radicals who curse their fates and the restraints prohibiting them
from living their own lives. The ordinary progress of students guided
by such principles is to begin easily with something on the level,
say, of Kipling, and gradually to work up to the high seriousness of
the poetry of Oscar Wilde. The popularity and influence of the sort
of contemporary literature which I have mentioned may be very well
explained, I think, by the existence of this view in the minds of many
of our educators.

The sciolism which is the second form of our literary dilettantism,--a
shallowness which investigates only the superficialities of things,
which delights in accepted definitions and phrases,--is largely
involved in the manner in which our times have forsaken the study of
the classics, as well as of the other literatures and other subjects
without which the study of no one literature can be complete. No
teacher of science would admit to his classes students unversed in
mathematics; he would say that science without some mathematical
knowledge was an impossibility. Now, a knowledge of the literature and
customs of classical antiquity is just as necessary to the student of
a modern literature as a mathematical knowledge is to the student of
science. The teacher of literature, however, who demanded from his
students this indispensable knowledge, would soon lecture to empty
halls. Popular opinion, as reflected by those who are to be taught, is
altogether on the side of those “other matters, far too many,” which
have been crowded into education.

The teacher of literature may well turn out, in the end, to be the sole
means by which society and literature can be raised from their present
depression, and then only provided his influence be stricter and more
humane. For a materialistic epoch such as ours, the only refuge and
the only basis for further progress is in the idealistic humanity of
the past; but the search of the past must not be such a frail and
self-indulgent one as condemns before it understands. Whether we have
outworn the ideals of history or whether they were projected into a
realm of life beyond our present power of realisation, in either case
they reflect the tendency directing all human achievement,--a tendency
to rise to a plane uncircumscribed by the limits of physical existence.
Accordingly, the teacher of any branch of our cultural heritage has
within his hands the reins of destiny; slackly and half-heartedly he
may lose them from his grasp, or by firmly holding them he may guide
the future toward a new triumph of the human spirit. There is no sound
where there are no ears, nor without the development of the inner
mind and segregated human life, of which our literature has been both
the motivation and the record, could there again be true community or
beauty in the world.


FOOTNOTES

[74] A Senior paper read at Bowdoin College, Commencement,
1929.--Editor.




