_Humanism: An Essay at Definition_

IRVING BABBITT


I

The art of defining is so indispensable that one needs to define the
limits of definition itself. A very eminent humanist, Erasmus, showed
his awareness of these limits when he complained of the attempts of the
theologians of the Reformation to formulate deity that every definition
was a disaster. Though the humanist does not seek to define God and is
in general chary of ultimates, he is wont in more mundane matters to
put the utmost emphasis on definition. This Socratic emphasis would
seem especially needed at a time like the present which has probably
surpassed all previous epochs in its loose and irresponsible use of
general terms. Unless this tendency is corrected, the day may come
when, outside of words that stand for the measurements of science or
the objects of sense, communication between men will be well-nigh
impossible. The exchange of ideas regarding those aspects of life
that fall outside the merely quantitative and material may become
as difficult as economic exchanges would be with coins that have no
definite value.

This growing debasement of the intellectual coinage may be illustrated
from the word humanism itself. The boundaries of a genuine humanism
are broad and flexible. It is plain, however, that the word is being
appropriated for points of view that cannot be brought within these
boundaries, however generously extended. As a preliminary to pointing
out some of the more serious of the resulting confusions it would
seem desirable to build up the historical background. For what a word
actually has meant should surely throw light on what it ought to mean.

As is well known, the word humanist was applied, first in the Italy of
the fifteenth century, and later in other European countries, to the
type of scholar who was not only proficient in Greek and Latin, but who
at the same time inclined to prefer the humanity of the great classical
writers to what seemed to him the excess of divinity in the mediævals.
This contrast between humanity and divinity was often conceived very
superficially. However, the best of the humanists were not content with
opposing a somewhat external imitation of the Ciceronian or Virgilian
elegance to the scholastic carelessness of form. They actually caught
a glimpse of the fine proportionateness of the ancients at their best.
They were thus encouraged to aim at a harmonious development of their
faculties in this world rather than at an other-worldly felicity.
Each faculty, they held, should be cultivated in due measure without
one-sidedness or over-emphasis, whether that of the ascetic or that of
the specialist. “Nothing too much” is indeed the central maxim of all
genuine humanists, ancient and modern.

In a world of ever-shifting circumstance, this maxim is not always of
easy application. Whoever has succeeded in bridging the gap between
the general precept and some particular emergency has to that extent
achieved the fitting and the decorous. Decorum is simply the law of
measure in its more concrete aspects. For every type of humanist
decorum is, in Milton’s phrase, the “grand masterpiece to observe.”
Actually this observation may rest on deep insight, as it did in the
case of Milton himself, or it may degenerate into empty formalism.
The adjustment of which I have spoken between the variable and the
permanent elements in human experience requires spiritual effort and
most men are spiritually indolent. For genuine adjustment they tend
to substitute outer conformity so that decorum itself finally comes
to seem a mere veneer, something that has no deep root in the nature
of things. Moreover the notions of decent behaviour to which men have
conformed at any particular period have always been more or less
local and relative. It is easy to take the next step and assume that
they have been _only_ local and relative, an assumption subversive
not merely of decorum but of humanism itself. Humanism, one of our
modernists has argued, may have done very well for other times and
places, but under existing circumstances, it is at best likely to prove
only a “noble anachronism.” A similar objection to humanism is that
it has its source in a psychology of “escape,” that it is an attempt
to take flight from the present into a past that has for the modern
man become impossible. But humanism is not to be identified with this
or that body of traditional precepts. The law of measure on which it
depends becomes meaningless unless it can be shown to be one of the
“laws unwritten in the heavens” of which Antigone had the immediate
perception, laws that are “not of to-day or yesterday,” that transcend
in short the temporal process. The final appeal of the humanist is not
to any historical convention but to intuition.

It does not follow that the humanist is ready to abandon history to
the relativist. The main conventions that have prevailed in the past
reveal important identities as well as differences. These identities
cannot be explained as due to their common derivation from some
previous convention. The Chinese made an independent discovery of
the law of measure.[2] An important task, indeed, that awaits some
properly qualified scholar, preferably a Chinese, is a comparison of
Confucian humanism with occidental humanism as it appears, for example,
in the _Ethics_ of Aristotle. The announcement was made recently in
the press that a Harvard astronomer had discovered the “centre of the
universe” (more strictly the centre of our galactic system). In the
meanwhile the far more important question is being neglected whether
human nature itself has any centre. One’s faith in the existence of
such a centre increases when one finds the best commentary on Pascal’s
dictum that the great man is he who combines in himself opposite
virtues and occupies all the space between them, in a Confucian book
the very title of which, literally rendered, means the “universal norm”
or “centre.”[3] Here and elsewhere the Confucian books reveal a deep
and direct insight into the law of measure. Legge’s translation of the
Chinese word for decorum (_li_) as “the rules of propriety” has been
rightly censured as unduly prim and formalistic; though it must be
admitted that a formalistic element is very marked at times even in the
older Confucian writings.

Practically the assertion of a “universal centre” means the setting
up of some pattern or model for imitation. The idea of imitation goes
even deeper than that of decorum, but is an idea that humanism shares
with religion. Humanism, however, differs from religion in putting
at the basis of the pattern it sets up, not man’s divinity, but the
something in his nature that sets him apart simply as man from other
animals and that Cicero defines as a “sense of order and decorum and
measure in deeds and words.”[4] It dwells on the danger of any attempt
to pass too abruptly to the religious level; it holds, if I may be
pardoned for quoting myself, that the world would have been a better
place if more persons had made sure they were human before setting
out to be superhuman. The virtue that results from a right cultivation
of one’s humanity, in other words from moderate and decorous living,
is poise. Perfect poise is no doubt impossible: not even Sophocles
succeeded in seeing life steadily and seeing it whole. The difference
is none the less marked between the man who is moving towards poise and
the man who is moving away from it. Since the break with the somewhat
artificial decorum of the eighteenth century most men have been moving
away from it. It would not be easy to argue with any plausibility that
the typical modernist is greatly concerned with the law of measure;
his interest, as a glance at our newspapers should suffice to show,
is rather in the doing of stunts and the breaking of records, in
“prodigies, feats of strength and crime,”[5] the very topics that,
according to the traditional report, Confucius banished from his
conversation. “Let us confess it,” says Nietzsche, speaking not merely
for the rank and file but for the leaders, “proportionateness is
foreign to us.” It is foreign to us because we no longer refer our
experience to any centre. With the growth of the naturalistic temper,
the normal has come to have less appeal than the novel. The pursuit
of poise has tended to give way to that of uniqueness, spontaneity,
and above all intensity. “The last remnant of God on earth,” says
Nietzsche himself, “are the men of great longing, of great loathing, of
great satiety.” Once grant that there is no constant element in life
and one might agree with Walter Pater that a man’s highest ambition
should be “to burn with a hard gem-like flame,” to get “as many
pulsations as possible into the given time.”[6] Æsthetic perceptiveness
is an excellent thing, but thus to set it up as an end in itself is
almost at the opposite pole from humanism. Yet Pater has been called
a humanist. One might so regard him if one accepted his view that
the distinctive humanistic trait is an all-embracing curiosity.[7]
Humanism appears primarily, not in the enlargement of comprehension
and sympathy, desirable though this enlargement may be, but in the act
of selection, in the final imposition on mere multiplicity of a scale
of values. Matthew Arnold, with his striving for centrality, has far
better claims to be regarded as a humanist than Pater--and that in
spite of his inadequacy on the side of religion. The model that Arnold
sets up for imitation in the name of culture is a constant corrective
of everything that is one-sided and out of proportion. “I hate,” he
says, speaking not only for himself but for all true humanists, “all
over-preponderance of single elements.”


II

We have seen thus far that the word humanist has two main meanings--an
historical meaning in its application to the scholars who turned away
from the Middle Ages to the Greeks and Romans, and a psychological
meaning, as one may say, that derives directly from the historical
one: humanists in this latter sense are those who, in any age, aim at
proportionateness through a cultivation of the law of measure. Keeping
this definition in mind, we should now be prepared to deal with the
confusions in the use of the word of which I spoke at the beginning.
These confusions have arisen from its misapplication to various types
of naturalists and supernaturalists, especially the former.

For example, the eminent orientalist, M. Sylvain Lévi, has in a recent
book used the term humanism in speaking of persons as far apart as
Buddha and Rousseau.[8] Buddha, it is true, had his humanistic side:
he recommended that one follow a _via media_ between asceticism and
self-indulgence. But, unlike Confucius, he is in his primary emphasis
not humanistic, but religious. The association of humanism with
Rousseau is especially unjustifiable. Rousseau was, in the current
sense of the word, a highly vital individual, but he cannot be properly
regarded as either religious or humanistic. He attacked both humanism
and religion in their traditional forms, and instead of working out
some modern equivalent for these forms, helped to usher in the era of
free naturalistic expansion in the midst of which we are still living.
He was above all for free temperamental expansion. He was himself
emotionally expansive to a degree that was incompatible not only with
artificial but with real decorum. He encouraged the humanitarian hope
that brotherhood among men may be based on emotional overflow. In
general the most serious confusion in the use of the word humanist
has arisen from its appropriation by the humanitarians. Walt Whitman
was, for instance, highly Rousseauistic in his notion of brotherhood.
We should therefore know what to think of the assertion of Mr. Lewis
Mumford that Walt Whitman was a true humanist; also of the assumption
of the term by the left-wing Unitarians and other Protestants who have
been moving towards humanitarianism.[9]

The humanitarian has favoured not only temperamental expansion; he
has also, as a rule, favoured the utmost expansion of scientific
knowledge with a view to realising the Baconian ideal. Perhaps indeed
the chief driving power behind the humanitarian movement has been the
confidence inspired in man by the progressive control physical science
has enabled him to acquire over the forces of nature. It goes without
saying that the humanist is not hostile to science as such but only
to a science that has overstepped its due bounds, and in general to
every form of naturalism, whether rationalistic or emotional, that
sets up as a substitute for humanism or religion. In the case of such
encroachments there is not only a quarrel between the naturalist and
the humanist, but a quarrel of first principles. When first principles
are involved the law of measure is no longer applicable. One should
not be moderate in dealing with error. I have pointed out elsewhere
the danger of confounding the humanistic attitude with that of the
Laodicean.[10]

The reason for the radical clash between the humanist and the purely
naturalistic philosopher is that the humanist requires a centre to
which he may refer the manifold of experience; and this the phenomenal
world does not supply. In getting his centre the humanist may appeal
primarily to tradition, or as I have said, to intuition. In the latter
case he will need to submit to a searching Socratic dialectic the word
intuition itself--to distinguish between intuitions of the One and
intuitions of the Many. Otherwise he will run the risk of not being a
modern but only a modernist. The contrast between modern and modernist
is not unlike that between Socrates and the sophists. Both modern and
modernist are under compulsion to accept in some form the ancient
maxim that man is the measure of all things.[11] Only, the measure of
the modern is based on a perception of the something in himself that
is set above the flux and that he possesses in common with other men;
whereas the perception with which the modernist is chiefly concerned,
to the subversion of any true measure whatsoever, is of the divergent
and the changeful both within and without himself. The present menace
to humanism, it has been said, is less from its enemies than from
those who profess to be its friends. Thus Mr. F. C. S. Schiller of
Oxford proclaims himself a humanist, and at the same time seeks to show
that the true humanist was not Socrates but that precursor of recent
“flowing” philosophers, Protagoras.

It should be noted that many of our votaries of change and mobility
are more emotional than Protagoras or any other Greek sophist. They
tend to make, not their own thoughts, but their own feelings the
measure of all things. This indulgence in feeling has been encouraged
by the sentimentalists who have discovered in feeling not only the
quintessentially human element, but, as I said in speaking of Rousseau,
the ultimate ground of fraternal union. In our own time, partly perhaps
as a result of the psycho-analytical probing of the sources of the
emotional life in the subconscious, there is a growing distrust of the
sentimentalist. To be sure, one may, according to the psycho-analyst,
turn the emotions to good account by a process of “sublimation.” Why
not escape still more completely from one’s complexes and infantile
survivals by adjusting oneself to the cosmic order that is revealed
to the scientific investigator in his laboratory? One may thus cease
to be ego-centric and become truly mature and disinterested. This is
the attitude that Mr. Walter Lippmann recommends in _A Preface to
Morals_, and it is this attitude that, by a flagrant misuse of the
word, he terms “humanism.” It is well that a man should adjust himself
to the reality of the natural order and, as a preliminary, should
strive to be objective in the scientific sense; but humanism calls
for an adjustment to a very different order that is also “real” and
“objective” in its own way. It insists in short that there is a “law
for man” as well as a “law for thing,” and is in this sense dualistic.
Mr. Lippmann’s attempt to base ethics on monistic postulates is,
from either a religious or humanistic point of view, a revival of the
stoical error. Yet he would have us believe that any one who has become
disinterested after the scientific fashion has got the equivalent not
only of humanism but of “high religion.” By thus dissimulating the gap
between the wisdom of the ages and the wisdom of the laboratory, he is
flattering some of the most dangerous illusions of the present time.
He escapes from the main humanitarian tendency to give to feeling a
primacy that does not belong to it, only to encourage its other main
tendency to accord to physical science a hegemony to which it is not
entitled.

It is self-evident that humanitarianism of the scientific or
utilitarian type, with its glorification of the specialist who is
ready to sacrifice his rounded development, if only he can contribute
his mite to “progress,” is at odds with the humanistic ideal of
poise and proportion. The religious pretensions of humanitarianism
of this type are even more inacceptable, at least if one understands
by religion anything resembling the great traditional faiths. The
Baconian has inclined from the outset to substitute an outer for an
inner working--the effort of the individual upon himself--that religion
has, in some form or other, always required. The result has been to
encourage the acquisitive life and also the pursuit of material instead
of spiritual “comfort.” A typical example of this utilitarian trend is
Professor T. N. Carver’s _Religion Worth Having_, in which he so exalts
the “productive life” that religion is all but identified with thrift.
At this rate it may soon be possible to get one’s religion securely
tucked away in a safe-deposit drawer! One should, however, be grateful
to Professor Carver for not having called himself a humanist.

It does not seem possible to supply from the sentimental or
Rousseauistic side of the humanitarian movement the elements that are,
religiously speaking, absent from its utilitarian side. The nature to
which the Rousseauist invites one to return, is, as I have sought to
show elsewhere, only a projection of the idyllic imagination. In the
state of nature or some similar state thus projected, in other words
in Arcadia, man is “good.” Practically this has meant that there is
in the natural man an altruistic impulse that may prevail over his
egoism. The upshot of this myth of man’s natural goodness has been to
discredit the traditional controls, both humanistic and religious.
Humility, conversion, decorum, all go by the board in favour of
unrestricted temperamental overflow. The crucial question is whether
the immense machinery of power that has resulted from the efforts of
the utilitarians can be made, on this basis of unlimited expansion, to
serve disinterested ends. Everything converges indeed on both sides
of the humanitarian movement upon the idea of service. If it can
be shown that there has been no vital omission in the passage from
the service of God to the service of man, one may safely side with
all the altruists from the third Earl of Shaftesbury to John Dewey.
Unfortunately a formidable mass of evidence has been accumulating (the
Great War was for many a convincing demonstration) that, in the natural
man as he exists in the real world and not in some romantic dreamland,
the will to power is more than a match for the will to service.

The benefits that have ensued from the major concentration upon the
natural order that has been under way since the Renaissance have
been numerous and dazzling. We are still celebrating these benefits
under the name of progress. It is no longer possible, however, to
allay the suspicion that the price which has been paid for progress
of this type has been a growing superficiality in dealing with the
still more important problems of the human order. “Nothing is more
certain,” says Burke in a well-known passage, “than that our manners,
our civilisation, and all the good things which are connected with
manners and with civilisation, have, in this European world of ours,
depended for ages upon two principles; and were indeed the result of
both combined; I mean the spirit of a gentleman and the spirit of
religion.” The whole debate would seem to narrow down to the question
whether it is possible to secure on utilitarian-sentimental lines a
valid equivalent for Burke’s two principles. As for the “spirit of a
gentleman,” its decline is so obvious as scarcely to admit of argument.
It has even been maintained that in America, the country in which the
collapse of traditional standards has been most complete, the gentleman
is at a positive disadvantage in the world of practical affairs; he
is likely to get on more quickly if he assumes the “mucker pose.”[12]
According to William James, usually taken to be the representative
American philosopher, the very idea of the gentleman has about it
something slightly satanic. “The prince of darkness,” says James, “may
be a gentleman, as we are told he is, but, whatever the God of earth
and heaven is, he can surely be no gentleman.”

As for the “spirit of religion,” I have already glanced at its
humanitarian substitute. The humanitarian maintains that the spirit
that appears in Christianity will, if disengaged from mere dogma, be
found to be something very similar to his own spirit of service. One
should at least be able to understand the position of the person who
has become convinced that there is a supernatural element in genuine
Christianity, lost in the passage from the old dispensation to the
new, for which mere altruism is no substitute, and who therefore takes
his stand on the side of tradition. Dogmatic and revealed religion, he
argues, was alone capable of rescuing the ancient world from a decadent
naturalism. It alone affords an avenue of escape from the analogous
situation that confronts the world to-day.


III

The relation of the humanist to this religious traditionalist can
scarcely be defined too carefully. Between the humanist and the
humanitarian, I have said, there is a clash of first principles.
Between the humanist and the authentic Christian, on the other hand,
there is room for important co-operation. To be sure, many of the
leaders of the early Church were satisfied with nothing short of a
stark supernaturalism and inclined to reject the genuinely humanistic
elements of the ancient civilisation along with its naturalistic
errors. But the orthodox attitude has, in spite of the difficulties
of reconciling otherworldliness with a merely secular wisdom, come
to be one of friendliness to the classical humanities.[13] Mr. T.
S. Eliot is probably close to this attitude when he maintains that
humanism is of very great value, but only in subordination to the
historical Church. As an independent doctrine, at least in any large
way, it is, he maintains, ineffective. A broad survey of the past
does not, however, confirm the view that humanism is thus either
precarious or parasitical. The two most notable manifestations of the
humanistic spirit that the world has seen, that in ancient Greece and
that in Confucian China, did not have the support of Christianity
or any other form of revealed religion. Take again the humanism of
seventeenth-century France: the ideal of the finely poised gentleman
who “does not plume himself on anything” was often allied with
Christianity (“devout humanism”), but it was also found among the
free-thinkers (“libertines”) who were hostile to every form of belief
in the supernatural.

In general, why should not the humanist, it may be asked, devote
himself quietly to his own task--that of effecting an adjustment
between the law of measure and the ever-novel emergencies of actual
living, and at the same time refuse to take sides too decisively in
the great debate between the naturalists and the supernaturalists? If
pressed too hard by the supernaturalists in particular, why should he
not reply in the words of Pope:

            “Presume not God to scan;
  The proper study of mankind is man”?

One must, however, admit an element of truth in the assertion of
Plato that things human cannot be properly known without a previous
insight into things divine. Another thinker, Pascal, who had this
religious insight in a high degree, though combined with a form of
dogma peculiarly alien to most modern men, declared that unless man
has the support of the supernatural, unless in short he attains to
true humility, he will fall fatally either into the stoic pride or
else, through the intermediary stage of scepticism, into the epicurean
relaxation. The whole question bristles with difficulties: one thinks
of the immense and, on the whole, salutary influence that two Roman
humanists, Cicero and Horace, have exercised on occidental culture,
though, to adopt Pascal’s classification, the humanism of Cicero leaned
unduly to the stoical side, that of Horace to the epicurean. Yet I
believe that the humanist will finally be forced to recognise that
there is truth in Pascal’s contention, that he will have to take sides
in the debate between naturalists and supernaturalists, however much he
may deplore the frequent failure of both of these fell antagonists to
do justice to the immense range of human experience that is subject
primarily to the law of measure.

For my own part, I range myself unhesitatingly on the side of the
supernaturalists. Though I see no evidence that humanism is necessarily
ineffective apart from dogmatic and revealed religion, there is, as
it seems to me, evidence that it gains immensely in effectiveness
when it has a background of religious insight. One is conscious of
such a background, for example, in Sophocles, who ranks high among
occidental humanists, as well as in Confucius, the chief exponent of
the humanistic idea in the Orient. The phrase religious insight is in
itself vague. Is it not possible to give the phrase a definite content
without departing from the critical attitude? One may be helped to
such a definition by asking oneself what element has tended to fall
out of the life of the modern man with the decline of the traditional
disciplines. According to Mr. Walter Lippmann, the conviction the
modern man has lost is that “there is an immortal essence presiding
like a king over his appetites.” But why abandon the affirmation of
such an “essence” or higher will, to the mere traditionalist? Why not
affirm it first of all as a psychological fact, one of the immediate
data of consciousness, a perception so primordial that, compared
with it, the deterministic denials of man’s moral freedom are only
a metaphysical dream? One would thus be in a position to perform a
swift flanking movement on the behaviourists and other naturalistic
psychologists who are to be regarded at present as among the chief
enemies of human nature. One might at the same time be in a fair way
to escape from the modernist dilemma and become a thoroughgoing and
complete modern.

The philosophers have often debated the question of the priority of
will or intellect in man. The quality of will that I am discussing and
that rightly deserves to be accounted superrational, has, however,
been associated in traditional Christianity not primarily with man’s
will, but with God’s will in the form of grace. The theologians have
indulged in many unprofitable subtleties apropos of grace. One cannot
afford, however, as has been the modern tendency, to discard the
psychological truth of the doctrine along with these subtleties. The
higher will must simply be accepted as a mystery that may be studied in
its practical effects, but that, in its ultimate nature, is incapable
of formulation. Herein the higher will is not peculiar. “All things,”
according to the scholastic maxim, “end in a mystery” (_Omnia exeunt in
mysterium_). The man of science is increasingly willing to grant that
the reality behind the phenomena he is studying not only eludes him,
but must in the nature of the case ever elude him. He no longer holds,
for example, as his more dogmatic forebears of the nineteenth century
inclined to do, that the mechanistic hypothesis, valuable as it has
proved itself to be as a laboratory technique, is absolutely true; its
truth is, he admits, relative and provisional.

The person who declines to turn the higher will to account until he
is sure he has grasped its ultimate nature is very much on a level
with the man who should refuse to make practical use of electrical
energy until he is certain he has an impeccable theory of electricity.
Negatively one may say of the higher will, without overstepping
the critical attitude, that it is not the absolute, nor again the
categorical imperative; not the organic and still less the mechanical;
finally, not the “ideal” in the current sense of that term. Positively
one may define it as the higher immediacy that is known in its
relation to the lower immediacy--the merely temperamental man with
his impressions and emotions and expansive desires--as a power of
vital control (_frein vital_). Failure to exercise this control is the
spiritual indolence that is for both Christian and Buddhist a chief
source, if not the chief source, of evil. Though Aristotle, after the
Greek fashion, gives the primacy not to will but to mind, the power of
which I have been speaking is surely related to his “energy of soul,”
the form of activity distinct from a mere outer working, deemed by
him appropriate for the life of leisure that he proposes as the goal
of a liberal education. Happiness, which is for him the end of ends,
is itself, he tells us, “a kind of working.” Here is a difference,
one may note in passing, between a true humanist like Aristotle and
the epicurean who also has his doctrine of moderation and so often
sets up as a humanist. It is no doubt well, as the epicurean urges,
so to indulge in present pleasures that they may not be injurious to
future ones. To employ the trivial illustration, it is well to avoid
overeating at dinner lest one impair one’s appetite for supper. But the
meaning of the Aristotelian working is that one should not be content
with transitory pleasure at all, but should be striving constantly to
rise from a lower to a higher range of satisfactions. The energy of
soul that has served on the humanistic level for mediation appears on
the religious level in the form of meditation. Religion may of course
mean a great deal more than meditation. At the same time humanistic
mediation that has the support of meditation may correctly be said to
have a religious background. Mediation and meditation are after all
only different stages in the same ascending “path” and should not be
arbitrarily separated.

This question comes up especially in connection with the rôle of
enthusiasm. Humanism is not primarily enthusiastic, whereas religion
is. There is a touch of enthusiasm even in Aristotle, in general one of
the coolest and most detached of thinkers, when he comes to the passage
from the humanistic to the religious level. “We should not,” he says,
“pay heed to those who bid us think as mortals, but should, as far as
may be, seek to make ourselves immortal.” At the same time it must be
admitted that even a true religious enthusiasm is hard to combine with
poise and that this true enthusiasm has many counterfeits. “For one
inspired, ten thousand are possessed,” wrote the Earl of Roscommon,
having in mind the religious zealots of the English seventeenth
century. The neo-classic gentleman was therefore as a rule distinctly
unfriendly to the enthusiast. The humanist, however, should not deny
enthusiasm but merely insist on defining it. He cannot afford to be
an enthusiast in Rousseau’s sense; on the other hand, he should not
neglect the truth of Rousseau’s saying that “cold reason has never done
anything illustrious.”

Though one should, in my judgment, side with the oriental as against
Aristotle and the Greeks in giving priority to the higher will over
mind,[14] especially if one attaches importance to the supreme
religious virtue, humility, it yet remains true that this will must
be exercised intelligently. Granted that the existence in man of a
power of control may be affirmed, quite apart from any dogma, as
a psychological fact, the individual must nevertheless go beyond
this fact if he is to decide rightly how far he needs to exercise
control in any particular instance: in short, he needs standards. In
getting his standards the humanist of the best type is not content
to acquiesce inertly in tradition. He is aware that there is always
entering into life an element of vital novelty and that the wisdom
of the past, invaluable though it is, cannot therefore be brought to
bear too literally on the present. He knows that, though standards
are necessary, they should be held flexibly and that, to accomplish
this feat, he must make the most difficult of all mediations, that
between the One and the Many. The chief enemies of the humanist are
the pragmatists and other philosophers of the flux who simplify this
problem for themselves by dismissing the One, which is actually a
living intuition, as a metaphysical abstraction.

Whatever reality man achieves in his dealings with either the human or
the natural order, is dependent, I have tried to show elsewhere, on the
degree to which he establishes a correct relationship between the part
of himself that perceives, the part that conceives, and the part that
discriminates. The part that conceives, that reaches out and seizes
likenesses and analogies, may be defined as imagination; the part that
discriminates and tests the unity thus apprehended from the point of
view of its truth may be defined as analytical reason; the part that
perceives is, in the case of the humanist, primarily concerned with
the something in man that is set above the phenomenal order and that I
have already defined as a power of control. One may say therefore that
standards result from a co-operation between imagination and reason,
dealing with the more specifically human aspects of experience, and
that these standards should be pressed into the service of the higher
will with a view to imposing a right direction on the emotions and
expansive desires of the natural man. The supreme goal of ethical
endeavour, as Plato pointed out long ago, is that one should come to
like and dislike the right things.


IV

Humanism, even humanism of the distinctly individualistic type I have
been outlining, may, as I have already suggested, work in harmony
with traditional religion. In that case there must be a careful
determination of boundaries. Though humanism and religion both lie
on the same ascending path from the naturalistic flux, one must
insist that each has its separate domain. It is an error to hold that
humanism can take the place of religion. Religion indeed may more
readily dispense with humanism than humanism with religion. Humanism
gains greatly by having a religious background in the sense I have
indicated; whereas religion, for the man who has actually renounced
the world, may very conceivably be all in all. On the other hand, the
man who sets out to live religiously in the secular order without
having recourse to the wisdom of the humanist is likely to fall into
vicious confusions--notably, into a confusion between the things of God
and the things of Cæsar. The Catholic Church has therefore been well
inspired in rounding out its religious doctrine with the teaching of
Aristotle and other masters of the law of measure. It can scarcely fail
to recognise that the position of the positive and critical humanist
is sound _as far as it goes_. It follows that the Catholic and the
non-Catholic should be able to co-operate on the humanistic level.
A like co-operation should be possible between the humanist and the
members of other Christian communions who have not as yet succumbed
entirely to humanitarianism.

I have tried to show that the weakness of humanitarianism from both
the humanistic and the religious point of view is that it holds out
the hope of securing certain spiritual benefits--for example, peace
and brotherhood--without any ascent from the naturalistic level. The
positive and critical humanist would seem to have a certain tactical
superiority over the religious traditionalist in dealing with the
defects of the humanitarian programme. In the battle of ideas, as in
other forms of warfare, the advantage is on the side of those who
take the offensive. The modernists have broken with tradition partly
because it is not sufficiently immediate, partly because it is not
sufficiently experimental. Why not meet them on their own ground
and, having got rid of every ounce of unnecessary metaphysical and
theological baggage, oppose to them something that is both immediate
and experimental--namely the presence in man of a higher will or
power of control? I use the word experimental deliberately by way of
protest against the undue narrowing of this word by the scientific
naturalists to observation of the phenomenal order and of man only in
so far as he comes under this order. One should also protest against
the restriction of the term reality to observation of this type.
Some of the most monstrous mutilations of reality that the world has
ever seen are being perpetrated at this moment--for example, by the
behaviouristic psychologists--in the name of the “real.” At all events
everything in the modernist movement will be found to converge either
upon the rôle of feeling or upon the rôle of experiment, and the final
question raised in either case is that of the will. As a result of the
combined influence of the various types of naturalists, the present age
is at once more emotional and more mechanical than any other of which
we have historical record. By mechanical I refer primarily not to the
multiplication of machines in the outer world but to the mechanising
of mind itself. An effective procedure is, as I have said, to meet the
mechanist on his own ground and point out to him that he is unduly
dogmatic, if he holds that his hypothesis is absolutely valid even for
the natural order, and that, if he goes further and seeks to make it
cover the whole of experience, to impose a deterministic nightmare on
the human spirit itself, he is abandoning the experimental attitude for
an even more objectionable form of dogmatism.

Similarly one should meet the emotionalist on his favourite ground
of immediacy. Inasmuch as the higher immediacy has been largely
associated in the Christian occident with the operation of God’s will,
the substitution for it of the lower immediacy has meant practically
the setting up of a subrational parody of grace. In order to make this
parody plausible, the emotionalist has had recourse to the usual arts
of the sophist, chief among which are a juggling with half-truths and
a tampering with general terms. I have commented elsewhere on the way
in which words like “virtue” and “conscience” have been so twisted from
their traditional meaning as to eliminate the dualistic element that
both humanism and religion require. If there is to be any recovery
of the truths of dualism, at least along critical lines, a battle
royal will need to be fought over the word “nature” itself; here, if
anywhere, one needs to practise a Socratic dichotomy.

The half-truth that has been used to compromise religion in particular
is that, though religion is in itself something quite distinct from
emotion, it is in its ordinary manifestations very much mixed up with
emotion. I give an example of this error in its latest and fashionable
form. In a very learned and, in some respects, able book,[15] the
Rev. N. P. Williams seeks to show that St. Augustine’s experience of
grace or, what amounts to the same thing, his love of God, was only a
“sublimation” of his “lust.” St. Augustine was a very passionate man
and his passionateness no doubt enters into his love of God. But if
it could be shown that the love of God was in St. Augustine or any
other of the major saints merely emotion, sublimated or unsublimated,
religion would be only the “illusion” that Freud himself has declared
it to be. The psycho-analytical divine, who is, I am told, a fairly
frequent type in England, is about the worst _mélange des genres_ that
has appeared even in the present age of confusion.

One may be helped in escaping from this confusion by considering, so
far as possible from a strictly psychological point of view, what the
exercise of the higher will has actually meant in genuine religion.
One must admit at the outset the difficulty of determining what is
genuine religion. Religion, not merely to-day but always, has been
subject to extraordinary perversions. It has ever been the chosen
domain of self-deception and “wishful” thinking. When one reflects
on the fanaticism, casuistry, obscurantism, and hypocrisy that have
defaced the history of Christianity itself, one is tempted at times
to acquiesce in the famous exclamation of Lucretius.[16] Yet one must
insist that religion is in its purity the very height of man. As to
where this pure religion is to be found, we should keep in mind the
saying of Joubert that in matters religious it is a bad sign when one
differs from the saints. Let us then turn to the saints in whom there
is some authentic survival of the spirit of the Founder. This spirit
surely appears in the author of the _Imitation_ when he writes: “Know
for certain that thou must lead a dying life; and the more a man dies
to himself the more he begins to live in God.” Moreover the author of
the _Imitation_ is at one here not only with Christ but with Buddha,
the chief source of sanctity in the Far East.

The point on which Christ and Buddha are in accord is the need of
renunciation. It should be abundantly plain from all I have said that
the higher will is felt in its relation to the expansive desires as a
will to refrain. The humanist does not carry the exercise of this will
beyond a subduing of his desires to the law of measure; but it may
be carried much further until it amounts to a turning away from the
desires of the natural man altogether--the “dying to the world” of the
Christian.

With this background in mind, we should know what to think of the
humanistic and religious claims of the modernist movement. This
movement has, from the eighteenth century and in some respects from
the Renaissance, been marked by a growing discredit of the will to
refrain. The very word renunciation has been rarely pronounced by those
who have entered into the movement. The chief exception that occurs
to one is Goethe (echoed at times by Carlyle). Any one who thinks
of the series of Goethe’s love affairs prolonged into the seventies,
is scarcely likely to maintain that his _Entsagung_ was of a very
austere character even for the man of the world, not to speak of the
saint. The humanitarians in particular, whether of the utilitarian
or of the sentimental type, have put slight emphasis on the inner
control of appetite. They have encouraged, either directly or through
the ineffectiveness of the substitutes they have offered for this
control, a multiplication and complication of desires that is in flat
contradiction with the wisdom of the ages. Judged by the standards of
the great traditional faiths, the religion of “progress” or “service”
or “humanity” merely illustrates on a vast scale the truth of the
old Latin adage that “the world wishes to be deceived.” The various
naturalistic philosophies that have been built up on the ruins of
tradition should, at all events, whatever their merits or demerits, be
made to stand on their own feet. It should be one’s ambition to develop
so keen a Socratic dialectic, supported by such a wealth of historical
illustration, that it will not be easy for the Walter Lippmanns of
the future to propose some form of naturalism as the equivalent of
“humanism” and “high religion.”

In his attempt to show the inadequacy of humanism apart from dogmatic
and revealed religion, Mr. T. S. Eliot has painted a picture of the
humanist exercising in a sort of psychic solitude self-control purely
for the sake of control. It is evident however that the real humanist
consents, like Aristotle, to limit his desires only in so far as this
limitation can be shown to make for his own happiness. This primary
reference to the individual and his happiness is something with which
we are nowadays rather unfamiliar. Our preoccupation, one is almost
tempted to say our obsession, is, at least in our official philosophy,
with society and its supposed interests. A study of humanism from
the sociological point of view would call for a separate essay. I
may, however, indicate briefly the main issue: the individual who is
practising humanistic control is really subordinating to the part of
himself which he possesses in common with other men, that part of
himself which is driving him apart from them. If several individuals
submit to the same or a similar humanistic discipline, they will become
psychically less separate, will, in short, move towards a communion. A
group that is thus getting together on a sound ethical basis will be
felt at once as an element of social order and stability.

No doubt a still more perfect communion may be achieved on the
religious level. There are however differences of dogma and
ecclesiastical discipline that make a meeting on this plane difficult
even for the various denominations of Christians. If one’s survey
is extended, as it should be in these days of universal and facile
material communication, to include Mahometans and Hindus and Chinese,
the obstacles in the way of a union among men that is primarily
religious are seen to be well-nigh insuperable. It might, for example,
be conducive to the peace of the world if everybody, East and West,
accepted the authority of the Pope. The chances of such universal
acceptance are, however, short of some very “visible upset of grace,”
practically negligible. One can scarcely remind oneself too often that
the great traditional faiths, notably Christianity and Buddhism,[17]
have their humanistic side where closer agreement may be possible. If
the leaders of the various national and cultural groups could bring
themselves to display in their dealings with one another moderation,
common sense and common decency, they would accomplish a great
deal--vastly more than they have been accomplishing of late. The
difficulties in the way of an understanding, even on this humanistic
basis, not to speak of any deeper religious understanding, have been
augmented by the fact that large numbers in the Christian occident as
well as in the orient, especially in China, are falling away from their
traditional disciplines into spiritual anarchy. The dangers of this
anarchy, combined, as it is, with the accumulation of a formidable mass
of machinery that, in the abeyance of any higher will, is likely to be
pressed into the service of the will to power, are appalling.

The first step, if there is to be an effective opposition to spiritual
anarchy of the current type, must be, as I remarked at the outset,
right definition. The idea is becoming fairly widespread that there is
needed at present a reaction from the romantic movement and that this
reaction should assume a religious or a humanistic character. This
idea will not in itself take us very far. Even Benedetto Croce, whose
philosophy would seem to be in its underlying postulates almost at the
opposite pole from a genuinely religious or humanistic position, has
declared that we need a “new Christianity” or a “new humanism,” if we
are to escape “from intellectual anarchy, from unbridled individualism,
from sensualism, from scepticism, from pessimism, from every aberration
which for a century and a half has been harassing the soul of man and
the society of mankind under the name of Romanticism.”

Occasional humanists may appear under existing conditions, but if there
is to be anything deserving to be called a humanistic movement, it
will be necessary that a considerable number of persons get at least
within hailing distance of one another as to the definition of the word
humanism itself and the nature of the discipline that this definition
entails. This preliminary understanding once established, they could
then proceed, in the literal sense of that unjustly discredited term,
to work out a convention. Their next concern would almost inevitably
be with education. Education is, as Professor Gass has remarked,
the one altruistic activity of the humanist. The reason is that if
the humanistic goal is to be achieved, if the adult is to like and
dislike the right things, he must be trained in the appropriate habits
almost from infancy. The whole question should be of special interest
to Americans. Economic and other conditions are more favourable in
this country than elsewhere for the achievement of a truly liberal
conception of education with the idea of leisure enshrined at its very
centre. In the meanwhile, our educational policies, from the elementary
grades to the university, are being controlled by humanitarians. They
are busy at this very moment, almost to a man, proclaiming the gospel
of service. It will be strange indeed if dissatisfaction with this
situation is not felt by a growing minority, if a demand does not arise
for at least a few institutions of learning that are humanistic rather
than humanitarian in their aims. One is at all events safe in affirming
that the battle that is to determine the fate of American civilisation
will be fought out first of all in the field of education.

  Note.--For a humanistic view of the field of education, the reader
  may be referred to an article by Irving Babbitt, “President Eliot
  and American Education,” in the _Forum_, January, 1929, or to his
  book on _Literature and the American College: Essays in Defence
  of the Humanities_ (Houghton Mifflin Co., 1908). See also Norman
  Foerster’s recent book, _The American Scholar: A Study in Litteræ
  Inhumaniores_ (University of North Carolina Press, 1929).--Editor.


FOOTNOTES

[2] For an outline of Chinese humanism, see the article by Chang
Hsin-Hai in the _Hibbert Journal_ for April, 1928 (“The Essentials of
Confucian Wisdom”).

[3] See _The Conduct of Life_, translation of the _Tsung Yung_ by Ku
Hung Ming (Wisdom of the East series), p. 55.

[4] “Unum hoc animal sentit quid sit ordo, quid sit quod deceat, in
factis dictisque qui modus.” _De Officiis_, Lib. I.

[5] See _Analects_ (Wisdom of the East series), p. 109.

[6] “Conclusion” to his volume _The Renaissance_.

[7] For Pater’s definition of humanism see the end of his essay on Pico
della Mirandola (_The Renaissance_).

[8] See _L’Inde el le Monde_, pp. 32, 165.

[9] See, for example, the symposium entitled _Humanist Sermons_ edited
by C. W. Reese (1927). On page 60 of this volume one encounters the
statement that “all Americans are humanists”! For a fuller elucidation
of the distinction between the humanist and the humanitarian see the
opening chapters of my book _Literature and the American College_
(1908).

[10] See my book _Democracy and Leadership_, p. 25.

[11] For the different meanings that this maxim may have see the last
chapter of my book _The Masters of Modern French Criticism_.

[12] See “The Mucker Pose” by James Truslow Adams, _Harper’s Magazine_,
November, 1928; reprinted in _Our Business Civilisation_ (1929).

[13] For the early hostility of certain Christians to Graeco-Roman
culture and the final reconciliation between this culture and the
Church, see E. K. Rand’s _Founders of the Middle Ages_, _passim_. _Cf._
also P. E. More’s “Paradox of Oxford” (_Shelburne Essays_, Vol. IX).

[14] See Ch. V of _Democracy and Leadership_ (“Europe and Asia”); also
Appendix A (“Theories of the Will”).

[15] _The Ideas of the Fall and of Original Sin_ (Bampton Lectures for
1924). See p. 331.

[16] “Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum.”

[17] Confucianism is of course primarily humanistic.




_The Humility of Common Sense_[18]

PAUL ELMER MORE


I

It is a nice question to ask whether belief in the absolute
irresponsibility of the artistic temperament has engendered the modern
ideal of absolute art, or the contrary. Which is first, the complacency
of conceit or of theory? For myself I am willing to leave the solution
of such a problem to the Demon himself, who alone knoweth his own
mind; but from the _Æsthetic_[19] of Signor Croce, the most epoptic
hierophant of the demonic mysteries in these days, I can see how
nearly the two absolutes are related, and can get some glimpse of the
procedure of the metaphysical mind at its highest point of activity.

Now Signor Croce, though really himself a child of Hegel, makes
good sport of the theoretical æstheticians in the train of Kant and
Hegel who define art as pure hedonism, or pure moralism, or pure
conceptualism; and so far he does well. You might suppose he was taking
the ordinary and sensible point of view, viz., that art must of course
give pleasure, and must be psychologically moral (not pedantically so),
and must contain ideas, but that it is a false sort of simplification
to define art itself therefore _as_ pleasure, or _as_ morals, or
_as_ ideas. If such were the motive behind Croce’s antipathy to the
Teutonic æsthetics of the last century, he would seem, as I say, to
be pleading for the liberty of common sense against the absolutism of
the Demon; but he too quickly dispels any such illusion. “Art,” he
declares, “which _depends_ on morals or pleasure or philosophy _is_
morals or pleasure or philosophy, and not art at all.” Now what kind of
logic is this that argues: Because art is not pure pleasure, therefore
pure art is absolved from the need of giving pleasure; because art is
not pure morals, therefore pure art is absolved from any concern with
morals? One might as well say, e.g., that cookery which is relished
for the pleasure it gives _is_ pleasure, and not cookery at all;
therefore cookery has nothing to do with pleasure. It is the old story
of Luther’s drunken man on horseback: prop him up on one side and over
he flops on the other. Because one absolute is not true, therefore the
contrary absolute must be true; because art which gives pleasure is not
definable simply as pleasure, therefore art is a hieratic abstraction
entirely independent of pleasure.

But if such a theory of art would seem to be buzzing in a metaphysical
vacuum, it is not without its very practical aspect, whether as
cause or effect. “The artist,” says Signor Croce, coming down
abruptly to earth, “is always above blame morally and above censure
philosophically.” There you have it, the claim to irresponsibility, so
dear to our militant gentlemen of the press, vested in the authority of
an awesome name. I do not suppose many of our emancipated writers are
deeply versed in the thin dialectic of æsthetics, but they understand
pretty well what is meant when they are told that in their work as
creative artists they need not concern themselves with the ethical laws
supposed to govern life or with the dull maxims of truth.

It may be a question, as I have said, whether the great Neapolitan
has risen from the popular lust of irresponsibility to his theory
of independent art or has condescended to the lower level from the
heights of abstract reasoning. In either case the next step, from a
definition by negation to a definition by affirmation, carries him
into an altitude beyond the reach of any earthly telescope. Art, he
has shown, is absolutely not pleasure or morals or philosophy; it just
absolutely _is_--but is what? In the answer to this question I seem
to hear no human voice but the very diction of the Demon. Otherwise
I cannot understand whence the avowed foe of Kantian and Hegelian
abstractions has derived his positive definition of art, which of
all abstractions is the most abstract and of all absolutes the most
absolute. “Art is intuition,” he says, that and nothing else; not the
vision of something, mind you, but pure vision. Or, if you desire
more words in your definition, you may have it thus: “An aspiration
inclosed in the circle of a representation, that is art; and in it the
aspiration exists solely by the representation, and the representation
solely by the aspiration.” Which words, if they mean anything, signify,
I suppose, that art is of the spirit of pure creativeness, a reaching
out towards a goal which is non-existent until visualised by the very
act of reaching out. Such a definition may engage the attention of
metaphysicians; in my common-place mind, frankly, it draws blank. I
do not comprehend what is meant by aspiring towards that which is
non-existent until we visualise it by aspiring.

Croce is the pope of the new school, and as such ought to be immune
from the questioning of the lay intelligence. For a more accessible
exposition of the ideas stirring the young modernists, I turn to the
distinguished critic and philosopher of Spain, José Ortega y Gasset,
and in particular to his essay published under the significant title of
_The Dehumanization of Art_.[20] Unless I mistake his language, Señor
Ortega finds little satisfaction æsthetically in the extreme products
of the movement he describes. But he believes that it is not the
function of a critic to value works of art in accordance with his own
taste or distaste. And especially to-day, when more than ever before
it is a characteristic of art to divide mankind sharply into those who
comprehend and those who do not, the business of criticism should be to
enter into the intention of the artist, and not to judge his work from
some alien point of view, least of all to condemn. Well, Señor Ortega
in a sense comprehends; he states the various theories adopted by the
_jóvenes_ to justify their adventurous ways with admirable perspicuity
and precision--and with that final confusion at the back of his mind
which enables him to speak as one who belongs intellectually to the
movement, however practically his taste may lag a little behind its
utmost advance.

The central thesis of Señor Ortega’s book, which at once justifies his
title and summarises the most advanced attitude towards art, is exactly
this: “To rejoice or suffer with the human lot which a work of art
may incidentally suggest or present to us, is a very different thing
from the true artistic pleasure. More than that: this occupation with
the human element of the work is essentially incompatible with pure
æsthetic fruition.”[21]

That clearly is the voice of the Demon once more, appealing to the
same lust for an irresponsible absolute as inspires the Crocean
æsthetics. And now art is to be not only independent of morals but in
its essence divided altogether from human nature; and if it still aims
to please, its pleasure is of a kind peculiar to itself and unrelated
to the coarse fodder of life. Suppose, to take the illustration given
by Señor Ortega, a notable man is lying at the point of death. His
wife will be standing by his bed, a physician will be counting his
pulse, while elsewhere in the house a reporter awaits the news and
a painter is engaged to depict the scene. All four persons--wife,
physician, reporter, painter--are intent upon the same fact, but with
varying degrees of intimacy and with different kinds of interest. To
the wife the event is an occasion of grief and anxiety; she is, as it
were, a part of it; whereas to the artist, at the other extreme, the
situation is entirely divested of human sympathy or sentiment: “his
mind is set solely on the exterior, on certain lights and shadows,
certain chromatic values.” And so it happens that if the natural
emotions felt on such an occasion by the wife, the physician, and
even to a lesser degree by the news-reporter, are what the ordinary
man (the “philistine” or “bourgeois” of the older romantic jargon)
regards as the real stuff of life, then art to the ordinary man is
removed to a sphere of incomprehensible unreality. “An artistic
object,” says Señor Ortega, “is artistic only in the measure in which
it ceases to be real.” Hence, in the scene just described, the actual
death-bed and the artist’s picture of it are two things “absolutely
different (_completamente distintos_).” We may interest ourselves in
one or the other; in one case we live with, or in, the event, in the
other case we “contemplate” an object of art as such, with æsthetic
pleasure perhaps, but with no human emotions. Just in so far as the
picture shows any feeling for, or awakens in the beholder any response
to, the significance of death, it falls below the high function of
art. The tragedy of loss, the frustration of ambition, the humility
of surrender, the consolations of hope, the victory of love, the
sanctities of religion,--any shadow of these resting upon the canvas
will detract from the purity of æsthetic pleasure. The artist and the
connoisseur in the presence of death find only an occasion for certain
lines and colours. And further, as our power of contemplation becomes
more refined, we cease to discern (or, if we are artists, to paint)
even the unreal representation of a real event; a picture will cease to
depend on, or suggest, any subject whatsoever. For art is like a window
through which we look out upon a garden. The ordinary man sees only the
flowers and leaves beyond, and is so absorbed in these as to be quite
unaware of the pane of glass, the more so as the glass is purer and
clearer. But with effort we can make ourselves conscious of the medium
through which we are looking; and as our vision is thus concentrated on
the glass, the garden fades into a confused blotch of colours or even
passes out of conscious perception altogether.

That is Señor Ortega’s vivid metaphor for the Crocean theory of
art as pure intuition--which he professes to reach, however, by no
theorising of his own but from study of the actual practice of certain
of the _jóvenes_. For those who believe in the divine mission of art
the elevation of society might seem to lie in obeying the command
of Mr. Skionar in Peacock’s _Crotchet Castle_: “Build sacella for
transcendental oracles to teach the world how to see through a glass
darkly.” It all sounds rather funny to me. But I hope I am not laughing
at an unfair caricature. What else in fact is the meaning of those
sapient critics, who might join me in repudiating the language of
metaphysics, yet insist that in judging a picture we shall pay no heed
to the subject represented but consider it as pure representation,
or who say that the value of a work of art depends not at all on
the character of the human experience put into it but only on the
sincerity of self-expression?--as if there were some mystical virtue
in self-expression even when the self has no experience worthy to be
expressed. It is, in fact, pedantic talk of this sort in the mouths of
respected critics that indicates how far the depredations of the Demon
have extended into the realm of common sense.

As for the creators, so called, there may be a young votary of art
here and there who is trying honestly to put these abstractions into
practice; and for him, I should suppose, the goal of dehumanisation and
derealisation will have been attained when his pictures are simplified
to a cunning design of line and colour with no suggestion of a definite
subject, or still further to a spread of pure colour with no design at
all; his music to a pure tone without melody or even variation; his
poems to a succession of beautiful words unsullied by sense. That would
seem to be the nearest practical equivalent to seeing a pure pane of
glass. One wonders why the pilgrim of vacuity should be so slow and
hesitant in his progress towards so easy a mark. Perhaps he foresees
that absolute art, so reached, will cease to be art at all. Perhaps
he has a foreboding that the prize if obtained would not be very
valuable. It is hard to imagine the pleasure or profit to be derived
from concentrating one’s attention upon a pane of transparent glass
until one sees nothing through it; most of us would prefer to retain
our impure perception of the flowers in the garden beyond. Despite the
majestic logic of youth we persist in thinking that such a picture
as Leonardo da Vinci’s Last Supper is a truer work of art than the
deftest whirl of colours ever painted; that the _Æneid_ is richer in
poetical joy than _Kubla Khan_ (not to mention the latest lyric from
the American colony in Paris); that Bach’s Mass in B Minor is still a
miracle and a rapture of sound. Yet all these--the painting and the
epic and the mass--are brimming with human emotion and with a brooding
sense of the eternal values of life. They are great for various
reasons, no doubt; but certainly among those reasons is the fact that
they are not art at all as the modernists would have us believe.

The simple truth is that the effort to create pure art is nothing
more than idolatry to a fetish of abstract reason--unless you prefer
to ticket it as empty conceit--and could never engage the practical
interest of any but a few witless cranks. There is a profound confusion
in Señor Ortega’s interpretation of what is happening among the mass of
the younger artists, as indeed there is often in their own statement of
what they are endeavouring to do. They may be seeking an absolute, but
it is not an absolute of purity in any sense of the word.

Now I grant at once that there is a difference between art and life,
that the attitude of the painter, to return to the old illustration,
is not identical with that of the wife in the house of mourning.
There is in art a change, a transmutation, a something taken away
and a something added. “Art,” said Goethe, “is art only because it
is not nature.” And Aristotle, perhaps, had the same truth in mind
in his famous theory of the purgation of the human passions. In that
sense we can accept a maxim that comes from Japan: “Art lies in the
shadowy frontiers between reality and unreality.”[22] The point I
would make is the falseness and futility of the logical deduction that
art can therefore dispense with the stuff of humanity or nature, or
can weigh anchor and sail off into a shoreless sea of unreality. What
has actually happened is this. Always the great creators have taken
the substance of life, and, not by denying it or attempting to evade
its laws, but by looking more intently below its surface, have found
meanings and values that transmute it into something at once the same
and different. The passions that distract the individual man with the
despair of isolated impotence they have invested with a universal
significance fraught with the destinies of humanity; the scenery of the
material world they have infused with suggestions of an indwelling
otherworld. And so by a species of symbolism, or whatever you choose
to call it, they have lifted mortal life and its theatre to a higher
reality which only to the contented or dust-choked dwellers in things
as they are may appear as unreal. That, for instance, is precisely what
Perugino has achieved in his picture of a death-scene entitled the
Mystic Crucifixion, where pain and grief and the fear that clutches the
individual heart in its hand of ice have been transmuted into a drama
of divine redemption through suffering, while the tender burgeoning of
spring thrown up against the far-off juncture of earth and sky gives
hints of a mode of existence in joyous and infinite freedom. Even the
lesser creators, those who in innocence of spirit have undertaken
merely to reproduce what they see, may have done so with a clarity and
largeness of vision capable of working a magic alchemy of which they
themselves perhaps never dreamed.

That was the tradition of agelong practice; it is what we mean,
or ought to mean, by classical. And then, after the devastating
materialism of late eighteenth-century philosophy there came a change
of ideals. The veritable feeling for the otherworld and for spiritual
values was lost, while at the same time the new school, stirred
with vague aspirations, was not satisfied with a simple and, in its
way, wholesome naturalism. Above all these prophets of the romantic
movement, as we designate it, revolted from the restrictive rules
of an art which was neither classical nor innocently naturalistic,
but pseudo-classical, and which had developed from one side of the
Renaissance. They too perceived that no great art was possible without
escape from the levelling tyranny of natural law, and, being unable
to transcend nature, seeing indeed no higher reality into which
nature could be raised, they sought freedom by sinking below nature.
In painting, as Mr. Mather has shown with fulness of knowledge
and admirable acumen, this process of escape meant “a successive
elimination of academic authority, imagination, memory, fidelity to
nature, and nature itself. It would seem as if the last sacrifice had
been made; but no. In all these rejections and in the most grotesque
experiments the painter had retained his seriousness and self-respect.
This too went by the board in a brief moment after the War, when the
Dadaists bade the artist create in a mood of joyous bluff, meanwhile
mocking himself and his world. The oft-repeated demonstration is
complete once more--the latter end of expansive Romantic individualism
is Romantic disillusionment and Romantic irony.”[23] And the same
history might be given of modern music and literature, though in
the case of the latter the disinvolution, by reason of the medium
employed, is more complicated. For instance the liberation of art
from the moral obligations of life, so vaunted by Mr. Cabell and
others of the left wing in America as a new achievement, is really
contemporaneous with the romantic movement. At least as far back as
1837 we find George Sand declaring that by almost universal consent
the arts have become accomplices in this strange tendency towards
“amoralism.” Now conscientious theorists may hold that amoralism is a
step in the direction of freedom; in practice it became commonly a mere
euphemism for immorality, not to say vulgar indecency. The climax of
the movement in that direction was reached in the realism of Zola and
others who, quite frankly and systematically and “scientifically,” made
human nature coterminous with the bestial in man. Art may have been
emancipated from one set of bonds, but it was wrapt and enfolded and
constricted in a bondage tenfold straiter. It may have been dehumanised
in the sense that it had repudiated the government of reason which to
the older humanists was the distinguishing trait of man as man; it
certainly was not purged of its attempt to evoke passions which on a
lower plane are _menschlich allzu menschlich_.

As a matter of fact the radical writers of to-day who are accomplishing
anything of magnitude are still predominantly of that school of
realism. But a few restless souls, those in particular whom Señor
Ortega has in mind, driven on by the despotic Demon of the Absolute,
have not been content to abide in this halfway house. They see clearly
enough that art has not been purified by such realism, but mixed and
muddied by deliberate opposition to the ethical interpretation of life;
they will detach art from even that poor remnant of deliberation which
made a selection among the elements of composite human nature with
a certain regard, though an inverted regard, for moral values. They
hold deliberation to be the foe of liberation. Hence the later theory,
exemplified in English by James Joyce, that art shall not reproduce
a picture of life as the humanist sees it, or even from the inverted
point of view of the realist, but for its subject matter shall descend
to what they call the pure “stream of consciousness.” The hero of
fiction shall have no will, no purpose, no inhibition, no power of
choice whether for good or evil, but shall be merely a medium through
which passes an endless, unchecked, meaningless flux of sensations and
memories and emotions and impulses.

And so the limit of elimination has been reached--at least the
practical limit, since below the stream of consciousness there would
seem to remain nothing to represent save bottomless inanity. But
this fact is to be noted: though the process of evolution may seem
to have been carried on in the name of absolute art, the actual goal
attained is an absolute of quite another order; there has been no true
liberation, but a progressive descent in slavery. As, successively, one
after another of the higher elements of our composite nature has been
suppressed, a lower instinct has taken its place. The submergence of
the humanistic conception of man as a responsible creature of free will
has been accompanied by an emergence of the romantic glorification of
uncontrollable temperament; this has been supplanted by a realistic
theory of subjection to the bestial passions, and this, at the last, by
an attempt to represent life as an unmitigated flux, which in practice,
however it be in literature, means confinement in a mad-house. The
practitioners of the newest art call themselves _surréalistes_,
super-realists; they flatter themselves, they are sub-realists.
Art may be dehumanised, but only in the sense that, having passed
beyond the representation of men as undifferentiated from animals,
it undertakes to portray them as complete imbeciles. To speak of the
works produced by the boastful modern school as pure art is, from any
point of view, mere bluff. By their fruits you shall know them. Turn
the pages of the little magazine published in Paris under the title
of _transition_, wherein Mr. Joyce and a group of denationalised
Americans and Americanised Frenchmen collaborate to their own mutual
satisfaction: you will there find what the Simon-pure article is in
theory and practice. For instance a certain M. Louis Aragon,--described
by his admiring introducer as “an intellectual on a lifelong holiday,
a twentieth-century pilgrim with a pack of words on his back,”
etc.,--expounds the theory thus:

  Reason, reason, o abstract day-phantom, I have already driven you
  from my dreams. And now I am at the point where they are ready
  to blend with the realities of appearance. There is no longer
  room only for me. In vain reason denounces the dictatorship of
  sensuality. In vain it puts me on guard against error. Error is
  here the queen. Come in, Madame, this is my body, this is your
  throne. I pat my delirium as I would a beautiful horse.... Nothing
  can assure me of reality. Nothing, neither the exactness of logic
  nor the strength of a sensation, can assure me that I do not base
  it on the delirium of interpretation.

And so M. Aragon, concluding “that only the syllables of reality are
artistically usable,” exemplifies the new style:

  _Ité ité la réa
  Ité ité la réalité
  La réa la réa
  Té té La réa
  Li
  Té La réalité
  Il y avait une fois LA RÉALITÉ._

Such is the manifesto of Super-realism, “the Freudian period,” as the
addicts of the stream of consciousness call it, “to the realistic
misconception.” Their title, I have said, is a pretty mistake for
sub-realism; but they are not mistaken in their claim to have reached
a kind of absolute. At least I cannot imagine what lower level of
imbecility may still be honoured with the name of art.

(If any votary of “pure art” chances to read this essay, he will say:
So Keats and Milton were treated by critics of their age.)


II

One of the hardest things for a student to learn, which yet, if he
could but know it at the beginning, would save him from endless
perplexities and perhaps from final despair, is just the simple fact
that _brain-power is no guarantee for rightness of thinking_, that on
the contrary a restlessly outreaching mind, unchecked by the humility
of common sense, is more than likely to lead its owner into bogs of
duplicity if not into the bottomless pit of fatuity, that, to repeat
the phrase of Bacon, himself a shining example, the _intellectus sibi
permissus_ is the easiest of all dupes for the Demon of the Absolute.
There has been no more powerful intellect for the past hundred years
than Kant’s; I doubt if any writer ever filled the world with more
confusion of thought or clouded the truth with a thicker dust of
obscurity. And it is in this spirit of distrust, not incompatible with
a kind of admiration, that I criticise the works of one who to-day has
reached the pinnacle of fame as a thinker.

Professor Whitehead’s philosophy spans the double field of religion and
science; and in each of these, I presume to say, he has come by the
circuitous ways of abstract reasoning to conclusions that in a lesser
man would be regarded as preposterous. If such a statement shocks you
or sounds disrespectful, take yourself the argument of his _Religion in
the Making_ and strip it to the bones. You will find that it proceeds
from the definition of religion as “the longing for justification,”
and is directed by the fact that “to-day there is but one religious
dogma in debate: What do you mean by ‘God’?” Upon this basis, then, Mr.
Whitehead undertakes to find such a meaning for the word “God” as will
satisfy man’s “longing for justification.” Such a simplification of the
religious problem will strike some inquirers as high-handed, but I let
that pass; it has at least whatever merits appertain to simplicity. And
I admit ungrudgingly that in the course of his lectures Mr. Whitehead
makes many shrewd observations on the deeper mysteries of human life.
Memorable passages might be quoted, for instance such sentences as
these, that touch the Crocean metaphysic on the quick: “To be an actual
thing is to be limited,” “Thus rightness of limitation is essential for
growth of reality,” “Unlimited possibility and abstract creativity can
procure nothing.”

But in the end how does Mr. Whitehead reply to his own question: “What
do you mean by ‘God’?” For convenience’ sake I quote this summary of
his answer from a eulogistic article in the _Hibbert Journal_ for July
1927:

  All being does this [_i.e._, “comes to a focus in each thing”]
  because it is its nature so to do. _This inherent nature of all
  being is God._ All being does this because it is organised
  according to the principle of concretion. All being does this
  because of a certain order or character which pervades it. That
  order pervading the universe that makes it concrete is God. God is
  not himself concrete, says Whitehead, but he is the principle which
  constitutes the concreteness of things.

That is to say, in still simpler language: An individual object is not
cut off from the universe, but stands in some relation to all other
objects and owes its character to this relationship; this is so because
it is the nature of things to be so; such is the law of “concretion,”
and the “principle of concretion” is God.

Now, apart from the final clause, a plain man might suggest that the
argument, so relieved of the obscurantism of metaphysical jargon, is
more true than original--true to the point of insipidity. As for the
conclusion, no doubt, so left in its native jargon, it comes with the
shock of originality; but has it sense? Will any man admit that the God
whom he worships and to whom he prays--and without worship and prayer
the use of the word “God” is a pure solecism--is no more than the
“principle of concretion” in the universe? Has such a definition any
bearing on religion as the “longing for justification”? Is it anything
more than a phantom of abstract science surreptitiously substituted for
the object of faith? The fact is that between the last clause of the
argument and what precedes there is a sheer hiatus. It is the age-old
fallacy of metaphysics: you take a word used in ordinary speech (“God”)
with a perfectly clear connotation; you define the word in a manner
to suit your convenience (“the principle of concretion”); you prove
that there is something in the nature of things corresponding to your
definition, and then casually assume that your proof holds good of the
word in its popular sense. It is the oft-repeated adventure of the
Absolute: you wrap a common-place up in abstract terminology, and then
in that fog of language you find yourself precipitated into an abyss of
nonsense (that the “longing for justification” is satisfied by belief
in “the inherent nature of all being”).[24]

But this is by the way. Our present topic is rather Mr. Whitehead’s
philosophy of science, which is his real concern, and in which the
terms “God” and “religion” are manifestly unwarranted intrusions.
Here, again, to the student of contemporary thought Mr. Whitehead’s
_Science and the Modern World_ must be in many ways a welcome book. His
comments on the connexion between the poets and the physical theories
of their day are illuminating and bring to the subject a knowledge not
often found in the literary critic. And I for one am much beholden to
him for his treatment of the ghastly relic of materialism bequeathed
to us by our fathers--I would almost say his indecent burial of it,
were the epithet indecent applicable to the disposal of a corpse which
has remained too long above ground. And very cleverly he directs his
attack to the two points where the mechanistic philosophy is most
vulnerable--its apparent simplicity and its presumptive regard of facts.

There was indeed at first sight a seductive simplicity about the
theories of Huxley and his militant brothers. It is so easy to say
that the world is nothing but a machine nicely constructed of atoms,
running smoothly and undeviatingly under the mechanical laws of
motion; to deny that anything new or incalculable ever breaks in to
disarrange the regularity demanded by science; to dispose of the
passions and appetites and the very consciousness of man as mere
products of atomical reaction. It was the kind of simplification that
promised to solve for us all the annoying problems of life, exactly
the kind of bait that the Demon of the Absolute loves to dangle before
a mind unprotected by the humility of common sense. Certainly if
ever any group of men had a cosmic footrule in their pockets, it was
this particular group of mid-Victorians who married the atheistical
philosophy of the eighteenth century to the physical discoveries of
the nineteenth. Unfortunately, what seemed a process of simplification
has led step by step to such a complexity of adjustments to keep
the machine going that long ago the plain man, if he dared, would
have scouted the whole conception as a fantastic dream. And here Mr.
Whitehead, by virtue of his standing as a mathematician, speaks with an
authority for which the plain man must be very grateful. “The physical
doctrine of the atom,” he says, “has got into a state which is strongly
suggestive of the epicycles of astronomy before Copernicus.” In all
conscience, is it not true that to accept the more recent developments
of scientific mechanism requires about the same sort of credulity as
was demanded of the theologian in the Middle Ages when asked to debate
the number of angels who could stand together on the point of a needle?

And as the mechanistic theory, when used to explain the inner workings
of matter, instead of simplifying science, breaks down under a weight
of infinite complications, so, when applied to the nature of man, it
shatters itself on what Mr. Whitehead rightly calls certain “stubborn
and irreducible facts”--the most stubborn and irreducible of these
facts being, as every unperverted mind knows, that we are not pure
machines, and that any argument which would subject the human will and
consciousness to the mechanical laws of motion is void because based
on false premises. Against the high-handed assumptions of Darwinian
materialism and the fanatical dogmatism of its votaries (relics of
which still circulate in the backwaters of the biological laboratory),
as against all forms of complacent obscurantism, whether theological or
scientific, “Oliver Cromwell’s cry echoes down the ages: ‘My brethren,
by the bowels of Christ I beseech you, bethink you that you may be
mistaken.’”

It is the bare truth that one must rake the records of history to
discover a more complete and abject subservience to the Demon of the
Absolute than that of the philosophy, falsely called science, of the
period now closing. And, as I say, any one who clings to common sense
must be thankful to Mr. Whitehead for lending his authority as a
scientist to the unlocking of these shackles. But then, why should so
masterly an intellect, again like Luther’s drunken man, topple over on
the other side into a contrary but equally impossible absolutism? Why?
“The only way of mitigating mechanism,” he says, “is by the discovery
that it is not mechanism.” And so, instead of admitting humbly that
mechanism is mechanism while beside it there exists something of a
totally different nature, and that the ultimate nexus between these two
fields of experience surpasses our comprehension, he must demonstrate
mechanism out of the world altogether. In his philosophy there will be
no more solid obstinate material things such as go to the making of
machines, but only “events.” Time and space, which used to be regarded
as modes of perception, become internal components of things; value,
which used to be a name for our conscious estimation of what we could
do with things or for their effect on our spiritual life, now proves to
be “the intrinsic reality of an event.” There is, you see, an entire
reversal of the mechanistic hypothesis. Formerly it was held that the
human soul obeys the same laws as a stone; now we are to believe that
a stone is of the same nature as the soul. In either case we avoid the
discomfort of a paradoxical dualism and reduce the world to a monism
which may plausibly call itself science, though as a matter of fact Mr.
Whitehead’s theory, if carried out, would simply abolish science.

And it is clear enough that the new monism is open to precisely
the same criticism as was that of the mechanists which it looks to
supplant. Aiming ostensibly to simplify, it really renders the nature
of things incomprehensibly complex. Promising to release us from the
known paradox of a world composed of two irreconcilable classes of
things, it ends by forcing a perfectly arbitrary paradox upon us in
its definition of inanimate objects. To define a stone as an event
consisting of a bundle of time, space, value, and relationships, does
not seem to me to be moving in the direction of lucid simplicity. “What
is the sense,” Mr. Whitehead asks, “of talking about a mechanical
explanation when you do not know what you mean by mechanics?” And the
question is entirely pertinent, if by the word “mechanics” we mean
slyly to imply something more than the observed actions and reactions
of material bodies in motion. Mr. Whitehead therefore discards the
“traditional scientific materialism” for an “alternative doctrine of
organism,” that is, for a “theory of _organic mechanism_.” Well and
good. But is it unkind to ask the use of talking about an organical
explanation when you do not know what you mean by “organism,” or to
hint that no very clear idea will be evoked by joining together two
unknown quantities, “organism” and “mechanism,” and calling the world
an “organic mechanism”?

And again, what of the “stubborn and irreducible facts,” in whose name
Mr. Whitehead attacks the rationalism of the Huxleyites and their
predecessors of the eighteenth century? If we are to cast away their
imposing structure of logic as unreasonable for the simple reason
that, after all is said, we still know that the human mind (or soul,
if you please) is something other than a stone, shall we swallow the
contrary theory, which has not even the virtue of logic, and which
transfers human qualities to a stone? Aristotle made the proper and
sufficient distinction long ago, when he said that a stone obeys laws
and a man forms habits: you may throw a stone into the air a thousand
times and it will continue to do the same thing, whereas a man learns
by experience. But alas for those “stubborn and irreducible facts”! How
bravely we all summon them to our aid! How desperately we run from them
when they appear!

But if this merging together of the animate and the inanimate in a new
naturalism makes a travesty of the inorganic world, its real menace
is that, equally with the older naturalism, it reacts to deprive
humanity of what is distinctly human. The solid objects of “our naïve
experience” have been made organic by a kind of relaxation into fluid
composites of time and space and value and relationships; they have
evaporated into a semblance of psychical events (the very term “events”
indeed is little more than an awkward translation of Berkeley’s “ideas
in the mind”), and the peculiar note of an event is its transitoriness:
“one all-pervasive fact, inherent in the character of what is real,
is the transition of things, the passage one to another.” Thus it
happens that the organic and the inorganic worlds flow together in an
indistinguishable flux, wherein the soul also, dissolved by association
into a complex of relationships, loses that central permanence of
entity which used to be held to mark the dignity of man. Nor, if we
look beyond, is there anywhere “an ultimate reality” to which we can
appeal “for the removal of perplexity,” but only an endless concurrence
of events. “In the place of Aristotle’s God as Prime Mover [itself a
conception, one might suppose, far enough removed from ‘our naïve
experience’ into the abyss of abstraction], we require God as the
Principle of Concretion”--not a person, not an entity of any sort,
nor even a law apparently, but a mere name for the fact that concrete
groups of qualities are everlastingly forming and reforming in the
infinite vortex of existence. A cynic might distinguish between the
old naturalism and the naturalism now proposed to take its place by
saying that under the régime of the former true science might flourish
but no humanism or religion, whereas the metaphysical naturalism of
Mr. Whitehead would leave us neither true science nor humanism and
religion, but only mathematics. The Demon of the Absolute, whether he
appears as the advocate of a mechanical fatalism or of the universal
flux of relativity, is brother germane to Apollyon, the Destroyer.

The curious thing in all this farrago of insight and error is the
superstitious hold of the word science on a mind otherwise so awakened.
Mr. Whitehead perceives that one scientific hypothesis swallows up
another--as indeed he could not fail to see that his own hypothesis
turns its predecessor upside down; he admits with engaging candour
that one and all they rest on a “naïve faith” which cannot be verified
and is “indifferent to refutation”; yet he clings fanatically to the
scientific attitude as possessing a monopoly of truth and honesty.
“When,” he says, “Darwin or Einstein proclaim[s] theories which modify
our ideas, it is a triumph for science. We do not go about saying that
there is another defeat for science, because its old ideas have been
abandoned. We know that another step of scientific insight has been
gained.”

I suspect that an utter confusion of thought has arisen here
from the ambiguity of a word--as has happened immemorially with
metaphysicians better and worse than Mr. Whitehead. Science as an
accumulation and classification and utilisation of observed facts
may go on from victory to victory; but science as a name for such
hypothetical theories of time and space, matter and motion and life,
as those broached by the Darwinians of the nineteenth century, or the
Einsteinian relativists of the twentieth, is not a progress in insight
but a lapse from one naïve assumption to another in a vicious circle
of self-contradicting monisms. It really is not easy to understand the
state of mind of one, cognisant of the history of thought, who urges
us to seek relief from the present _débâcle_--Mr. Whitehead himself
places our intellectual and spiritual level lower than it has ever been
since the Dark Ages--by introducing the hypothetical method of science
into religion. This is his analysis of the present condition of the
popular mind: “A scientific realism, based on mechanism, is conjoined
with an unwavering belief in the world of men and of the higher
animals as being composed of self-determining organisms. This radical
inconsistency at the basis of modern thought accounts for much that is
half-hearted and wavering in our civilisation.” My reading of history
is different. I should assert that our vacillating half-heartedness
is the inevitable outcome of the endeavour, persistent since the
naturalistic invasion of the Renaissance, to flee from the paradox of
life to some philosophy which will merge, no matter how, the mechanical
and the human together. I should assert that the only escape from our
muddle is to overthrow this idol of Unity, this Demon of the Absolute,
this abortion sprung from the union of science and metaphysics, and to
submit ourselves humbly to the stubborn and irreducible fact that a
stone and the human soul cannot be brought under the same definition.

  There are two laws discrete
  Not reconciled,--
  Law for man, and law for thing;
  The last builds town and fleet,
  But it runs wild,
  And doth the man unking.

For legitimate science one may have the deepest respect. But to
scientific absolutism masquerading as religion, one may say justly and
truly what was said so unjustly and cruelly to Keats: Back to your
gallipots!


FOOTNOTES

[18] Sections IV and V of the title essay in _The Demon of the
Absolute_ (New Shelburne Essays, Vol. I), 1928; reprinted with the kind
permission of the author and of the Princeton University Press. Section
IV (I, as here reprinted) concerns “The Fetish of Pure Art” and section
V (II) “The Fetish of Pure Science.”

[19] _Nuovi Saggi di Estetica_, 1920.

[20] _La Deshumanización del Arte_, Madrid, 1925.

[21] _Alegrarse o sufrir con los destinos humanos que, tal vez, la obra
de arte nos refiere o presenta, es cosa muy diferente del verdadero
goce artistico. Más aún: esa ocupación con lo humano de la obra es, en
principio, incompatible con la estricta fruición estética._

[22] _Masterpieces of Chikamatsu, the Japanese Shakespeare_, translated
by Asataro Miyamori, p. 48.

[23] _Modern Painting_, by Frank Jewett Mather, Jr., p. 375.

[24] There are passages in Mr. Whitehead’s books in which the word
“God” is used properly, even nobly, with its religious connotation; and
indeed, as Professor A. E. Taylor has shown in the _Dublin Review_ for
July 1927, part of the difficulty in grasping his argument is owing to
this intellectual double-dealing. But in the end the conception of God
as a physical law, or impersonal principle, quite wins out.




