_The Plight of Our Arts_

FRANK JEWETT MATHER, Jr.


I

Any expression of a humanistic society through the arts depends upon
the acceptance by the artist of some sort of central authority. The
authority is not that of official organisations or written codes; it is
rather that of approved traditional ideals in which both the artist and
the laity believe. In their application to the work of art, such ideals
appear concretely as accredited conventions. In a humanistic society,
these conventions assume no burdensome or arbitrarily authoritative
form. They represent merely a body of successful experience--ways
that have been tried and found good. The accepted convention tells
the artist how he must begin; it does not tell him how he must end.
It does, however, warn him off from any too abrupt breaking with
tradition, and from any too urgent assertion of his individual taste
save in so far as that taste finds sanction in precedent and in opinion
other than his own. Right here is the stone of stumbling. The humanist
artist willingly admits that his own genius is not his final authority.
He checks its impulses by the practice and teaching of other geniuses,
and by the degree of acceptance which its expression commands from
competent criticism and patronage. It is not enough that he shall have
expressed just himself; it matters quite as much that he shall have
communicated himself to a fit public with whom he shares a confidence
in the guiding conventions of his art and in ideals mutually honoured.

On the side of the artist, this relation will indicate a procedure of
delicate adjustment. The accepted conventions of his art and the ideals
of the society for which he works, will of course not fit him precisely
any more than a ready-made suit fits perfectly either the artist or
layman. The practical problem of the humanist artist, then, will be
how far he shall reshape himself to the expectations of his public;
and how far he may change these expectations in a sense favourable to
his individual bent. And this implies chiefly a very superior sort of
judgment and common sense. The humanist artist will feel that it is a
vain thing to have expressed himself, however gorgeously, if nobody
knows that he has expressed himself, and he will also admit that the
mere feelingful and urgent self gains richness and value only when it
is measured by other selves in society.

On the side of society and patronage, a humanised art would imply
in practice a central authority lightly and genially imposed, a
just offishness towards the artists who too overtly repudiated the
tradition, withal a somewhat sceptical hopefulness towards experiment
and innovation, a hospitable desire to understand the artist even when
his communication is obscure, a wish to have its own ideals expressed
through the arts. In short a humanised society co-operates with the
artist to a degree difficult even to imagine to-day. It provides him
with incentive, furnishes most of his æsthetic notions, helps him to
realise himself through opportune criticism and companionship, thus
taking an active part in what is the essential thing--the formation of
his spirit.

So far I have dealt in convenient abstractions which are in part
misleading. I have made the reciprocal relation between the artist and
public too conscious, much more conscious than it has been in history.
I shall presently try to correct the error by appealing to precedents
concretely in given time and place. However, the over-emphasis on
consciousness as producing mutuality between artist and public may
well be pragmatically justified. It seems unlikely that our society
will simply gravitate towards humanism. On the contrary, if we are to
achieve a humanistic social balance, it will apparently be done only
through much taking of thought, on the part of both the enlightened
laity and the intelligent artist. So the analysis I have tried to make
of the mutually helpful relation of artist and layman in a humanised
world, though it overstresses the conscious element in this reciprocity
in seeming disregard of past history, may for that very reason suggest
a programme for history yet to be realised.

Programmes, however, are entirely valueless except as they rest soundly
on dynamic states of mind. Our problem as humanists is to create a
state of mind in which neither artist nor layman will exaggerate
the worth of his idiosyncrasy, nor yet follow the general drift
unthinkingly. We are trying to make a man who is a friendly critic both
of himself and of the society in which he moves, a man who accepts
the growing complexity of living as offering him fascinating and
profitable problems of adjustment. To maintain this hope in the face
of the chicken-and-lobster-eating motorist, the radio fan, the devotee
of the “talkies,” the sycophant artist who bows to base authority, and
the behaviourist artist who admits none but that of his own glands--to
keep the hope of making humanists in the face of the daily American
spectacle requires an audacity which even the Expressionist might
envy. But we contributors to this symposium have actually seen a few
humanists made, have helped a little to make them perhaps; and we are
dealing with spiritual values which transcend ordinary statistics.
A few thousand genuine humanists in America would make our society
humanistic; a hundred humanist painters, sculptors, architects,
musicians, and men of letters would make our art solidly humanistic.
In this hope we keep our tiny banner up beside the hoardings that
promise to beautify our teeth, remove our corns, clothe our bodies
appealingly, or incase the relentlessly exposed legs of our women in
silk as durable as filmy.


II

That adjustment between artist and layman which seems so difficult
to-day, until the seventeenth century and the beginning of modern times
came of itself and in some such fashion as this--it hardly matters
whether the scene be Italy, Spain, France, England, China, Japan,
India, or Persia: in every case the basis was fine craftsmanship.
Pretty much all objects of common use were delicately conceived and
carefully made. The amateur of to-day gladly pays great prices for the
ordinary grave figurines and temple vessels of China, for the horse
trappings of the Scythians, for the common household gear and even the
workman’s tools of the European Middle Ages and Renaissance, for the
comfit boxes and carved fobs of feudal Japan, for the peasant furniture
of Brittany and Scandinavia. This general high level of craftsmanship
depended chiefly on the fact that even the humblest craftsman was also
a designer. To the joy of fit execution was joined that of successful
invention.

A very few craftsmen became what we now call artists,--that is made
finer inventions on a more impressive scale, designed a cathedral or a
palace instead of a simple house, decorated an entire chapel instead
of a bride chest or tournament shield, made a bronze statue instead
of a chiselled ink stand. But the line between the craftsman and the
artist was not a sharp one. At Florence a Donatello belonged to the
Stonecutters Guild and officially was merely a very highly esteemed
stonecutter. And every future artist entered upon his career as a
simple apprentice in a craft. The tragedy and frustration so common in
the artists’ career to-day were absent. The apprentice with only a fine
craftsman’s endowment lived out his life contentedly as a craftsman.
But he was free, had he the ability, to become an artist and to achieve
the companionship of princes.

The step from craftsman to artist lay really in the artist’s
intelligent assimilation of greater subject matter or in his fuller
expression of subject matter common to artist and craftsman alike.
Such subject matter was furnished him by his ecclesiastical and
temporal betters; he did not invent it. There was no hardship in this
imposition, for the values of his betters were also his own. There was
a like-mindedness and real co-operation between artist and patron. A
romantic and sentimentally individualistic criticism has challenged
this case. No person who knows either history or human nature, however,
will hold that Giotto was hampered because he had to paint the legends
of Saint Francis and those of the Virgin; that Raphael was great in
spite of the fact that he had to find symbols for syncretic theology;
that Hogarth is belittled by the fact that he so genially followed
the literary, satirical current of his age. A humanistic criticism
will hold, on the contrary, that an essential factor in the greatness
of these artists was that, their themes coming almost ready made,
they were spared the waste and perturbation of so-called original
invention and were free to face in tranquillity their real problem of
transformation and execution.

To recapitulate: the craftsman, until at most a couple of centuries
ago, depended on a universal taste for the well-made thing, while the
artist depended on the taste of a minority, the taste of an aristocracy
with which he himself felt in harmony. The few remaining fine craftsmen
of to-day find no general taste for the well-made thing upon which they
may depend, while the myriad artists of to-day face no aristocracy
whatever, no accepted body of taste whatever, but rather a congeries
of pseudo-aristocracies each with its shifting preferences, which
hardly deserve the name of tastes at all.

How the isolation of the artist with the virtual extinction of the
craftsman has come about is a commonplace of history which need be
recalled here only in its broad lines. The factory within a century
has done away with the craftsman designer. Still earlier the crumbling
of the old aristocracy of birth and religion at once put an end to
community of taste at the top, and gave exaggerated scope to the
already strongly rising ideal of originality and individuality as
highest æsthetic values. A stable and spiritually profitable patronage
ceased and was succeeded by a capricious and heavy handed patronage
from a new wealth undisciplined either by tradition or by fine and
broad personal experience. The artist’s immemorial task of realising
himself in society became almost impossibly difficult. If he were
weak and clever, his resort was to sycophancy; if he were strong and
wise, there was little for him but patience, resignation, and a tragic
hopefulness; if he were strong and unwise, he became a rebel. And the
rebel, in a manner perfectly familiar to the neurologist, built up his
compensations, by which he extolled that isolation which was really
his sore misfortune as his superiority and his advantage, until after
three generations it has become a common conviction among artists that
their proper task is self-expression in a void, that there should be no
desire to communicate and, obviously, no need to be understood.

And just at the moment when the position of the artist was becoming
barely tenable, the number of artists increased inordinately. The
craftsman who didn’t want to go into a factory but wanted to use his
head and hands delicately, had to become an artist, while wholesale
methods of education in the practice of art made the way to becoming an
artist easy to any young person with a modicum of money and diligence.
As if that were not enough, the false glamour thrown about the artist
life by romantic poets and novelists brought new hordes of the unfit to
join the bewildered survivors from the old régime.


III

Now, any going back to the conditions of the Middle Ages or to those of
the Renaissance is of course impossible; but if craftsmanship and art
are again to become normal functions in a helpful social order, the old
formulas, at least in principle, must hold. There will be no generally
fine craftsmanship until most people want well-made things and get
them from craftsmen who design; and the so-called fine arts will have
no general importance until there are many patrons with a common bond
of taste which is sympathetic to most artists. Is there anything which
promises so desirable a reconstruction?

On the side of craftsmanship, I fear nothing is to be expected. The
gallant counter-attacks of a John Ruskin and a William Morris against
modern industrialism show just how much and how little can be gained
from a militant reaction. A hundred passionate spinsters are printing
batiks or glazing pottery in as many æsthetic last ditches, but they
are mostly doing so at the expense of rich and generous eccentrics,
in short are merely subsidised artists disguised as craftsmen. We
are getting better designed things from the factory--the museums are
working usefully to this end--but this reform only enlists a handful
of professional designers, and does nothing to produce the old type
of creative craftsman. In short we probably must say good-bye to the
craftsman save as a picturesque survival, like the man who is skilful
with the rapier or the long bow. All we can hope for is that some
improvement in the general taste, which I think is reasonable to look
for,--since for a century it could hardly have been lower,--may cause a
discriminating demand for better designed factory goods. This of course
leaves the problem of the artist and the craftsman just where it was,
with the sole difference that the passing of the craftsman shuts off
the possibility of any return of the artist to his traditionally best
school, the shop of a good craftsman.

So if there is to be any useful rebuilding, I feel it must proceed
after the very modern precedent of the skyscraper, from the top
down. Much might conceivably be done to produce a more coherent and
intelligent patronage for the fine arts, much is already being done
by museums, art dealers, colleges and universities, and all manner of
art societies. Indeed the increased activity of museums, collectors,
and colleges in behalf of the acquisition and appreciation of fine
works of art has persuaded Mr. R. C. Duffus that we are well launched
on an American Renaissance, and to that effect he has published a very
interesting book. Far be it from me to minimise the importance of
activities in which I have been and am deeply engaged myself. One may
gladly admit that to multiply our art treasures--and for a generation
the multiplication has been astoundingly accelerated--is in itself an
unqualified benefit. But the mere accumulation of great works of art
and much talk about them does not imply understanding of them, and the
question the humanist must raise is always--Are these masterpieces
understood? And how are they understood? Mediæval Rome lay in full
artistic decadence when much of the glory of her old art was visible
on every hand. To understand any nobly conceived work of art, one must
have lived nobly in deed, in imagination, or in both. To own a great
work of art may be a mere counsel of personal vanity; to expound a
work of art, a mere assertion of self-importance. A whole school of
interpretation, which has its faculty, museum, and journal, tears the
work of art from its human context and studies its forms as if these
were ends in themselves. And this sort of teaching is popular. Along
such lines one may make a generation of resolute pedants. For the
humanist such teaching is not merely defective but positively harmful.
On the other side, there is much sound and modest teaching, and the
next generation of art patrons will be far better trained than that
which is passing.

Yet all such useful activities are simply marginal. Without a
predisposition in its visitors, the museum might just as well be
unvisited, since it then has no more dignity or value than the peep
show. It is a proper uneasiness before flattering statistics of
attendance that has rightly induced our museums to inaugurate direct
instruction in appreciation. It is a weakness and limitation of such
teaching that it too often merely foments a diffused interest in art
taken as an entity and not as related to human values generally. For
appreciation really requires a right and balanced attitude towards
life. It was really more important for Florence that her great
citizens, while bowing to the glory that was Greece and the grandeur
that was Rome, wanted a full and honourable life in Florence--it was
really more important, I say, that they cared discriminatingly for the
dignity of their ordinary activities and for the authority of their
faith, than that they cared _specifically_ for painting, sculpture, and
architecture.

In short some aristocratic vision of the good life has always been the
foundation on which great national art has been reared in the past.
It behooves us then to ask what is in America our accepted vision of
the good life? For upon it must rest our art. What do we all agree to
(saving always negligible minorities of “knockers”)? I fear it would
come to these few articles of faith:--to make a lot of money by fair
means; to spend it generously; to be friendly; to move fast; to die
with one’s boots on. This is a credo which has within its limitations
positive merits, and it is by no means lightly to be decried, but it
palpably offers little spiritual nourishment to the “art-artist,”
to quote a recent mayor of New York. A certain kind of art it feeds
admirably. And it naturally gets the art it feeds--the immaculate bank
clerk in campus clothes, the sylph-like apparition in the porcelain
tub, the beach party in the classy car--the art of the advertisement
generally. And this ideal also finds its authentic expression in the
cheap heroics and shallow idealisms of the moving picture, and the
potpourri of dubious music and eloquence over the radio. These are our
representative arts, as sculpture was the representative art of Greece,
or painting of Florence.

The prospect is more pleasing when we turn to architecture, really the
only art that is perennial. Here there is at least a great progress, a
far higher level of taste than that of a generation ago, a competent
and audacious coping with unprecedented problems. Yet here as elsewhere
the cult of haste works harm. No architect of a skyscraper is given
time to think his building out. Perfection in the arts rests largely on
trifles lovingly meditated, and what successful architect has time for
meditation? We have in abundance such arts as we deserve, and we shall
have better arts only as we deserve them through better ideals of life
generally.

Painting and sculpture are kept alive by a sort of artificial
respiration. It is to be hoped that the increasing public use of
both in decoration may restore to these traditionally leading arts
a fuller measure of vitality. As it is, these arts have joined
fine craftsmanship as an elegant survival, like fencing or court
tennis. Since painting and sculpture are the arts I most love, it
would be pleasant indeed to come forward with a programme for their
rehabilitation. But I have no such programme. I feel rather that we
should at once accept the situation and emphasise it. The only remedy,
and a partial one at that, is, I think, this: since painting and
sculpture have become exotic, relatively unwanted, and subsidised
arts, let us rebuild on their rarity value. If instead of making
it ridiculously easy to learn painting and sculpture, we made it
difficult, we should probably have better painting and sculpture. This
could be done by withdrawing charitable support from the art schools,
keeping open such as reasonably pay their way, and by suspending the
artificially encouraged salesmanship of painting and sculpture. There
would remain the human problem of what to do with the thousands of
young men and women who legitimately wish to work delicately with their
hands; but in a civilisation that is supplied from the factory, that
problem seems insoluble. And withal there may be a satisfactory outlet
in amateurism--this has happened notably in the art of the theatre at
the very moment when the moving picture seemed to announce the end
of the spoken play. In general I am not discouraging the support of
survivals. Indeed I see in such support a singularly sympathetic act of
patronage. But one should know what he is about. I have, for example,
a predilection for the quill pen, but I should be very unwise to endow
an institution for writing with the quill. And we are very unwise in
America when, not really wanting their works, we artificially multiply
painters and sculptors.

Whatever reform comes from within the arts, will probably not come
from carefully fostered survivals nor yet from conscious revivals,
but rather from the response of the wanted arts to a finer demand.
The comic strip and the moving picture seem barometric to me, as does
illustration for advertising. Whenever I see a marked improvement in
these popular arts, I shall expect to find greater improvement in the
traditional fine arts of sculpture, painting, and architecture. And
while I am only a casual observer of these barometric arts, what I
have observed of design for advertising and of the moving picture
does not cause me either to hope unduly nor yet to despair utterly.
Certainly both have improved much within my experience. There remains
the dilemma: can the democratic arts really acquire distinction, that
solicitude for perfecting trifles which we have already remarked, or
must they stop at a certain level simply because they are democratic
arts? It would be hazardous to answer this question, but historically
no democratic art, with the possible exception of engraving, has as yet
transcended fine craftsmanship and successfully invaded the realm of
great ideas. That realm has without exception been occupied by the arts
that were frankly aristocratic.


IV

Our desired rehabilitation of the traditional and also of the new
arts may in the last analysis depend upon the creation _within_ our
democracy of the right sort of an aristocracy. Here we are back to
the central problem of humanism--how to produce a superiority that
is generally accepted and socially available. If we can make such
an aristocracy, it will foster the artist and the arts justly and
generously; it will provide a world in which the creative artist is
no longer a tolerated alien but solidly at home. Whenever such an
aristocracy has a clear and noble vision of the good life, it will want
symbols for its ideals, and will call upon the only man who can provide
such symbols--the artist.

One would like to think that the oncoming generation, with unparalleled
advantages in museums and in collegiate instruction in art, endowed
with a great open-mindedness, audacity, and hopefulness--one would like
to think, I say, that this young generation will provide the needed
humanistic support for art. But association with youth, delightful as
it is, gives me no very clear hope in any humanistic direction. The
most typical and engaging youths and maidens of to-day illustrate
merely the lovelier and more attractive traits of the barbarian. They
have an unlimited confidence, very beautiful in its way, with the
smallest background of lived or imagined experience. They think life is
so simple that they may ignore all the traditional solutions for its
manifold problems, trusting to their own instinct of the moment to meet
emergencies that have engaged the best wits of generations of sages
and saints. We have, characteristically tinged with humanitarianism,
the mentality of the noble bandit sheik or the generous sea rover,
who knows what he wants and asks nothing from tradition or authority.
To make humanists of this generation of self-elected spiritual
adventurers implies preliminary contrition and moral rebuilding. There
was a better chance really of making humanists out of my own somewhat
over-sophisticated and _fainéant_ generation. At least we started
from the sound postulate that life was complex, and the problem of
living a problem of delicate adjustment in which one needed whatever
help he might draw from any time or source. So I am really glad that
I shall probably not see the young generation when it passes the
forties. Bruised in its self-confidence, perplexed and baffled by a
life envisaged too simply, it is all too likely to manifest a general
revulsion to indiscriminately chosen formalisms--social, political, and
religious--with the result that the middle-aged dull dog of to-day will
be as nothing in view of his successor of twenty years hence. On the
better side, a general return to formalism may be the opportunity for
an intelligently aggressive humanism. It will be an advantage to find,
what we to-day sadly lack, a basis of agreement on any traditional
plane, however narrow. Thus the new generation may after all serve the
ends of a future humanism, if only by living into entire discredit
their barbarous programme of individualism.

In fine, the problem of a humanistic art is no discrete problem, but
rather that of humanism generally. It has been my task merely to define
the issue in a single aspect, and not at all to find a solution that
could be adopted to-morrow. The deep gap that isolates the serious
artist from a public content with the puerilities of the radio and
the “talkie,” will scarcely be bridged to-morrow or the day after.
Many critics, indeed, hail the latter-day individualist as the finally
liberated artist, and bid us joyously expect even more individualism
than that which has already been so generously vouchsafed us. This
may be a true prognosis. No one can safely deny the possibility that
art may be permanently “on its own.” If so, art will of course become
merely an eccentric activity, an indulgence and luxury of coteries,
hence of no more concern really to the humanist than the trade, say,
of the perfume maker. On the other hand, no one can safely deny the
possibility that art may once again be profoundly integrated with
society. Every contributor to this volume is perforce thinking toward
that reintegration, even if the theme be not in his mind nor the words
on his pen. To my younger colleagues, then, in whom the hope of a
new humanism lies, I leave the problem and the solution, with that
chastened confidence which befits a humanist grown old in the most
unpopular of faiths.




