_Dionysus in Dismay_

STANLEY P. CHASE


Twenty-five years ago, when my generation were beginning to find their
way around in the world of print and paint, a group of us used to
meet occasionally to share each other’s discoveries in contemporary
thought and literature. You may smile at the association of the date
1904 and contemporary literature, and confessedly some of the objects
of our attention were fantastic enough--Elbert Hubbard, Edward Howard
Griggs, and even “I, Mary MacLane.” The more daring among us were
delving in Haeckel and Henry George; our conservatives, according to
their bents, delighted in Kipling and Barrie, or a group of alluring
Celts, or became expert in discriminations between the earlier and the
later manner of Henry James. We all read, of course, William James and
Bernard Shaw and H. G. Wells and Chesterton. In poetry, to be sure, we
had no such variegated menu as the contemporary road-house affords; I
should say that our diet was easily digestible and a little saccharine.
For the most part, as I recall, we followed along the vagabondia trail
after Richard Hovey and Bliss Carman. In that old college town near the
coast, we could still thrill to such verses as

  Three of us without a care
  In the red September
  Tramping down the roads of Maine,
  Making merry with the rain,
  With the fellow winds a-fare
  Where the winds remember.

Frost and Sandburg, Lindsay and Masefield, had not come into our
world--much less Walter de la Mare or Aldous Huxley or Robinson
Jeffers. But we were not so entirely neglected by the contemporary
muse as you may suppose. We knew the early work of Yeats, and “The
Hound of Heaven” of Francis Thompson; we had discovered the sonnets
of Santayana; we could repeat a large part of _A Shropshire Lad_; and
of course for our more cosmic moods we had Walt Whitman. Hundreds of
other such groups must have existed, like ours callow, inexperienced,
bumptious, but very inquisitive, very receptive. Not against us did the
“new poetry” (no longer such) have to hurl its bolts.

And even in that distant, unreal decade of the nineteen-hundreds,
before President Roosevelt, by a few kindly pages in the _Outlook_, put
Edwin Arlington Robinson’s name into every one’s mouth, we knew the
poet of “Tilbury Town” (only thirty miles from our own). There was one
poem of his whose meaning used to be a great subject of dispute,--for
we were than naïve enough to think that a poem must be susceptible of
some rational explanation. It was entitled “Cortège,” and had appeared
in the _Captain Craig_ volume of 1902.[45]

  Four o’clock this afternoon,
  Fifteen hundred miles away:
  So it goes, the crazy tune,
  So it pounds and hums all day.

  Four o’clock this afternoon,
  Earth will hide them far away:
  Best they go to go so soon,
  Best for them the grave to-day.

  Had she gone but half so soon,
  Half the world had passed away.
  Four o’clock this afternoon,
  Best for them they go to-day.

  Four o’clock this afternoon
  Love will hide them deep, they say;
  Love that made the grave so soon,
  Fifteen hundred miles away.

  Four o’clock this afternoon--
  Ah, but they go slow to-day:
  Slow to suit my crazy tune,
  Past the need of all we say.

  Best it came to come so soon,
  Best for them they go to-day:
  Four o’clock this afternoon,
  Fifteen hundred miles away.

The half-benumbing, half-intensifying effect of the “crazy tune,” the
curious way in which a mere pattern of words can usurp the mind, now
stealing its attention from the very grief they point to, and now
flashing upon it a new aspect of that grief--something like that,
I suppose, accounts for the fascination the poem had for us. But a
number of us were dissatisfied with an explanation so simple. No, we
wanted to know, first, who and how many persons were being buried at
four o’clock to-day, and their relationship to the poet (was it, for
instance, a former sweetheart and her husband?), and whether “she” in
the third stanza was one of the deceased, and in what sense it could
be said that Love “made the grave so soon,” and what “half so soon”
meant--was it any different from “twice as soon”? We even calculated
that the burial must be taking place some fifteen hundred miles to the
_west_, since otherwise, all (Protestant) funerals being held commonly
at two o’clock, the poet’s time would be twelve noon instead of four
afternoon. All, of course, very silly and irrelevant questions.

Only a few years ago, in a poetry course, I was recalling these old
agitations of ours, as a warning, I feel sure, against such literalness
of interpretation. But, as will happen with class-room instruction, my
admonitions produced quite the opposite effect from that intended, for
one member of the class was so intrigued by the problem, even as we had
been twenty years before, that he evolved the staggering theory that
the poem was not about a funeral at all, but about a marriage. This
ingenious view having been communicated, in a circuitous way, to Mr.
Robinson, he settled the matter quite simply with the following note to
the inquirer:

  “I have long given up attempting to interpret my own poetry, but
  in this instance, would go so far as to suggest a funeral rather
  than a marriage. I remember this poem chiefly as a more or less
  reprehensible experiment in sound and feeling--a performance more
  pardonable thirty years ago--perhaps--than it would be to-day.”

Of course, it was not Mr. Robinson’s performance, but ours, which was
reprehensible. We were treating an “experiment in sound and feeling”
as we might have treated a deposition in court or an application for
the payment of life-insurance; we were bringing to a poem an attitude
of mind alien to its character _as a poem_. It was as if one should
read Mr. Frost’s “The Thatch” and demand to know _why_ he “would not
go in till the light went out.” For “Cortège” in essential matters is
not cryptic in the least; it is only irrelevant, external details that
are left unexplained. And ultimately, I suppose, what we call a taste
for poetry, of any except a very elementary sort, depends upon the
possession of tact or intelligence to perceive just such a distinction.

I have used this personal recollection because much more frequently
to-day and to a greater degree a somewhat similar feeling of puzzlement
assails the reader of contemporary poetry. This simple instance of an
obscurity gratuitously created by readers may lead to the consideration
of a problem of poetic form more comprehensive than any question of
mere technique (though technical elements of poetry are involved in
it too), I mean the question of those necessities which are laid on
poetry from its being a form of communication between mind and mind.
For, I believe, from misapprehension and confusion in this matter,
on the part now of poets and now of their readers, springs, to some
extent, the unsatisfactory state of poetry at the present time. On
the one side, there is reported a feeling of exasperation, by readers
competent enough in other kinds of literature or in the older poetry,
who “can make nothing of this modernist stuff,” and on the other side
the modernists’ rejoinder that such readers are precisely in the
position of my group of twenty-five years ago--lacking the intelligence
to grasp what is essential and to disregard non-essentials. Surely a
consideration of the nature and limits of that community of mind which
must be assumed to subsist between the poet and his readers is not
foreign to the subject of this book.


I

At the outset we encounter the Crocean view of all art, including
poetry, as expression merely, and conversely of all expression
as art. But leaving the confusions of Signor Croce to be dealt
with by others,[46] we are warranted in assuming, I think, that,
generally and typically, the poet desires communication with other
persons,--conceivably only one other person, or persons of the
future, but at any rate communication and not merely self-expression.
Otherwise, he wouldn’t publish or circulate or read his poems, as
generally and typically poets do. The theory of Laura Riding and
Robert Graves[47] that the poet publishes (or “externalises”) only
out of consideration for the rights of the poem, which, like physical
offspring, has attained an independent status with a life of its own,
is a naïve and superfluous bit of mystification, sufficiently answered
by the query, “Why then sign one’s name?”--and I have not remarked any
unusually wide return to the practice of anonymity. And one is led
to wonder, as one turns the pages of our more advanced periodicals,
what possible readers some of these poets are addressing. After a
moderate success in comprehending, let us say, such diverse productions
as those of the mediæval mystics, the wits of the Roman Empire and
the Restoration, the English metaphysical poets, and the symbolist
group in France, and after a period of conscientious schooling in
the pronouncements of this newest movement, it is disconcerting to
find oneself completely balked by the innocent-appearing contents of
the latest anthology of verse. Among the ten possible but improbable
interpretations of some poem, it seems somehow less than a sporting
chance that the one you finally choose as the least implausible will be
what was intended.

Take, for instance, this poem of Mr. Wallace Stevens, which I select
not as an example of that writer’s often delightful connoisseurship in
verse, but as fairly representative of this decline in what has been
called “communicative efficacy.”

  ANECDOTE OF THE JAR[48]

  I placed a jar in Tennessee,
  And round it was, upon a hill.
  It made the slovenly wilderness
  Surround that hill.

  The wilderness rose up to it,
  And sprawled around, no longer wild.
  The jar was round upon the ground
  And tall and of a port in air.

  It took dominion everywhere.
  The jar was grey and bare.
  It did not give of bird or bush,
  Like nothing else in Tennessee.

Now the elements of this experience--the jar, its shape, colour, and
quality, the hill in Tennessee where it is placed, the behaviour or
appearance of the wilderness, the bird, the bush--stand doubtless in
some kind of relation with each other in the poet’s mind, have possibly
certain symbolic values. Since we have no clues to these relationships
and values, our mind is free to do anything it pleases with the bare
grey jar, the hill, and the wilderness. This freedom, however, and any
pleasure we may take in the separate images, in the rhythms, or the
placing of the words, are not sufficient compensation for the state of
uncertainty and slight irritation in which we are left. Very likely
the little poem is meant to suggest nothing more than the superiority,
to an intensely civilised person, of the simplest bit of handicraft
over any extent of unregulated “nature,” but it has been seriously
interpreted to me, by devotees of recent poetry, as, respectively, an
_objet d’art_, a sex-symbol, and a burial-urn containing the remains of
a valued friend. And so it must remain, for me, not only like nothing
else in Tennessee but like nothing else in the universe.

Considerable damage was done to this shallow affectation of knowingness
of the last few years by Max Eastman’s witty article in the April
(1929) _Harper’s_. A young intellectual from one of our well-known
private schools told me that members of his group were observed to
discontinue their perusal of _transition_[49] upon the appearance
of Mr. Eastman’s “The Cult of Unintelligibility.” But contemporary
poetry is still afflicted by an acute attack of that extreme of
Puritanism--separatism: it asserts the right not only of private
judgment, but of a private symbolism,--which is, æsthetically, of
much graver consequences. My point here, of course, has nothing to do
with the values or qualities of the experience which the writer is
presumably seeking to share. I am simply saying that, in the reading
of the slightest as of the most profound poem, a sense of singleness
or wholeness is the most essential part of the experience, and that
this totality of effect cannot be achieved if all clues to the way the
poem is organised are withheld or too casually indicated. The enigmatic
character of Dr. William Carlos Williams’s poems, we are told, is due
in part to his habit of jotting down free-verse impressions in the
intervals between his professional visits to patients. I can only hope
that in writing out his prescriptions he makes a greater allowance for
the mental capacity of the pharmacist than he seems to make for mine.
To speak bluntly, the difficulty of reading much “modernist” verse is
due less to the superior sophistication or cleverness of these writers
than to their essential lack of art.

By contrast, in the following lyric of Elinor Wylie, even though it is
a repudiation of something accustomed, beautiful, and comforting, there
is so clear and deft an employment of symbol, so perfect a fusion of
mood with image, that the effect of totality is achieved; the peace
denied to this orthodox landscape (or universe) is momentarily attained
in the very denial of it, and thus one of the functions of poetry is
discharged.

  INNOCENT LANDSCAPE[50]

  Here is no peace, although the air has fainted,
    And footfalls die and are buried in deep grass,
  And reverential trees are softly painted
    Like saints upon an oriel of glass.

  The pattern of the atmosphere is spherical,
    A bubble in the silence of the sun,
  Blown thinner by the very breath of miracle
    Around a core of loud confusion.

  Here is no virtue; here is nothing blessèd
    Save this foredoomed suspension of the end;
  Faith is the blossom, but the fruit is cursèd;
    Go hence, for it is useless to pretend.

“The transport ... that the poet kindles in us,” observes Professor
De Selincourt in his Inaugural Lecture at Oxford, “springs from our
instinctive recognition that his form, a term that includes both rhythm
and diction, is an entirely faithful rendering of his experience,
so that we gain from it a sudden clear sense of fulfilment, such as
we can hardly hope to gain outside the ideal world of art.” That may
be a rather narrowly æsthetic interpretation of Longinus’s doctrine
of the poetic “transport,” but certainly “a sudden clear sense of
fulfilment” is an experience which it is easy to miss in the poetry of
our contemporaries.

In fact, this “sense of fulfilment” is precisely what the typical
modernist, experiencing nothing of the sort in life itself and
disdaining an “ideal world” thus cut off from reality, avoids giving
us. He would regard it as part of the old hocus-pocus of orthodoxy.
Life being to him fragmentary, inchoate, he would say that his poetry,
if it is to be “an entirely faithful rendering of his experience,” must
itself produce an effect of inchoateness, fragmentariness.

  THE END OF THE WORLD[51]

  Quite unexpectedly as Vasserot
  The armless ambidextrian was lighting
  A match between his great and second toe
  And Ralph the lion was engaged in biting
  The neck of Madame Sossman while the drum
  Pointed, and Teeny was about to cough
  In waltz-time swinging Jocko by the thumb--
  Quite unexpectedly the top blew off:

  And there, there overhead, there, there, hung over
  Those thousands of white faces, those dazed eyes,
  There in the starless dark the poise, the hover,
  There with vast wings across the cancelled skies,
  There in the sudden blackness the black pall
  Of nothing, nothing, nothing,--nothing at all.

Here Archibald MacLeish, who stands somewhere between the centre and
the extreme left wing in poetry, employs a traditional verse-form
in a poem the theme of which is the absurdity of the spectacle of
human antics in a cosmos without intelligibility or significance. He
guards against any specious effect of “fulfilment” by the unexpected
reiteration of the word _nothing_. Yet there remains the regrettable
necessity of rounding out the sestet and capping the rhyme; and, more
important, the method of presentation has imposed an adventitious
kind of order on a scene which, in the poet’s apprehension of it, is
an even wilder scramble and jumble of absurdities. And so the sonnet,
thoroughly “modern” in spirit, is quite conservative in technique.
The distinctiveness of this new poetry, indeed, is less a matter of
measures, whether new or old, than of the principle of association
by which it is governed. It aims at an organisation of images and a
succession of rhythms which spring more immediately from the poet’s
stream of consciousness.

In attempting to divert this stream through the reader’s mind, without
spilling over or filtering, some recent poets have adopted startling
innovations in typography, including punctuation, use of capitals and
small letters, spacing, and line-division. The fashion is prompted in
part by a spirit of mere impishness, but back of it also is a certain
amount of genuine experimentation in the resources and the graphical
representation of language, the object being to prod the reader out of
the lethargy and complacency which, it is alleged, are fostered by the
conventions of verse-form and page-arrangement. Undeniably, if one is
willing to play this game and doesn’t mind having the rules made up as
one goes along, some of the results are amusing. You will understand
most readily what it is all about if you first take one of these poems
down from some one’s dictation, then attempt to write it as you think
the poet would do to bring out the subtler shadings and nuances, and
finally compare your representation of the poem with his. Here, for
instance, are the words (written as ordinary prose) of a poem by E. E.
Cummings from a group called “Impressions.”

  “I was considering how, within night’s loose sack, a star’s
  nibbling infinitesimally devours darkness, the hungry star,
  which will eventually jiggle the bait of dawn and be jerked into
  eternity, when over my head a shooting-star burst into a stale
  shriek like an alarm-clock.”[52]

On the chance that at this point the reader may wish to try the
experiment which has been suggested, I postpone to a later page Mr.
Cummings’s original arrangement of the words. If you will compare his
printing of the poem with that above, you will see how the tininess and
the quick little repeated nibbles of the mouse at the grain-sack are
suggested by the short, broken lines; how ingeniously the shooting-star
is made to interrupt the poet’s revery; how the effect of flare,
streaking, and slower fading is conveyed in the printing of “bursts”;
and how the new simile of the alarm-clock impinges upon the retinal
image of the meteor.[53] But--“the pleasures of sudden wonder are soon
exhausted.” After scrambling up a hundred or so of these typographical
escarpments, I found that there was seldom a view from the summit
commensurate with the discomforts of the climb, and my interest in
the new sport began to flag. It is hard to imagine a mature artist
interesting himself for long in this sort of preciosity.

Though each individual’s inner life is in a measure unique, the
mere attempt to convey some fraction of it to others by written or
printed words presupposes a certain shared and common ground of human
experience. Freshness, piquancy, gusto, can be properly savoured only
when they are delicately blended with “human nature’s daily food.” The
importance of a common understanding upon essentials is clear in the
sphere of our personal relationships, which become rich and satisfying
only with the mutual recognition of things that may be _taken for
granted_; oddities and varieties are most engaging in those with whom
we already own a fundamental bond. Now the forms and conventions of
poetry may be regarded as so many aids to the speedier establishment of
such understanding between reader and poet,--the indispensable means
by which an original experience is so shaped and clarified that it has
significance for others. No one of these conventions, naturally, is
absolutely fixed or static, and skilful manipulation of their elements
is constantly yielding new and unsuspected possibilities of æsthetic
pleasure, and even of social comprehension. For this reason we may look
with a tolerant and not unfriendly eye upon such experimentation by
some of our younger poets as I have described.[54] Nevertheless, it is
imperative that persons who wish to modify or to replace the accepted
vehicles of poetic expression should have a clear understanding of
what convention in literature or art is _for_. Adequate treatment of
this subject would require a separate book, and here I must content
myself with a mere statement of faith: that some set of assumptions as
to the experiences most valuable and important for mankind--in other
words, of universals in the Aristotelian sense--is as necessary in
the establishment or the maintenance of an æsthetic convention as in
any purely social or political activity. Indeed, the most promising
development in American poetry at the present time, I believe, is to
be found, not in these centrifugal and eccentric movements, but in the
considerable amount of genuine if less spectacular work which is being
done upon the lines of a firmly rooted literary tradition.[55]


II

In the last few paragraphs, though concerned primarily with the aspect
of communicability, I have been skirting the topic which lies at the
centre of all movements of thought and feeling in our day, and with
which I shall be concerned through the rest of this essay. I refer
to the prevalent spirit of disillusionment, a state of mind which in
America has made itself felt, acutely and widely, only within the last
three or four years.

Certainly the mood of the younger generation of poets (the men and
women now in their twenties or early thirties) is very different from
the poetic temper of fifteen years ago--those exciting, strained,
exalted, painful years that witnessed, among other things, the rise
of the “new poetry” in England and America and, somewhat later, the
beginning of the war. Any comprehensive view of the stream of poetry
warns us not to make too much of these twists and turns between one
decade and the next; yet there is some reason to think that we have now
reached or are approaching one of the major bends in the course. The
“poetic renascence” of 1912-1917 was, it is true, in reaction against
certain nineteenth-century attitudes,--against its Puritan code in
morals and its tradition of gentility in belles-lettres; as some one
has said, it delighted in hurling bricks at the silk hat of Hamilton
W. Mabie; but to the most characteristic force of nineteenth-century
thought and life--namely, an expansive philosophy of naturalism,
embraced with enthusiasm and glorified by a romantic imagination--it
merely gave a fresh impetus.

  The serene and humble mould
  Does in herself all selves enfold--
  Kingdoms, destinies, and creeds,
  Great dreams, and dauntless deeds,
  Science that metes the firmament,
  The high, inflexible intent
  Of one for many sacrificed--
  Plato’s brain, the heart of Christ;

     *     *     *     *     *

  Out of the earth the poem grows
  Like the lily, or the rose;
  And all man is, or yet may be,
  Is but herself in agony
  Toiling up the steep ascent
  Toward the complete accomplishment
  When all dust shall be, the whole
  Universe, one conscious soul.[56]

These lines by John Hall Wheelock epitomise the thought that had been
the main inspiration of the nineteenth century. Despite their regular
metrical form, with its reminiscence of Emerson, we recognise in them
the ecstatic evolutionary naturalism of Walt Whitman.

Indeed, it was the spirit of Whitman, more than any other, that
presided over our “poetic renascence.” Not, of course, that all the
poets who made their appearance in those years were akin to him. Frost,
for instance, was hardly more like Whitman than he was like Pope;
consciously, in his living and in his poetry, he was facing and he has
continued to move in just the opposite direction. Nor perhaps in the
work of Masters or of Robinson[57] is the relation to Whitman at once
apparent, for superficially neither the _Spoon River Anthology_, that
sardonic record of stunted human growths, nor Robinson’s sombre studies
of the thwarted lives of his New Englanders suggest the tolerance,
the breadth and human warmth of the older poet’s sympathies. But the
analysis of these unfortunate victims of a repressive and unhumane
morality (for such is the way the poetry of both writers was commonly
described, and such, in one aspect, it is) was really in line with
Whitman’s gospel of emotional emancipation, as well as with the new
direction given to psychology by Freud and Jung. In the work of Lindsay
and Sandburg, and notably in that of the far less original Oppenheim
(whose disappearance from current collections is itself significant
of the change that has taken place), the influence of Whitman was
patent. All the spokesmen and contemporary critics of the movement,
from Amy Lowell (1917) to Bruce Weirick (1924), with varying degrees
of emphasis, stress Whitman’s primacy in American literature. He had
had his lovers and disciples before, but now for the first time a
group of American poets could give him whole-hearted welcome with no
inner abashment to overcome. Throughout the earlier productions of the
movement, even in the poems of the Imagists, whose theory and practice
of verse were so different from his own, is diffused the vibrant
spirit of Walt Whitman. It is experienced as a certain buoyancy and
expectancy of mood, and most characteristically as an underlying trust
in a life-force which is felt to be working here in America to high,
unforeseen ends.

It would be an over-simplification, but somewhere near the heart of the
matter, to say that the presence we are most aware of in the poetry of
to-day is not Walt Whitman, but Thomas Hardy--his desolating irony,
at least, if not his artistic and personal elevation. These younger
poets accept, but coldly and without enthusiasm, the account which
contemporary science offers of the universe and of the human make-up,
and they are as hostile to the glowing affirmations of the great
romantics as they are to the evasions and tepidity of the Victorians.
Perhaps this is but an inversion, a different guise, of that restless
and changeable temper which we call romanticism, but to me at least
its emergence seems to be more significant than were any of the varied
energies released by the last poetic movement. This new spirit is not
more characteristic of poetry, of course, than of other expressions
of the age. To some extent, though less here than abroad, it is an
after-effect of the war--the inability of nervous organisations
overstrained by the excitements of those years to respond to normal
stimuli. It may be briefly described as a despair of achieving any
reading of life in its totality which will be tolerable in the light
of all we know and feel. “In the course of a few centuries,” writes
Mr. Joseph Wood Krutch in _The Modern Temper_, “[man’s] knowledge, and
hence the universe of which he finds himself an inhabitant, has been
completely revolutionised, but his instincts and his emotions have
remained, relatively at least, unchanged. He is still, as he always
was, adjusted to the orderly, purposeful, humanised world which all
peoples unburdened by experience have figured to themselves, but that
world no longer exists.” This modern sense of frustration differs
from states of disillusion or pessimism experienced in the past in
two respects. It is, for one thing, more widespread, producing a
considerable body of poetry of sheer negation, turning some writers
to mere elaboration of surfaces and appearances, and making itself
felt as an undercurrent, now cynical, now passionate, in much
writing which seems superficially to be almost free of philosophical
implications. And secondly, this spirit of denial is a more positive
and uncompromising thing than we have known in the past. Not only is it
unable to effect any synthesis of its intelligence and its emotional
promptings; it has come to believe that such a synthesis is in the
nature of things impossible. It grows “more and more likely,” continues
Mr. Krutch, “that [man] must remain an ethical animal in a universe
which contains no ethical element.” His dilemma is that he cannot
either feel as his intelligence bids him or think as his emotions would
have him. Even the highest of the personal emotions, love itself, which
had somehow eluded the cold touch of nineteenth-century science, has
not been able to withstand the psycho-analysis of the twentieth. “Have
you not heard,” asks the lady in _Cavender’s House_,

  “Have you not heard yet, anywhere, death-bells ringing
  For Love and poor Romance? Biologists
  And bolshevists are ringing them like mad--
  So loud that Love, we’re told, will soon be lost
  With dodos, dinosaurs, and pterodactyls.”

Specifically, a feeling is abroad that poetry is at some kind of crisis
or turning-point, and there are even predictions that poetry of a sort
that the past would recognise as such cannot continue much longer to be
produced.

The poetry of T. S. Eliot has been praised for its seizing of just
this aspect of the modern situation, the sense of frustration, of
insignificance. “The passions which swept through the once major
poets,” writes Mr. Krutch, “no longer awaken any profound response,
and only in the bleak, tortuous complexities of a T. S. Eliot
does [the present age] find its moods given adequate expression.”
Love-making carried on with an accompanying sense of its futility
and ridiculousness, an acquaintance with art and poetry which serves
only to confirm misgivings as to their relevancy for us to-day, the
employment of religious symbols to arouse a poor mirthless mockery--in
such experiences our young intellectuals find mirrored the age and body
of their time. The cryptic character of the writing, the sometimes
arbitrary connection between one image and the next, the casual
allusions to one person’s recondite reading, are all indications of
the contemporary sense of the individual’s isolation. The broken
rhythms, the fragmentariness of the scenes or movements, the deliberate
foregoing of any rational principle of organisation, reflect the
feeling of the fragmentariness of life itself, the modern inability to
effect any kind of integration of experience. And this, we are told by
some, is the only kind of poetry which an honest and sensitive mind in
an age like ours can be expected to produce.

Mr. Eliot, though no longer belonging even nominally to American
literature, is worth attention because of his present high reputation
in intellectual circles. He has written literary criticism of a kind
especially needed at the present time, based as it is on a wide
knowledge of literature, informed by a delicate taste, and guided by
severe yet humane standards. And in his poetry he has shown himself
capable of finding a comedy of the mind in these hesitations and
inhibitions of modernity,--as in the early “Love Song of J. Alfred
Prufrock.” By the haunting, individual rhythms of his poems alone,
we are apprised of an exceptional poetic endowment. Yet Mr. Eliot’s
literary output, poetry and prose, constitutes, to my mind, one of the
most arresting paradoxes of this paradoxical age: an advocate of the
sterner disciplines of the past (“classicist in literature, royalist in
politics, and anglo-catholic in religion”), who gives to these causes
all the organising power of a firm intelligence, and is content to let
his poetry express chiefly the states of confusion, doubt, faintness,
with which the positive principles of his thought have had to wrestle.

  “We are the hollow men,
  We are the stuffed men.”

In a recent essay Mr. Eliot has ventured the opinion that a great
event in the intellectual world would be the conversion of Professor
Irving Babbitt to Roman or Anglo-Catholicism, but, he concludes
regretfully, such a consummation, though devoutly to be wished, is
hardly likely, for Mr. Babbitt “knows too much.” Perhaps an even more
salutary conversion, in its immediate effects upon other poets, would
be Mr. Eliot’s compassing, in his creative work, of those genuinely
classical values of which, in his critical writing, he shows such fine
apprehension. For a transformation of that kind, one need not fear that
any man of letters knows too much. One may at least entertain the hope
that Mr. Eliot’s permanent reputation as a poet is not going to lie
in the fact that he has voiced, more completely than any one else in
verse, the confusion and disillusionment of this post-war generation.

The humanist is aware that poetry, like mythology, possesses no
power of conferring immediate revelation of truth; he knows that its
scenes and personages, its thoughts and passions, from the earthiest
to the most ethereal, belong to the world of unsubstantiality, of
illusion--of dreams, if you will. He will go further: this element of
illusion, this impassable gulf between reality and our comprehension
or representation of reality, is not confined to poetry and mythology;
it is part of all our conscious life; it baffles us even in our
attempt to comprehend that nearest thing of all--ourself. “... beneath
the surface of all we see and feel, beneath the very act of seeing
and feeling, lies the unredeemed chaos of desires and impressions,
unlimited, unmeaning, unfathomable, incalculable, formless, dark.
Life is but appearance, and this personality we call by our name is
but illusion within illusion.”[58] But working within the illusion is
also a power to control and order these impulses, to check them or to
bring them into a harmonious co-operation, yielding a serenity and a
sense of stability which, of all human experiences, seems freest of
illusion. It was the characteristic error of much nineteenth-century
poetry (of Browning’s in England, of Whitman’s in America) to limit
personality to the mere welter of desires and feelings, to find there
its central “urge” (the favourite word of romantic criticism), and
to erect upon such foundations a philosophy of the “ideal.” But the
hollowness of _this_ illusion (the philosophy which found an immediacy
of truth in natural instincts, impulses, and feelings) has to-day
become all too apparent; and when its former adherents ask where then
certainty can be found, they are bidden to direct their gaze to the
abstract world of the physicist and the mathematician. Here, in the
words of Mr. I. A. Richards, “intellectual certainty is, almost for
the first time, available, and on an unlimited scale.”[59] But even
if this were so,--and one hears of developments in these fields that
appear to make the certainty considerably less than absolute,--it would
still be a certainty about matters that have no particular relation to
the behaviour and feelings of human beings, and that give no support
for poetry. The beguiling mirage of an Absolute fostered by romantic
poetry has disappeared, only to be replaced by the mirage of another
Absolute, terrifying though incomprehensible. And so we have come to
the _impasse_ already described.

From the point of view of the humanist, what has so suddenly collapsed
is the towering structure of nineteenth-century romanticism, not any
dwelling necessary to the continued life of poetry. For he has long
recognised those metaphysical limitations with which contemporary
physics is so deeply entangled; and he has been unwilling to trust
metaphysics, any more completely than natural science, with the whole
determination of a philosophy of life. Instead of asserting that
intellectual certainty in the field of science is available now almost
for the first time on an unlimited scale, he would postulate a large
degree of what amounts to _practical_ certainty, in all that concerns
us most nearly as ethical beings, available now, as it has been for
centuries. This assurance is embodied, for him, in the dualism of the
great historic religions, in the teachings of Socrates and of Jesus,
and in the most persistent traditions of European literature. But
its final sanctions are not found in any “great tradition,” however
imposing; they are arrived at empirically and experimentally by any
one who, divesting his mind of shibboleths and catch-words, will
honestly examine his own impulses and springs of action. In his own
soul he will find the cleavage, the dualism, which runs through human
nature. This opposition of forces, by whatever names he calls them,
by whatever symbols he represents them, may never be resolved; but in
his mysterious power of intervention in their unending conflict lies,
for him, the ultimate reality within the illusion. To the reading of
poetry, then, he will bring the same habit of discrimination that
serves him in the conduct of life, mindful that it is still a world
communicating with ours by the gate of horn and the gate of ivory, and
that the phantasms which issue therefrom may light our way a few steps
nearer truth, or may deepen for us the shadows of the dark, chaotic
flux.

To the consciousness of intellectual defeat and spiritual dismay,
evidenced so widely in contemporary literature, it is not to be
expected that poetry will for the present make any very direct or
explicit answer. For we do not look to poetry for polemics, for the
formulation of ethical or metaphysical ideas; and when poetry tries
to assume a burden that belongs rather to criticism and philosophy,
the result may have literary interest and excellence, as does Pope’s
_Essay on Man_, but is more likely to be merely dull and forced, like
the later work of Wordsworth or Browning. In either case some fulness
of life belonging to poetry when confident in its own right is missing.
No, what we look for in the poet is some more pervasive or implicit
evidence of his scale of values, some intuitive, and for that reason
more certain, indication of the quality of his response to life, felt
as unmistakably in his imagery, his diction, and his rhythms as in
those more ponderable elements of style which the eighteenth century
called “fable” and “sentiments.” Thus, in two stanzas[60] of A. E.
Housman--

  The year might age, and cloudy
    The lessening day might close,
  But air of other summers
    Breathed from beyond the snows,
    And I had hope of those.

  They came and were and are not
    And come no more anew;
  And all the years and seasons
    That ever can ensue
    Must now be worse and few.

--something that belongs to his deepest intuition (his acceptance,
without evasion and without reconciliation, of life’s transitoriness)
is caught in the very movement of the lines and the simplicity of the
words:

  They came and were and are not.

This pervasive sense of things chiefly valued and most deeply felt,
which every great poet’s work gives us, is surely not determined
altogether by forces external to him. The poet is something more than a
highly sensitised receiving-set for remote, scattered goings-on in the
world at large. What we prize in every poet we come to know intimately
is some irreducible, _given_ quality of the personality. We shall not
easily accept, therefore, the current argument that, in an age like
ours of dissolving faiths, the only genuine kind of poetry must be one
which has cut itself off from belief of any kind.[61] The history
of English literature is not lacking in instances of poets who have
withstood the pressure of their age: to recall only the greatest, the
poems of Milton, from _Lycidas_ to _Samson Agonistes_, are triumphant
testimonies against the idea that poetry need be so utterly subject to
contemporaneous disintegrating influences. But if we claim for poetry a
certain power of immunity from such forces, neither, by the same course
of reasoning, should we expect too much from the _direct_ effect upon
it of those forces which we think salutary, such as humanism.

I do not mean to suggest here the notion of poetry’s having a life of
its own in any transcendental sense, or to imply that poets possess
mysterious astral powers. My thought is simply that the new humanism,
before it is given any large imaginative expression in American poetry,
must expect to prove its worth by responding to broadly human, and
not alone specifically poetic needs. It will do this by its power
of bringing harmony into lives which are ordered in accordance with
its insight, of establishing in society “a current of fresh and true
ideas,” and of creating thus “a quickening and sustaining atmosphere”
which poetry can breathe. I feel no need of apologising for my use of
these well-worn phrases of Matthew Arnold; not only was he the best
representative of the spirit of humanism in nineteenth-century England
or America, but also, in his realisation of the hopeless disparity
between natural processes and human aims, he anticipated the very
pattern of our own dilemma. The paralysis which came over Arnold’s
poetic powers in later life is sometimes attributed to the steady
growth of his humanistic interests, requiring the ampler medium of
prose. However that may be, I believe it certain that his humanism--his
sense, that is, of the worth and fruitfulness of human powers when
wisely exercised and his acceptance of the limitations which such a
view imposes--gave to his poetry nearly all that power of invigoration
and refreshment for which we chiefly value it. A contemporary critic,
R. H. Hutton, observed how frequently Arnold closes a poem on the
burdensomeness of existence by some seemingly unconnected figure or
story, such as the simile of the Tyrian trader in “The Scholar Gipsy,”
instinct with the pride and buoyancy of old world enterprise. “‘The
problem is insoluble,’ he seems to say, ‘but insoluble or not, let
us recall the pristine strength of the human spirit, and not forget
that we have access to great resources still.’”[62] In such ways
to-day, indirectly and obliquely, humanism may make itself felt as one
influence among many upon contemporary poetry: by rendering accessible
and operative, for the poets as for the rest of us, some of these
moral energies from times of more robust faith and higher intellectual
vitality than our own.


FOOTNOTES

[45] Reprinted by permission of The Macmillan Company, Publishers.

[46] “If you disregard critical trivialities and didactic accessories,
the entire æsthetic system of Croce amounts to a hunt for pseudonyms
of the word ‘art,’ and may indeed be stated briefly and accurately in
this formula: art = intuition = expression = feeling = imagination =
fancy = lyricism = beauty. And you must be careful not to take these
words with the shadings and distinctions which they have in ordinary or
scientific language. Not a bit of it. Every word is merely a different
series of syllables signifying absolutely and completely the same
thing.”--G. Papini, _Four and Twenty Minds_, quoted by I. A. Richards,
_The Principles of Literary Criticism_ (1924), p. 255, note 4.

Mr. Richards adds: “It is interesting to notice that Croce’s appeal has
been exclusively to those unfamiliar with the subject, to the man of
letters and the dilettante. He has been ignored by serious students of
the mind.... [Papini] has here rendered a notable service to those who
have been depressed by the vogue of ‘Expressionism.’”

_Cf._ also the following from Gilbert Murray’s _The Classical
Tradition in Poetry_ (1927), p. 243: “Everything that a man does is
self-expression. The way a man laces his boots, the way he writes,
the way he says, ‘Good-morning,’ is probably different from the way
followed by any other man, and is thus expressive of his personality.
But it need not be good art for that reason. Imagine a pompous and
egotistic man in a state of personal irritation, having to make an
after-dinner speech. It would probably express him only too well, but
it might not be a good speech.”

[47] _A Survey of Modernist Poetry_, by Laura Riding and Robert Graves,
1927, p. 125.

[48] From _Harmonium_, by Wallace Stevens, 1923. Reprinted by and with
permission of and special arrangement with Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.,
authorised publishers.

[49] For the sake of “communicative efficacy,” as the editors remind
me, I should explain that _transition_ is “an international quarterly
for creative experiment,” edited in Paris by a group of young Americans
and others.

[50] From _Trivial Breath_, by Elinor Wylie, 1928. Reprinted by and
with permission of and special arrangement with Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.,
authorised publishers.

[51] From _Streets in the Moon_, by Archibald MacLeish, 1926. Reprinted
by permission of Houghton Mifflin Company, Publishers.

[52] From _Tulips and Chimneys_. Reprinted by permission of Alfred &
Charles Boni, Inc., Publishers.

[53] For a more elaborate analysis of such effects in Mr. Cummings’s
poetry, see Laura Riding and Robert Graves, _A Survey of Modernist
Poetry_, Chapter I.

[54] E. E. Cummings’s poem, previously referred to, is printed by him
as follows (_Tulips and Chimneys_, New York, 1924, p. 78):

  i was considering how
  within night’s loose
  sack a star’s
  nibbling in-
  fin
  -i-
  tes-
  i
  -mal-
  ly devours

  darkness the
  hungry star
  which
  will e
  -ven
  tu-
  al
  -ly jiggle
  the bait of
  dawn and be jerked

  into
  eternity. when over my head a
  shooting
  star
  Bur    s
          (t
            into a stale shriek
  like an alarm-clock)

[55] Such, for instance, as the poetry of John Crowe Ransom and Donald
Davidson in the South, and of Wilbert Snow and Robert P. Tristram
Coffin in New England.

[56] From the poem “Earth,” in _Dust and Light_, 1919, published by
Charles Scribner’s Sons.

[57] Mr. Robinson, of course, had been publishing poetry for nearly
twenty years before the new movement got under way, but his work was
regarded as belonging to it in temper and outlook.

[58] Paul Elmer More, “Definitions of Dualism,” Section LXXIII, in
_The Drift of Romanticism_ (1913), p. 291. The next section is almost
prophetic of what has happened in American poetry of the last few years:

“In some men, especially in an age of spiritual apathy, the sense of
disillusion may spring up without the corresponding assurance of faith.
To such men nothing is real; they walk in a place of shadows, and feel
that life is continually slipping away from them into a bottomless
abyss. All their labour is to re-create for themselves the illusion
which has been shattered, or, by ceaseless occupation, to escape the
dull horror of the void.”

[59] I. A. Richards, _Science and Poetry_, 1926, p. 60.

[60] From _Last Poems_, by A. E. Housman, 1922, published by Henry Holt
and Company.

[61] I. A. Richards, _Science and Poetry_, Chapter VII.

[62] Richard Holt Hutton, _Essays on Some of the Modern Guides to
English Thought in Matters of Faith_, 1891 (Second Ed., revised), p.
146.




