_The Dilemma of Modern Tragedy_

ALAN REYNOLDS THOMPSON


I

Most modern tragedy is depressing; classic tragedy is elevating.
That the best tragic art of the past, in spite of the calamities it
presents, elevates the spirit is obvious; but the cause of the “lift”
it produces is obscure. If the cause were technical and formal beauty,
_Ghosts_ ought to be more inspiriting than _Macbeth_. If it were wholly
the melody of verse--which most modern drama has foregone--no great
classic tragedy could endure translation. But Greek tragedies can
still powerfully exalt an audience, though presented in the English
renderings of Campbell and Potter!

The problem seems particularly to have appealed to the German
metaphysical mind. Hegel thought tragedy a transcendental
reconciliation of opposites. Schopenhauer found in it resignation to
loss of individuality and return to the universal Will. Nietzsche
turned the latter’s pessimism into the semblance of optimism by
defining the spirit of Dionysus as an intoxicated joy in annihilation
and union with nature.

But one hardly need resort to metaphysics, since the experience seems
sufficiently explained by psychology. It is in my opinion chiefly
the result of admiration. Every tragedy grows from a struggle of the
individual against circumstance; but this emotional elevation we are
discussing, as distinguished from more melodramatic thrills, seems to
arise not from the mere struggle but from an impressive exhibition
of will. The spectator is inspirited because in tragedy he sees an
exhibition of convincing heroism. The tragic hero achieves a spiritual
victory in spite of a physical defeat. “To affect the soul, and excite
the passions, and above all to move admiration,” says Dryden, “is the
delight of serious plays.”[37]

In some respects the reverse of this view is the neo-classic doctrine
of poetic justice, which is still held by some critics. According to
poetic justice it is not the hero whom we are to admire, but the moral
law which destroys him. Thus Mr. Ludwig Lewisohn writes: “Traditionally
the serious drama deals with the transgressions of an immutable moral
law by a self-originating will.... In each instance the destruction of
the protagonist reconciles the spectator to a universe in which guilt
is punished and justice is upheld.” That some such view governed the
_intentions_ of religious dramatists like Æschylus or Racine we must
admit; but for the modern sceptic at least their plays are inspiriting
in proportion as the struggle exalts the endurance, if not the goodness
of the hero. That such was even the intention of other dramatists,
Shakespeare in particular, is more than doubtful.

Other critics like Mr. Joseph Wood Krutch foretell the extinction of
tragedy because it is dependent on an anthropocentric view of the
universe. It is the “tragic fallacy,” says Mr. Krutch, to fancy that
one’s “passions are important throughout all time and all space.”
Though we may agree that they are not, to conclude from that rather
obvious fact that tragedy is dead seems not wholly logical. Whatever
the nature of the world, human greatness remains important for human
beings; and Mr. Krutch would seem to give away his case by so plainly
admiring greatness in the very tragedies whose passing he deplores.

The ethical victory of the tragic hero is not a vindication of a moral
order in the universe; neither is it a victory for an elaborated system
such as religion fosters. Macbeth is wicked but admirable. Something
primitive and universal in mankind responds to courage, fidelity,
endurance, even for evil ends. Such admiration rises spontaneously
from our strongest impulses, those toward survival and success. In
the theatre to behold a man steadfast in his will even to death is to
feel our own natures enhanced and to discover in ourselves unrealised
powers. Such heroic manifestation of will is essential to tragedy of
the great tradition, and is found in Sophocles, in Shakespeare, in
Corneille alike.

Several influences have combined in destroying heroic tragedy. It
was the tradition of the Renaissance to make the hero a prince, the
mere semblance of nobility securing a deferential response from the
audience. Modern democracy has changed all that. Industrialism,
furthermore, has fostered the feeling that success is synonymous
with getting rich. And science has not only helped destroy popular
traditions that might have nourished a modern spirit of admiration,
but has fostered a wintry air of scepticism, making man appear not an
imperfect angel but a super-educated monkey. Psychology in particular
has been industriously cutting at the root of heroism, the belief in
free will, by exhibiting the mechanical causes for conduct.

The writer of tragedy who succumbs to these influences finds himself
thus in a dilemma. Unable to believe in greatness, he cannot inspire
others. If he would gain elevation, he must falsify his beliefs; if
he would express his candid view of life, he must forego the tragic
lift. Heroic tragedy was the outcome of a view perhaps pessimistic
about things in general, but always optimistic about the human quality
of individuals. The modern view is pessimistic about everything. As
Hardy expressed it, the prospect most harmonious with the temper of
the thinking modern would be a gaunt waste in Thule. As a result the
dilemma of the naturalist poet is this: _He cannot be both honest and
sublime._[38]


II

This statement will be more convincing when illustrated with examples
drawn from various manifestations of the tragic spirit--in narrative
poetry and the novel as well as in the drama.

I have emphasised the effect of science; and at first thought it might
seem that the great romantics of a century ago, who preceded the
scientific disillusionment, still kept the heroic tradition alive. It
is true that they inherited the tradition, but in their hands it became
not heroism but heroics. The romantic tendency was to seek thrills
rather than truth, and to draw less from human nature than from a
literary fashion.

_Hernani_ and _Ruy Blas_, for example, are highly effective
constructions of clap-trap, to which Hugo’s beautiful and rhetorical
verse gives a semblance of significance. But they can be taken
seriously only by abandoning the intelligence. To-day they seem no more
tragic than Dumas _père_ or the _mélodrames_ of the Boulevards from
which Hugo learned his technic. As melodrama they are, to be sure,
still entertaining.

Such romantic literature of escape did not of course decrease in
popularity with the development of science, but it distinctly lost
literary prestige. After the fifties and sixties the romantic who would
be taken seriously had to cope with scepticism and disillusionment.
Thus Rostand, writing _Cyrano de Bergerac_, was careful to preserve the
smile of sophistication; he delicately played with pathos, and even
flirted with comedy. We can take the extravagances of the drama half
in the spirit of play and enjoy them as a fairy tale. Its heroism is
the heroism of fancy, not of life. It is in a similar spirit that we
enjoy the thrillers and detective tales of to-day. We seek them for
recreation only; and it is difficult to imagine that such romance can
ever again be thought of as seriously tragic.

The romantic writer, however, can scarcely be expected to be content
with the rôle of popular entertainer. Though for the past fifty years
on the defensive, he has persisted in attempting the exaltation of
tragic art. Maeterlinck, for example, sought to reconcile pessimism
with romance by developing a fatalistic “static drama” and throwing
over it a Pre-Raphaelite mist of romantic symbolism. With him a symbol
became less a visible sign of another object than a stimulant to
emotional intoxication; and if we look at the early plays with clear
heads we see that they are rooted in a determinism fatal to the heroic
tradition. Later Maeterlinck grew more optimistic, but in _Monna
Vanna_, which was inspired by Browning, we get exaltation of passion
rather than will.

Whereas Maeterlinck tried to preserve romantic values, if not heroism,
by reconciling them with science, the great Russians, Tolstoi and
Dostoevski, evaded scientific pessimism by escape into a romanticised
Christianity. The result was no less fatal to heroism. As they saw it,
the Christian paradox was that the worst persons achieve the greatest
regeneration; and they presented it with extreme violence. Thus in
Tolstoi’s _The Power of Darkness_ the leading character is not only
a drunkard, a lecher, and a murderer of his own child, but he is
hopelessly craven, stupid, and weak. Yet he wins salvation by public
confession. Such a conversion seems more emotional than religious,
since it is the result of no discipline of the will. But apart from
such questions it would appear obvious that such a play as this is
poles apart from heroic tragedy. It is Tolstoi’s sentimentalised
conception of Christian poetic justice which is exalted.

The exaltation which the romanticist failed to achieve, the scientific
naturalist did not even attempt. Ibsen, apart from his great intrinsic
importance, is interesting because he shows the transition from the
one mode to the other. His early plays were modelled after Scribe and
Schiller; and use of the sagas links him with the heroic tradition.
Though sceptically, he exalted the will and prophesied the superman.
But his mature work shows the effect of science: men are portrayed
more as victims than shapers of events, and responsibility is shifted
from the individual to society. His transition from romanticism to
scientific naturalism was made easy by the fact that romanticism had
already identified man with nature. Disillusion concerning the latter
brought about degradation of the former.

Though the increasing use of symbolism gives Ibsen’s later work a
romantic tone, the plays are built on studies of mental abnormalities
which seem almost intended to demonstrate the non-existence of heroism.
The fall of the master builder is indeed a symbol of the falsity of
what Shaw calls “ideals.” But Ibsen’s anti-heroic tendency is seen
perhaps most forcefully in the famous tragedy of his middle period.

In _Ghosts_ the formal resemblances to Greek tragedy and the element of
human error obscure the essential differences. The animus vitalising
the action is the attack upon a false code of morals--or “ideals”--of
which the heroine is the victim. And, as is proper in a naturalist
tragedy, the _Spirocheta pallida_ is made the _deus ex machina_. The
emotional effect, furthermore, is not elevation but horror. We can
admire the author for honesty and daring, but not the characters. The
best of them, Mrs. Alving, is admirable only in intention, and false to
her convictions, as the author makes a point of showing. She is at the
curtain so far from a “spiritual victory” that there remains for her a
dilemma which is probably the cruelest in dramatic literature: killing
her own son or letting him live an idiot.

The contrast between this play and, let us say, _Hamlet_ is plain when
we compare Oswald’s cry, “The sun--the sun,” and the final speech of
Fortinbras:

  Bear Hamlet, like a soldier, to the stage;
  For he was likely, had he been put on,
  To have prov’d most royally; and for his passage,
  The soldiers’ music and the rites of war
  Speak loudly for him.

The former is the bitter irony of disillusion, the very mockery of the
romantic cliché, “Then came the dawn.” The latter ends the play with
eloquent praise.[39]


III

The elevation which Ibsen gains in _Ghosts_ through beauty of structure
and atmospheric effect does not carry over to the theme; here the
author frankly chooses honesty and foregoes sublimity. Few or no
writers since have been at once as great and as honest. If we observe
the literature of the last quarter century to see how it has met the
dilemma, we shall find perhaps an explanation of current anarchy and
experimentation. Some take refuge in subtle evasions, disguised by the
cleverness of novel technic or material. But those who do not evade the
issue follow two roads: _the road of laughter_, which goes by way of
irony and satire; and _the road of tears_, by way of pathos or cruelty.

The former path, since it leads away from the tragic emotions, need
not detain us long. With effort the romantic can school himself into
a detachment of head from heart in which he can smile at the contrast
between his dreams and the reality. His laughter may be bitter, but
it is laughter. Pirandello, aware of the flux and illusoriness of
life, deliberately contrasts it with the permanence and significance
of fiction; and extracts mirth from the grotesquerie and cleverness
of his paradoxes, in spite of the disillusionment underlying them.
Anatole France armoured his sensibility with detached artistry and the
_esprit gaulois_. Aldous Huxley, too much the moralist to be wholly
detached, solaces himself with savage satire. The whole work of Cabell
is a series of repetitions of one bitter “jest” involving the night
before and the morning after. Such writers, emotionally romantic but
intellectually sceptical, choose to laugh at their predicament rather
than weep.

The road of tears concerns us directly. It usually follows the way of
pathos. Though Aristotle made pity and fear correlative emotions, it is
a fact that we feel the former more for the weak victim like Ophelia
than for the hero, and that the more we admire, the less we need weep.
Pathos must be subordinate in heroic tragedy if the play is to elevate
our spirits. Obviously, however, the modern who sees nothing to admire
is left with pathos as his chief effect.

Pathos and horror we find in Hardy, little mitigated by any admiration
except for the author’s artistry. Rarely we find a heroism of sorts
in characters like Michael Henchard; but it is significant that the
author ended his novels with _Jude_. Galsworthy’s habitual irony always
borders on pathos if not sentiment. French “naturalism” is harsher and
at times, as in _Madame Bovary_, finds expression in bitter irony. But
pathos is none the less its most powerful effect. _The Old Wives’ Tale_
of Arnold Bennett is an English imitation; here we feel the pathos of
mere mortality quite apart from anything the very ordinary characters
do. In Theodore Dreiser, “naturalism,” though sadly in need of pruning,
still bears its bitter fruit. It is characteristic of its spirit that
Dreiser uses the word “tragedy” with reference to the fate of a Clyde
Griffiths.

But since pathos skirts the gulf of sentimentality, the “hard-boiled”
generation since the war have turned from it. Those of the younger
group who cannot laugh have as a result begun to explore another
emotion, which lies even deeper in our nature, and which is also
compatible with disillusionment. The savage in all of us finds a fierce
and hard delight in torture. Significantly the word “sadism” has become
fashionable. We may name the emotion “cruelty,” though the word is
perhaps inadequate.

In the drama an important forerunner of contemporary exploitations
of cruelty and sex, as well as of expressionism, was Frank Wedekind.
Cruelty is manifest in James Joyce. In D. H. Lawrence it accompanies
a pathological exaltation of sexuality, and thus gives him greater
hardness than his American parallel, Sherwood Anderson. A very
interesting instance of it is the work of a contemporary American poet
whose fame is still unequal to his remarkable achievements. I speak of
Robinson Jeffers.

Jeffers’ long narrative poems spread a more than Thyestian banquet of
horrors. With surprise we learn that in private life the author is so
unwilling to inflict pain that “he never picks a flower wantonly.”
But in his art he more than compensates for such sensibilities. _Roan
Stallion_, for example, depicts the passion of a modern Pasiphaë. The
unlucky husband is trampled by the stallion, and the woman shoots the
animal. _Tamar_ deals with incest between brother and sister, and ends
with a fire which burns down the house and its more or less crazy
inmates. _The Tower Beyond Tragedy_, though treating the Clytemnestra
legend with great power, ends in the incest motive between Orestes and
Electra.

The perversity of theme, however, is partly compensated by elevation of
treatment, for Jeffers has a certain grandeur of style, drawing as he
does upon Greek literature, the Bible, modern psychology, and physical
science for thought, and the beauty of natural scenery for description.
A passage which illustrates at once his power of style and his drift
toward cruelty is found in preparation for the crucial scene of _Roan
Stallion_.

                Humanity is the start of the race; I say
  Humanity is the mould to break away from, the crust to break
      through, the coal to break into fire,
  The atom to be split.
                        Tragedy that breaks man’s face
      and a white fire flies out of it; vision that fools him
  Out of his limits, desire that fools him out of his limits, unnatural
      crime, inhuman science,
  Slit eyes in the mask; wild loves that leap over the walls of nature,
      the wild fence-vaulter science,
  Useless intelligence of far stars, dim knowledge of the spinning
      demons that make an atom,
  These break, these pierce, these deify, praising their God shrilly
      with fierce voices: not in a man’s shape
  He approves the praise, he that walks lightning-naked on the
      Pacific, that laces the suns with planets,
  The heart of the atom with electrons: what is humanity in this
      cosmos? For him, the last
  Least taint of a trace in the dregs of the solution; for itself, the
      mould to break away from, the coal
  To break into fire, the atom to be split.[40]

In interpretation of his thought Mr. Louis Adamic quotes Mr. Jeffers
as saying that civilisation tends inevitably toward downfall through
sexual introversion. Although to attempt to “break out of humanity”
after the fashion exalted in _Roan Stallion_ is, to be sure, dangerous,
“misinterpreted in the mind of a fool or a lunatic,” nevertheless the
fault of the civilised person is that he “regards man exclusively,”
“founding his values, desires, his picture of the universe, all on
his own humanity.” Mr. Jeffers thus levels his attack directly at the
foundation of humanism, and allies himself with the naturalists who
seek salvation in the physical.

He thus flies from normal humanity into cruelty and perversion. But the
end of these is death. And in poem after poem is expressed the longing
for the peace and endurance of granite,--of the grave. The violent
destruction of the individual is the logical outcome of his creed, and
the denial of human values leads to the annihilation of humanity.

This tendency, the extreme development of which we find in Jeffers, we
find in less degree in our leading American dramatist. But in Eugene
O’Neill it is obscured by other qualities; and generalisations are
rendered difficult because he is groping and experimental, not only in
technic but in philosophy. Because of this difficulty as well as for
his intrinsic importance, O’Neill requires special consideration.


IV

A writer’s ’prentice work is likely to be revealing, and O’Neill’s
is no exception. The one-act play _Thirst_, for example, reveals an
imaginative absorption in the violences and brutalities of life. Most
of the one-acts in the volume with _The Moon of the Caribbees_ have
more normal and convincing characterisation, but about half are built
upon abnormal situations involving incipient insanities or morbid
passions.

This interest in mental abnormality has not diminished. O’Neill’s plays
are studies in psychopathology. _Beyond the Horizon_ deals with a weak
romantic who takes refuge from harsh reality in dreams, and finally
dies of consumption. _Gold_ is a melodrama growing out of an insane
delusion. _Diff’rent_ is the horrible case-history of a victim of
sex-repression. _The Hairy Ape_ describes a character who, if he is not
a mere symbol, develops from incipient to raving madness. A play with
a normal beginning, “_The First Man_,” turns out to be a study of an
emotional fixation. _Welded_ depicts two egotistical introverts in whom
goes on the torturing conflict between passionate love and uncontrolled
temperament. The flames of lust and greed, fanned into madness--these
are the materials of _Desire Under the Elms_. _The Great God Brown_,
viewed apart from its symbolism, portrays split personality and
madness. _The Fountain_, beneath its exotic romanticism, is the story
of an _idée fixe_. The plot of _Strange Interlude_ might have come
from the case-book of Freud. If we cannot judge the chief character
of _Lazarus Laughed_ by human standards, we can recognise in Caligula
and Tiberius realistic studies of psychic abnormalities born of lust,
cruelty, and fear. And the author’s latest play, _Dynamo_, is a study
of religious mania.

The blighting effects of our industrial and social life seem hardly
adequate to explain this persistent interest in the pathological. To
follow the method of the new psychology which O’Neill uses so largely,
we are likely to be correct if we seek an emotional frustration; but
American life is hardly the chief cause. Similar interests are seen,
for example, in Ibsen, Strindberg, and Wedekind, all of whom must
have had their effect on the younger dramatist. My suggestion is that
O’Neill has found his highly romantic temperament incompatible with the
teachings of science, and has sought to evade the dilemma of modern
tragedy by the road of tears, exploiting both pathos and cruelty.

That his temperament is highly romantic is obvious. His early work is
almost Conradian in atmosphere; and his great vigour of imagination is
strikingly displayed in the gorgeous settings and strange situations
of plays like _Marco Millions_ and _The Fountain_. Indeed, in the
melodrama of fear and horror he is a genius, fertile in themes to
startle and amaze, and skilful in adapting them effectively to the
stage. Such a play as _Ile_, moreover, is not only horrible but
poetically true. _The Emperor Jones_ is in my opinion his masterpiece,
perfectly constructed and artistically inevitable. The settings and
plot contribute with as inexorable an art as that of Poe to a single
emotional effect, which is furthermore bound up with a clear and
convincing problem in character. The theme of _The Emperor Jones_ is
the regression of a negro to savagery; and as we watch the succession
of weird visions, and feel the emotional crescendo of the tom-toms,
at the same time we see the disintegration of the negro’s mind. The
parallel progress of outer and inner effects is beautifully executed;
and behind the individual we become aware of the dark tragedy of his
race.

But with so luxuriant a fancy, O’Neill has never been content to
construct a dream-world of his own, out of despair of the real one.
He has never abandoned the search for his dreams in actual life, and
as a consequence in his later plays his visions of beauty are forever
being distorted by the lurid light of disillusion. Thus he has seldom
written pure romance. _Marco Millions_ becomes heavy satire; and _The
Fountain_ leaves a bitter taste. For the most part he seeks to deal
realistically with contemporary life.

To see men as mere parts of a mechanistic and soulless universe, and
at the same time to long passionately for the beautiful visions of
imagination, is to find those visions a torture unless they can in some
way be reconciled with reality. Lesser writers have often been diverted
into a seeming reconciliation of them by becoming ardent propagandists;
by adopting programmes of reform, and writing problem or thesis plays.
But while O’Neill shows the romantic’s characteristic hatred of
tradition and restraint, he is not content to do less than face the
fundamental problem. And if he hates “puritanism” and sympathises with
its victim, he by no means blindly admires the libertine. Indeed, he
seems to find no man whom he can whole-heartedly admire; he can exalt
no character or cause, and thus does not gain the elevation of heroic
tragedy. He finds life a muddle; he leaves it a muddle.

Too often, indeed, the muddlement gets into the construction as well
as the themes of his plays. _Desire Under the Elms_, one of the most
nearly tragic of his plays, starts as a study of greed, with old Cabot
as the central character. Cabot, in fact, has heroic qualities, for
he is a man of will. But half way through, the play turns off into
the more alluring theme of sexual lust; old Cabot is thrust into the
background; and the ending is, surprisingly, the traditional one of
crime and retribution. The play lacks artistic unity; it falls in two.

The lack of unity is felt, again, in _Anna Christie_, which in spite
of the author’s expressed intention has for the audience simply a
conventional happy ending. It is strikingly manifest in _Strange
Interlude_. The central character of this alone knits together the
various situations and themes of the nine acts. Of the situations
three or four distinct plays might have been built. Of the themes
there are at least eight; and it is impossible to say which the author
considered central. Much, for example, is said about “happiness”
as the end of life. Again, the doubtful value of self-sacrifice is
illustrated. From Darrell’s point of view, love, that blind biological
urge, seems to be a modern variety of Fate. More than once Nina
expresses the notion that God is a woman. The most powerful scene of
the play is where Nina exults over her “three men”: are we to look
for possessiveness in love as a theme? Or a woman’s need of several
sorts of love? Or is the play a study in relativity with reference
to insanity? Certainly the character with the insane inheritance is
actually the most normal person. Or perhaps we have a study in the
results of meddling with other people’s lives. The popular success of
this play is hardly an indication of unification. That success seems
to be attained in spite of lack of unity, and to rest chiefly on the
novelty of the nine acts and of the technic of spoken thought, on the
frank treatment of sex, and on the great power of characterisation and
of separate situations.

Here is a writer with a genius for the theatre, a powerful imagination,
and great emotional force, who except in shorter studies of
melodramatic horror seems unable to canalise his energies into rounded
and unified works of art. He suffers the conflict he symbolises in
“Dion Anthony,” between his inborn longing for goodness and beauty,
and an acquired frustration, cynicism, and despair. Often the despair
conquers; but we must honour him for the fact that, having no faith,
he persists in seeking one. Unlike lesser writers he is no compromiser
with truth as he sees it; but in one play at least he has persuaded
himself into a positive affirmation. The play is _Lazarus Laughed_.

The symbolist technic of this play forces attention upon the
underlying theme. Only Lazarus is unmasked, and he is thus shown
freed from the illusions of mortality. The rhythmical repetitions and
symmetrical groups of the choruses materialise ethical sympathies and
antagonisms. And the theme is stated repeatedly: there is no death.

But when we try to understand this affirmation we are repeatedly
baffled. It cannot be the Christian belief in personal immortality. The
resurrection of Lazarus would give ground for such a view were it not
obvious that the author has taken over a Christian legend merely as
starting point for his non-Christian allegory. Not only is Christian
immortality not preached, but Christian morality is not expounded.
The hero displays not humility but arrogance. For him men are not
evil until redeemed by the grace of God; they are innately good but
perverted by fear. He thus incites them not to love one another because
children of a loving God, but to live passionately and instinctively.
To be freed from the fear of death means for those who come under
his spell not to live on earth after the Golden Rule, in meekness to
forgive and suffer wrong; but to drown all human interests in a mad
delight in death. And they laugh with exultation at the prospect of
annihilation. The paradox seems essentially irrational.

Cries Lazarus: “Once as squirming specks we crept from the tides of
the sea! Once as quivering flecks of rhythm we beat down the sun. Now
we re-enter the sun! Cast aside is our pitiable pretence, our immortal
egohood, the holy lantern behind which cringed our Fear of the Dark....
We will to die!” In a manner strikingly similar to that of Jeffers,
O’Neill exalts pan-evolutionary nature; having passed beyond horror at
the scientific demonstration of an inhuman universe, he attempts to
pull himself out of humanity into a rapturous acceptance of Nature.
But Jeffers finds no source for laughter in his god “that laces the
suns with planets, the heart of the atom with electrons.” Whence does
O’Neill derive his mirth?

He may well have got his inspiration from Nietzsche. I have summed
up Nietzsche’s idea in _The Birth of Tragedy_ as “an intoxicated joy
in annihilation and union with nature.” Significantly it is just
following an attack on Christianity that he exalts the laughing mood.
We must fear the “romantic,” he says, because the romantic tends to end
comforted like a Christian. “No! ye should first of all learn the art
of earthly comfort, ye should learn to _laugh_, my young friends, if ye
are at all determined to remain pessimists: if so, you will perhaps,
as laughing ones, eventually send all metaphysical comfortism to the
devil--and metaphysics first of all! Or, to say it in the language of
that Dionysian ogre, called Zarathustra:

  “‘Lift up your hearts, my brethren, high, higher! And do not forget
  your legs! Lift up also your legs, ye good dancers--and better
  still if ye stand also on your heads!...

  “‘This crown of the laughter, this rose-garland crown--to you, my
  brethren, do I cast this crown! Laughing have I consecrated: ye
  higher men, _learn_, I pray you--to laugh!’”

It needs intoxication--of one Dionysian sort or another--to find such
incitements mirth-provoking. It is necessary to abandon all reasonable
grounds for comfort except the rather chilly one that we are physically
made of stardust, and therefore should rejoice to dissolve our living
complexity back into it. _Lazarus Laughed_ indeed arouses a fair
measure of the necessary intoxication, so imaginative and emotional is
it. But its comfort can last, I fear, only while we actually hear the
laughter of Lazarus.


V

Thus our most gifted American dramatist, together with other finer
spirits of to-day, is unable to accept traditional modes or satisfy
the desire for admiration and worship. Romanticism, in identifying man
with nature, hastened the decay of a heroic tradition which it at first
attempted to foster; and under scientific naturalism the decay ended
in dissolution. Whether the author uses a so-called “naturalistic”
technique after Ibsen or Maupassant; or whether, like Wedekind or
Jeffers or Cabell, he seeks other modes of expression, so long as he
thinks of man as in no way superior to the outer world or different
from it, he is none the less subject to the naturalistic point of
view.[41]

Recently, to be sure, certain developments of science have given rise
to hopes of mysticism within a naturalistic monism. The argument,
so far as an unscientific reader understands it, seems to run thus:
Einstein has offered proof that time and space form a continuum and
that events are “relative.” Studies of the atom have upset orthodox
conceptions of physics, and physicists themselves are beginning to
talk about matter in terms that sound for all the world like Bishop
Berkeley. Science admits a mysterious enveloping Unknown.

The new hypotheses, of course, merely re-enforce the acknowledgment of
ultimate mystery which thoughtful people have always made. The novelty
of the new mysticism is that it builds not on theology or metaphysics
but mathematics and laboratory experiment. The next step in its
argument is the dubious one.

If science grants an enveloping Unknown, the man who would explain
that Unknown in terms of his desires is as likely to be right as one
who explains it in inhuman terms. And if there is a chance that one’s
desires may be true, it needs no psychologist to assure us that plenty
of people will immediately assume that they are true. For them science
seems to justify mysticism and open the door for the hosts of dreams,
so long shut out of a rationalistic universe. But the weakness of
such wishful thinking seems obvious; and to the humanist the whole
argument is beside the point because it would vindicate human values by
naturalistic data.

If some scientists are nowadays growing mystical, it is not therefore
logical to deny the facts that their controlled experiments have
demonstrated. The dilemma of modern tragedy remains very real. There
is no refuge in obscurantism through return to illusions which science
has shattered. Reason denies the objective reality of our dreams; and
so long as the honest man accepts a monism which identifies man with
nature, he can find no justification for tragic exaltation.

The humanist, however, denies the necessity for this identification.
Without in the slightest degree disparaging the truth or worth of
physical knowledge he maintains that the realm of value has significant
validity when taken as distinct from the realm of fact. The realm of
value belongs to man; that of fact, to outer nature. One depends on the
other, but the two are different.

Value depends on the operation of physical laws, but it remains value.
The fallacy of the naturalist has been the assumption that to explain
the cause of a thing is to explain away its value. Human emotions may
be caused on the naturalistic plane by the secretion of endocrine
glands or what not; on the human plane they remain what they were to
Homer or Shakespeare. It is interesting to know about chromosomes
and Mendelian laws, about biochemistry and vital machinery; but human
values remain the same. Whatever the findings of science, man humanly
speaking is still what he always was: comic, pitiful, despicable--now
and then sublime.

The humanist is concerned with the realm of values, and thus is
concerned with ethical laws. The lives of all men progress under
these laws; and the endeavours of great men have been to discover and
formulate them. To the humanist it seems evident that literary art,
dealing as it does with human actions, must deal with ethical laws,
which are the foundation of conduct. And it would seem obvious folly to
attempt to divorce literature from them.

Romantic art as recreation is a blessing to jaded mortals; and
naturalistic art at its best is, within its limits, penetrating. But
to the humanist it seems that both types of art have failed in dealing
with ethical laws. The romantic is always an extremist, demanding
perfection, or denying the existence of goodness. The naturalist has
become so absorbed in the mechanism of the instrument that he has
become deaf to its music. The humanist desires emotional satisfaction;
he desires to face the truth. But he also wishes to preserve a
normal humanity in which human values are central. Though hearing
the revelations of science, he keeps his ear attuned to the music of
humanity. Though enjoying the thrills of liberated feeling, he is
unwilling to purchase them at the expense of moderation or proportion.
He believes not in prohibition but in temperance.

Ethical laws are what make man human, and it is these that the artist
must ponder. And to find guidance he cannot do better than follow
Arnold’s advice--not less sound for being tiresomely familiar--to know
the best that has been thought and said in the world. He must break
with the contemporary tradition of romantic scorn for tradition; he
must seek to become a part of the great tradition, by knowing the
best. To become a part of it does not mean to attempt mere imitation;
it means that the artist will be forevermore dissatisfied with
pettiness or insincerity in himself, and will have a lofty but possible
standard by which to measure his work.

Those who work in the “modern temper” are unable to discover a worthy
heroism to exalt. But if one turns to the records of classic art, he
will find a nobility of spirit no less admirable to-day than in the
past. His response will be an evidence of the existence of heroism,
a proof of its reality in human nature. It will be a proof of its
reality, of course, not in perfection but in aspiration. And if one
looks about him he will find the same aspiration in living men and
women. He will find it even expressed in deeds--imperfectly, humanly.
If he should be artist enough to give adequate expression to what
he feels and sees, he could rise above the dilemma against which
naturalism has forced our modern literature.

Cynicism will, to be sure, urge that every man finds what he looks
for, and to look for greatness will lead to a denial of evident
imperfections. The humanist professes himself not unaware of the
latter. Long before naturalist novelists pictured the _bête humaine_,
Christianity declared man innately evil; but unlike naturalism,
Christianity believed man capable of redemption by Grace. The humanist
as such is not concerned with theology, and is content to believe that
Grace, however it comes, is sometimes found. He is inclined to doubt
that it comes only to those who have joined a church; he is inclined
to believe that nobility is found now and again in all sorts and
conditions of men. But the main thing is that it exists; and no artist
who does not see the good with the evil sees life steadily and whole.

To follow the narrow path between cynicism and romantic idealisation;
to recognise the imperfections in man and the inevitable domination of
physical force over the individual, and yet to preserve admiration for
the indomitable spirit which drives the individual to will and to do
nobly; and finally to find adequate means of artistic expression--that
is the task of one who would write great tragedy. Though hard, it is
still possible. Only when the artist follows lofty standards can he
hope to control and guide his own efforts toward sublimity. While
humanism offers him no magic key to success, it offers him hope, and a
discipline.


FOOTNOTES

[37] I have considered the tragic emotions more fully in an article,
“Melodrama and Tragedy,” _Publications of the Modern Language
Association_, September, 1928.

[38] Since this paper was written my attention has been called to
“Humanism and Tragedy,” an admirable article by Mr. F. McEachran
(_Nineteenth Century and After_, July, 1929). Based on Professor
Babbitt’s three levels of human conduct, naturalistic, human, and
religious, Mr. McEachran’s thesis is that tragedy, since it demands an
assumption of human dignity, cannot develop in a naturalistic age like
the present, and is difficult in a religious one. The age of Pericles,
of Elizabeth, and of Louis XIV were humanistic; they were followed by
naturalistic decadence in which man and nature were equated and tragedy
became impossible. Mr. McEachran’s “human dignity” and my “heroism”
seem equivalent.

[39] It is to be noted, as further illustration of the anti-heroic
tendency of modern thought, that critics have sought to explain Hamlet
as not a hero but a psychopath. What Shakespeare wished his audience to
feel, however, seems open to no doubt.

[40] From _Roan Stallion, Tamar, and Other Poems_, Boni & Liveright,
1925.

[41] Should I remind the reader that in thus generalising I admit
exceptions? One such, whom I have discussed elsewhere (_Sewanee
Review_, April, 1929) is, in my opinion, Joseph Conrad.




