_Behaviour and Continuity_

BERNARD BANDLER II


I

Until humanism and psychology are more suitably defined than they are
at present the task of establishing their relations is hazardous.
Psychology is still in a primitive state: its basic problems and
principles are disputed, its relation to the other sciences is
undetermined, and its method is loose and unsystematic. That it may be
a science, however, is indubitable. The constitution of human nature
is open to analysis: human behaviour no less than the stars and plants
may be observed and hypothesis may be employed to order its seeming
irregularities. But the common scientific ground of purpose which
underlies the differences of psychological theories does not unite the
humanists, and the problem of stating the nature and scope of humanism
is correspondingly difficult. The absence of a common scientific
ground, of an accepted subject matter and a technique, enables any
man interested in human activities to call himself a humanist and to
maintain his contention, whereas no man, unless technically trained,
will consider himself a psychologist. He may observe society and
deliver himself of apothegms and epigrams that characterise people
truly--like the French moralists, La Rochefoucauld, La Bruyère, and
Joubert. He may trace the influence of ideas on conduct, as Mr. Babbitt
has done. But that is ethics and philosophy, not psychology. Psychology
limits itself to studying how human beings behave and to reducing their
most complex actions to primitive elements. Ethics evaluates their
activities and judges them. So, however confusing the positions of
contemporary psychologists and humanists, if we keep in mind the formal
aspects of psychology and ethics, a study of the relations of the two
may be instructive.

Upon psychology as a science, as upon physics and chemistry, humanism
can have nothing to say. It may examine the logic of psychology and
criticise its presuppositions, although that is properly the task of
the cosmologist, like Mr. Whitehead. But towards the conclusion of
psychology, the “laws” it may formulate, humanism’s only possible
attitude is one of interested acceptance. An ethics should not
prescribe the limits of science, nor dictate the nature of its results.
And if the science deals successfully with human actions, ethics,
instead of criticising, should respect its results, that ideals may not
be founded on ignorance and fancy but rather on knowledge.

Unfortunately, the amount of psychology which is scientific and
relevant to human nature is small. Much of it reduces to physiology.
The chemistry of the glands and blood, the nature of sensation,
feeling, emotion, and of the thinking processes, and those
predispositions of the body which we call instincts are ultimately
problems of physiology and await the development of that science for
their solution. What distinguishes psychology from physiology is the
study of behaviour in society: the transmutation of the instincts and
temperament into habits and sentiments. Of psychology proper we have,
so far, elaborate programmes, a bewildering variety of theories,--part
epistemology, part logic, part metaphysics, and part mythology,--a
vast accumulation of data, some classifications, and hardly any
science. Yet the studies of “types,” “personality,” “culture forms,”
and particularly the researches of psychiatrists contain many accurate
descriptions of human behaviour. Their endeavour to explain the most
sublimated actions, by reference to the constitution of the organism
and to the determining factors of its environment, approaches sound
science.

But “behaviour in society” and “the determining factors of environment”
are vague phrases. If there is to be a science of behaviour and society
two conditions are necessary: first, that the organisms in spite of
individual variations should be essentially the same; and second, that
the environment to which they react should be stable and limited. For
if each organism were essentially unique there would be no basis for
the science of psychology, and if the environment were constantly
changing there would be no conditions and no control for studying
the organism. But human environment, the totality of forces which
affect us and help satisfy our needs, is not stable and limited. It is
plastic and relative. Tradition and convention are added to the forces
composing an animal’s environment. These multiply the possibilities of
behaviour indefinitely. In proportion as a man frees himself from a
blind adherence to custom, the more personal his environment will be.
To know such a man’s environment is to become acquainted with a unique
world. It is to know not only his ancestry, his history, his habits,
his occupation, and his social milieu, but also his purposes, the ends
which he consciously seeks and which are the meaning of his actions to
him. It is to know his mind. But a mind, being unique, can never be
absolutely known. Even if it were completely revealed in behaviour,
conversation, and writing, and if all the occasions that have served to
form it were discovered, one could never be certain to capture a man’s
understanding of his words, or his interpretation of his attitude and
actions.

Behaviourists are therefore right in excluding consciousness, purpose,
and mind from psychology. These are inaccessible to science: first,
because they can never be precisely seized; and second, because they
introduce an indefinite number of objects which preclude a limited and
stable environment. Mind can reflect upon all objects of experience,
and these in turn can become objectives of action. So soon as this
happens the exact control which experimental science demands is
prevented and the progress of psychology is blocked. It thus seems
impossible for psychology to deal with the most interesting aspect
of human behaviour, those where action is guided and dominated by
thought and is not blindly reflexive. To avoid this limitation of
psychology certain behaviourists, in the name of what they conceive
to be mechanism, have denied the efficacy of purpose and mind
altogether. According to the argument, consciousness, purpose, and
mind are waste products, attendant upon natural processes, like sparks
from a locomotive. Or they are like the decorations on illuminated
manuscripts, illustrating the text, and quite superfluous. Otherwise
they would be forces, inexplicably interfering with natural processes.
These arguments fail by misconstruing the notion of purpose, which is
not a force but an end. Purpose does not direct action but _is_ the
direction which action takes. It is the rational explication of the
objects of our desires and wishes. The end has no initial power, but,
once thought has discerned it as the true object of our desires and
they have attached themselves to it, as a lover to his mistress, so
that satisfaction cannot be found elsewhere, then the end acquires a
deputed power which it may never surrender. Since purpose defines the
objects of desire which thereby become objectives of action, it is a
determining factor of human behaviour, and the so-called mechanistic
arguments against it are invalid. Yet, since science deals with
material and efficient causes only, psychologists are compelled to
disregard formal and final causes, purposes, and ends.


II

The goal of ethics, on the other hand, is to discover the most
organised system of ends, of goods, which a rational life can realise.
This goal of ethics can never be fully achieved, for so long as man
acts and reflects he may pursue and conceive novel ends. But though
the most elaborate system of ethics is in origin an expression of
personal preferences, it is not therefore arbitrary and unjustifiable
by reason. My values have their roots in my nature. I can exhibit
them, demonstrate that they are mutually consistent and do not defeat
the interests which underlie them. Furthermore I can declare that if
any one honestly questioned his heart he might find that my values
represented it. It is not to psychology, then, that one must turn for
knowledge of human goods. For psychology, although it may analyse the
efficient causes of desire, cannot estimate the value of its objects,
of the ideal form of a rational life. If psychologists talk of a normal
organism, they mean one whose desires are adjusted to its environment,
the one most likely to survive. If they speak of superior organisms
and civilisation, they mean increased ability for adjustment to a more
complex environment. Thus though psychologists speak of normal and
civilised they are unable either to define or to evaluate them.

Knowledge of human goods is furnished by philosophers, when they
are frank and speak for themselves; by the founders of religions,
the saints, and the mystics; by the poets, and chiefly, as Socrates
knew, by knowledge of oneself. Self-knowledge, though it may first
look back upon the behaviour studied by psychology, moves in the
opposite direction toward the objects sought. These it endeavours to
comprehend, to purge of contradictions, to regard intently _sub specie
mortalitatis_. From the vantage point of death one becomes a spectator
of human life. Thought acquires the prestige of impersonality, without
the sacrifice of its warm interest in life. The point of view of death
differs from seeing things _sub specie æternitatis_ both in essence
and in purpose. It does not abolish time or elevate mind to the
contemplation of a necessary order, which is the function of seeing
things _sub specie æternitatis_, although consideration of death (as in
the Phædo) may do this. It enables one to regard life in its totality
and, without projecting it against the background of nature, to
estimate each partial aim in the perspective of all others, and thus to
distinguish the objects one truly desires.

The effort to detach oneself from the present and to incorporate it
with the past and future in a satisfactory whole, which psychology
does not attempt, is what makes action ethical. In the unique self the
past exists in memory, which is one’s personal tradition. Thus memory,
besides being the mother of the muses, is the mother of ethics and
of rational action. It enables us to confront our present condition,
its projects, hopes, and fears, with the past, and by comparison
to evaluate the present action. It enables us to utilise the whole
of our experience in the active organisation of our life and thus
to attain a continuity of being. Consequently a succession of full
moments does not, as Pater thought, constitute a full life. For each
of those separate selves which a past moment represented and which
the subsequent one renounced lives in memory to advance its claim to
existence against the present; and only similar circumstances are
needed, a chance odour, or gesture, or phrase, to revive it, and make
one feel the desolation of its loss. These intermittances of the heart,
as Proust calls them, are dependent on the infinite passive occasions
of sensation, and since they never represented an ideal actively
striven for, no analysis is able to penetrate to an underlying unity.
On the other hand the consequence of dispossessing oneself of the past
in order to live in the moment is a reduction of the personality to
indecision and apathy. Besides, the past preserved in memory and the
future that we anticipate enrich the present and give it its fulness
of being, as a musical phrase has more significance in a symphony than
when played in isolation.

As one interrogates the present, with its What shall I do? What shall
I be? it expands to absorb the relevant testimony that relates it to
the past and to the future. Ordinarily the present includes a fairly
definite content, some concrete situation and prospect, often trivial,
as a dinner to be ordered. Choice when it is not automatic can easily
review the relevant factors; one’s favourite dishes, the season of
the year; possible illness on the morrow. At other times the relevant
relations are endless, particularly when an irrevocable choice forces
us to discriminate among all the elements of our being: love, honour,
country, and religion each claiming our allegiance. The infinite
variety of situations that may arise and the impossibility of relating
them to a definite past and a definite future are responsible for the
differences of ethical systems. A philosopher’s conception of the
typical situation will define his problems and dictate the general
terms of his solution. Buddha saw sorrow and suffering as the main
portion of human existence. His endeavour, therefore, was to emancipate
mankind from them. Aristotle started with man’s desire for happiness.
Therefore he analysed the actions of men, the pursuit of wealth, of
honour, and of knowledge to see which conformed most with the essential
nature of man. Amiel’s situation was intensely personal, but he stated
his problem in universal terms. Amiel recognised from his youth the
necessity of an organising purpose and a continuous effort. His culture
and sympathies, however, extended to all human actions; to limit his
life to one of the manifold beings he felt contained within himself
seemed a violation of the ideal.

Now what is the context, the appropriate situation and problem, from
which ethics should start? Is it some general aspect of life common
to all people, like sorrow or suffering, or the generic nature of
man, or the attempt to discover an organising purpose? Or is it our
immediate context, the world to which our traditions, conduct, desires,
and ambitions have engaged us? It is this world that confronts us
daily. Our actions in it are the theme of the novel, the drama, and
the epic, which are an almost inexhaustible field for ethical study.
Each work is a representation of an action, and in proportion as the
writer concentrates his imagination on the situation before him, on his
_donnée_, and reveals its possibilities, the action will illustrate
some ideal. Literature always retains the concrete immediacy of life,
the movement of an action never being from a situation to a principle.
But all the comprehensiveness of a principle, the innumerable
unsuspected relations which it opens when once intuition has leapt the
gap between a formula and the fact it covers is implied by an action
at its close. The characters are still flesh and blood, but as they
finally define themselves their situation includes all their relevant
past and all that is significant in their future, so that they become
transparent, and the whole moral world which they represent shines
clearly through them. Hence it is possible that a profound ethics and a
great work of art may introduce us to the same moral world, so that the
orientation of our being, emotional and intellectual, after reading the
_Ethics_ of Spinoza and _The Wings of the Dove_ say, will be identical.

If ethics is to be persuasive and reasonable it must be founded on the
most complete experience possible. The context from which it arises,
as in life and literature, should be rich and concrete. The defect of
most ethical systems is that they quit life too abruptly. Instead
of studying the complex conditions which underlie any achieved good,
as psychology is contented to do, philosophers ignore them, except
in their generality, and so attain a factitious unity. Consequently
rationalistic philosophers invert the proper procedure of thought.
They start from the typical, the general, and the rational, whereas
these are the ultimate fruits of reflection. When an ethics, however,
repudiates the purpose of rationalism as well as its method, it severs
itself from all connection with the good. If it speaks of goods and
ideals, it speaks of them only provisionally and instrumentally. Its
excessive preoccupation with the conditions marks the return of ethics
to that immersion in the present from which it initially arose.

Humanism differs from other ethical systems by its data and by its
method. Its data are each individual in his context; his inherited
values, his body, his capabilities, and the relations formed by them.
It is the task of each individual to preserve himself in the world,
and to establish a continuity of being. The essence of humanism is the
refusal to allow any sudden break of development, any shift of basis
that arbitrarily repudiates one’s past, such as breaking one’s word.
Its method is to survey life in the light of death. By this means one’s
personal situation can be enlarged by history, and by the contemplation
of the ideals which men pursue. The more vivid the conception of
an ideal society and a rational life within it, so long as it does
not weaken one’s personal reality, the more likely is life to yield
happiness.

Psychology and ethics deal with the same subject matter, human
behaviour, but they regard it from opposite points of view. Psychology
regards it externally as a physical phenomenon having already taken
place in time. Like any other science psychology tries to correlate
its diverse data and to reduce them to the simplest elements possible.
But since psychology requires that the organisms which it studies
should be essentially the same and that the environment to which they
react should be stable and limited, it cannot deal with the behaviour
dominated by mind. For mind is unique and its possible objects are
infinite. Its language is that of meaning, purpose, end. The effort of
a moral individual is to know what he wants, to know his mind. Hence
ethics regards human behaviour internally and as directed towards the
future. The goal of ethics is the satisfactory synthesis of the unique
perspectives of different minds. It approximates this synthesis by
studying the dialectic of desire, the logical implications of each
purpose in relation to all other objects. In this way ethics will
describe ideally how an individual may harmonise with himself and with
society, which psychology can never do, and thus point the way to
happiness.




