_Pandora’s Box in American Fiction_

HARRY HAYDEN CLARK


America, Carlyle wrote Emerson, “is verily the Door of Hope to
distracted Europe; which otherwise I should see crumbling down into
blackness of darkness.”

The Door of Hope! It is perhaps time now to ask down what corridors
this door has led, to scrutinise the precise quality of American hope.
Is it a new hope, or a disguised form of the European hope which has
led “to blackness of darkness”? What, for example, have our fiction
writers, reflecting the American mind, past and present, reported
regarding the success of their quest for happiness? If they have
reported that certain sorts of hope have led to despair, what evidence
is there that other sorts lead to joy? For “the desire for happiness,”
says Arnold, “is the root and ground of man’s being. Tell him and show
him that he places his happiness wrong, that he seeks for delight where
delight will never really be found; then you illumine and further
him.” Let us sketch the quality, first, of the hope of a paradise of
supernal beauty; second, the hope of an American paradise of nature;
and finally, the hope of “A Paradise _within_ thee, happier far.”


I

If we consider the European background of the hope to escape to a
paradise of supernal beauty and bliss, we find that in the classical
legends of the Golden Age, in such Renaissance writers as Lyly,
Sidney, and Spenser, and in such later work as Thomson’s _Castle of
Indolence_, this idyllic Arcadianism was either frankly recreational
and non-philosophic or else a cloak for allegory. Not until the middle
of the eighteenth century was the idyllic dream taken seriously.
Revolting from earlier and contemporary restriction of the imagination,
Akenside advocated refusing to “restrain” one’s “soaring fancy,” Joseph
Warton glorified the “creative and glowing imagination,” and Edward
Young sought to escape “this pestilential earth” by the “creative
power” of the imagination to call forth paradisiacal beauties, “shadowy
beings and unknown worlds,” in the “vast void beyond real existence.”
He exalted a genius which was to “wander wild” in “the fairy land of
fancy,” “reign arbitrarily over its own empire of chimeras,” and “sport
with its infinite objects uncontrolled.” Thus in _Vathek_ Beckford
created a sensuous and erotic paradise with its five palaces which he
destined “for the particular gratification of each of the five senses.”
“The light that never was, on sea or land,” enthralled the youthful
Wordsworth, but he soon questioned it as a “fond illusion.” Keats
sought to escape on “the viewless wings of Poesy” from the “weariness”
of actuality to the “charmed magic casements.” Shelley, the high priest
of this ceaseless and aimless quest for the unattainable, tells us
that only his “fearful and monstrous” story of _The Cenci_ is “a sad
reality”; otherwise he “dreams of what ought to be, or what may be.”
For him the Spirit of Beauty leaves “This dim vast vale of tears,
vacant and desolate.” His is a longing indeterminate, a

            “devotion to something afar
  From the sphere of our sorrow.”

  “I loved I know not what--but this low sphere,
  And all that it contains, contains not thee.”

_Alastor_ and _Epipsychidion_ are matchless records of his fruitless
quest for the phantom of desire. DeQuincey’s fantasies are “filled
with perishing dreams, and the wrecks of forgotten deliriums.” _The
Lady of Shalott_ and _The Palace of Art_ testify to Tennyson’s
reluctant renunciation of the life of illusion. Swinburne characterised
himself in _A Nympholept_, while his friend, the author of _The Earthly
Paradise_, strove to

               “build a shadowy isle of bliss
  Midmost the beating of the steely sea.”

With this background in mind, let us see to what extent the American
story-tellers’ hope for a paradise of supernal beauty coincides with
the idyllic, indeterminate hope of the English romanticists. In _The
Author’s Account of Himself_, Irving, our first master of the short
story, states his Old World longing “to escape, in short, from the
common-place realities of the present,” to “the shadowy grandeurs
of the past,” the “earthly paradise” of “Bellissima Granada” and
the legend-haunted Alhambra. _The Legend of Prince Ahmed al Kamel_,
dealing with the quest for the phantom of desire, illustrates the
idyllic quality of his imagination. The Prince, called the “Perfect”
on account of his “super-excellence,” receives from a dove tidings
of a fair princess--“no flower of the field could compare with her
for loveliness.” In the Spanish spring-time the Prince, a “pilgrim of
love,” resolves to “seek this unknown princess throughout the world.”
Guided by a parrot and an owl, he eventually finds her in the court of
her hostile father. The lover produces his “silken carpet of the throne
of Solomon,” and after confessing his devotion, “the carpet rose in
the air, bearing off the prince and princess ... and then disappeared
in the blue vault of heaven.” Irving, however, sought “escape ... from
the common-place” not only in the picturesque fantasies of Old Spain
but also in the glamorous aspects of the American past, as illustrated
in _The Legend of Sleepy Hollow_. In “a remote period of American
history,” among “some of the goodliest scenes of the mighty Hudson,”
Ichabod rides on a “fine autumnal day” through the “rich and golden
livery” of a natural paradise to win the “peerless,” “ripe and melting
and rosy-cheeked Katrina” and her “unimaginable luxury.” Introduced
by lines from _The Castle of Indolence_, _The Legend_ illustrates
Irving’s somewhat sentimental and humorous continuation of the merely
recreational Arcadianism of earlier days. And the ruse of the Headless
Horseman, in connection with the “twilight superstitions” of one who
was “a perfect master of Cotton Mather’s _History of New England
Witchcraft_,” suggests the interesting tendency of the native Puritan
interest in things unearthly, with the waning of faith, to become a
subject for the æsthetic imagination as in the case of Hawthorne and
Poe.

Unlike Irving, Poe takes the idyllic dream seriously. He defines
the Poetic Principle as “simply the Human Aspiration for Supernal
Beauty,” manifested “in an elevating excitement of the Soul.” Of
course, as every one knows, his vigorous reason controlled the decadent
imagination and emotion of the earlier Gothic school and made him
perhaps our greatest master of the short story technique. But let us
illustrate and define the content of his “aspiration,” his “elevating
excitement of the Soul.” Where does he seek happiness? One thinks of
the “delirious bliss” of “the Valley of the Many-Coloured Grass” in
_Eleanora_. We might better, however, turn to _The Domain of Arnheim_,
where Ellison, with “_a fortune of four hundred and fifty million
dollars_,” seeks to satisfy his passion for an exclusively “physical
loveliness,” his “four elementary conditions of bliss,” which are
“free exercise,” “the love of woman,” “contempt of ambition,” and “an
object of unceasing pursuit.” After a four year quest he finds in the
“luxuriant nature of the Pacific Islands” “an elevated tableland of
wonderful fertility and beauty”; it was the “Paradise of Arnheim,”
combining everything rich and voluptuous. Ellison, however, sought to
gratify the “one passion of his soul, the thirst for beauty,” “above
all ... in the sympathy of a woman, not unwomanly, whose loveliness
and love enveloped his existence in the pure atmosphere of Paradise.”
Thus the content of Poe’s aspiration, as well as his references here
to the “chimera of the perfectionists” “Turgot, Price, Priestley and
Condorcet,” to “Fonthill,” the birthplace of _Vathek_, and to the “rapt
day-dreams of De Staël,” suggest that his aspiration is essentially one
with that ceaseless and aimless sensuous longing already illustrated in
the English romanticists. Or take _The Island of the Fay_, which deals
with the contemplation of “the glory of God” in “natural scenery”--“all
within the Spirit Divine”--in a “rivulet and island,” “all one
radiant harem of garden beauties.” Shelley-like, he sees approach the
“enchanted” island a gentle Fay in a “fragile canoe” with a “phantom
of an oar.” This vision of loveliness, however, passed “disconsolately
with her boat into the region of the ebony flood,” and “darkness fell
over all things and I beheld her magical figure no more.” Thus, as
Professor Foerster has so finely said, Poe gives us only “shuddering
harmonies of the murky subconscious, and roseate harmonies of
sensuous longing posing as spirituality.... His vision oscillated not
between the earthly and the supernal, but between the infernal and
the Arcadian.” But what did Poe report regarding the success of his
aspiration for supernal beauty? “To be thoroughly conversant with Man’s
heart,” he concludes, “is to take our final lesson in the iron-clasped
volume of Despair.” Thinking of writing a book on his life, he said:
“No man will ever dare write it. No man could write it, even if he
dared. The paper would shrivel and blaze at every touch of the fiery
pen.”

Perhaps the most vigorous and passionate Arcadian in American
literature is Herman Melville, mariner and mystic. Descended from Dutch
and New England parents proud and conservative, Melville was driven
to “the water world,” he tells us, by “sad disappointments ... united
with a naturally roving disposition.” He deserted his ship and found
in the valley of the Typees “perpetual hilarity. Surrounded by all the
luxurious provisions of nature,” the innocent natives enjoy the idyllic
bliss “that springs principally from that all-pervading sensation which
Rousseau told us he at one time experienced: the mere buoyant sense of
healthful, physical existence.” This was before the missionaries and
“the worst attendances of civilisation” drove “all peace and happiness
from the valley.” In _Mardi_, frankly idyllic and nympholeptic, devoted
to the savages “as they are not,” Melville’s nostalgic idealism and his
hatred of reality become intensified. Here he creates a dream-girl,
Yillah, “the earthly semblance of that sweet vision, that haunted my
earliest thought,” and the book is a record of the allegorical quest
for her through all the nations of the earth. It follows Unitarianism
and Transcendentalism, with their hope for the infinite perfectibility
of men; it is the quest of _Alastor_ and _Epipsychidion_, the quest
of Novalis for the Blue Flower. “But fiery yearnings their own
phantom-future make, and deem it present. So, if after all these
fearful, fainting trances, the verdict be, the golden haven was not
gained;--yet, in bold quest thereof better to sink in boundless deeps
than float on vulgar shoals; and give me, ye gods, an utter wreck,
if wreck I do.” If Melville fled, however, “not so much bound to any
haven ahead as rushing from all havens astern”--such as the “Babylonish
brick-kiln of New York,” “Commonness and Conventionalism,” “mines
and marts,” and Democracy, “the harlot on horseback”--his first-hand
experience with the reality of a sea red in tooth and claw as well as
“the mystery of iniquity” tended to clash with his dreams of Utopia.
_Moby-Dick_ was born of this clash between the hope of a paradise of
supernal beauty and the sight of a malignant reality from the deck of a
whaler. We have his own commentary on the final results of nympholeptic
longing:

  “Explain this darkness, exorcise this devil, ye cannot.... The
  truest of men was the Man of Sorrows, and the truest of all books
  is Solomon’s, and the Ecclesiastes is the fine hammered steel of
  woe. All is vanity. All.... He who ... calls Cowper, Young, Pascal,
  Rousseau, poor devils all of sick men.... And your only Mardian
  happiness is but exemption from great woes--no more.... Sadness
  makes the silence throughout the realms of space; Sadness is
  universal and eternal.”

Let us skip the realism of the later nineteenth century, most of which
is essentially arid, and approach such a figure as Floyd Dell. Born
of autobiographical revery, _Moon-Calf_ is the history of a “lonely,
unhappy, desperately desiring and bewildered child” in various Middle
Western towns as he sought refuge in dreams from “the mysterious and
troublesome real world which he feared and disliked.” The avenues of
escape are two: the “gorgeous fantasies which were unrolled for him in
the pages of books,” and the quest of the dream-girl. Lured by the hope
of “freedom, of happiness, of a world altogether new and beautiful,”
Felix becomes a Socialist, only to find later that “that garret
Utopia had somehow lost its savour.” He becomes a factory worker--in
the chaste language of his boss, “the messiest, absent-mindedest,
God-damn carelessest person he had ever seen around a factory.” And
then he tries newspaper work, and is again discharged. Then “he wanted,
with a kind of nostalgia, to write that novel.” Like Shelley, he
sought refuge from a world to which he refused to adjust himself by
turning “his gaze inward upon a world of ideas and dreams.” As Wheels
says, “The world itself is hideous. You can’t do anything with it.
But you can dream beautiful dreams.... There is no other beauty.”
An “incorrigible Utopian,” a member of the Agnostic Society, Felix
escaped to poetry--an “enchanted land”--loving the “drug-like beauty”
of “words, which were like a perfumed breeze out of nowhere, or out of
some strange life lived before, affecting him with a strange nostalgia.”

  “Nay, I was sent a wanderer
  On Beauty’s desperate quest--
  To go forever seeking Her,
  Nor, ere I find her, rest.”

And then there is the quest for the dream-girl. First there is Rose,
the gardener’s daughter, whom he meets in the attic and to whom he
reads Rousseau’s _Confessions_. One night they stay in the woods,
watching the stars, and “awakened chill and stiff, a little before
dawn.” In “the innermost caves of fantasy” she was the “Virgin Queen”
of Atlantis, and he her Harper.... “She was ... hope that turns to
despair.” And then there was Margaret, Helen Raymond, Daisy Fisher,
Emily, Mrs. Miller, Lucy, and finally Joyce, with whom he spent the
nights in the cabin. He explains to Joyce that he seeks “something
better than just ordinary, everyday happiness,” that he doesn’t believe
in private property, God, the home, or the support of one’s wife. He
wants a companionship “at once light and gracious, irresponsible and
sincere, generous and self-respecting!” Finally he felt “a discrepancy
between her and a not very distinct ideal of his imagination.” He
“clung to the memory of his shadow-land of ideas” in preference to the
“world of desperate reality,” and when his beloved Joyce tells him she
is to work out her human destiny with another the “world of his dreams
fell shattering about him.” Obviously, _Moon-Calf_ is the creation of
the sort of hope which robbed Shelley of “peace within.”

Let us turn to Willa Cather, whose main theme is the struggle for
æsthetic or emotional self-realisation amid the sordid environment
of either the frontier or an industrial society. In _O Pioneers!_
most piteous is the fate of the fair Marie Tovesky, murdered in the
arms of her lover. In _The Song of the Lark_ Thea Kronsburg develops
her rare voice in spite of a gossipy Colorado town. “There is only
one big thing--desire.” In _My Ántonia_ the heroine says, “That is
happiness--to be dissolved in something complete and great.” Her lust
for richness of experience leads to her becoming an unmarried mother
and finally the mother of a large family. In _Youth and the Bright
Medusa_ a typical story is that of Paul, whose longing for an æsthetic
paradise in a flatly stolid industrial town led him to robbery and
to suicide after a week’s fulfilment of his hopes. Most instructive,
perhaps, is _The Professor’s House_, based on the fruitless struggle of
the romantic spirit against materialism and convention. The Professor
does not “think much of science as a phase of human development”; he
resisted the new “commercialism” in education; he preferred his old
dingy study to the one in the pretentious house which his worldly
wife and daughters had planned; he loathes the petty quarrels of his
daughters over fashions; and his wife accuses him of “shutting yourself
away from everybody.” In place of materialism and convention, however,
he seeks to substitute not a central interest in what is most richly
and typically human but rather a refuge in the romantic past: in the
pomp of the Middle Ages when man was “a principal in a gorgeous drama
with God”; in the bygone glories of the Spanish adventurers; in
reliving in revery his youth, “the realest of his lives”; in the loving
study of many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore; and in his
interest in his former student’s worship of the ancient Cliff-dwellers.
The seemingly irrelevant interpolation of Tom Outland’s story of his
inability to interest official Washington, “so petty, so slavish,”
in his “religious emotion” regarding his discovery of the relics of
the Cliff-dwellers is explained by its paralleling and under-scoring
the Professor’s own struggle--the romantic spirit struggling in vain
against materialism and convention. Finally, when the Professor’s
family departed for Europe, he “thought of eternal solitude with
gratefulness,” and “wanted to run away from everything he had intensely
cared for.” One night while he is resting in his old study a storm
blows out his gas stove and slams his window shut: he awakens to find
himself “nearly asphyxiated”; he wished to die. “He hadn’t lifted his
hand against himself--was he required to lift it for himself?” He
cannot bear the thought of his wife’s return and the continuation of
their way of life. Finally an old friend revives him, but he found that
“he had let something go--and it was gone: something very precious.”
He reflects that “his apathy” will not trouble a family “preoccupied
with their own affairs.” No, the merely romantic devotion to what is
picturesque in the storied past will never avail in the quest for peace
in a conventional and materialistic environment.

Like Poe, Joseph Hergesheimer strives to escape “the dreary and
impertinent duty of improving the world” in his worship of an
unattainable beauty. His friend Mr. Cabell finds “in all the
Hergesheimer novels” “men labouring toward the unattainable, and a
high questing foiled.” For example, in _Linda Condon_, based on this
theme, Peyton, a sculptor, seeks in vain to win the beautiful Linda,
who marries another. The sculptor endeavours to sublimate his passion
in the creation of a great statue, which is destroyed by a mob, and he
dies in forlorn desolation.

  “Love was the supreme force, and its greatest expression a desire
  beyond the body.... The endless service of beauty. Of course,
  a woman--but never the animal; the spirit always. Born in the
  spirit, served in the spirit, ending in the spirit. A direct
  contradiction, you see, to nature and common sense, frugality and
  the sacred symbol of the dollar.... The old gesture toward the
  stars, the bridge of perfection, the escape from the fatality of
  the flesh. Yet it was a service of the body made incredibly lovely
  in actuality and still never to be grasped. Never to be won.”

This spiritualised beauty, however, is of course dependent upon
sensuousness, and Mr. Hergesheimer asserts that “the whole discharge
of my responsibility was contained in the imperative obligation to
... put down the colours and scents and emotions of existence.” And,
like Keats, like all who found life on a merely sensuous beauty,
he is haunted by the dread of transience, by “that sharp sense of
beauty which came from a firm, delicate consciousness of certain high
pretensions, valours, maintained in the face of imminent destruction
... in the category none was sharper than the charm of a woman, soon to
perish in a vanity of array as momentary and iridescent as a May-fly.”
He tells us that he creates ideal beauty as a result of “the assault of
a persuasive discontent.” Nothing matters but an unattainable sensuous
beauty; and this merely impresses him with its evanescence. This
transient beauty can be arrested only by art, and he begins a later
essay on art with the words, “I am getting damned tired of art....”

Perhaps the endless and aimless longing for the unattainable has
received most elaborate treatment at the hands of Mr. Hergesheimer’s
friend, James Branch Cabell. In _Beyond Life_, a series of essays,
he outlines his literary creed, his hostility to realism. Holding
that “veracity is the one unpardonable sin,” he “perceives this race
... to be beyond all wording petty and ineffectual,” and he follows
the “instinct of any hurt animal to seek revenge ... in the field
of imagination” by retreating to Poictesme, “that fair country ...
which is bounded by Avalon and Phæacia and Sea-coast Bohemia, and
the contiguous forests of Arden and Broceliande, and on the west of
course by the Hesperides.” Let us examine the quality and success
of Mr. Cabell’s aspiration as embodied in _The Cream of the Jest_.
Felix Kennaston, the hero, is actually a conventional novelist, a
conservative property-owner, a Presbyterian, and a good husband.
Inwardly, however, he is a dreamer who seeks to escape from the
thralldom of actuality in his quest of “Ettarre, who embodied all
Kennaston was ever able to conceive of beauty and fearlessness and
strange purity, all perfections, all the attributes of divinity,
in a word, such as his slender human faculties were competent to
understand.” “It is the cream of a vile jest,” he says, “that I am
forbidden ever to win quite to you, ever to touch you.” These magic
dreams of Ettarre are induced by a sigil--a broken disc which Felix
found on one of his walks. Finally, near his death, it is discovered
that this magic sigil is only “the metal top of a cold cream jar,”
and his dreams become a tale told by an idiot, signifying nothing.
This is perhaps the blackest pessimism in American literature--the
conviction that reality is a “dragging nightmare,” and the discovery
that the illusion which alone makes life bearable is founded on nothing
more sacred than the broken “top of a cold cream jar.” And it should
be noted that, all Mr. Cabell’s books being parts of a “Biography,”
Felix is nothing less than a symbol of “humanity.” “His history was,
in essentials, the history of our race thus far. All I advanced for or
against him, was true of all men that have ever lived.”

_Jurgen_ may be said to deal mainly with the poignancy of the
realisation of the contrast between the veiled loveliness of youthful
illusions and a cold and ugly sensuous reality; relief is sought
through an escape from this reality in dreaming of these illusions now
shattered, or in dreaming of new illusions. In actuality, Jurgen is
only a dirty little pot-bellied pawn-broker of the Middle Ages married
to a shrewish, cowardly wife. Through magic, however, he is enabled to
pack into one year “the follies of a quarter of a century,” to seek
through a land of fabulous loveliness the phantom of desire. There he
meets Dorothy la Désirée, “in all things perfect,” as he had loved
her in the “garden between Dawn and Sunrise”; in reality she was a
“horrible lascivious woman.” And there in her robe of flaming silk is
the young Guenevere, “the fairest of mortal women”; there is the Queen
Sylvia Tereu of pallid charm who vanishes at dawn; there is Anaitis,
the personification of a nature myth, with her ecstatic rites and
sensual orgies; there is the plump Chloris, loveliest of Hamadryads;
there is Queen Helen, for whose fabulous beauty he hungered even in
childhood; there is the proud Dolores, “lovely as a hawk is lovely”;
there is Florimel who dwelt by the Sea of Blood; and there is Phyllis,
Satan’s wife, “the loveliest little slip of devilishness.” Of one and
all Jurgen tires. His remark that his “tender heart and tolerably keen
eyes” force him “to jeer out of season” to avoid “far more untimely
tears” reminds us of the Bohemian Byron who finally confesses with
infinite sadness:

  “If I laugh at any mortal thing,
    ’Tis that I may not weep; and if I weep,
  ’Tis that our nature cannot always bring
    Itself to apathy.”

And in the end we have Jurgen’s Shelley-like admission of the futility
and hopelessness of his aimless longing:

  “Oh, nothing can help me, for I do not know what thing it is that
  I desire!... For I am Jurgen who seeks he knows not what.... I have
  gone romancing through the world, ... nowhere have I found what I
  desired.... I am compact of weariness and apprehension, for I no
  longer discern what thing is I, nor what is my desire, and I fear
  that I am already dead.”

It is evident, then, that in the hope for a paradise of supernal
beauty Americans have been lured as by a Siren to an abyss of despair
of which the English romanticists, who experimented with this idyllic
hope, warned us over a century ago. The Edward Young who sported in
his paradisiacal “empire of chimeras” “cast the total” of his life as
“despair.” Keats reported that in the romantic “Temple of Delight”

  “Veiled Melancholy has her sovran shrine.”

And Shelley of the iridescent dreams, who would

              “Hope till Hope creates
  From its own wreck the thing it contemplates,”

confessed in the end:

  “Alas! I have nor hope nor health,
    Nor peace within nor calm around.”

Very beautiful are these rainbow visions--but they are conjured out of
night.


II

Let us turn to a second sort of hope--the hope of an American paradise
of nature. Although the paradise of nature appears in Vergil, in
Renaissance pastorals by Lyly, Sidney, and Spenser, in Perdita’s
shepherd home and in the sylvan cave of Cymbeline’s sons, its use
was mainly either decorative or allegorical until the eighteenth
century. In 1711 Shaftesbury proclaimed the natural man benevolent,
compassionate, and altruistic; and as such he appears in _Ossian_. Pope
said, “The state of Nature was the reign of God.” Rousseau broadcast
the doctrine that civilisation had tended to corrupt the morals of
mankind, while he described the enchanting life of man in a natural
paradise. Cowper united literary simplicity, religious emotionalism,
and the naturalistic humanitarianism of Rousseau. Burns glorified the
simple peasant close to nature. And Coleridge and Southey dreamed
fondly of an American Pantisocracy--“A Dell of Peace and Equality”--on
the banks of the Susquehanna. In 1771, Philip Freneau, our first man
of letters, deriving his radical democracy and his devotion to the
indigenous scene from naturalism, envisaged “The Rising Glory of
America”:

  “A new Jerusalem, sent down from heaven,
  Shall grace our happy earth, ...
  Thence called _Millennium_. Paradise anew
  Shall flourish, by no second Adam lost ...
  No tempting serpent to allure the soul
  From native innocence.”

Indeed, it is interesting to speculate upon the extent to which
this English romantic faith in the “native innocence” of mankind,
transplanted to the inexhaustible resources of the American frontier,
has under these unique conditions furnished philosophic sanction
for an unbridled materialism which has become so characteristically
national. Frontier isolation tended to breed self-confidence, equality,
self-reliance, optimism, contempt for artificial distinctions and a
dependence upon the material world. Crèvecœur in 1782 defined “an
American” as a “new man who acts upon new principles.”

  “We have no princes, for whom we toil, starve, and bleed: we are
  the most perfect society now existing in the world. Here man is
  free as he ought to be.”

Our first novelist who sought a paradise of American nature was James
Fenimore Cooper. Revolting against both the feudalism of aristocratic
Europe and the crude democracy of Jacksonian America, Cooper sought
refuge in projecting his ideals in the character of Leatherstocking
and also in such a Utopian paradise as in _The Crater_. Whatever one
may think of Cooper’s Indians, his “females,” his woodcraft, or his
rhetoric, Leatherstocking remains a great contribution to the fiction
of the world, “perhaps,” according to Professor Paine, “the greatest
embodiment of native character in American literature.” He is strangely
compounded of Cooper’s memories of his old hunter-friend Shipman, of
the heroic saga of the early frontiersman as synthesised in Daniel
Boone, of the Rousseauistic-Wordsworthian myth of the natural man
spiritualised by contact with forest and stream, and of the idealism of
American manhood. According to Cooper’s summary,

  “... His feelings appeared to possess the freshness and nature of
  the forest in which he passed so much of his time, and no casuist
  could have made clearer decisions in matters relating to right and
  wrong.... In short ... he was a fair example of what a just-minded
  and pure man might be, while untempted by unruly or ambitious
  desires, and left to follow the bias of his feelings, amid the
  solitary grandeur and ennobling influences of a sublime nature.”

In 1828, however, we find Cooper disillusioned: “All attempts to blend
history and romance in America have been comparative failures....
The baldness of American life is in deadly hostility to scenic
representation.” And in _The Crater_ (1847) we find him creating a
Utopia in a fabulous mid-Pacific island in order to furnish a contrast
to the wretchedness of contemporary American life. This is a story
of how some folk, shipwrecked on a reef which is the crater of a
volcano, succeed in causing vegetation to grow, of how they create
a “settlement surrounded with a sort of earthly paradise” which is
finally “buried beneath the ocean.” The story, as Cooper conceives it,
is a parable: “Of such is the world and its much-coveted advantages.
For a time our efforts seem to create, and to adorn, and to perfect,
until we forget our origin and destination, substituting self for that
divine hand ...” Already, in _The Monikins_ (1835), born of bitter
disenchantment, Cooper the former idealist had presented the world as
a country ruled by a race of monkeys who laughed to scorn the Yahoo
race of mankind. The hope of an American paradise of nature ended for
Cooper in disillusionment; natural goodness, democracy, human ideals
are revealed here as sounding brass and tinkling cymbals. Professor
Pattee compares Cooper’s final pessimism with that of Mark Twain: “Both
began as border-minded individualists, parochial-minded, intoxicated
with American idealism; both by travel and by wide contacts with urban
pessimism were educated into blasé cosmopolitanism ... and both went
out at last in utter misanthropy.... It is an American evolution!”

The most significant history of our national quest for a material
happiness is perhaps embodied in the work of Mark Twain, whose
much-discussed pessimism may be explained mainly by the fact that,
as the spokesman of frontier America living exclusively “in the
present,” he served as the faithful mirror to a whole nation in which
an Industrial Revolution, philosophic mechanistic determinism, and
the collapse of illusions led to despair. His stories illustrate the
changing importance of the two planes of consciousness in the frontier
mind--the consciousness of a hopeful and radiant illusion, and the
consciousness of a hopeless and sordid reality. Take three stories,
representing three different periods. _The Jumping Frog_ (1865),
dealing with the winning of a bet by roguery, embodies in a humorous
way the reckless exuberance and joyousness of the dawning West after
the Gold Rush. To this type belong also the books which glorify the
“natural man” and the free-born American--_Roughing It_ (1873), _Tom
Sawyer_ (1876), _Life on the Mississippi_ (1883), and _Huck Finn_
(1884). In contrast, his first book, _Innocents Abroad_ (1869),
represents the frontiersman’s life-long contempt for European tradition
and Europe, “one vast museum of magnificence and misery,” groping “in
the midnight of priestly superstition for sixteen hundred years.” A
story of a second period, _The Million Pound Bank Note_ (1893) mirrors
a materialistic “gilded age” in which, lured on by a fabulous hope,
men bowed to the Golden Calf while the spectre of reality haunted
their thoughts. In this story the two planes of consciousness are in
equipoise until the end, when the plane of illusion prevails. It is
the tale, briefly, of how a poor tramp masquerades as the owner of a
million pound bank note; grim poverty stalks behind him, but every
one worships the illusion of his wealth, and he finally wins the girl
of his heart as well as the million pounds. The story is a parable of
the West: these were the days of illusory fortunes in transcontinental
railroads, in iron and steel, the days of the Morgans and Carnegies
and Fricks and Goulds. “I am,” said Mark Twain, “frightened at the
proportion of my prosperity ... Whatever I touch turns to gold.” In
1895 he was bankrupt. But take a story representative of the third
period--_The $30,000 Bequest_ (1907). A poor book-keeper and his wife,
learning of a promised fortune at the death of a relative, each night
“put the plodding world away, and lived in another and a fairer,
reading romances to each other, dreaming dreams, comrading with kings
and princes.” They increasingly neglect realities and scorn their
associates. “The castle-building habit, the day-dreaming habit--how it
grows! What a luxury it becomes; how we revel in them, steep our souls
in them, intoxicate ourselves with their beguiling fantasies--oh, yes,
and how soon and how easily our dream life and our material life become
so immingled and so fused together that we can’t tell which is which,
any more.” Just as the Golden West was unable to keep its “dream life,”
its illusions, triumphant over its “material life,” its stark reality,
so with the brutal news that the “town had to bury” the deceitful
relative, the poverty-stricken book-keeper and his wife “lived yet two
years, in mental night, always brooding, steeped in vague regrets and
melancholy dreams”--like the modern realists!

What did Mark Twain report regarding his early hope for a material
paradise? In _The Mysterious Stranger_ (1916) he recorded his final
despair, his conviction that life is cruel and meaningless--a
“wandering forlorn among the empty eternities”--and in that nightmare
of the fancy cowardice, hypocrisy and slavery are all that man can hope
for. After the death of his daughter the master of comedy said, “My
life is a bitterness, but I am content; for she has been enriched with
the most precious of all gifts--the gift that makes all other gifts
mean and poor--death.” His _What Is Man?_ and _To a Person Sitting in
Darkness_ express the same vein. “There is, of course, a Master Mind,
but it cares nothing for our happiness or our unhappiness ... As to the
hereafter, we have not the slightest evidence that there is any ...” To
him man became “a poor joke--the poorest that was ever contrived!”

Although Hamlin Garland came to believe that “truth was a higher
quality than beauty” and set himself down as “an unflinching realist,”
one must recall that he comes of a race of “potential poets, bards, and
dreamers,” that he traces in general the disillusionment resulting
from an idyllic hope based upon an idealistic quest for an American
paradise of nature. He records the “deep vein of poetry,” the illusion,
through which the pioneer viewed a sordid reality, “the place of the
rainbow, and the pot of gold.” “Beneath the sunset lay the enchanted
land of opportunity.”

  “When we’ve wood and prairie land,
  Won by our toil,
  We’ll reign like kings in fairy land,
  Lords of the soil!”

Here is Pater’s “Sangreal of an endless pilgrimage” transferred to
prairie-land. Later he confesses, “I had idealised all the figures and
scenes of my boyhood.” “This land of my childhood,” “its charm, its
strange dominion,” he has to admit, “did not in truth exist--it was a
magical world, born of the vibrant union of youth and firelight, of
music and the voice of moaning winds.” Like Wordsworth’s early “light
that never was, on sea or land,” Garland’s illusion “has all the
quality of a vision, something experienced in another world,” covered
with “a poetic glamour.”

However, if the Son of the Middle Border sought a pot of gold at the
foot of the rainbow which did not exist, if he is pursuing fancifully
a phantom of hope, he is honest enough to record the results of such a
quest. As he grew up he noted a “growing bitterness”--“disillusionment
had begun.” The Shelleyan rainbow of hope faded into the light of
common day. What had been the “marvel of a golden earth before a
crimson sky” became merely “Uncle Sam’s domain, bleak, semi-arid, and
wind-swept.” “I perceived little that was poetic, little that was
idyllic.”

  “What purpose does a man serve by toiling like that for sixty years
  with no increase in leisure, with no growth in mental grace?...
  At the moment nothing glozed the essential tragic futility of
  their existence.... The essential tragedy and hopelessness of most
  human life under the conditions into which our society was swiftly
  hardening embittered me, called for expression, but even then I did
  not know that I had found my theme.... Now, suddenly I perceived
  the futility of our quest....”

It is clear, also, that Garland is attempting a serious generalised
study of the outcome of frontier hope. The young orator, meeting his
father, is shocked at his sudden appearance of age and gloom: “He
had come a long way from the buoyant faith of ’66, and the change in
him was typical of the change in the West--in America.” “The almost
universal disappointment and suffering of the West was typical.”
“All the gilding of farm life melted away. The hard and bitter
realities came back upon me in a flood ... Every house I visited had
its individual message of sordid struggle and half-hidden despair.”
Garland, then, has given us a cross-section of our national history; he
has faithfully recorded the “almost universal” despair which greets men
who would “reign like kings in fairyland.”

Rolvaag’s _Giants in the Earth_, “A Saga of the Prairie,” is
another impressive record of the Odyssey “Toward the Sunset” of the
frontiersman and the finding of despair instead of the pot of gold.
Per Hansa and his religious wife Beret, Norwegians, journey “straight
toward the west, straight toward the sky line,” “deeper and deeper
into a bluish-green infinity--on and on, ... for Sunset Land.”
Finally they halt and raise a sod hut in “the endless solitude,” the
“eternal, unbroken wilderness”; they plant crops, and winter sets
in; Beret has a child. Here again we meet the two planes of frontier
consciousness--idyllic hope built on illusion and the dread of a sordid
and terrifying reality.

  “That summer Per Hansa was transported, was carried farther and
  ever farther away on the wings of a wonderful fairy tale--a romance
  in which he was both prince and king, the sole possessor of
  countless treasures. In this, as in all other fairy tales, the
  story grew ever more fascinating and dear to the heart, the farther
  it advanced.... Ever more beautiful grew the tale; ever more
  dazzlingly shone the sunlight over the fairy castle.”

On one side there is the “divine restlessness,” the “enchanting
joyousness” of Per Hansa, on the other, Beret’s poignant yearning for
human companionship and inner spiritual peace which her dread of the
stark reality cannot satisfy. “Bleak, grey, God-forsaken, the empty
desolation stretched on every hand ... How could one lift up one’s
voice against such silence!” As winter came on Beret saw only the snow,
and for her the day “died in a pitch-black night that weighed down the
heart.” Her reflections give the key to the book:

  “The country did not at all come up to her expectations; here, too,
  she saw enough of poverty and grinding toil. What did it avail,
  that the rich soil lay in endless stretches? More than ever did she
  realise that ‘man liveth not by bread alone.’... Even the bread was
  none too plentiful at times....

  “But no sooner had they reached America than the west-fever had
  smitten the old settlements like a plague. Such a thing had never
  happened before in the history of mankind; people were intoxicated
  by bewildering visions; they spoke dazedly, as though under the
  force of a spell.... ‘Go west!... Go west, folks!... The farther
  west, the better the land!’ Men beheld in feverish dreams the
  endless plains, teeming with fruitfulness, glowing, out there
  where day sank into night--a Beulah Land of corn and wine!... Ever
  westward led the course, to where the sun glowed in matchless glory
  as it sank at night; people drifted about in a sort of delirium,
  like birds in mating time; then they flew toward the sunset, in
  small flocks and large--always toward Sunset Land.... Now she saw
  it clearly: here on the trackless plains, the thousand-year-old
  hunger of the poor after human happiness had been unloosed!”

As she expects to die in childbirth, she pleads with Per Hansa to take
the other children back to civilisation: “Human beings cannot exist
here!... They grow into beasts!” And the magic of a fairy tale turns
out to be simply nature red in tooth and claw. In the last section of
the book, entitled “The Great Plain Drinks the Blood of Christian Men
and is Satisfied,” the story is told of how Per Hansa the faithful, the
hopeful, the loving husband and father, is frozen to death while going
for a doctor to help a neighbour.

  “There was the Red Son of the Great Prairie, who hated the
  Palefaces with a hot hatred; stealthily he swooped down upon them,
  tore up and laid waste the little settlements. Great was the terror
  he spread; bloody the saga concerning him.

  “But more to be dreaded than this tribulation was the strange spell
  of sadness which the unbroken solitude cast upon the minds of some.
  Many took their own lives; asylum after asylum was filled with
  disordered beings who had once been human.... Then, too, there were
  years of pestilence--toil and travail, famine and disease.”

The frontier is exhausted, but it should be carefully noted that the
quest for a physical, external paradise lives on in the American
machine-age, in the dream of an industrial Utopia. To take but one
illustration recorded in our fiction, Sherwood Anderson’s _Poor
White_--paralleling the frontier stories--traces the transition
from the optimism born of untapped resources to the despair of a
standardised industrialism. It is the tale of a stolid boy, Hugh McVey,
who manages to invent machines from which every one hopes great things;
it is supposed to be typical, to present a cross-section of American
life.

  “In every mind the future was bright with promise. Throughout the
  whole Mid-American country ... a hopeful spirit prevailed.... The
  youth and optimistic spirit of the country led it to take hold of
  the hand of the giant, industrialism, and lead him laughing into
  the land.... The thing that was happening in Bidwell happened in
  towns all over the Middle West. Out through the coal and iron
  regions of Pennsylvania, into Ohio and Indiana, and on westward
  into the States bordering on the Mississippi River, industry
  crept. Gas and oil were discovered in Ohio and Indiana. Over night
  towns grew into cities. A madness took hold of the minds of the
  people.... Wealth seemed to be spurting out of the very earth....
  Farmers owning oil-producing land went to bed in the evening poor
  and owing money at the bank, and awoke in the morning rich.”

But Hugh McVey, “the poor white, son of the defeated dreamer by the
river,” finds mere money and the satisfaction of physical needs
insufficient. “He was unfilled by the life he led.” Conscious of
“some indefinable, inner struggle,” “he fought to accept himself, to
understand himself, to relate himself with the life about him.” For
the sanctity of the individual personality America had substituted the
worship of mass production, of material gain.

  “It was a time of hideous architecture, a time when thought and
  learning paused. Without music, without poetry, without beauty in
  their lives or impulses, a whole people, full of the native energy
  and strength of lives lived in a new land, rushed pell-mell into a
  new age.”

In place of the free workman, joyously expressing with his own hands
the dream of his own mind, came the factory-hand, blindly bitter from
the machine-standardisation which thwarted the self-expression which
even the farmer enjoyed. In the town of Bidwell, Jim Gibson exults
in selling machine-made harnesses and ruining Joe Wainsworth, the
old harness maker. Finally, in a fit of rage Wainsworth kills his
tormentor. Clara, the wife of Hugh McVey, points the moral:

  “In her mind the harness maker had come to stand for all the men
  and women who were in secret revolt against the absorption of the
  age in machines and the products of machines. He had stood as a
  protesting figure against what her father had become and what she
  thought her husband had become.... As a child she had gone often to
  Wainsworth’s shop with her father or some farm hand, and she now
  remembered sharply the peace and quiet of the place.... Everything
  worth while is very far away.... The machines men are so intent on
  making have carried them very far from the old sweet things.”

And we have Anderson’s summary indictment of industrialism:

  “Modern men and women who live in industrial cities are like mice
  that have come out of the fields to live in houses that do not
  belong to them. They live within the dark walls of the houses where
  only a dim light penetrates, and so many have come that they grow
  thin and haggard with the constant toil of getting food and warmth.”

Thus those who have sought an American paradise of nature, a physical
paradise, have reported finding only despair. In essentials this hope
is identical with the primitivistic and industrial hope which Europe
found inadequate over a century ago. Wordsworth, the high priest of
naturalism, confessed he had “too blindly reposed” his trust, and he
had the wisdom to seek the support of the classical and the Christian
traditions. And Ruskin and Carlyle exposed the criminal fallacies
involved in setting material gain above the sanctity of the individual
personality. But when this outworn, exploded philosophy, based upon
primitivism, faith in natural goodness, absolute liberty, _laissez
faire_, and reliance upon nature and material things, was transplanted
to the vast material resources of a frontier land, it was given a
new, hysterical lease of life. Now, a century and a quarter later, a
disenchanted America agrees with the English naturalist who testified
of his infinite “dejection” and his conviction that man

            “may not hope from outward forms to win
  The passion and the life, whose fountains are within.”


III

If those who have entered the American Door of Hope in quest of
happiness have reported that it is to be found neither in the Land of
the Blue Flower nor in the Land of Sensuous Desire, let us inquire what
those have reported who have sought the happiness of self-perfection,
of an exalted personal life, of “A Paradise within thee, happier
far.” This quest involves a definitely focused aspiration toward,
and a disciplined imitation of what is most richly and deeply human,
of what is most balanced and poised and complete, of what has in the
past been reported to yield lasting contentment and peace. This sort
of quest is very old. To Plato and Aristotle, justice, the crown of
life, consisted of the ideal balance of all the desires. Behind the
Horatian doctrine of the golden mean--_auream mediocritatem_--and
Cicero’s praise of _mediocritatem illam quae est inter nimium et parum_
is the ideal of mediation and centrality. The Christian tradition,
according to Mr. G. K. Chesterton, is peculiar in its reconciling of
opposites, in its synthetic balance. At any rate, the worldly classical
and the other-worldly Christian traditions have united in upholding
the doctrines of imitation, restraint, of a dualistic conflict in
man between appetite and aspiration, and of a definitely focused
aspiration which culminates in inner peace. In the Middle Ages the
“law for measure” was allied to the theory of the four humours, the
balance of which caused health, the excess of any one of which caused
“one-sidedness” and disease. In the Renaissance the author of _Everyman
in His Humour_ used satire to render eccentricity ridiculous, and the
Hamlet who allowed all to be “sicklied o’er with the pale cast of
thought” recognised that “by the o’ergrowth of some complexion,” by
“one defect,” men “take corruption.” He honoured Horatio, his “soul’s
choice,” because in him “blood and judgment are so well commingl’d.”
The Elizabethans recognised that a great man, like a tall tower,
must be balanced at all points, or be drawn down to ruin by his own
strength. If space permitted, one might trace through the impetus given
scientific specialisation and material progress by Bacon and the Royal
Society, through such figures as Congreve and Pope and Edward Young
and Rousseau, the gradual evolution of the theory of humours into
the theory of the master-passion and the “original genius” of being
idiosyncratic. But let us remember that Milton, uniting the Renaissance
passion for sensuous delight and the Puritan passion for saintliness,
kept his sublime balance, his vision of centrality, his ideal of
self-mastery. His exhortation to Adam as he leaves the physical
paradise of Eden is his exhortation to us:

                                    “Only add
  Deeds to thy knowledge answerable; add faith;
  Add virtue, patience, temperance; add love
  By name to come called Charity, the soul
  Of all the rest: then wilt thou not be loth
  To leave this Paradise, but shalt possess
  A Paradise within thee, happier far.”

Mindful of the dark impulses of the natural man, the great liberal
distinguished sharply between anarchy and the true liberty resulting
from the substitution of inner for outer control: “License they mean
when they cry Liberty,” he remarks of the Cavaliers, “For who loves
that must first be wise and good.” “He who reigns within himself ... is
more than a king.... Real and substantial liberty is rather from within
than from without.”

Americans may well be proud that this noble hope partially lives on
in Emerson, our greatest man of letters, who found Milton “foremost
of all men ... to inspire,” to communicate “the vibration of hope, of
self-reverence, of piety, of delight in beauty.” Out of materialistic
America has come this “friend and aider of those who would live in
the spirit,” who strove above all to celebrate “the Ideal and Holy
Life, the life within life, ... the spiritual powers in their infinite
contrast to the mechanical powers and the mechanical philosophy of this
time.” It is true, of course, that Emerson did not altogether escape
the contagion of his romantic age; that in his apparent praise of the
unique and the individual, in his most un-Miltonic faith in natural
goodness, in his belittling of logic, of tradition, and of the aid
which culture can give as a guide to conduct, Emerson has a certain
kinship with Rousseau. Let us grant it--and guard against it! One must
recall, however, that part of his dubious influence has resulted from
a superficial and piece-meal reading of Emerson, encouraged by his
characteristic oracular device of presenting two conflicting statements
rather than a balanced and qualified generalisation. If one reads
all of Emerson, however, in an endeavour to relate and define his
thought, it is apparent, as Professor Harrison and Professor Foerster
have found, that his stronger affinities are not with Rousseau but
with Plato and the humanists. His central doctrine of self-reliance
turns out to be a reliance on a self which is not unique but common to
all men, “a reliance upon man’s share of divinity,” upon his higher,
universal self. “We become divine,” he says, not by eccentricity, by
revolt, but by “obedience,” by conformity to “the common heart,” to
what is normally, typically, and nobly human. In fact he strictly
warns us against the “rudeness” of failing to “distinguish between
the private and the universal consciousness.” He perceived the
unity of man, the need of spiritual concentration; his occasional
assumption of good intentions is balanced by his own Spartan virtue
and his confession that “because the temptations are so manifold and
so subtle,” he agrees with Socrates and the Hindoos in denominating
the Supreme Being the “Internal Check.” In common with the Christian
tradition, he sharply severs the “law for man” from the “law for
thing.” He is aware of “the eternal distinction between the soul and
the world,” aware that too great a preoccupation with the outward,
sensuous, mundane life about us (the “work” rather than the “workman”)
at the expense of “the integrity of your own mind” and deeper spiritual
needs, breeds a dread of transience and hence “uneasiness” and
despair. Behind the fleeting scenes of daily life he perceived “that
which changes not,” permanent human elements common to every one, the
cultivation of which gave him that sweet serenity, that “cheerfulness
and courage” which Arnold pronounced the outcome of his philosophy,
“his abiding word for us.” “Happiness in labour, righteousness,
and veracity; in all the life of the spirit; happiness and eternal
hope;--that was Emerson’s gospel.”

Here, then, in our own native tradition is a sort of hope which led to
happiness. Can such a hope, however, be reconciled with the artist’s
devotion to beauty? To Emerson, as to the æsthetes, art is simply “the
creation of beauty,” “beauty is its own excuse for being,” and “the
Beautiful is the highest.” But, unlike the æsthetes, he proclaims the
unity and parity of beauty, truth, and goodness--“different faces of
the same All.” Beauty has “its source in perfect goodness”; it is “the
mark God sets upon virtue.” In other words, the rarest beauty is a
by-product of that perfect harmony by which a man realises his complete
humanity, his complete happiness. This ideal of beauty was given the
support of a literary creed by James Russell Lowell, who never feared
to expose the weakness of a romanticism whose ultimate fruit was a
“melancholy liver-complaint.” He urged the study and creation of a
literature which should be an ideal representation of life, “stripped
of all unessential particulars” by an imagination which found “the
true ideal” not by escape but by a purposeful selection of the real.
For Lowell as for Emerson the “first duty” of the artist “is to be
delightful.” He distinguishes, however, between a merely recreational
“literature as holiday” and a literature which, ideally “representing
life, ... teaches, like life, by indirection.” Such a literature,
ministering to all the higher needs of the mind and spirit, yields the
greatest delight and the greatest beauty.

Aspiration and art of this quality, however, are rare in American
fiction. We looked for them in vain in the seekers for a paradise of
supernal beauty, and in the seekers for an American paradise of nature.
Great as is Hawthorne as an artist, in my judgment he falls short of an
aspiration of the Emersonian quality on account of his penchant for the
eccentric, the fanciful, and the morbid. One seeks it in vain in the
realists’ transcripts from life, which lack the selection and focusing
that distinguish art from experience. There is evidence, nevertheless,
that the novel is no longer hostile to the specifically human destiny
of normal humanity, no longer oblivious to that rare beauty which is
the by-product of the struggle by which a noble character imposes order
on the chaos of natural desire and approaches the imaginative ideal of
a life richly varied, finely poised, and of exalted happiness.

I have space for but one example in modern fiction--Dorothy Canfield’s
_The Brimming Cup_. This deals with the “eternal triangle” in a
little Vermont town. Marise Chittenden, whose children have gradually
taken her interest from Neale, her husband, becomes lonely when her
children all go to school and she senses that “the days of her physical
flowering are numbered.” She is loved by Marsh, a wealthy man visiting
her elderly neighbour Mr. Wells; Marsh tries to convince her that
she is sacrificing “a world of impassioned living” for “an outworn
ideal” of “the traditional thing to do.” The characters, not always
vividly humanised, symbolise man’s universe. Marise, the “brimming
cup,” “filled with some emotion ... gushing up in a great flooding
rush,” typifies the surge of impulse. Marsh, a “swirly brook,” to
whom life is but a moment’s “blind sensual groping and grabbing”
before the “big final smash-up,” typifies unbridled lust and greed.
The “steady, visible light” of Neale’s life, Neale who had found
true freedom by conquering his “great, fierce, unguessed appetite,
the longing for wandering, lawless freedom,” typifies centrality.
Mr. Wells, who surrenders “the happiness that comes of living as
suits his nature” to help make the world more courteous to negroes,
typifies humanitarian sympathy. The much-travelled Eugenia typifies
“sophisticated cosmopolitanism,” æsthetic escape: to her “everything’s
so common-place”; she cultivates her fading beauty by “breathing in and
out through one nostril, and thinking of the Infinite!” Cousin Hetty
symbolises tradition; the Indian Touclé, mysticism. Marise sees her
conflict as one not between “routine, traditional, narrow domestic life
and the mightiness and richness of mature passion,” but as a conflict
between the lure of sensuousness and “what is deepest and most living
in you.” It is a psychological novel, a novel of introspection: it
is based on the quest, not for what is conventionally moral, but for
what in the end gives the richest human satisfaction. It presents a
struggle based on self-reliance and self-conquest. Neale “wanted her
to be herself, to be all that Marise could ever grow to be, he wanted
her to attain her full stature.” “Nothing is your own, if you haven’t
made it so.” Marise wonders if her mother-love is what Marsh calls
“inverted sensuality”; Neale says, “Look into your own heart and see
for yourself.” He “longed for her sake to have her strike out into the
deep,” he knew that peace could only come from “Marise’s acting with
her own strength on her own decision.” He urges not outer but inner
control--“as few umpires as possible.” In her conflict Marise sought
“what was deepest and most living in her ...; that was what the voices
were trying to cry her down from finding.” She longed to be “one with
the great current”--Emerson’s “stream of power.” She discovers that she
is being lured by “the conventional pose of revolt,” that separation
from her children would not be true “growth and freedom, and generous
expansion of the soul.” Like Milton and Emerson, she finally becomes
free by discovering and obeying what is deepest within:

  “She was a free woman, free from something in her heart that was
  afraid. For the moment she could think of nothing else beyond the
  richness of that freedom. Why, here was the total fulfilment she
  had longed for. Here was the life more abundant, within, within her
  own heart, waiting for her!”

Joyous in her centrality, poise and freedom, she sees Marsh as an
“undeveloped and tyrannical soul, the cramped mind without experience
or conception of breadth and freedom.” “How narrow and cramped,”
and “blinded to the bigness and variety of life” seemed people who
thought that “a woman of beauty and intelligence” was wasting her
life “unless she was engaged in ... stimulating ... sexual desire.”
Marise had the serene joy of her home, her beloved children and her
understanding husband; she had the marvel of her music; and she had
the surpassing wisdom to seek her happiness not in the miraculous but
in the common--in the symbolic neighbourly gathering on the night of
the blooming of the Cereus, that rite of beauty; in the calm strength
of simple folk whom experience has made wise. And this woman, living
out her “heritage, alive and rooted deep,” with her “vivid charm like
an aureole of golden mist,” “felt slowly coming into her, like a tide
of a great ocean,” the ineffable peace which comes from self-mastery,
from the quest of what is most universally and nobly human. Calm and
free, she was lifted “high, high above the smallness of life, up to a
rich realm of security in joy.”


IV

What are we to conclude from this cursory sketch of the quality of
three different sorts of American hope represented in our fiction?
To the hope for a paradise of supernal beauty we owe much delicate
artistry of a high order; one may maintain, however, as Emerson and
Lowell did, that other things being equal, the truthful representation
of typical humanity alone produces that harmony which yields the
highest beauty. To this hope we owe much which, when read for
recreation, can give delight; one takes issue only with those, like
Poe and Cabell, who take Arcadianism seriously as a universal way of
life and would substitute it for a literary ideal which resolutely
confronts life and seeks to solve its meaning. To the hope for a
paradise of American nature, a physical paradise, we owe the imposing
of order upon the natural chaos of the wilderness; we owe the physical
“improvements,” the miracles of the machinery and science of a great
nation. Of what ultimate avail, however, are material resources,
physical comfort, time-saving machinery, and science unless the time
and energy conserved are used for higher intellectual or spiritual
ends, for the attainment of happiness? To those who have recorded this
hope in fiction we owe the faithful preservation of an important aspect
of the social history of America; but literature is greater than social
history: it aspires to embody the meaning of life in terms at once
timeless and universal and beautiful. Our frontier lands are exhausted,
and those who have sought the physical paradise of a standardized
industrialism have found nothing but boredom and despair. In place of
this dead level of repression and standardisation let us develop a new
respect for personality--for personality richly varied and healthily
individual. Let us re-direct the joy-giving passion for creation
through the matchless resources of the realm of the spirit. If both
the rarest happiness and the rarest beauty are the fruit only of the
hope of a paradise within, it would appear that American fiction would
in the future be wise in dealing not with escape or with externalities
but with the infinite variety and eternal mystery of the human soul’s
conflict between appetite and aspiration on its quest for an exalted
inward happiness. Before we can expect American fiction to do this,
however, the way must be prepared by the development of an adequate
social imagination. For great art has always been organic with and
supported by the life and vision of a whole people. Shakespeare was the
“Soul of the Age,” Dante the “voice of ten silent centuries.” A hope
must have throbbed in the breasts of a whole age before a writer can
body it forth with the concentration, the brooding intensity, and the
unerring congruency to human nature demanded of great art. Such a hope,
such a social imagination, such an agreement in aspiration, can be
developed best, perhaps, through education--through our interpreters of
literature in college and university. Mindful of the heritage of heroic
pioneers, we must embark upon our intellectual pioneering with the same
resolute courage, the same loyal devotion, the same consecration to a
high cause. Although our scholars are still being lured aside either to
the camp of the æsthetes or the camp of the philologists, America must
hereafter strive to develop the “middle-of-the-road” scholar who shall
be, as Emerson said, Man Thinking, the delegated mind of society, whose
major aim shall be the purposeful and discriminating interpretation of
the record man has left, in terms of beauty, regarding “the conduct of
life” and the path to peace. When such scholar-critics have developed
such a social imagination, such a popular unanimity of hope, we shall
be ready to receive the artist of genius who is to write for us the
great American novel.

  Note--For copyrighted evidence used in the foregoing essay I am
  indebted as follows: Sherwood Anderson, _Poor White_ (Modern
  Library, N. Y., 1925); Dorothy Canfield Fisher, _The Brimming
  Cup_ (Grosset and Dunlap, N. Y., 1921); James Branch Cabell,
  _The Cream of the Jest_ (Modern Library, N. Y., 1922); _Jurgen_
  (Grosset and Dunlap, N. Y., 1927); _Beyond Life_ (Modern Library,
  N. Y., 1919); _Straws and Prayerbooks_ (Robert M. McBride and
  Co., N. Y., 1925); Willa Cather, _The Professor’s House_ (Alfred
  A. Knopf, N. Y., 1925); Floyd Dell, _Moon-Calf_ (Alfred A. Knopf,
  N. Y., 1921); R. W. Emerson, _Complete Works_ (Houghton Mifflin
  Co., Boston, 1903); _Journals_ (Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston,
  1909-14); _The Correspondence of Emerson and Carlyle_ (Houghton
  Mifflin Co., Boston, 1888); Norman Foerster, _American Criticism_
  (Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, 1928); Hamlin Garland, _A Son of
  the Middle Border_ (Grosset and Dunlap, N. Y., 1927); Joseph
  Hergesheimer, _Linda Condon_ (Alfred A. Knopf, N. Y., 1919); Mark
  Twain, _Complete Works_ (American Publishing Co., Hartford, 1903);
  A. B. Paine, _Mark Twain, A Biography_ (Harper and Brothers, N. Y.,
  1912); F. L. Pattee, “James Fenimore Cooper” (_American Mercury_,
  Alfred A. Knopf, N. Y.); Gregory Paine, Introduction to _The
  Deerslayer_ (Harcourt, Brace and Co., N. Y., 1927); O. E. Rolvaag,
  _Giants in the Earth_ (Harper and Brothers, N. Y., 1929).




