_January, 1930._




_Contents_


                                                                    PAGE
  PREFACE: _Norman Foerster_                                           v

  THE PRETENSIONS OF SCIENCE: _Louis Trenchard More_                   3

  HUMANISM: AN ESSAY AT DEFINITION: _Irving Babbitt_                  25

  THE HUMILITY OF COMMON SENSE: _Paul Elmer More_                     52

  THE PRIDE OF MODERNITY: _G. R. Elliott_                             75

  RELIGION WITHOUT HUMANISM: _T. S. Eliot_                           105

  THE PLIGHT OF OUR ARTS: _Frank Jewett Mather, Jr._                 113

  THE DILEMMA OF MODERN TRAGEDY: _Alan Reynolds Thompson_            127

  AN AMERICAN TRAGEDY: _Robert Shafer_                               149

  PANDORA’S BOX IN AMERICAN FICTION: _Harry Hayden Clark_            170

  DIONYSUS IN DISMAY: _Stanley P. Chase_                             205

  OUR CRITICAL SPOKESMEN: _Gorham B. Munson_                         231

  BEHAVIOUR AND CONTINUITY: _Bernard Bandler II_                     258

  THE WELL OF DISCIPLINE: _Sherlock Bronson Gass_                    268

  COURAGE AND EDUCATION: _Richard Lindley Brown_                     285

  A LIST OF BOOKS                                                    291


  _The essence of Elizabethan as of other humanisms is the
  understanding of man and the definition of the sphere of properly
  human activity. The philosophical mind of Shakespeare’s age began
  the work of reflection by cleaving the universe along three levels.
  On the lowest level is the natural world, which is the plane
  of instinct, appetite, animality, lust, the animal passions or
  affections; on this level the regulation is by necessary or natural
  law. On the middle level is the human world, which is regulated
  and, in a sense, created by the will and knowledge of man; working
  upon the natural world; but governed by reason, the special human
  faculty; and illuminated more or less from the level above. On
  the third level is the supernatural world, which is the plane of
  spiritual beings, and the home of eternal ideas._

  --STUART P. SHERMAN: “ON CONTEMPORARY LITERATURE.”




                                HUMANISM
                                   AND
                                 AMERICA




_The Pretensions of Science_

LOUIS TRENCHARD MORE


I

Since the time when the Whigs of England fastened the specific title of
_Pretender_ on the son and grandson of James II, the word has retained
in our speech a sinister significance. For us a pretender is one who
makes a false claim to a title. But in speaking of the pretensions of
science, humanists do not mean precisely this. No humanist would deny
that science has a legitimate field of its own when investigating the
phenomena of the objective world and attempting to find law and order
in the flux of events. Nor would he deny that it has added much to our
security and power and has increased our opportunities for a richer
life and character.

Science has its legitimate pretensions to power; but false claims are
now being advanced on all sides under the shelter of its name, and
it is these false claims which the humanist is concerned to expose.
While our modern pretenders are unfortunately far greater in number
than the two descendants of James, they do fall into two classes. The
first includes those men of science who are not content to work in
their limited field, but are really metaphysicians who have created
a fictitious world of the imagination made out of æthers, electrons,
and mathematical symbols, and have confused it in their own and
others’ minds with the sensible world of brute fact. This class does
comparatively little direct harm, as it merely creates some confusion
in the orderly domain of science; but, indirectly, it has given a
stimulus and specious authority to the pseudo-scientists. The second
class comprises those who are claiming that the phenomena of the
subjective world also lie in the field of science and have imposed on
the age the pseudo-sciences of psychology and sociology. They would
have us believe that all truth is scientific and that the conclusions
of self-examination are but guess-work. By mere verbal analogies they
have linked the study of man’s intellectual and spiritual nature to the
physical world of mechanical matter and motion. It is the false claims
of these pseudo-sciences which must be exposed and renounced in order
that humanism may come again into its own as the arbiter of character.

As in the Middle Ages canting simulation of goodness, as well as honest
virtue, was covered by the word religion, so to-day vague speculation,
as well as accurate experimentation, is proclaimed as science. By a
curious throw-back we are apparently using the word “science” in the
primitive sense of “all knowledge,” as the Greeks used it. And they,
in spite of their acumen, had not been able to differentiate between
the two equally valid methods of learning by objective experimentation
and by personal experience. We have seemingly forgotten that one
of the greatest achievements of the Renaissance was to discover
this difference of method and to limit “science” strictly to the
investigation of objective phenomena. Even Descartes, who attempted to
create a purely mechanical world, excluded the processes of thought as
something foreign to the scientific method.

It was the biologists of the nineteenth century, intoxicated with the
delusion that the magic word evolution was a key to unlock all the
mysteries of the universe, who foisted on the world the idea that man
is but a complicated physical and chemical machine, and who sought to
discredit the dualistic philosophy of the Renaissance physicists. And
of all the biologists, Huxley, the militant propagandist, was the
one who did the most to degrade humanism into the pseudo-sciences of
psychology and sociology. He first correctly emphasised the fact that
there is but one scientific method which is best exemplified by the
subject of mechanics. But--and in this lies the source of his mischief
to clear thinking--_he then defined science as merely organised common
sense_. One has only to analyse this definition to discover its
speciousness and its confusion of thought. His definition has been
almost universally accepted, although it undoes all the lessons taught
us by the religious thinkers of the Middle Ages and the scientific
experimentalists of the Renaissance; and its effect has been to drive
theoretical science back into the hypothetical metaphysics of the
Greeks.

It is merely a truism to say that our contact with the objective
and subjective worlds is based, directly or indirectly, on our
sense-perceptions; and, to be intelligibly transmitted from one person
to another, such data must be common to many individuals. Also, it
is an inevitable tendency of the mind to organise all facts or to
link them together. Thus Huxley really classes all sound knowledge
as science. But, since this sound knowledge, according to him, can
be attained only by following the method of mechanics, which is the
interpretation by the mind of the spatial and temporal relations
between sensible bodies, his inference is clear that the phenomena of
consciousness, the individual mind, and our social relations, are to be
interpreted as problems of matter and motion.

Yet what, actually, is the process of exact science? The answer to this
question should show us whether or not the term does have any precise
and limited significance, and whether or not fundamental confusion must
result from the attempt to make it synonymous with all knowledge.

Exact science, then, is first of all based on the naïve belief in an
objective and real world whose events are connected in an orderly and
prescribed manner, and occur independently of our thought or will. The
phenomena of this objective world appeal to us through our sense-organs
by some form of action, which we call energy, and are interpreted by
our minds. We speak of this interpretation as observation; but to be
scientific we must also select the phenomena to be observed, in order
that we may classify their similarities and their dissimilarities.
In the course of time, we have found such precision in many of our
classifications and such regularity in the past actions of phenomena,
that we are able to predict future events. Those predictions, which
from past experience we find to have been accurately verified, we
formulate as laws. For example, we have observed the actions of so
many falling bodies that we have formulated the law of gravitation. It
would be an error to say that a body fell, yesterday, because of this
law; that event was simply one of the observed facts from which the
law was deduced; but it is quite proper to predict that such a body
will fall, to-morrow, in accordance with the law of gravitation. To
sum up, the scientific method is limited to experimental observation
and the formulation of laws; its value lies in the fact that, by its
cultivation, we have done much to allay our apprehensions for the
future and thus have abated the edge of superstition; and we also
have vastly increased our power over our environment, or, in the much
misunderstood aphorism of Francis Bacon, we have found science to be
valuable for its fruits.

In a general way, we may say that the scientist should follow in his
investigations the phenomena of the objective world only until their
special forms of energy are absorbed by our nervous system. It is in
the province of the humanist to study the phenomena of the subjective
world after these stimuli have been translated into emotion and thought.

If a scientific prediction, or law, is to be something more than a
vague statement of what will probably occur, we feel the necessity
of measuring the quantity of the event; that is, our minds are not
satisfied until we are able to express it mathematically. Since the
only measurable attributes, concerning which our opinion of more or
less is definite, are geometrical lengths, the aim of all science is,
and must be, to express its laws in the language of mechanics; for that
subject alone deals exclusively with simple, sensible masses and their
geometrical relations in space. We have then the paradox that while
mathematics is the goal of science, in that it is the ideal method,
or language of expression, it is not itself a science since it is
concerned with subjective ideas and is not limited by the restrictions
of sensible bodies. Modern men of science may rebel against this fact;
but even the newer, and more dubious, of the pseudo-sciences are
forced to substantiate their claims with the support of factitious
mathematical formulæ and tables and to simulate the mechanistic method.
The inevitable tendency of science is to investigate all phenomena
quantitatively, and to view the whole universe as a vast and measurable
machine.

If the phenomena of life are to be classed as an exact science, it is
necessary to postulate that the living organism, also, is a machine,--a
thing of various material parts, acting on each other by mechanical
forces. Such a postulate is pure _fiat_, for we have found no common
factors between what we call vital actions and mechanical and physical
forces. Biology is, at best, confined to the discovery of qualitative
classifications, and the mutual chemical and physical reactions of
the organism; and life is so complex and so variable that very few of
its phenomena can be predicted with any accuracy. For example, the
so-called law of heredity is often cited, but we have made scarcely
any progress towards predicting variations in even an immediately
succeeding generation. Even if a general law of progressive evolution
were granted to have been established, no one could foretell by it the
future variations of any species.

If the scientific method is badly strained when applied to even the
simplest forms of life, it completely fails when used to elucidate the
phenomena of the mind. The fundamental definition of science excludes
the processes of consciousness from its field, for it assumes that
objective phenomena are to be interpreted by the mind. If we attempt to
study the mind objectively, then we come face to face with the absurd
paradox of a thing investigating itself by means of I itself. And the
gibe cast at the scientific psychologists, that they propose to study
the mind by first denying its existence, is only too well founded.

The possibility of a scientific method is based on a rational
interpretation of objective phenomena. Psychology, as a science, would
be a solemn version of _Alice Through the Looking Glass_ in which
real persons are viewed and analysed by their images, or rather by
some other intelligence, such as a dog or an inhabitant of Mars. The
futility of such a process should be apparent if we recollect that an
animal’s mental processes can themselves be estimated and expressed
only as a vaguer and more rudimentary sort of human mind.


II

Our modern idea that science embraces all kinds of knowledge is, as
I have mentioned before, a curious reversion to the Greeks. In spite
of the fact that they formulated the great deductive laws of physics,
such as cause and effect, conservation of matter, etc., and developed
an extraordinarily fruitful science of geometry, they remained
indifferent to the experimental method. They developed almost no
apparatus for experimentation, established no standards of measurement,
and their arithmetical symbols were so awkward that only the simplest
calculations could be made. They never succeeded in disentangling
subjective and objective ideas. Plato could anticipate the modern
conception of natural law in his aphorism that God geometrises, but
at the same time he vaguely identified the human soul with the stars
and endued the universe with life. Democritus pictured the world as an
aggregation of atoms, differing only in size, shape, and motion; yet
he also tacitly ascribed to them a will or desire to move which was
only less pronounced than in those finer particles which constituted
the souls of men. Also the four classic elements,--earth, water, air,
and fire,--which combined in different proportions to form all material
bodies, were actuated by the animistic principle that each element
sought its own place. One could multiply these examples of classical
thought which confused mechanical forces with the vital attributes of
will and desire.

The failure of the Greeks to develop an objective and experimental
method was intensified by the domination of the Christian religion
during the Middle Ages. The emphasis of thought was placed on the
problems of human character. At a time when men were taught that our
environment was a trap set by the powers of evil to allure our souls to
eternal damnation, there could be little stimulus to study the laws of
nature or to apply them to increase our interest in a temporal life. It
is customary for historians to condemn the Church for having crushed
science, but no concerted opposition was necessary in a society which
saw no advantage in gathering its fruits. It was an axiom that truth
was the direct consequence of intuition and revelation, that God had
revealed in the Bible, and through His living Church, all the knowledge
necessary for man’s guidance in a transitory state. To neglect such a
certainty for the perceptions of our fallible and sinful senses, and to
construct a world from them according to our reason, would be to fall
into the sin of the pride of the intellect. Furthermore, in a society
small in numbers and in area, where the greater number were believed to
have been created to minister to the comfort of the few, little need
was felt for mechanical power and industry. The only science which
seemed to be worth cultivating was one which was believed to foretell
human events and to affect our spiritual life.

It had been generally accepted from ancient times that the stars
influenced our lives and foretold the future. Such knowledge was
eagerly sought by a society which was principally concerned with
religion and was, at the same time, a prey to superstitious fear.
It is not surprising that astrology was seriously cultivated. If we
grant the postulate that the stars do affect us, then we must admit
that astrology was a true science. The positions and the motions of
the planets and stars were observed and recorded as accurately as
possible, and deductions were made according to rules and laws believed
to have been verified by experience. Nor does it seem to me much more
credulous to believe that our character is determined by the relative
positions of the planets, than to assume, as do Mr. Watson and the
modern behaviourists, that our thoughts are caused by the relative
positions and motions of the material atoms which happen to compose
the substance of our brains. The astrologists had, at least, the great
advantage of dealing with real bodies which we can observe, while these
psychologists have for their use only the hypothetical and machine-made
atoms of the chemist which they can never hope to observe. There is
little to choose between the superstition that the planets foretell our
characters and the superstition that atoms constitute thought; both
lead to equally foolish and irrational practices. And there is the
less excuse for the psychologist, since he has had the benefit of a
longer past experience than had the astrologer to convince him of the
futility of identifying mind and matter.

The only other science which aroused popular interest was alchemy. The
basis of this subject was the postulate that all matter was composed
of the four elements combined in various proportions. By the use
of chemical reagents, the combinations of these elements could be
altered and a given substance be thus changed into another. Alchemy
is generally associated with the attempt to transmute metals and, in
particular, to change lead into gold, because the natural cupidity
of their patrons made it advisable for the alchemists to hold that
prospect before them in order to obtain a livelihood. In principle,
alchemy is but little different from modern chemistry. Our most recent
theory still holds that the difference between lead and gold is due
only to the numerical relations of a single element, the electron. The
difference between chemistry and alchemy does not lie in either their
fundamental hypotheses or their methods, but in our vastly superior
technique of experimentation and accumulated knowledge. The nature of
the modern electronic atom is essentially as fictitious as was the
nature of the mediæval elements.

Besides exciting the hope of wealth, alchemy was important as an aid
to health and longevity. Since health required that the four elements
of the body should be preserved in their proper balance, illness, and
even death, were but the temporary or permanent loss of their right
proportions. Alchemists, convinced of this truth, were led to seek for
a sovereign substance, the philosopher’s stone, which would have the
power to restore this disturbed balance and give to its fortunate owner
permanent health and life.

It is a mistake to suppose that the Church oppressed these
sciences--many of its most orthodox fathers and saints eagerly studied
them. The abuses due to the rampant charlatanry of many of their
practitioners were repressed, but their serious doctrines were fused
into the religion of the time much as, in our day, the clergy have
tried to harmonise Christianity and biological evolution. In fact, as
we shall see, the most determined opposition which the new Copernican
theory of the solar system had to overcome was the fusion of Christian
dogma with Aristotelian astrology and alchemy.

It was natural that the first fruits of the new science of the
Renaissance should have been in astronomy and mechanics. The
accumulated observations of the astrologers had vastly increased the
complexity of the Ptolemaic system, and the discrepancies between
the observed and calculated positions of the planets had become
glaringly evident. When the great treatise of Copernicus was finally
published as he lay on his death-bed, it is altogether probable that
no one suspected that it marked the beginning of a new philosophy. He
had merely proved that the calculations of astronomers were greatly
simplified by assuming that the sun, instead of the earth, was the
fixed centre of the solar system, and that the earth and other planets
revolved about it in circular orbits. It must remain a mooted question
whether Copernicus believed that his discovery was only a mathematical
device; his book states explicitly that he, as a Catholic, still
subscribed to the belief that the earth was actually the fixed centre
of the universe as the Church and the Aristotelians both taught to be
a necessary article of faith. At all events, it was not until Galileo
some sixty years later invented the telescope and turned it on the
heavens, that men saw the significance of the discovery. The eye of
the telescope penetrated the depths of the solar system. It proved
that the planets were not pure celestial matter but were mere masses
like the earth. Their brilliance was not a divine fire but ordinary
sunlight reflected from their dull surfaces; they, like the earth,
were inanimate bodies revolving about the sun and the Copernican system
became a fact instead of a mathematic device. It is not extravagant to
assert that, with the acceptance of Copernican astronomy, the whole
mediæval conception of nature gave place to a reliance on experimental
evidence.

The work of Galileo in founding the science of mechanics was fatal to
the mysticism of the contemporary alchemists. Instead of the elements
with their natural places, their likes and dislikes, their hierarchy of
nobility, and their subserviency to planetary influences, he laid down
the universal principle that all natural actions were due to mechanical
forces whose only function was to alter the motions of bodies and whose
amount was measurable in mathematical symbols. His significant work for
us was an uncompromising war waged against the scientific dogmatism
of the Aristotelians on the clear-cut issue that knowledge of the
objective world could be obtained only by experimental evidence, and
not by subjective preconceptions. Understood rightly, he had reinstated
the Platonic dualism of two worlds, one of matter, and the other of the
mind or spirit.

It is significant that during Galileo’s lifetime, so swift was the
movement, Descartes saw the trend of the new science and its inevitable
effect on philosophy and religion. In his _Système du Monde_, he
pictured a universe of matter and motion and nothing else,--a
machine. From matter he tried to strip every sensible attribute
except extension, or its mere geometrical position and extent. All
phenomena became for him merely phases of motion. With the courage
of his conviction, he even tried to imagine plants and animals to be
mechanically acting automata. One thing only he could not include in
this mechanism,--and that was _thought and consciousness_.

The cosmogony of Descartes has long since crumbled to dust, but the
gap he made between the subjective and objective worlds has never been
closed in spite of incessant later attempts. And these early creators
of science, as something distinct from humanism, were quite conscious
that they were engaged in a revolution which could end only with the
overthrow of the dogmatic science of the Middle Ages, sheltered by the
authority of Aristotle and the Bible. Galileo, Descartes, Pascal, and
Bacon all declared explicitly that the old order must pass. From their
day to ours, we have more and more regarded the universe as a machine,
a combination of inert matter and moving forces, acting not as we may
desire, but according to invariable laws which we have personified as
Nature. Man was left, by the physicists, as a unique outsider who could
interpret this machine in terms of his sensations and mind, but could
neither alter nor avoid its fateful operation.

Only one step further was needed to identify all science with mechanics
and to compress the scientific method within the limits imposed by
mechanical laws. This fundamental principle was Newton’s discovery
of the universal attraction of matter. According to this law, a
single kind of force, depending only on the amount of matter and the
distance between bodies, operated to hold the stars in their paths
and to cause all the chemical and physical activities of atoms. With
its discovery, the mechanistic theory was complete and dominant,
and science had, in principle, gone as far as it can ever go. But,
what is even more important, Newton grasped in his early years the
fact that the scientific method is limited to the experimental
investigation of objective phenomena, those which can be classified,
measured geometrically, and formulated in laws which predict future
events. He held with absolute consistency and restraint that what is
once accomplished by this method is permanent. The experimental laws
of gravitation, of the pressure of gases, and all others of like
nature, are true within the limits of accuracy of our observation
and measurement. If these improve, such laws do not fail, their
mathematical expression is merely made more precise. They belong to the
permanent acquisitions of the mind.


III

To attempt to explain the nature of matter, or heat, or light, the
mechanism by which they act, or the method by which their energy is
translated into sensation and thought, this, however, is to pass
into the realm of metaphysics, or what Newton excellently called
hypothesis. All such speculations are, at best, transitory, and,
instead of predicting new lines of work, they lag behind the sure and
steady advance of experimentation; they are constantly being revised
to explain new phenomena after they are discovered. A convincing
illustration of this criticism can be found in the history of the
hypotheses of the nature of light. Physicists commonly assert that the
corpuscular hypothesis retarded the advance of the subject of light for
a century; their answer was to replace it by an equally metaphysical
hypothesis of mechanical waves in an æther. After incessantly
patching up this new conception during the next century, they are
again returning to a corpuscular hypothesis, even more metaphysical
and incomprehensible than its prototype. It seems impossible for us
to learn that the trouble does not arise from the weakness of any
particular variety, but lies in the nature of hypothesis, itself.
We have created fictitious æthers, atoms, and electrons which bear
no resemblance to sensible bodies; light is alternately a stream of
corpuscles, or waves, or quanta of energy, or even a mathematical
symbol; space is declared to be impenetrable except along certain
curves; and time is confused with space. What one age proposes as a
great advance is flung aside by the next which makes a new hypothesis
whose only fate is to be rejected. So far have these speculations been
carried that the dogma is seriously maintained that a false scientific
hypothesis is valuable because in some mysterious way it leads to the
discovery of truth.

As we have advanced in sober experimental science, these hypotheses
have become more and more abstruse and more and more dogmatic until
the most recent of these dreamers, Whitehead, Eddington, Einstein,
have pictured a phantasmagoria, instead of a world, as non-sensical as
the hallucinations of the mediæval monk driven mad by the fevers of
asceticism.

Such models of the structure of matter may, indeed, be useful to
give substance to our thought and a language for our ideas. They
have something of the same sort of relation to real objects that
portraits do to living persons. But there is this important point to be
remembered. A skilful painter has seen and studied the person and can
make so faithful a likeness as to create the illusion of reality. But
the man of science is attempting to picture things which can never be
seen, for atoms lie in the realm of the infinitely small, whose very
existence is problematical. Models of atoms, of æthers, or of space
have about the same degree of authenticity as the posthumous portrait
of a person whom no one then alive had ever seen. Men of science are
too prone to confuse the thing and the model in their own minds, and
they have certainly been so careless in their teaching that even very
highly educated laymen accept these hypotheses as facts. Is it not true
that the world pretty generally takes the hypothetical explanation of
gravitation by Einstein, which involves the concept of a fictitious
space of more than three dimensions and the fusion of time with space,
to be equally as scientific, and therefore equally as true, as the
experimental law of the attraction of bodies? Do not many accept as
a demonstrated fact one or another of the many hypotheses advanced by
biologists to explain the cause of the observed variations in species?
And having failed to distinguish between scientific fact and fiction,
we have incorporated this mass of speculation into our philosophy of
life and especially into our religion. We are worse confused than the
Deists of the eighteenth century who believed that the mind of God
could be defined by learning the facts and laws of Nature; we now
propose that the intellectual and spiritual attributes of Man be framed
in the hypotheses of dogmatic Science.

That the scientific method, as evolved from physics and chemistry, is
not applicable to the problems of life has been the settled conviction
of virtually all the investigators in those sciences. In fact, in
order to achieve their results they have had to assume that life is a
perturbation which cannot be included in a mechanical and mathematical
world, and that so far as possible sense-perceptions must be excluded
as criteria of laws. However, it has not been so clear to many of
them that the mechanical method imposes definite, and rather narrow,
limitations even upon the study of physical and chemical problems.
These limitations were clearly defined in the seventeenth century
during the protracted controversy between Newton on the one side, and
Hooke and Huygens on the other, as to the nature of light and the
_modus operandi_, or mechanism, of its transmission. The question
involved was clear-cut; and it will pay to discuss it in some detail
because it settled once for all, I think, the distinction between
science and humanism.

Theoretical physics, from the very beginning, has been a synthesis of
phenomena in terms of mechanics; that is, in terms of substance and
motion. For example, the physical properties of heat, sound, and light
are expressed by the same mathematical formulæ which express the motion
of a wave in water. To distinguish between them, we assign different
names to the substances involved, as a molecule of air, a corpuscle of
light, or an æther. But whatever names we may give to them, or however
we may try to distinguish them, we assign to all of them the common
attribute of mass, or inertia, which is the only essential coefficient
in a mechanical equation. And we use for all these different phenomena
the same formula of motion, the quotient of the distance by the time.
These quantities, mass and motion, when combined give us the law of
mechanical energy, and our synthesis rests on the single fact that
heat, sound, and light may be changed into mechanical motion, and may
be produced by it. This energy is then their common and mutable factor.

But the objective phenomena of heat, light, and sound are cognisable
to us through three separate sense-organs and are perceived as
temperature, sight, and tone. These sensations are fundamentally
different and, in fact, to confuse any of them with another is one of
the surest indications of insanity. Thus the world as depicted by the
physicist does not correspond with our world of sensation; nor does he
attempt to do more than to discuss a restricted set of attributes, and
not even those which really distinguish heat, light, etc., as such.

Newton, in his earliest published work, made evident this essential
difference between the fields of physics and psychology. By means
of a prism he refracted a beam of white sunlight into a continuous
spectrum. He then placed a screen, containing a narrow slit, behind
the prism in such a way as to permit only a very thin ray from the
spectrum to pass on, and through, a second prism fastened parallel to
the first prism. (I call it a homogeneous light ray to distinguish it
from its psychological analogue, colour.) No matter what portion of the
spectrum was used for the second prism, there was no further change of
colour; the ray merely suffered a second angular deviation equal to
that produced by the first refraction. He also recombined the whole
spectrum by a reversed prism and obtained a single ray parallel to the
original ray and pure white in colour. As a result of his experiments,
he announced the following law: a primary ray of light is one which
has a definite and specific angle of refraction by a prism, and each
such primary ray is, to the eye, a primary colour. White is therefore
a mixture of an indefinitely large number of primary rays, each
possessing a different angle of deviation when passed through a prism;
and when so separated each primary ray is seen by the eye as a primary
colour.

The experiments of Newton were accepted as correct by Huygens and
Hooke, probably the two most eminent physicists of the time. But they
objected to his definition of a primary colour and to his conclusions.
They had found previously, by their own experiments, that certain
pairs of complementary colours, such as a certain red and a certain
blue, gave to the eye the same sensation of white as did clear
sunlight. They had defined them as the two primary colours which, by
different proportions of mixture, would produce all other colours,
including white. They therefore objected that it was unnecessary and
cumbersome to assume an infinite number of primary rays when two were
quite sufficient. By no process of reasoning could these two opinions
be either reconciled or controverted. They involved fundamentally
different criteria. White produced by the combination of a continuous
spectrum and the white produced by a combination of red and blue
were one and the same to Hooke and Huygens because their criterion
of identity was the sensation of sight, and it must be the same for
all psychologists who deal with subjective light. To Newton, the two
whites were altogether different. The one examined by a prism gives a
continuous spectrum, and the other gives two separated bands of blue
and red. What, then, to the physicist is a fundamental dissimilarity
is to the psychologist complete identity. How then can psychological
sensations be studied by physical methods?

To show that this is not an isolated case, but that this gulf runs
between the entire fields of physics and psychology, I can give an
artificial example. While I deprecate the pseudo-scientific pictures,
now fashionable, of the state of prehistoric man and of the condition
of the earth before its habitability, I am able to imagine a world
in which the eye had never developed, so that all life was blind. I
am sure the word colour would never have been coined in such a world
and that there could be no psychology of sight, but I also know that
the blind race could develop a physical science of light because very
many of its phenomena can be, and are now exclusively, studied by such
apparatus as thermometers and electric galvanometers which can be read
by touch. Or, to cite an everyday example, is not the mere fact, that
the sensation produced by pepper on the tongue cannot be distinguished
from that of heat, sufficient to make us hesitate before trying to
study the sensations objectively, to synthesise the objective and
subjective worlds, or to try to investigate them by the same method?

The history of physics, since the time of Maxwell, shows a record of
vain efforts to reconstruct a materialistic monism. These attempts
have failed because they involved a supposititious æther and atom
which could no longer satisfy the growing body of experimental facts
about radiant energy. After Maxwell predicted the existence of
electro-magnetic radiation, an æther or atom possessing the ordinary
attributes of matter became an absurdity.

But our childish, or at least youthful, reluctance to admit our
limitations is so great that we proceeded to repeat the hypothetical
method once more by substituting an energiastic monism. Unmindful of
Pascal’s dictum that man cannot investigate the world of either the
infinitely small or the infinitely large, we are replacing a material
atom and æther by Planck’s hypothesis of discrete and disembodied
_quanta_, or atoms, of energy. Already there have arisen four
insuperable difficulties.

The hypothesis affirms action without specifying something to act,
unless the word _energy_ is given all the physical attributes of
matter. In which case a _quantum_ of radiant energy is merely our old
friend, a corpuscle of light, masquerading under a new name. Again, it
substitutes the principle of discontinuity of action for continuity,
and one is puzzled to know from what the _quantum_ originates and
in what it ends. And again, it creates the dilemma that light is
simultaneously corpuscular and vibrational, since without the latter
quality none of the phenomena of interference is explicable. Lastly, it
drifts into a pure philosophy of idealism.

My discussion would not be complete without a reference to the theory
of relativity. It is significant that the earliest serious critique
of Newtonian physics was made by Bishop Berkeley. With the greatest
ingenuity and skill, he pointed out that objects can become known
to us only _by_ the mind and that since light, sound, and motion
are interpreted by the mind as essentially different, they cannot
be synthesised by any experimental and objective process. So far
Berkeley’s critique is thoroughly valid. He proceeded, however, to make
the _non-sequitur_ that objects exist only _in_ the mind. If we accept
this postulate, the logic of idealism is irrefutable; few, however,
will accept it. Idealism fails because it ignores brute fact, and we
accept the answer of Dr. Johnson who made his objection by merely
kicking a large stone in his path.

Einstein also began with a critique of Newtonian dynamics to prove
that the conclusions we can draw from electrodynamics are as limited
and as relative as those from mechanics. From this denial of our
ability to obtain real or absolute knowledge he, like Berkeley,
has proceeded to construct a positive philosophy of the absolute.
Relativity, as it has now been interpreted by such disciples as
Whitehead and Eddington, is merely idealism under a new guise. The
objective world of sensation and experience is illusion, and truth
exists only in a set of subjective mathematical formulæ of cosmic
_events_. The relativists openly rejoice that mathematics has come into
its own kingdom and is no longer to be the handmaiden of physics, no
longer to be restricted by the limitations of the sense-perceptions.
Euclidean geometry, which is limited to the three dimensions of tactual
space, has been replaced by a geometry of hyper-space, the properties
of which no one can be cognisant of. Subjective time is eliminated, and
objective time is conflated with space. They, too, deny the validity of
the senses, as did the mediæval schoolman, and picture a topsy-turvy
world. They are labouring under the delusion that the limitations of
logic can be avoided by the simple substitution of mathematical symbols
for words, forgetting that mathematical symbols are as meaningless as
words when they are detached from facts. They fail to see that the
equation is but a form of the syllogism. One can trace all through
their argument the old and familiar fallacy of the ambiguous middle.
They are quite reckless, as it suits their convenience, in confusing
physical space of three dimensions with mathematical space of an
unlimited number; neither do they distinguish time as a subjective
sequence of events from time as a measurable component of velocity. The
relativists are as rash as those sociologists who see a real connection
between physical energy of motion and mental energy of thought and so
deceive themselves with the notion that they are scientific.

A note of uncertainty is beginning to show itself, however, for
thoughtful physicists are seeing the _impasse_ into which their
unbridled hypotheses have led them. Abstruse mathematical analysis is
again proving to us, what Pascal, Newton, Lagrange, and philosophy
had demonstrated in a simpler way, that the mechanistic method can,
at best, only picture an objective world as it seems to us, and not
as it is. As a recent physicist confesses: “The physicist thus finds
himself in a world from which the bottom has dropped clean out; as he
penetrates deeper and deeper it eludes him and fades away by the highly
unsportsmanlike device of just becoming meaningless. No refinement of
measurement will avail to carry him beyond the portals of this shadowy
domain which he cannot even mention without logical inconsistency. A
_bound_ is thus forever set to the curiosity of the physicist. What
is more, the mere existence of this bound means that he must give up
his most cherished convictions and faith. The world is not a world of
reason, understandable by the intellect of man, but as we penetrate
ever deeper, the very law of cause and effect, which we had thought to
be a formula to which we could force God himself to subscribe, ceases
to have meaning.”[1] The answer to this naïve confession is simple
enough: there never was a _bottom_ to his hypothetical world, as he
could have foreseen if he had acquainted himself with the warning of
the more profound men of science, philosophers, and humanists.

The writer adds that this failure, now proved, “must forever keep the
physicist humble.” But there is no cause for him to think lowly of
himself for what he has accomplished and for what he may achieve. He
should, rather, be modest and restrict himself to what can be done
legitimately by the scientific method. I fear, however, that in spite
of such occasional confessions, the physicists are neither humble nor
modest, but are merely bewildered. The false pretensions of science
must be wholly abandoned, and the problems of our destiny be examined
by a wise judgment drawn from human experience, before we can hope for
a sane and humanistic philosophy.


FOOTNOTES

[1] “The New Vision of Science,” by Professor P. W. Bridgman, _Harper’s
Magazine_, 1929.




