_Our Critical Spokesmen_

GORHAM B. MUNSON


“Art,” I thought I heard a voice say as I sat down to my table, “aims
to _be_ something; while criticism aims first to clarify and then to
_value_ something. Criticism is talk _about_ something with a view to
passing judgment upon it. It is an aspect of man the valuer, weighing
the actions, impulses, passions, thoughts, and imaginings of his
fellow-men. Study the criticism of a period and it will show you the
state of the general intelligence and the kind of values professed and
in vogue, and above all it will enable you to divine the amount of
consciousness of life’s processes and meanings which is current in this
period.”

“So,” I remarked to the air, “the subject I have been thinking about
has some importance? It has to do with man in his most human rôle,
that of valuing, and it assists in indicating the range and depth and
intensity of his awareness of life.”

But there was no reply to this, and perceiving that I must dig with
my own mind, I scratched down what I had previously decided should be
my opening sentence. I had been dwelling on the subject of American
literary criticism from 1915 to the present. About 1915 a new phase in
our national letters began to be manifest. Europe was well drenched
in blood and the _Lusitania_ was torpedoed in 1915--events that were
vitally to affect us. Mr. Dreiser’s _The “Genius”_ came out, and the
next year, 1916, it was suppressed by its publishers out of deference
to the power of a narrow censoring body soon to be effectively
challenged. American liberals in the wake of Bull Moose Progressivism
had hopefully established the _New Republic_. Mr. P. E. More in the
year previous to 1915 had resigned from the editorship of the _Nation_.

Afterwards there came our participation in the war: the crushing
of liberalism: post-war disillusion. There came a ferment of new
magazines and new publishers, captivating the sons and leaving the
fathers cold. There came a tide of naturalistic novels, a foam of _vers
libre_, a roar of essays attacking the genteel tradition. Since 1915
the reputations have been made of Messrs. Sinclair Lewis, Sherwood
Anderson, Carl Sandburg, Waldo Frank, H. L. Mencken, and Eugene
O’Neill--to name only enough to establish a contrast with the writers
of the preceding period. Inevitably it happened that some excitable
journalists in the midst of the uprising promptly called this decade
and a half an American literary renaissance.

To me, on reviewing these years, they seem more like a tragi-comedy,
almost a tragi-farce. So when I penned my premeditated first sentence I
spoke of the tragi-comedy of American criticism. But even if our recent
criticism has been very often foolish, we are to take it seriously for
reasons outside itself,--if my voice out of the air is to be believed.
I must now try to develop the line of thought that moves out from the
opening sentence I wrote down when my aerial counsellor deserted me.


I

There have been no villains in the recent tragi-comedy of American
literary criticism.

The leading critics of our nation have not been villains--that is,
amazing men of initiative, strength, and will bent on destruction--but
rather they make us think of well-intentioned bookish gentlemen
gyrating in the fields of certain hidden sociological magnets and
vociferating their reflexes to the magnetic attractions. On behalf of
a potential human greatness, there are perhaps great errors in the
present world of literary criticism to be opposed, but there are with
us no great men, no geniuses, to be overthrown. In other words, our
critics are not germinative but derivative.

I mean, of course, our professional critics. It is plain that I am
not setting out to praise them--not even by calling them villains,
for villains must, to satisfy my conception of the scale on which the
intellectual drama of the race has been played, possess a certain
epical character. There is another world of criticism, the academic
world, whose faults have often been exposed scornfully and truthfully.
Lying out of the eye of the reading public, it never bears any
relation, according to the professional critics, with what is being
currently written. Yet it has its virtues of course: there is a
laudatory paper for some one to write on recent advances in American
literary scholarship: within academic circles there has grown up
the only critical movement in our land now worthy of international
interest, and the leaders of this movement, Professors Irving Babbitt
and Paul Elmer More, are--I have several times committed myself to the
assertion--the best living critics America can show. It is not with the
academic world nor with humanism, however, that I am here dealing, but
with the critics of the past fifteen years who have enjoyed something
like popularity. First, let us follow the figure of the late Stuart P.
Sherman, once a successful university professor, as he flies away from
the campus into the full light of public attention beating upon the
world of professional criticism.

Stuart P. Sherman is of exceptional interest to us. He admired Matthew
Arnold: he wrote a popular exposition of Arnold, and a course of his
entirely devoted to Arnold is said to have been popular with the
students at the University of Illinois. Let us then, noting this
affinity, measure Sherman by Arnold. The difference in their prose is
the difference between distinction and mere competence. Sherman’s is
democratic: it is as if written in shirt-sleeves or talked with the
feet on the table, the writer or speaker deliberately putting on easy
manners. Note the “It’s-a-plain-man-speaking” effect in the following
typical passage at the beginning of Sherman’s essay, _Towards an
American Type_: “When I was in college, I used to poke around in the
library a good deal looking for books which would take me out of the
shallow water of college life into the deep channel of experience,
into the serious life of the world. And naturally enough the works of
Tolstoy came into my hands. Now one knows what a typical Tolstoy novel
is, etc.”[63] Lucid writing, of course, but it is not charming: it has
none of Arnold’s aristocratic sweetness.

I am going to try to point out a fatal lack of austerity in Sherman,
a certain ultimate slackness of mind and purpose. The prose, so
lustreless beside Arnold’s, shows that Sherman failed to achieve any of
the rarer virtues of verbal deportment: just as clearly one realises
that not so superficially, so mushily, could Arnold have defined
religion as, in Sherman’s words, “that which binds us and holds us.
Religion is that which at heart we do earnestly believe in, whatever it
is.” Nor could Arnold, doughty wrestler with himself, so easily drop
his hard questions and substitute gentler ones. In the essay quoted
from above, Sherman went on to raise the question all great minds
have most seriously confronted: “Is life worth living, and for what
purpose?” But it did not take him long to say, “Assuming that life is
worth living, what are its durable satisfactions?”--a serious enough
question, but subtly veering the asker away from any tragic vision of
life and encouraging him to settle into a limited pattern of behaviour
that happens to appeal to his temperament rather than to go forth and
lead the great adventure of pursuing perfection.

In his growth Sherman was influenced by the books of three conservative
critics, Mr. Paul Elmer More, Mr. Irving Babbitt, and the late W. C.
Brownell; and here again his conduct was significant of some lack of
desperation in him or of some softening influence on the fibres of his
mind. For under the pressure of the ideas of Mr. More and Mr. Babbitt
he was a little impatient. They were too austere for his taste, whereas
he could not admire Brownell sufficiently. But of the three critics
Brownell dealt least in the primary ideas of life: he elaborated with a
great deal of fine sense secondary ideas about literature and society.
He had, it appears to me, a mind more localised in the nineteenth
century than the minds of his two colleagues. And nineteenth-century
minded, rather than classical minded, was Stuart P. Sherman: his
perennial enthusiasms were for Emerson, Whitman, and Stevenson.

Sherman conceived that he was a spokesman for the “average man,” and
the point is important in estimating him. It makes it fitting that his
style should be passably good but inconspicuous in any pageant of fine
styles, fitting that his thinking should constantly deflect from issues
that require an unusual severity of discipline for meeting them to
issues that are less agitating to the pulse, and most fitting that he
should seem not out of joint with his time, like a Forest Philosopher
discoursing with men who regard motor-cars as a convincing symbol of
progress, but that he should seem to be a contemporary with a touch
of conservatism, crying with other average men for Prohibition and
vituperating with them our one-time Teutonic enemies. My reader, are
you now chiding me for drawing an unsympathetic portrait? Recall then
one of the pieces in _Americans_ (1922) and then say, if you can,
that in respect to Sherman’s chief weakness I am wrong. The piece in
evidence is _An Imaginary Conversation with Mr. P. E. More_, wherein,
after paying his respects to Mr. More’s gifts, Sherman complained: “But
he has done too little to meet his poor living fellow-countrymen.” In
fact, he said, and this is the self-incriminating statement, “Mr. More
has not attended to the technique of ingratiation by which a master
of popularity plays upon an unready public with his personality,
flattering, cajoling, seducing it to accept his shadow before his
substance arrives.”[64] It all depends! The genuine writer does seek to
reduce his reader by a species of white magic, he labours to compel him
to be his slave. But this is a more virile conception of the writer’s
rôle than Sherman’s ingratiator embodies. If one puts the emphasis on
ingratiation rather than on the skilful imposition of one’s values,
then as is well known something is likely to happen to one’s values.
Consider the following sad example: Said Sherman, would that Mr. More
had loved the aristocratic Plato less and Socrates more. “If,” he went
on, “Socrates were among us to-day, I am convinced that he would be
a leader of the Democrats in the House; but Plato, I suspect, would
be a member of the Senate from Massachusetts.” Quite apart from the
fact, apparently forgotten by Sherman, that Socrates at his trial spoke
of his brief experience in politics and explained scathingly why he
had thereafter abstained from politics, I say that what has occurred
here in Sherman’s illustration is the domestication of two men so
uncompromisingly at variance with ourselves, so deeply critical of
us that if we really felt their presence to-day, we would be, to put
it mildly, thoroughly uncomfortable. But Senators and Congressmen do
not abash us, and Plato and Socrates transformed into them take on an
undisturbing and familiar air. This, I say, is a vicious technique of
ingratiation. But there is more and worse: in the same paper Sherman
eulogises the average man and then lets himself go deep in the sin of
cant. “If ‘P. E. M.’ had a bit more of that natural sympathy of which
he is so distrustful, he would have perceived that what more than
anything else to-day keeps the average man from lapsing into Yahooism
is the _religion of democracy_, consisting of a little bundle of
general principles which make him respect himself and his neighbour; a
bundle of principles kindled in crucial times by an intense emotion, in
which his self-interest, his petty vices, and his envy are consumed as
with fire; etc.”[65]

In the lexicon of contemporary humanism there is a damning phrase,
“unselective sympathy.” I think it applies to what Sherman meant when
he said “religion of democracy,” else why does he base so much of his
message on the statistical average man? He could, like Mr. More, have
appealed to the latent common sense of man, which is not a visible
property of the average man to-day any more than it characterises his
leaders, or he could, like M. Charles Maurras, have tried to conceive
clearly of a perfect and normal man and argued for a closer approach to
normality in human affairs;[66] but no--there was working in Sherman
an element of “unselective sympathy” and it made his grasp relax on
enterprises of perfection. It was no divine average man he espoused.

When in 1924 he became literary editor of the New York _Herald
Tribune_, Sherman had his opportunity to establish what our milieu
sorely lacks, a vigorous _conservative_ literary review. But what he
organised was essentially not different from any intelligent liberal
review with romantic tendencies: many of his regular reviewers were,
for instance, already identified as reviewers for the _Nation_. We
have followed Sherman from the academic world to the professional
literary world, and it would seem to a superficial glance that Sherman
changed remarkably in his transit from one to the other. He had been an
assailant of Mr. Dreiser’s naturalism: he was to praise _An American
Tragedy_. He had sneered, and not very well, at the “moderns”: he was
to become their friendly counsellor. He had learned, he said, that it
was a certain “vitality,” no matter under what guise, that he wanted in
letters, and this platform enabled him to do a great deal of explaining
away of his altered views. He became less provincial.

But underneath there was no change. He had not the stuff of leadership.
For what was this element of “unselective sympathy” in him which he
called a “religion of democracy”? It was a fear of distinction, a fear
of standing away from the mass, a fear of striving far enough ahead to
be a leader. Was Sherman, I wonder, one of those numerous professors
who are so anxious to be taken as in spirit “one of the boys” that they
will compromise the dignity of their learning, that they will feel
_defensive_ about the life of the mind? As a critic certainly he was on
the defensive in presenting his values to the average audience. Of no
marked force in himself, on him the registry of environment would be
speedily and plainly made. In an academic environment he had fought the
New York critics. He came as an editor to New York and the environment
quickly persuaded him to blend with it.[67]

When Sherman died, the professional literary world eulogised fulsomely
the _émigré_ from the academy. That already tells us a great deal about
this world. Let us see more distinctly what it was with which Sherman
assimilated.


II

It was a tragi-comedy begun in high spirits and closing now in
disillusion and pathos. Three representative players have been Mr. Joel
Elias Spingarn, Mr. Van Wyck Brooks, and Mr. H. L. Mencken: a study of
their rôles will instruct us in the mediocrity of contemporary American
criticism. The influence of the first of these is a most curious
phenomenon in our recent history.

In type Mr. J. E. Spingarn is the leisured gentleman and scholar who
adorns all too rarely our national society. His interests are wide: for
a number of years he was in politics and he has distinguished himself
by his generous efforts in behalf of the Negro: he has been an army
officer and has, one fancies, a spark of the old-time gallantry of the
military man. For us, however, he is the wealthy amateur of the arts
and philosophy; but what, one may still ask, are his claims to critical
leadership?

Like Sherman, Mr. Spingarn spent a number of years teaching in an
academic environment. He specialised in the history of literary
criticism, producing the three-volume compilation, _Critical Essays
of the Seventeenth Century_ (1909) and the volume, _Literary
Criticism in the Renaissance_ (1899), which pleased certain Italian
thinkers and began that friendship with them later to be cemented
by his championship of Croce. Neither of these works is more than
the usual competent product of academic industry and research: Mr.
Spingarn himself revolted against the type of sterile scholarship
they represent. In 1910 he delivered his famous lecture, _The New
Criticism_. He declaimed it at the climax of a spree, for he had
intoxicated himself with the æsthetic theory of Benedetto Croce: he
was in full cry against academic dry rot. Consequently his statements
at the time were more extreme than those he would probably make on the
same theme to-day.

Nevertheless, for the purposes of a record, we must write down such
pronunciamentos in this lecture, in the addenda to it in _Creative
Criticism_ (1917), in his article, _The Seven Arts and the Seven
Confusions_, and in his contribution to _Civilization in the United
States_ (1921) as bear on the following topics: the essence of art, the
function of the artist, the duty of the critic.

Literature, he said, pointing to the trend of nineteenth-century
criticism, “is an expression of something, of experience or emotion,
of the external or internal, of the man himself or something outside
the man; yet it is always conceived of as an art of expression.” As for
the artist, he bade him know that “madness and courage are the very
life of art.... For the madness of poets is nothing more or less than
unhampered freedom of self-expression.... To let one’s self go--that
is what art is always aiming at, and American art needs most of all.”
The duty of the critic? To ask and answer these questions: “What has
the poet tried to do, and how has he fulfilled his intention? What is
he striving to express and how has he expressed it? What impression
does his work make on me, and how can I best express this impression?”
With the flourishes of a platform speaker who knows instinctively that
it is not straight hard thinking which sways an audience so much as
the verve with which possibly dubious generalities are pronounced, Mr.
Spingarn exclaimed vehemently that the new critics have done with the
whole question of standards, including genres, hierarchies, and moral
judgments.

This is, of course, an unsubtilised outright statement of romantic
æstheticism. Mr. Spingarn was positive that the critic’s essential
response to a work of art must be æsthetic, but he has always withheld
what exactly he means by the æsthetic emotion or response or judgment.
(It _is_ hard to make concrete statements about the so-called æsthetic
emotion.) But that did not in the least militate against the “æsthetic
response” being used as a campaign catchword. For Mr. Spingarn had
written the proclamations for a new generation of American writers.
This is the curious phenomenon I spoke of. One is astonished not just
at the slight quantity of Mr. Spingarn’s writing in proportion to his
reputation, but more astonished at the complete lack of originality
in the documents of this apostle for originality. He added nothing
to the Crocean doctrine: he clarified nothing or modified nothing
in it. He did not even apply it, abstaining, then and since, from
concrete criticism of individual works. He merely proclaimed it. And a
widespread revolt against standards followed in American criticism. So
hearty, and eventually so wilful and silly, was the revolt that in 1922
its opponents were entertained by the issuance from Mr. Spingarn of a
restraining manifesto entitled _The Younger Generation_. This time,
recoiling from the destructiveness of the young men, Mr. Spingarn would
herd them back into an idealistic fold, back to “discipline, character,
morals, imagination, beauty, freedom.” Very often before, romantic
expansiveness has run its course into disillusion: it is a soberer
Crocean who said, “I, who once called upon young men for rebellion and
doubt, now call upon them for thought and faith.”

It is not Mr. J. E. Spingarn, enthusiastic amateur of letters, trained
scholar, man of feeling, who can detain us, for there is literally
nothing in his writing for the mind to work on: as a thinker, he is
thoroughly derivative and weak on definitions. But what Mr. Spingarn
stands for, the theory of self-expression, still needs a scotching.

“Self-expression” is simply a magical catchword of the black variety.
It is a good catchword in that it emphasises the self, but it is
pernicious to the best interests of the self. For to express one’s
self means no more than just to manifest oneself, and if we say
self-manifestation instead of self-expression, we see at once how
paralysing the latter term has been. It has placed the emphasis, one
sees, on the artist _as he is_ and not on his possibilities of growth:
thus it has a static effect. Think now: impulses, people say, arise in
them or occur to them; no one claims to create his own impulses, to
self-induce his inclinations; in a manner of speaking, our impulses
come to us from the outside. Therefore, advice to be spontaneous, to
let oneself go without check, to follow one’s impulses is necessarily
advice--to do what?--_to live as unconsciously and mechanically as
possible_. The romantic may just as well hand himself over to the
Behaviourist psychologist, saying, “Here am I, a creature of whim
and impulse, the living proof of your thesis of automatism.” But the
romantic is not sternly logical. He has been proof against the question
as to the value of the self that is being expressed, and not only proof
against it: self-expression as a theory has encouraged his conceit and
sometimes fostered megalomania, thus pitching him deeper into bondage
to _external_ conditions, for conceit makes one exaggeratedly sensitive
to the environment.

To identify one’s self with the mechanical temperamental flux of
one’s existence and call that freedom is surely strange, and it is no
wonder that it is a strange “science” which has risen to support this
identification. I am of course referring to psycho-analysis, spoken
of respectfully by Mr. Spingarn, utilised as a probing instrument in
biography by Mr. Van Wyck Brooks, and championed by Mr. Mencken. It
does not seem necessary here to make a serious attempt to discredit
psycho-analysis, for that is being done rapidly enough by such
critics of it as Dr. Trigant Burrow, by the Behaviourists, by the
academic psychologists themselves. The facts have never been other
than these: that psycho-analysis is admittedly experimental (and
therefore speculative in its procedures, unsure of itself), that its
central conception, the unconscious, not to speak of its many little
metaphors like the “censor,” has never been objectively established,
and that it has no ideal of psychological health toward which to guide
its adherents (in lieu of such an ideal, the analyst has either gone
in for an excessive relativity or he has taken the “reality” of the
statistical average to be the norm). These are the undeniable facts
and one who would like to take pride in the sturdy commonsense of
the literary profession must regret that they were not kept in mind.
Literary men to-day, one must conclude, are no less gullible than any
other group. Naively, they welcomed the psycho-analytical dramatising
of inhibitions as the causes of ills, they agreed at once that thought
was a sublimation of sex energy and somehow not quite a legitimate
function of man, they wiseacred in jargon about that bastard soul,
the unconscious. Ah, my highly suggestible writers, it is easy come,
easy go with your ideas: within a decade you will be sneering at
psycho-analysis as now you sneer at Christian Science.

Mr. Van Wyck Brooks in his social studies and biographical
interpretations came to use psycho-analysis with tact: he is not the
sort of critic whose errors will be glaring. A sensitive man but shy
of æsthetic ideas: a sociological critic of letters in control of a
persuasive and considerate prose style: a sentimental naturalist, to
use the terminology of Mr. Irving Babbitt, but far from extreme in his
humanitarian socialism and, despite his psycho-analytic superstitions,
temperate in his faith in emotional expansiveness.

Who would dispute Mr. Brooks’s central idea, namely, that an
acquisitive society provides unfavourable conditions for the
development of the artistic life? Of course it does. It badly
nourishes its men of genius, and Mr. Brooks became almost obsessed
with literary failure or what he conceived to be literary failure,
as witness his books on Symonds, Mark Twain, and Henry James. He was
continually calling the attention of the new writers to the conditions
in the history of America which had hampered and throttled their
predecessors: he showed how frontier life had made the machinery
of existence, the actual getting of a living, paramount and from
this necessity had originated the contempt for the arts of enjoying
existence, and how this split had perpetuated itself in the divorce
between the world of practice (“lowbrow”) and the world of theory
(“highbrow”): but he failed at the very crux of his pleading. For
struggling and unappreciated writers are too ready to believe that
the hostile environment is responsible for their shortcomings. They
are likely to wilt into self-pity and to feel victimised. That is
precisely the effect that Mr. Brooks’s writings produced, even though
he casually said: “If our literature is to grow it can only be through
the development of a sense of ‘free will’ on the part of our writers
themselves. To be, to feel oneself, a ‘victim’ is in itself not to be
an artist, for it is the nature of the artist to live, not in the world
of which he is an effect, but in the world of which he is the cause,
the world of his own creation.” But Mr. Brooks has not grown eloquent
on this theme. He seems rather to have the sweet wistfulness and
yearning of one pledged to a lost cause. This mood of wistfulness and
yearning, this image of oneself as an outcast, lonely and eager, has
not revived and will never, it seems to me, revive the spirit of the
American writer.

Was it fortuitous, as in the example of Mr. Spingarn, that Mr. Van Wyck
Brooks should have held a certain leadership, should have put far more
than most of his generation his impress upon American taste and thought
in literary matters? It would seem that he has been a leader _faute de
mieux_, for although a charming minor critic, he has never managed to
awake an indomitable desire among his followers to master the odds. He
voiced the sentiments of a wistfully rebellious generation but shed no
light on the object of their rebellion, the achievement in a democracy
of real individuality.

That is the problem Mr. H. L. Mencken has at least perceived, and
his bold tone better fits a leader in our present straits than Mr.
Brooks’s gentle accents, but alas! He “solved” the problem of being
an individual in a “democratic” nation simply by striking an attitude
of swagger, and like Midas he is cursed with a touch that changes all
objects into some one thing else. It is easy--and this is the secret
of his influence--to adopt Mr. Mencken’s attitude toward the current
affairs of men. Let me quote his _Catechism_ and you will have it
in one simple lesson. “_Q._ If you find so much that is unworthy of
reverence in the United States, then why do you live here? _A._ Why
do men go to zoos?” But let us observe the man in the zoo, traipsing
open-mouthed and superciliously from cage to cage, grinning in silly
patronage at the imprisoned beasts who at least are true to the laws of
their being, and shall we not mock at man’s cheap sense of superiority
based not on what he (poor lunatic!) has done for himself but only
on what Nature has made of him? No, no, it is not by contempt for
the inferior that man will grow but by dissatisfaction with himself.
The net effect of Mr. Mencken’s writings, however, is to produce
self-satisfaction and a feeling of false superiority, and this
naturally enough makes for personal passivity.

As for the Mencken touch! It turns everything to horse sense (not to be
confused with the hard-won virtue of commonsense) and it is admirable
when it is applied to current cant, as this: “Law Enforcement becomes
the new state religion. A law is something that A wants and can
hornswoggle B, C, D, E and F into giving him--by bribery, by lying,
by bluff and bluster, by making faces. G and H are therefore bound
to yield it respect--nay, to worship it. It is something sacred. To
question it is to sin against the Holy Ghost.”

But shrewdness is not enough when one is trying to cope with
master-ideas, and in their realm Mr. Mencken is, as he might say,
a clodhopper. One of the master-ideas in æsthetics and psychology,
one that has engaged great minds and been pondered upon each century
since the _Poetics_ was introduced into European thought, is the
Aristotelian conception of _katharsis_. Hear Mr. Mencken after the
sages and the learned have spoken. He is saying that capital punishment
affords _katharsis_ to modern societies. “_Katharsis_, so used, means
a salubrious discharge of emotions, a healthy letting off of steam. A
schoolboy, disliking his teacher, deposits a tack upon the pedagogical
chair; the teacher jumps and the boy laughs. This is _katharsis_. A
bootlegger, paying off a Prohibition agent, gives him a counterfeit
$10 bill; the agent, dropping it in the collection plate on Sunday,
is arrested and jailed. This is also _katharsis_. A subscriber to a
newspaper, observing his name spelled incorrectly in the report of a
lodge meeting, spreads a report that the editor of the paper did not
buy Liberty bonds. This again is _katharsis_.”[68] And this again is
cheap intellectual vaudeville or--it is clodhopperism. Something like
this always happens when Mr. Mencken fingers the diamond ideas of the
world; the process of degrading intellectual grandeur to horse sense
began when he grossly misunderstood Nietzsche years ago.

By way of a last word on this idol of the emancipated Rotarian, do
not forget that Mr. Mencken, destructive critic that he is, is also
given to fulsome and extravagant praise of certain transient artists.
Mr. Edgar Lee Masters’ _Spoon River Anthology_, he says, is “the most
eloquent, the most profound and the most thoroughly national volume of
poetry published in America since _Leaves of Grass_.” Conceivably, it
may be the third, but is it eloquent, is it profound? Such judgments
are not uncommon when Mr. Mencken feels a praising mood come on.


III

Into the critical pond presided over by Messrs. Spingarn, Brooks, and
Mencken leapt Sherman. His academic values were in deliquescence, and
he was greeted with cheers when he began to revise his former estimates
and with eulogies when he died untimely. Much may be said for the
three critics I have taken as big frogs in this puddle: do not forget
the gusto of Mr. Spingarn’s temperament, the historical consciousness
and fine humanity of Mr. Brooks, the valuable scavenger-work of Mr.
Mencken. But after all is said there is no seed, no fertility in the
viewpoint of each. We must stress their failures: the failure of Mr.
Spingarn to offer for application and development æsthetic ideas, the
failure of Mr. Brooks to give the new American writers an image of
themselves that would effectively inspire them against the crushing
forces of their environment, the failure of Mr. Mencken to escape
sophisticated superstitions as he escaped gross superstitions. Look
at their disciples and behold clearly the limitations of the pond’s
masters.

Mr. Mencken has bred a score of little Menckens, men who imitate his
style, who spend their time demonstrating, as Mr. Kenneth Burke said
of Mr. Mencken, the stupidity of many a stupidity and invariably
showing that it is stupid: they have no more capacity for realising
great central ideas than Mr. Mencken. Mr. Brooks has inspired Mr.
Lewis Mumford, who is a pleasing writer on architecture, a literary
critic who seizes on the romantic elements of Emerson, Thoreau, and
Whitman and repeats with spirit what his predecessor has said, a
thinker whose general terms are vague, and who is impractical because
of his credulity as to what modern letters can actually effect in
modern society. His distinguishing trait, like Mr. Brooks’s, is a
certain fine, sensitive, generous humanity, but beware here! Without
a corresponding growth of intellectual power, a corresponding stress
on deeds, this fervour may degenerate into mere emotional bluff.
And the followers of Mr. Spingarn? Are there any now? There is an
æsthetic school of young critics, but they derive rather from Mr. Ezra
Pound and the T. S. Eliot who wrote _The Sacred Wood_. For after all
Mr. Spingarn only winded a horn and left the startled and delighted
self-expressionists to hunt for themselves.

We have, it would seem, come to the end of a decade and a half of
exuberance. Enter mournfully Mr. Joseph Wood Krutch to confess the
disillusioned after-thoughts of the modern romanticist. It is a
supine admission he makes, without blushes be it added, when he
says in beginning his account of the modern temper or mood: “I have
been compelled to make references to many facts or supposed facts
in biology, psychology, and anthropology. Obviously no person is
qualified to assert them all with authority and obviously I am much
less qualified than many others, but when I state them I do so not as
facts, but simply as commonplaces which we have been taught to believe.
My subject is not any series of objective facts, but a state of mind,
and in the effort to describe and account for it I am responsible not
for Truth, but for the convictions, scientific or otherwise, which
I and my contemporaries have been led to hold ... if the tenets of
Freudianism or the hypotheses of the Darwinian theory are false, they
have at least been so accepted as to influence the modern temper quite
as unmistakably as if they were true ... these supposed facts have an
emotional significance. That is as far as it is necessary to go if
they are to be used as I use them, only in the effort to account for a
mood.”[69]

Shades of the heroes of the mind! Here is a critic who can entertain
the possibility that much of our contemporary “knowledge” is untrue,
and then merely wring his hands elegantly in the melancholy produced
by _assuming_ that it is true. In _The Modern Temper_ (1929) romantic
criticism in America culminates in weak despair.

As we should expect, there have been departures lately. There is Mr.
Walter Lippmann,[70] as able a cartographer of the Kingdom of Whirl as
Mr. Krutch. He sees clearly that the bell-tent of civilisation is in
collapse because society has no common human aim, no hold, that is,
on a center-pole capable of raising the whole structure. “The effect
of modernity, then,” he says in _A Preface to Morals_ (1929), “is to
specialise and to intensify our separated activities. Once all things
were phases of a single destiny: the church, the state, the family,
the school were means to the same end; the rights and duties of the
individual in society, the rules of morality, the themes of art,
and the teachings of science were all of them ways of revealing, of
celebrating, of applying the laws laid down in the divine constitution
of the universe. In the modern world institutions are more or less
independent, each serving its own proximate purpose, and our culture
is really a collection of separate interests each sovereign within its
own realm.”[71] And the remedy he proposes, who can quarrel with it?
The “good life,” he says, is an _acquired_ disposition,--surely an
advance over the implication of the other critics we have mentioned
that somehow the “good life” would _naturally_ come to pass, if one
could only eliminate puritanic inhibitions and flow with one’s desires.
No, says Mr. Lippmann, we must develop “detachment, understanding, and
disinterestedness in the presence of reality itself.” We must enter
into a new asceticism--who would have anticipated five years ago such
a phrase from our new critics?--defined as “an effort to overcome
immaturity.”

This is excellent in that it perceives the problem and the goal of the
clear-insighted modern man, but does not Mr. Lippmann underestimate
the enormous psychological difficulties that block the passage from
unregenerate to regenerate man? One has the feeling that his is a paper
solution, and one is appalled to read of his hopes for psycho-analysis
as a technique for achieving the re-education of desire. The aim of
psycho-analysis is adjustment to reality, and Mr. Lippmann adopts
the dangerous phrase. It is dangerous: for what does “adjustment”
in practice mean but taking the position of maximum comfort, the
following of the path of least resistance? Continual adjustments
by beings to an environment progressively unfavourable mean the
progressive deterioration of a species: ultimately adjustment means
extinction. Perhaps the dinosaurs can give us a lesson in the fallacy
of adjustment. It is farcical for this critic to patronise Pythagoras,
for instance, who “could not have known any tested method either of
equipping his followers to appreciate science or anything besides a
crude asceticism as a means of moral discipline,” as long as we can
contrast the ancient perception of the human necessity of surmounting
the environment with the contemporary belief in the value of adjusting
(merely reacting) to it.

Nevertheless Mr. Lippmann among others has articulated what will
probably be the fundamental position of American criticism in the
next decade, namely, the conviction that we are thinking and acting
chaotically and senselessly, and the deep surmise that man can “learn
to desire the kind of happiness which is possible.” The brilliant but
eccentric Mr. Waldo Frank has dwelt for some time on the dissolution
of the Mediæval Synthesis of Europe. America he announces is the grave
of Europe and he hopes for a kind of miracle: a generation within
the grave of a mystical revival. He too has had his thoughts turned
to the all-important question of a method of realising Wholeness in
fact as well as in concept. You will find his method outlined at
the close of _The Re-discovery of America_ (1929). It is, I fear,
hastily constructed, and more than smacks of amateurishness and of
the armchair. One wishes that he had not rushed in where sages fear
to tread, but he has at least thrown the question of a method for the
development of human potentialities into open discussion.[72]

The most impressive of the contemporary critics who offer us “a way
out” is Mr. T. S. Eliot, but before examining him, it is proper to
repeat here that I am excluding from this paper any consideration of
the formidable opposition party to all that has been described thus
far, the new humanists whom the romanticists have found raised up
against them. In passing, I may say that I have before this dipped
my freelance pen to the humanists in salutations of great respect
mingled with a few misgivings, and I have not the least hesitation in
volunteering to defend them against the oblique attack of Mr. T. S.
Eliot.

This painstaking critic owes much to Professor Babbitt, far more than
does Mr. Lippmann. There is in fact much overlapping between his views
and modern humanism. Yet there is an issue between the new humanists
and Mr. T. S. Eliot: it resolves itself into the question of Authority.
Let us trace out the evolution of Mr. Eliot’s ideas and we shall see
the latent weakness of his position, and those who wish may compare
it with the new humanists’ position. In _The Sacred Wood_ (1921) he
began as an acute æsthetic critic, basing the exercise of criticism
upon sensibility and intellect. He professed to be a classicist.
Opposed to romantic excesses he was, in spite of an admiration for
certain decadent poets, but was he a classicist? If so, what about the
essay on _Tradition and the Individual Talent_, in which the idea of
“creative imitation” is pushed to an extreme that makes one suspicious?
Matters became explicit a few years later when he debated with Mr.
J. Middleton Murry. In this debate Mr. Eliot admitted that such were
the instabilities and insufficiencies of private judgment and private
experience that a man should discipline himself in allegiance to some
outside Authority, and for the literary critic this meant loyalty to
the classical literary tradition. Something was here given away: the
strict corroboration by personal experiment of classical wisdom was
left out. Mr. Eliot was revealed as by disposition a neo-classicist
(with some romantic elements) thoroughly dependent upon literary
authority.

The next step for him, as a man too intelligent and too serious to
evade the problems of social and moral chaos, was to acknowledge that
criticism in our age could not be so limited as it was conceived to be
in _The Sacred Wood_. On the contrary, the critic he saw must become
philosophic: he must be a creator of values. But here again he was
neo-classical, for he searched for external Authority in politics and
in religion. In the former he is Royalist, in the latter Anglo-Catholic.

Turn to his essays on style and order entitled _For Lancelot
Andrewes_. They are the work of a fine judicial temperament, but not,
not at all, the work of a general in the warfare of the mind. The
distinction is worth making much of. I have elsewhere[73] analysed the
structure and procedures of Mr. Eliot’s prose to show its thoroughly
judicial characteristics: its calmness and gravity, its balance and
discriminatory powers among precedents, its fulfilment in a final
elucidation arrived at by comparisons and analyses. It is not a
full-bodied prose, the weight of the whole man concentrated on the pen,
but the prose of a judge conscious of the weight of authority _behind_,
not in, him. Now observe that in _For Lancelot Andrewes_ Mr. Eliot,
like a learned judge and with an air of profundity, is continually
pointing to the tradition of a Church, set up as an authority external
to himself. He is at his best when he presents comparatively narrow
ideas, ideas about literary style for the most part, as in his
exposition of the relevant intensity of Andrewes’ prose. At his most
disappointing, he ventures upon a safe common-place generality, as
when he remarks, “The greatest tragedies are occupied with great and
permanent moral conflicts.” The last is true enough, but Mr. Eliot
never talks very much or directly about this occupation, about the
stuff itself of moral conflicts.

Likewise Mr. Eliot, apologist for religion, does not write about
religion: he points to _a_ Church and the intellectual riches of its
history. “For us,” he declares, “religion is of course Christianity;
and Christianity implies, I think, the conception of a Church.” And
again, “And the spirit killeth, but the letter giveth life”--but
we need both the letter and the spirit! Stress on the letter gives
us legalism in religious thinking, and on the spirit gives us what
Mr. Eliot calls “_Ersatz_-religion”: the two, spirit and letter,
must correspond. There we are! the last critical “leader” in this
examination turns out to be merely sitting on a judge’s bench and
therefore necessarily inactive: he points out where Authority may be
found, but one may doubt from the evidence of his writing whether
Authority resides in him.


IV

Following the course of Sherman, we entered the professional literary
world and explored its criticism, coming finally to Mr. T. S. Eliot,
whose latest departure turns our eyes outwards again to the academic
world, to Professor Babbitt and humanism, or to the worlds of religion
or philosophy. It appears to me that our purely literary critics have
at one point or another all failed fundamentally: they are all leaders
by default only and not by essence. Either they are bound to move
towards the position of Mr. Joseph Wood Krutch, who realises that “all
the bases upon which modern despair rests were laid joyously by people
who were quite sure that they were serving humanity, and all the chains
by which we are now bound so much more firmly to earth than we want
to be were forged amidst shouts of triumph,” or they are spying some
loophole which on inspection seems not to exist. But in either case,
and this is a hopeful sign, they are all converging toward a common
realisation that King Whirl must, if possible, be deposed. The goal is
seen: the reconstructed human spirit. But without adequate leadership
how may we start to approach it?

Well, it is easy to exaggerate the power of literary criticism. If
certain things in our culture have gone dead, criticism cannot revive
them. The essential “about-ness” of the critical activity limits it
to the guidance, stimulation, and judging of things in which there
is still some life. But assuming that a funeral ceremony such as Mr.
Krutch has conducted is still premature,--and it is premature so long
as any doubt exists of final decay,--we may then try to conceive of
what a genuine leader in critical thought would be like, and by this
ideal measure ourselves.

Objectivity in judgment would be one of the principal marks of the
leader. That requires a sufficient scale of values to stand outside
not only the frame of one’s century but outside the frames of all
centuries. It means the ascertainment of _primary_ laws in our field,
which may be possible as it has been possible in physics to say that a
few laws are true regardless of what frame of time and space one may
be in. Objectively considered, literature may be found to have been
in decline, not just for a century and a half or just for six hundred
years but almost from its classical sources and from the Scriptures of
ancient lands. Is this depressing? It is not depressing to contemplate
a magnificent mountain from its base.

On the contrary, a real view of the heights of Parnassus and Olympus
may inspire an uncommon elevation of aim--a second mark of the critical
leader; it seems to me unnecessary to argue that the critics we have
looked at do not realise how high man has ascended in the past or can
conceivably ascend now. Their ideas of human greatness are small.
Really, _are_ we practitioners of literary criticism distinguished by
any grandeur in breadth and elevation of thought? No one can believe it.

Nor can I believe that we approximate the ideal critic in passion, in
a burning unquenchable indomitable love of perfect things. This is
the spirit that giveth life to standards that otherwise would seem
too skeletal, too non-human to be glamorous and magical in their
remoteness: this is the spirit that killeth despair and compromise.
Infused with it, our imagined critic becomes single-minded and proof
against deviations and resting-places.

Finally, he would, I conceive, be distinguished by an immense capacity
for relating deeds to words. His interest would not cease with a
beautiful formulation, but would continue until the formulation was
embodied in experience. Not words alone, not deeds alone, but words
_and_ actions would be his great desideratum.

Of whom am I thinking? It is dangerous in calling attention to concepts
or principles to cite examples until the concept or principle or, in
our case, ideal has been thoroughly understood, and I dare not hope
for that within the space of this paper. But with a caution not to
debate the achievements of him but only to study his framework, I take
the risk of nominating Matthew Arnold as having the build of a great
critic. We need in our national letters a critic of the stamp and
dimensions of Arnold.


V

I append _The Prayer of a Young Critic_.

  But we have heard rumour of the Mistral.
  It is a cold wind that blows from the heights,
  Day after day it sweeps steadily down,
  Cold and from above, changing the air
  In the lowlands.
                    We are dwellers in lowlands
  And our air has been breathed before. It is
  A sultry air: men talk to each other
  In haze and their words are close and fevered.
  A warm breeze crosses our little hillocks,
  And then the dust settles down again.
  Not near the Alps do we live.
                                Great Genius,
  Grant us an electric climate! Touch us
  With snowy fire, send the Mistral to sweep
  Bare our plain and proclaim the gaiety
  Of altitudes, the glory of clear stars,
  The exaltation of the sun burning
  The rare air. Great Genius, send the Mistral!


FOOTNOTES

[63] From _Points of View_, 1924, Charles Scribner’s Sons, publisher.

[64] From _Americans_, 1922, Charles Scribner’s Sons, publisher.

[65] The rest of the sentence is “and he sees the common weal as the
mighty rock in the shadow of which his little life and personality are
to be surrendered, if need be, as things negligible and transitory.”

[66] Also he could have mastered the philosophy of Mr. John Dewey and
made his “religion of democracy” more respectable.

[67] A perusal of the _Life and Letters of Stuart P. Sherman_,
published after this essay was written, increases my confidence in the
diagnosis above of Sherman’s weaknesses. Mr. P. E. More wondered many
years ago whether his young reviewer did not have “an inclination to
avoid the central problem.” Later, he warned Sherman: “I do not like to
see a man of your ability and insight deliberately taking up the job of
whitewasher” for democracy. And finally Mr. More said: “Yours is but a
sickly sort of democracy at bottom, and needs a doctor.”

[68] From _Prejudices: Fourth Series_, Alfred A. Knopf, publisher.

[69] From _The Modern Temper_, Harcourt, Brace & Co., publisher.

[70] Mr. Lippmann is not a literary critic but his views are pertinent
to this discussion.

[71] The Macmillan Company, publisher.

[72] Even in a footnote I mention Mr. Ludwig Lewisohn with some
reluctance, and only because there are so few critics among us who have
any interest in trying to plot a direction for the future. Pauline
Christianity (grossly libelled by him as akin to the degenerate
puritanism of our day) must be destroyed, he preaches. Salvation lies
in a fusion of Hellenism (Science) and Judaism (which he interprets
selectively and sentimentally). He is a suggestive writer: he is also a
prig, a special pleader, and embarrassing in his frequent intervals of
self-pity and in his intrusions of hearth-side intimacies (proper for
telling only to his closest friends) into the public medium of print.
One cannot take this muddled romanticist seriously.

[73] In _Style and Form in American Prose_ (1929).




