_The Pride of Modernity_

G. R. ELLIOTT


I

In European literature from Homer down to Milton and Racine (not to
speak of Oriental literature) pride, wrong pride, is represented as
far and away the chief of human evils. Such is not the case with the
comparatively brief stretch of literature that ensues. Of course there
are sharp exceptions to the rule. But speaking by and large recent
literature--if that of the past two hundred years may so be termed in
view of the long eras behind it--has not held up pride as the towering
villain of the human drama. That villain has become more and more
shrunken and shadowy. The _hubris_ of the Greeks, the proud presumption
against the high gods that constituted for ancient writers the crown of
human errors, seems now an old, unhappy, far-off thing, quite hopeless
for literary purposes in the opening twentieth century. Even more
hopeless seems the lineal successor to _hubris_, the Pride that led
the seven deadly sins in mediæval pageantry, and doomed the heroes of
humane tragedy in the Renaissance.

The surface reason for the fading of pride on our literary scene is
obvious enough. Pride used to be considered not only the most immoral
but also the most dramatic quality of human life. But recently life,
or our imaginative way with life, has assumed a non-dramatic air.
The interminable series of the falls of proud heroes and princes,
historical or legendary, that runs through the bulk of the world’s
literature--well, this series seems now to have terminated.
Democracy’s interest in such personages is lackadaisical. I heard
a bright American undergraduate refer to them as “those old guys
that used to get bumped off quick.” And one must bear in mind that
America, if still a bright undergraduate, is widely representative of
modern civilisation. Yesterday a remote collection of insignificant
states, she is now becoming an international state of mind and, more
significantly, of imagination. In this state of imagination the old
proud-falling potentate cuts a small figure. Recently, to be sure, many
princes have fallen, in fact the majority of them; but they have fallen
softly. The downfall of a business corporation is far more noisy and
generally disturbing; but a corporation is impersonal and undramatic.
As for pride, doubtless some American presidents have shown promising
tragic signs of it, but of course these had to be nipped in the bud.
A prince, even so powerful and autocratic a prince as the American
president, cannot fall proudly and dramatically when he has to fall
regularly every four years.

Pride is not popular with democracy either as a vice or as a virtue.
Even a just pride in oneself is publicly regarded as not justifiable.
Self-esteem must be submerged in party loyalty; and party loyalty, in
turn, must whitewash its rising arrogance with humanitarian sentiment,
with eloquent devotion to the welfare of men in general. To be sure,
intelligent persons dislike the blatancy of this sentiment. Most of
them nevertheless are actually in accord with the very heart of it.
They wince and shrug at the slogan trumpet of “Service to Mankind,”
but they quietly salute the flag. They bow in spirit to the reigning
standard of “Social Value.” Tacitly accepting it as prime motive they
deprecate their own self-esteem. They abet the general feeling that
pride as the ruler of this world, good and evil pride alike, has
modernly been deposed: it is a thing of the past.

This feeling, more than any other feature of modernity, constitutes our
break with the past. It has inspired the general conviction that the
modern age, so far from being merely one phase, even the most important
phase, of human history, has brought about a permanent alteration in
the basic conditions of human history. And here again the majority
of the leaders of opinion, while disavowing the popular view in its
blatant extreme, have been moulded in spirit by the accumulating
pressure of it. At the same time our knowledge of the _facts_ of the
past has continued to increase. Popular biographies and surveys have
circulated through a vast reading public. Hence has arisen what may be
termed the modern historical paradox. The opening twentieth century has
a wider speaking acquaintance with the past, and a fainter grip of its
essential reality, than was ever the case before. The past is quite
vivid to us, and quite unreal. Its main motif, its pride, is a dramatic
ghost.

Recently Lytton Strachey’s keen book on Queen Elizabeth and her Essex,
and Francis Hackett’s glowing story of Henry Eighth and his wives, have
made the pageant of the sixteenth century brilliantly alive for us. But
in the end the pageant is more a pageant than ever; the past is more
utterly past. The scene sparkles along before our eyes in sharp and
multitudinous detail. Above all, the persons are amazingly human, as
they loom toward us in vivid “close-ups.” Yet in the end they are human
foreigners. They belong to a remote clime, and our attitude toward them
is ironic and superior even when most sympathetic. In fact they seem
to us _amazingly_ human just because we are surprised that they can be
human at all. For the central motive of their lives, their pride of
spirit, is or seems to us entirely out of date. Their ordinary desires
were the same as ours; we see that more fully every day. But the power
of their pride, which swamped or swept before it all those common
desires, like the gale that ruled their little sailing-ships on the
Atlantic, is obsolete. It appears almost as strange and superstitious,
when we pause to reflect upon it, as the spasmodic fits of humility
that made those proud ghosts grovel at the feet of their kings and
gods. We think we have changed all that.

But so deep-going an alteration in human nature, such a huge
discrepancy between present and past, is disconcerting to the mind.
It must needs be reduced and accounted for. Our emotional conviction
of the obsolescence of pride, like every other strong and persistent
feeling harboured by human beings, must needs be rationalised. And the
rationalisation is now in progress. Pride has seemed to our imagination
very unreal in the present; therefore our reason is demonstrating that
it was also quite unreal in the past. Historical science aided by other
sciences has undermined the pride of the past. It appears now that
proud princes, as well as proud nations and empires, fell of old not by
reason of pride but by reason of economics--or the lack of economics.
Or else there were geographical, ethnological, biological, or
psychological causes. The last-mentioned category is the most effective
of all for eliminating moral factors from human history. For example,
only an old-fashioned reader may still fancy that Henry the Second,
by conquering the violence of his pride, could have refrained from
causing the slaughter of Becket. That, to be sure, was the subsequent
opinion of Henry himself. But, psychologically speaking, Henry and the
old-fashioned reader are mistaken. Henry was subject to certain stimuli
and certain complexes that completely determined, and completely
explain, his extraordinary behaviour before and after the murder of the
archbishop.

Emerson, looking back mildly from Concord upon the greedy and murderous
pride of old days, found human history very tiresome because it was
so very bad. To-day many disillusioned persons are finding it still
more tiresome because it seems to them neither bad nor good. It is
non-moral, and therefore non-dramatic. Never does it hang dramatically
in the fearful balance of the free human will between a false pride and
a right humility. It merely moves back and forth like the waves and
currents of the sea. History, unhappily, just happens.

Perhaps, however, this ultra-modern view of history, in which pride
seems so unreal, is itself the offspring of a very real pride. Modern
pride is not of necessity less real than ancient pride just because, so
far, its way is less conscious and dramatic. After all it takes time
to dramatise ourselves to ourselves; and the modern age, so modernists
say, is not yet in full swing. They say that the modern theatre has
merely made a beginning and that in the future it will do great things.
If so, I would claim that the greatest of those great things must be an
adequate dramatisation of modern pride. But we cannot wait for that.
If we did, it would never come. It cannot come until there is general
recognition of the fact that pride is still the grand protagonist in
the human drama; and that under its drab modern dress it has lost not a
whit of its ancient sinew.

Pride is most virulent, indeed, when it wears plain clothes, when it
hides itself from itself. Self-blindness, not dramatic display, is
and always has been the very heart of it. Precisely when pride is
most insidious is it least dramatic. Recognition of itself, which is
the preliminary step toward cure, is also the preliminary step toward
dramatic manifestation. Pride was very dramatic in old literature
just because it was unearthed from its very _un_dramatic lair in old
human nature. Discovery is the essence of drama. Life is intensely
dramatic as soon as its least discoverable motive is discovered, as
soon as its “last infirmity,” its most hidden pride of spirit, is shown
in action. Therefore if a superficial glance persuades us, as I said
at the beginning, that pride has faded in modern literature because
modern life is non-dramatic, a deeper search informs us that modern
life _seems_ non-dramatic because the meaning of pride has faded in
our thought. We need to rediscover the truth of the truism that pride
is the most insidious and blinding of all human qualities. Then we may
discover the way of modern pride. We must see how utterly non-dramatic
pride can be before our poets may show us how intensely dramatic
modern life is. We cannot envisage the drama of modern life in its
full reality, we cannot touch the very heart of its tragedy, until we
realise the peculiar blindness of modern pride.


II

For example. Some twelve years ago President Wilson announced on behalf
of the United States, or was quoted as announcing, that we were “too
proud to fight.” Soon afterwards we were fighting, not without martial
pride, in the greatest war of all time. The irony of this sequence was
too broad to escape notice. Yet the notice was comparatively slight.
And the whole matter has faded with ominous speed from the imagination
of a public debauched with the most adulterous mixture of pacific
and pugnacious prides that the world has ever known. The Wilsonian
remark was easily smiled into oblivion. The full dramatic irony of
the situation, and the tragedy behind it, cannot appear until that
proud utterance is recognised, not as the passing whimsy of a single
person or party or nation, but as a vivid symbol of the modern spirit
at large. It may fairly be regarded, indeed, as the verbal apex of
the whole bad pyramid of modern pride--the pride of quick and direct
solutions, the pride of immediacy.

The basis of that pyramid is religious. No doubt the superstructure
owes much to our triumphantly swift results in science, industry, and
humanitarian reform. But the pride of practical achievement, thoroughly
wholesome in its proper _locale_, would not have formed a modern
Babel unless assembled and underpinned by modern religion. And modern
religion, while denouncing more and more the various arrogancies of our
material civilisation, has not unearthed the deep foundation which it
itself has provided for them. As religion is properly the founder and
guardian of human humility, so religious pride is the prime evil. We
see this very easily in the past. We know that the most blinding and
hateful pride that grew among the ancient Greeks and Romans was not
the pride of city-state, of empire, of symmetric culture. It was the
arrogance of the religious philosophy of the Stoics, their assumption
of a pseudo-divine impassivity of spirit. Likewise the mediæval
glorification of chivalry, and even of ecclesiastic and theological
edifice, is as nothing to modern eyes in comparison with the spiritual
presumption that grew in mediæval asceticism. We see how vicious it was
for the Stoic to be proud of his pride, and for the monk to be proud
of his humility. We have not yet seen how vicious it is for the modern
citizen to be proud of being neither proud nor humble.

He is spiritually proud of having escaped from spiritual pride. He
believes he has left that historic vice far and forever behind.
In his leisure hours he has learned all about it, he thinks, from
interesting books, periodicals, preachers, lecturers, travels,
historical moving-pictures, and maybe survey courses in college. He
is amused and in better moments saddened at the tremendous dramatic
display of religious pride in old times,--unaware that this evil never
_displayed_ itself to the hearts it mastered, nor does to-day. What,
then, can he know of real humility? “Why,” I was recently asked by
a sincerely puzzled undergraduate whose psychological interests had
led him to scrutinise certain ancient documents, “why were the old
Christians always jawing about humility?” The modern man is conscious,
explicitly or implicitly, of possessing a new form of humility much
superior to the old. He is proud of his freedom from the fearful
self-abasement of his benighted ancestors. He is certain that his own
brand of humility, his kindly modesty in relation to nature and to
other men, is far more reasonable and real. Reality, indeed, is his
keynote. He believes he sees the facts of human nature with a plain
and full reality, or immediacy, that was impossible to men of old,
distracted as their vision was by the extremes of pride and humility.
He has done away with those two “mighty opposites.” His realism, his
direct contact with life, has antiquated their histrionic conflict.
He is superior to that primitive battle in the human breast. He has
emerged from that cave warfare into the light of immediate reality. He
is “too proud to fight.”

And this pride of immediacy, as I have called it, is at bottom
religious. It was founded by the Protestant Reformation. More broadly
speaking, it grows from that urgent religious revolution still going
on which was publicly begun by the Protestant revolt of the sixteenth
century. It goes on in Catholic and Protestant realms alike and has
many modes, ranging all the way from the glittering wit of French
Catholico-Modernism to the rash eloquence of the Protestant pulpits
of New York. Revolution it is with a vengeance, not re-formation.
And if it be true that the modern intelligence under the influence
of science is coming to see the natural need of ordered evolution,
instead of destructive revolution, in all human affairs, then we should
see this need primarily in religion. Here the cost of revolution is
heaviest. For the mischief of the revolutionary method--namely, that
it externalises the issue--is greatest in that sphere which should be
of all the most internal. The mental surfaces of religion are thrown
into false prominence as the insignia of controversy. Sacred rites and
dogmas, through the protective devotion of the loyalist and the pointed
hostility of the rebel, are externalised. The imaginative flexibility
properly belonging to them is congealed into a stiff surface that
hides their inmost meaning, human and divine. Instead of vital human
organisms, nourished in their growth and change by something of the
divine circulation, they become fixed mechanisms; to be maintained in
running order or else discarded altogether--windmills, pumping the
living water direct to the household of faith, or suddenly assaulted
into junk-heaps by quixotic insurgents.[25] Loyalists and rebels,
in reaction from each other, attribute to their own doctrines an
impossible immediacy of truth. Thus both parties foster the pride of
spiritual immediacy.

Obviously, however, it is not the conservative but the protestant or
modernist pride of immediacy that, for the time being at least, has won
the day. Indeed it has flourished like a weed in the very midst of our
best achievements. The great achievement of modern times is the general
realisation that life is of necessity experimental, that change is a
constant law for us, and that the human spirit is more important than
human customs and institutions however sacrosanct. Hence our pride of
freedom, freedom from the past. And this pride is proper and sound
in so far as it is a proud gratitude for the general dissemination
of a truth that the great saints and sages, under all dispensations,
knew--the experimentality of life. But our pride is rank and noxious
when we imagine we know this truth as well as the saints and sages knew
it, if not better. To be sure, we know it more widely in a certain
sense than they did, having discovered with the aid of science many
exterior illustrations of it which were unknown to them. We know it
with a wide and superficial immediacy. But they knew it with a profound
immediacy.

They knew the basal experimentality of life because they knew it was
basifixed. They knew the depth and height of change because they knew
the permanency below and above it. They knew the Permanency that does
the experimenting, the Changeless that enables us to know change. Of
this we have lost hold. And the main source of our modern spiritual
catastrophe, the cancerous growth that disguises itself and induces
the thronging diagnosticians to limit their attention to secondary
symptoms and remedies, is the ancient evil in modern form, blind
spiritual pride. The modern imagination has more and more lost hold of
the changing Permanency as the modern mind has more and more developed
its arrogance of change, its pride of immediacy. This very pride keeps
us from seeing the permanence of the law of pride and humility in
human nature. We patronise the wise men of old--confident writers on
“personal religion” in American magazines patronise them--assuming that
when they signalised spiritual pride as the _permanent_ root of human
ills, they were speaking only for an age and not for all time, at any
rate not for our time.

This pride means a false emphasis on “personal religion” over against
institutional religion. “Personal religion” now comprises a vast
variety of creeds. Many of these are asserted by their proponents,
sometimes angrily asserted, to be not religious at all, but they really
are religious in the broadest or lowest extension of this term. A few
years ago newspaper reporters discovered in a western state a not
insane man who claimed that the earth was flat. As to the long story
of geodesy, he said it meant little to him, for he had “a science of
my own.” Nowadays many a person has in the same way “a religion of
my own.” But this phenomenon, unlike the other, is too popular just
at present to have any comic news-value. It would start a public
laugh only in the thirteenth or, who knows, in the thirtieth century.
To-day many persons who religiously swallow the authority of science,
who religiously believe that Einsteinism is true and wish they could
understand what it means, reject all authority in religion.

They say that Jesus himself rejected it, and patronise Him as the first
of the moderns. They isolate Him from the religious organism to which
he was deeply attached; which shaped his principles no less than his
images; and through which indeed, during the long preceding centuries
of Hebrew history, his sublime nature itself had been (if this may be
said without irreverence) gradually “evolved.” Thus they affix to Him a
singularity no less miraculous, no less disruptive of the laws of human
nature and history, than that attributed to him by popular orthodoxy;
but far better calculated to debauch with blind pride the souls of his
worshippers or, as the case may be, his modern rivals or superseders.
They have learned from Him, not wisely but too well, that the Sabbath
was made for man and not man for the Sabbath. They hug the false
inference which he so sternly and constantly rejected, namely, that
man was made to disuse instead of to use the Sabbath, to win spiritual
maturity by discarding institutional religion. Jesus discarded
revolution. He continued and reformed a great religious tradition. He
made it capable of feeding itself--and us--upon the best of Greek as
well as Hebrew thought. He made it nobly catholic in the very process
of nourishing his individual soul upon it. He was crucified because
he was more deeply true to it than the modernists, as well as the
loyalists, of his day. Our modernists, however, deem that his hand was
raised and pierced to direct us to bite the hand that fed us.

The gnawing pride of religious individualism cloaks itself in the
assumption that the individual has transferred his reverence _entire_
from the traditional deity to “the present; God” as Emerson called
Him, or to the present Reality as successors of Emerson often prefer
to call It. But actually that transfer is never accomplished. The
reverence never arrives entire. Always some of it, often most of it,
leaks away unnoticed during the transshipment. Therefore this exchange
is never attempted by the greatest men of religion, nor advocated
by the truest realists or humanists. Jesus and Socrates both found
the “Father’s business” in the Temple, in the moral and imaginative
organism of orthodox religion, and never more so than when they were
doing their best to cleanse it of thieves. They were wrongly accused
of an intention for which some of our modern spiritual leaders have
been wrongly praised, the intention of destroying the Temple in order
to rebuild it on their own insights, as it were in three days. No
doubt all men of deepest insight are strongly tempted, in their first
maturity, by this pseudo-divine impatience with tradition. They yearn
to show immediately that the Power within them is more reliable than
the “pinnacle of the Temple.”[26] But they perceive the spiritual
pride of this yearning, its tempting of God, and they forthwith
school themselves to the divine patience. They recognise that the
Temple is essential for _their own_ fullest development. They do not
patronise it diplomatically for the public welfare while deprecating
it for themselves. They see that the fullest type of spiritual life
is attainable only through the unbroken “tension,”[27] the constant
critical interaction, between personal and institutional religion,
between individual inspiration and a rich tradition. They know that
their own humility, like that of the multitudes whom they influence,
must grow and bear fruit in the kind of temple that George Herbert saw,
the temple which is at once, and mysteriously, within and without. In
short, the greatest leaders of the spirit faced the pride of spiritual
immediacy and subdued it.

But Emerson did not. He only partly faced it, and he very considerably
succumbed to it.[28] He fell, and modern spirituality fell with him.
The greatness of this default in so great a man is admitted very
reluctantly by those of us who have loved him from youth. When they
were beginning life, he told them what a happy day it was for the youth
when he discovered that “the above” was the same as “the within.” He
did not tell them that “the within,” on the same happy day, begins to
leak down through an unseen pride to “the below.” He told them that “I
the imperfect adore my own Perfect.” He was not careful to explain to
them how very imperfect is this Perfect--or else, how scantily It is my
own.

Emerson’s effect on young men is most significant, I think, in the
case of Matthew Arnold. In Arnold’s Oxford days, Newman impressed
him with a sense of the laborious difficulty of spiritual truth. But
that sense was considerably soothed and weakened, I think, by the
cheery, confident voice that came to him from across the Atlantic;
throwing into contrast the melancholy beauty of Newman’s voice and
relegating its religious message to a past which, however alluring
in its beautiful melancholy, seemed now so utterly past. Arnold lost
Newman for religion while continuing to patronise him for beauty and
culture. He did not discern how greatly Newman, on account of his fresh
and profound humility, joined with a mind unsurpassed in the modern
age for analytic penetration, was needed by this age as a “friend and
aider of those who would live in the spirit.” Therefore Arnold left
the way open for T. H. Huxley to persuade the oncoming generation, in
the blundering pride of his naturalistic sophistry, that Newman’s way
with truth was in the main sophistic.[29] I am very far from wishing to
disparage Arnold, as I am accused of having done in previous papers.
It is just because he was so great and influential a critic, such a
fine stronghold of humanism in the midst of the nineteenth century,
that his deficiency in this matter is costly to-day. His tendency to a
certain superior ease, not free from presumption, in his treatment of
religious truth was doubtless due in good measure to the influence of
Emerson. Hence when Arnold came to America in the eighteen-eighties he
could tell us how matchless Emerson was as a modern “friend and aider
of those who would live in the spirit” without telling us how deficient
this friend was in the pertinent and prime requisite of spiritual
humility.

Just here, perhaps, some readers are priding themselves on never
having cared for Emerson, in other words on never having been young.
But maybe they have absorbed some jots and tittles of his toxin
by way of Arnold and the college professors, or of Huxley and the
scientific metaphysicians, or of Whitman and the current poets.
By de-personalising his individualism in a rare and not unspecious
fashion, Emerson could send it seeping through an extraordinary variety
of individuals. To-day wherever two or three, or two or three hundred,
are gathered together in the name of God (modern)--in the name of the
Over-Soul or the Under-Soul, of Reality, Nature, Humanity, Hinduism,
Good Will, Progress, World Peace, World Religion, Individual Freedom,
yes and even Enlightened Disillusion--there is Emerson in the midst
of them. To be sure it is but a shade, a distorted shade, of the
master. Yet it reminds us what a crooked, widening shadow is thrown
forward through the years by a hidden grain of pride in a master mind.
Emerson’s spiritual pride was veiled by his personal modesty, which
was the tolerant deference and flexibility of the modern spirit at its
brightest. His luminous nobility of nature and the underlying soundness
of his humanism[30] enabled him to give unexampled force and radiance
to the proud errors he inherited from the eighteenth-century naturists
and the great Romantic poets. It was he, above all, who made naturism
seem deeply natural and Romantic irresponsibility nigh divine.

He disclaimed responsibility for his words, yet spoke as one
having authority. He claimed the moody freedom of a Romantic poet
together with the plain weight of a prose prophet of common sense.
He consummated the noxious amalgam that his predecessors in prose
and verse had prepared: he _solidly_ confused poetic immediacy of
experience with the immediate presence of Truth. Admirers, half
perceiving his confusion, have wholly excused it on the ground of his
unique constitution--just as he did! If gold rust, what will iron do?
If Emerson could be vitally yet complacently muddled, what of the
Emersonians? If the modern outlook is now confused and unhappy, one
reason is that the chief modern sage was confused and at the same time
spiritually proud.

The balefulness of his confusion was concealed from him by the subtle
mingling of his pride into his modesty. He was too modest to believe
that his individual outlook could become a public tragedy, and too
proud to doubt that his individual inspirations were universally valid.
He attributed these too much to deity and not at all to Rousseau. He
disavowed all predecessors and all disciples. In his study or along the
woodpath he deemed he was alone with the Soul; never realising how much
the thoughts that arose in him were determined by the souls who had
influenced his soul and by the souls whom his soul wanted to influence.
His solitude of the Soul was thronged with unacknowledged souls. He
dislimned them all into deity. His religious predecessors had loudly
demolished one religious form after another to leave no barrier, so
they thought, between the soul and God. He, the last great Protestant,
serenely set fire to the limits of the soul itself. With suave and
awful presumption, he melted all souls into God. The outcome is a new
barrier between them and Him, a cool, unobtrusive glaze of pride.

The modern pride that Emerson helped so much to crystallise, wears a
lucent, modest air. It looks like a lens turned directly upon Reality.
But it has the opaqueness of a mirror and is turned upon ourselves--if
only by the grace of God we could see our reflections in it. Its
surface seems plain, undramatic, when compared with the ancient modes
of _hubris_,--until one perceives therein the swarming shapes and
conflicts of the modern tragedy.

Dramatic enough is the way this pride, during the past two hundred
years, has worked out cogently from its religious centre to its secular
circumference, in recent years with catastrophic speed. In religion
it has meant more and more a blind emphasis upon the _immediacy_ of
spiritual values--as though their close presence to Everyman were
the same, or almost the same, as his real possession of them. Modern
religionists have debased the great doctrine of the Immanence of God
and, therewith, the doctrines of divine love, the brotherhood of man,
the goodness of the human heart, and the “positiveness” of morality.
The results for Everyman are now glaring.

Deity, from Everyman’s modern viewpoint, is fast disappearing into
human nature; or into that mystic conglomerate of man and the universe
which is either called Nature or, as Mark Twain might say, is “the same
gentleman under another name.” New names are being invented for It
daily by pseudo-science. Advanced Protestant theology lies at the proud
foot of this conqueror. Forgetting that modern religion at the first
did help to wound herself, the more conservative type of theist blames
science for harming religion. The up-to-date theist blames religion
for not equalling the flight of science, unaware how terribly religion
has maimed her wing with pride. A common type of minister deprecates
the spread of atheism while confidently advocating the very doctrine
that fosters it. If he is shrewd enough to glimpse his dilemma, he
can justify himself with Emersonian blandness by pointing out that
the abuse of an excellent idea is not a good ground for the disuse
of it--the excellent idea being a conceited, facile, and slippery
sentiment of divine immanence.

This immanentism has proudly pawed down holy truths to the everyday
level of Everyman. And he, finding that when thus muddied they sour
the daily bread of his happiness, is now rejecting them wholesale;
thereby exhibiting the destructive aspect of that divine justice, that
relentless Love of Perfection, which his pastors have hidden behind
a gross version of the divine love for men. Our religious leaders,
announcing promiscuously the perfect love that casteth out fear--a
doctrine which the holiest saints approached with awe--have succeeded
in casting out the true fear that belongs with our imperfect love. They
have speciously disparaged “negative” in favour of “positive” morality.
With Emersonian impatience they have shrugged at the _definite_ moral
precepts of the ages, as trite and rather forbidding antiquities, while
advocating an _indefinite_ moral sentiment, as the prime discovery and
panacea of the modern age. They have slurred the divine negation, the
“Everlasting No,” which, acting down through the poor human conscience,
constitutes the great _unadulterable_ factor of positive morals and, in
the end, the most positive provision against positive unhappiness.

This proud religious blindness has opened the highway for blind secular
naturism. The one has played into the hands of the other; the blind
has led the blind toward the pit of spiritual anarchy. Consider, for
example, the quick succession and interplay of these three phases of
the modern spiritual drama: first, the Protestant notion of immediate
justification by faith in Christ; second, the humanitarian notion of
justification by faith in mankind; and third, the cynical notion of
justification by faith in nothing--except primitive desire. In the
third act of the tragedy, as in the other two, the leading motive is a
specious emotional immediacy fed by subconscious pride. For the Nothing
that modern sceptics are devoted to (its finest dramatic representation
is in the works of Thomas Hardy) includes a concupiscent Something
by the exercise of which, so they feel, we may be saved--or at least
vitally damned. Hence our very disillusion to-day is flown with pride.
Our current disillusionists, not humbled by the fact that the modern
rejection of moral severity is eventuating in a febrile weakness of
the vital human appetites, continue to disparage that severity and to
advocate, as our only hope, a romantic resurgence of those appetites.
They yearn for a flood-tide between rotten banks; fancying, apparently,
that “sinners plunged beneath that flood lose all their guilty stains,”
immediately. They hymn a spurious Primitive as their Protestant
forbears hymned a spurious Christ.[31]

Consider, too, the dramatic inevitability with which the “psychists”
and the “legislationists,” so to call them, have come swarming more
and more into the breaches that modern religion has made in the human
conscience. The psychists are proudly animated with the old Sophist
hope of reducing that mysterious citadel and of rearranging the
whole soul on modern rational lines. They are teaching the oncoming
generation to _think_ in a fashion indicated in the following remark
made to me by a thoughtful youth: “When a fellow tries to do the right
thing, he has a satisfaction that seems at the time very real; but of
course, as soon as he _thinks_, he sees that this satisfaction isn’t
real at all.” At a recent American congress of thinkers, one of them
explained how religion and morality are being taken over and saved, in
so far as worth saving, by psychology. He was confident of tucking the
setting sun, quite immediately, into his grandstand.

The legislationists, on the other hand, would save the fading rays
by immediate public measures, national and international. In a world
dim with unprecedented bloodshed, misty with subtle suspicion and
self-seeking, and darkening ever more with impiety and lust, they would
produce by political or social machinery the lights of peace, good
will, purity, and temperance. They are busily wiring a twilight world
for incandescent goodness. They would arrest and soften with electric
legislation the awful working-out of divine laws. The leader in this
project is an ideal figure of Columbia. But under grave scrutiny the
radiant figure reveals a good many lineaments of her who was the leader
of the seven deadly sins. One recalls with something of a shiver the
queenly “progress” of Lucifera in her pleasant twilight--oblivious of
the dead men’s bones thick under foot and the “foggy mist” all along
the way.[32]

Columbia, the progressive modern spirit, is too proud to face the
fearful carnage of human values and the foggy confusion of principles
brought about by the modern _heart_. Kindly persons after criticising
various modern ills, take comfort by concluding that, after all, the
modern age is sound and right at heart. But here, precisely, is the
source of all those ills. The modern heart has gone wrong. The chief
leaders of imagination during the past two centuries assumed that
modernity meant a real change of heart, a change for the better; that
owing to the long schooling of the past and the new lights of the
present, the human heart could now afford to relax its old combat
with itself. This assumption is parroted to-day, with varying degrees
of subtlety, by preachers, philosophers, educators, youngsters,
legislationists, artists, Rotarians, and disillusionists. At the same
time they are demonstrating conclusively that the old human heart,
unregenerate, is still with us. They are showing its ancient and
amazing capacity for inventing new ways of disguising old Duty,--the
kind of duty that means a daily, painful, but not inglorious battle
within the heart itself. They are showing us how inglorious human
thought and art can become, how shallow, cheap, and in the end
intolerable, when the human _heart_ has become “too proud to fight.”


III

This catastrophe, when fully recognised, can point us to fresh hope
and faith. We may win afresh the old faith which goes hand in hand
with a certain disillusion, a certain kind of scepticism, foreign to
our current disillusionists. This faith, says Newman, “looks for no
essential improvements or permanent reformations in the dispensation
of those precious gifts which are ever pure in their origin, ever
corrupted in man’s use of them.”[33]

So far, the moral corruption of the twentieth century has not produced
the flagrancy of conduct that characterised a good many earlier ages.
“My _ideas_ of life have become so rotten,” thus a Pragmatised and
Behaviourised youngster confessed to me, “that I wonder my _life_ is
not rottener.” He looked startled when I told him to give his ideas
time. However, it appeared that, partly in spite of and partly by means
of his marked self-consciousness, he had attained to some veracity
of inward unhappiness. We may hope that his case is quite typical.
In other words, our self-conscious modern age has provided a wide
and unprecedented demonstration of the fact that the chief danger to
human happiness is immorality of _ideas_. Previous ages have done
lip-homage to high moral standards while grossly violating them in
practice. The modern age has proudly assumed that it has grown far
beyond such hypocrisy. Meanwhile it has developed the subtler hypocrisy
of cultivating depraved and specious ideas while shrinking from the
_full_ consequences of them in conduct. The result is that life looks
dully undramatic, culture and art degenerate, and thoughtful persons
who are harmless enough in their acts have a real misery in their
spirit. Surely, therefore, we have now a chance to learn afresh the
_inward_ relentlessness of the Moral Laws; particularly that “precious
gift” which we have so bitterly corrupted, the law of humility. We may
now perceive that the universal proverb “Pride goes before a fall” is
no less applicable to our age than to the old aristocratic ages; and
that, far from being merely a maxim of external prudence, it is the
folk-sign of an _inward_ region of cause and effect that we, with all
our self-consciousness, have scarcely penetrated.

We may find again the inward and yet superhuman rigour of the Laws. We
may learn that they are supernatural without being ever _un_natural;
always immanent in us and yet, in a mystery beyond the reach of our
science, always transcendent of us. Browning’s Paracelsus, embodying
the modern mixture of romance and science, complained in regard to his
own catastrophe that “God’s intimations fail in clearness rather than
in force.” Precisely so; but there is no use in whining about it. The
human task is to clarify and obey, as well as we can, Laws which we did
not invent; which no man, except when stupified by pride--either his
own pride or the pride of his teachers, relentlessly visited upon him
to the third and fourth generation--can conceive to be merely human
inventions.

Those Laws fail in human clearness, certainly, but not in force. They
came to send a sword into the earth, more than Peace. They have been
the cause of agony and misery for millions of innocent or ignorant
people; and no man has succeeded in making clear the full ground of
this. From the standpoint of human justice, those Laws are fearfully
general, vague, and incalculable. Yet our truest happiness, and indeed
our truest originality, depend on a constant effort to elucidate them
and apply them afresh to each new generation and individual. This task
is of course, in a worldly sense, an impossible one. New sins and
difficulties, or rather old sins and difficulties in inexhaustibly new
modes, appear at every step. Salvation for the individual never becomes
easier; and the social frame is so built, beneath our building, that
it cannot be saved. Old seers and new scientists are true to a deep
human instinct in prophesying that some day the world will be destroyed
by fire, collision, or decay; will “dissolve like an insubstantial
pageant faded.” Our surest Comfort, at the opposite pole from modern
comfortableness and not divisible from right conduct, is in knowing
that those Laws, while “ever corrupted by man’s use of them” are indeed
“precious gifts ever pure in their origin.” Clough, that fine religious
humanist who faced the modern situation without blinking, had a sound
humility when he wrote:

  “I steadier step
  When I recall
  That though I slip
  Thou dost not fall.”

The fresh humility that we need must be built up patiently by religion
and by humanism; each working in its own way and carefully respectful
of the other, even (perhaps _especially_) when these two approaches are
equally employed by one person.

Religion is normally theistic, and therewith mediatorial and
sacramental. Otherwise she is not catholic and, _in the long run_,
loses her right humility. This should be evident enough from the long
history of religion, Christian and non-Christian, past and present.
Theism decays continually, but by reason of its own sins rather than
the virtues of opposing doctrines. Pantheism, deism, and all the others
flourish in its decadencies, more or less parasitically, but cannot
take deep root in human humility. I do not mean that theism is true
because it works, but that it works because at its best it is our
truest mode of conceiving the Eternal One. Voltaire’s epigram, “God
created man in His own image and man promptly returned the compliment,”
is superb and lasting because the doctrine here parodied is lasting
and sublime. The parody is catholically critical because the doctrine
itself is deeply catholic. Modernism, when strictly criticising
catholic doctrine, is helpful; when frankly rejecting it, respectable;
when blandly attempting to reduce it to poetry, baneful--baneful in
its hidden pride--and, I trust, hopeless. Not similarly hopeless
is Latin Fundamentalism; by which I mean the attempt of Latinised
theology, no matter in what branch of the Christian church it appears,
to define religious mysteries with a literalism that is too precise
to be accurate. Most hopeful is the work of a small and quiet group
of theologians, belonging to various churches, who are resuming and
carrying forward the thwarted hope of the great Christian humanists
of the Renaissance. They are striving for a non-revolutionary, a firm
and organic, development of Christian doctrine; that is, for a real
catholicity. It is they, studious, ethical, open-eyed, and humble who
are rebuilding the foundations of the Temple.

Yet the Temple, or let us say “the church militant here upon earth,”
is at its best inadequate. The man of good sense has always found and
will always find it necessary to take the church with a grain of salt,
even though the salt loseth its savour without the church. Good sense
is a distinct foundation; and humanism is built upon it. Humanism
may be theistic or _non_-theistic; it is unsound when it is anything
between. When non-theistic, it falls short of the full truth that is
in the human imagination. The pre-eminent example of course is the
sublime religious humanism of the Buddha. However, if it be true that
the primitive Hindu pantheon had 330,000,000 gods, doubtless the Buddha
had several million good reasons for not being a theist. Theism at
its worst fosters, as nothing else can, the proud imaginations of the
human heart. Humanism, which in one of its most important functions is
a criticism of religion, is essential for sound religious humility.
Religion needs the humility derivable from the consideration that
happiness may be obtained without religion. Humanism is the study
and practice of the principles of human happiness _uncomplicated_ by
naturistic dogmas on the one side and religious dogmas on the other.
When religion, as at present, has degraded “God’s love” and abolished
“God’s anger,” humanism will insist that the former doctrine (though
at its best supreme) is no less _metaphorical_ than the latter, and
not less subject to unconscious superstition. When religion assists
irreligion in softening God’s laws, humanism will insist that a
rediscovery of their severity is essential for right humility and
happiness.

Just here I am forced to express the hope that those estimable critics,
Mr. T. S. Eliot and Mr. Walter Lippmann, will at one point counteract
each other’s influence upon the public. Mr. Eliot, aiming toward
humane religion, tends to reduce humanism to a mere balance of mind,
a ghost of the Arnoldian culture, subservient to anglo-catholicism.
Mr. Lippmann, aiming toward religious humanism, tends to reduce deity
to “an ideal of the human personality,”[34] a rather ghostly ally of
practical morals. Each is somewhat swayed by the modern desire for
immediate measures.

Providentially, however, a more catholic attitude has already been
erected by two older critics, Baron Friedrich von Hügel and Professor
Irving Babbitt--the two most potent and distinguished personalities,
though not the finest writers, that have so far appeared in English
literature of the twentieth century. The one, a devout Roman Catholic
of England, has indirectly done much for the best interests of
humanism. The other, a rigorous moral humanist of New England, has
indirectly done much for the best interests of religion. Their
extraordinary scholarship is guided by a sound humility of spirit. In
their writings, neither ventures further than his equipment warrants
into the other’s field, and they do not contradict each other in
fundamental points. They agree in the conviction that now, for the sake
of religion itself, the way of humanism must be clearly discriminated
from the way of religion. Mr. Babbitt has urged that religion at its
best is far above, and at its worst far below, a sound humanism. Baron
von Hügel has urged that Christians should face now, more frankly and
fully than they have ever faced before, the fact that the ethical or
humane way has a distinct and _divinely ordained_ validity of its own
for those who cannot honestly follow the religious way; and that the
full health of each way depends upon the health of the other.

This truly catholic attitude, which is essential for modern humility,
is not palatable to the pseudo-catholicity of the modern mind. We
have fancied, especially in America, that expert reason aided by
democratic tolerance could soon discover the underlying relationships
between the different ways of salvation, thus federating these in
a single “concern,” a sort of efficient successor and substitute
for the universal infallible church of the Middle Ages. Behind this
enterprise stands the overweening assumption of modern philosophy
that the universe itself is a single organism with a large variety
of inter-assimilable aspects, such as religion and science, love and
morals, good and evil, God and Nature. Tennyson would not have been so
shocked by his rediscovery of the perennial fact that God and Nature
are at strife if he had not been so infected by the modern notion that
they ought not to be,--that properly they belong in a universal banking
trust whose members, however they may quarrel on the surface, never
suffer a real severance of business relations. Nor would our current
disillusionists feel so badly about the inevitable dissolution of that
trust if their grandfathers had not credited it so heavily. Let us
now recognise pride as the grand sponsor of that trust--the pride of
unity and immediacy, or of universal “continuity” as the late T. E.
Hulme would say. Let us humbly admit that the universe is faulted,
geologically speaking, deeper and higher than our knowing. What of
ultimate plan and unity its strata may have, God only knows.

Our youths who have learned to smile with a weary superior air at
the traditional division of reality into God, Man, and Nature, would
breathe more freely and begin again to taste the vital zest of the
universal drama, if we would now teach them that this traditional
division is _less naïve_ than the theory of universal continuity; is
better grounded in universal human experience; and, above all, is more
truly accordant with the profound division which any thinking man
may find within himself to-day when he is sufficiently self-reliant
and experimental to plumb beneath the surfaces where our ephemeral
psycho-physicisms weave and flutter. Recently humanism, in its attempt
to fulfil and deepen the experimentality of the modern spirit, has
of necessity placed its chief emphasis upon that inward division. It
has insisted that the _opposition_ between the higher and lower wills
within us, whether they be called “divine” and “natural” or what not,
is essentially inexplicable by expert reason and is nevertheless, from
the present standpoint of human happiness, the most important feature
of the universe arrived at by free and full experimentation.

This humane _dualism_ strikes at the very heart of modern pride,
the pride of spiritual _monism_. It sets a true immediacy over
against a false immediacy. It assigns a central value to the paradox
established by the immediate experience of Everyman when he tries
(in the terminology of common sense) to be “at one with himself” by
keeping his “better self” above his “worser self.” It depreciates
the expert reasonings and romantic emotions which, overriding that
vital paradox of good sense, would leap immediately at spiritual
unity and continuity. Consequently the humane dualism, more than any
other doctrine of recent criticism, has met with angry rejection or
obfuscating comment. A good example of the latter is afforded by
a generous and intelligent reviewer who comments as follows upon
the dualistic humanism of Milton: “Milton, after all, had not read
Darwin; we have ... Milton’s energetic dualism was based on religious
conceptions which are genuinely outlived; the power behind his allegory
of the soul was his belief that the world was shaped and created for
mankind; and, conceiving of ourselves now so much more humbly than he
did, we cannot set our lives on such a stage.... We cannot invent an
opposition we do not feel.”[35]

The above, in a representative modern fashion, confuses modesty and
humility. The modern modest dogma that the world was not “shaped and
created for mankind” has shown itself, when all its implications are
considered, no less deficient in real humility than the conceited
belief that the world was created for human comfortableness. This
belief was far more radically repudiated by Milton than by us. Only
with the aid of modern pride can we be sure that his _basic_ religious
ideas have been “_genuinely_ outlived” and that we, having read Darwin,
conceive of ourselves “much more _humbly_ than he did.” He, to be
sure, was no adept either in Darwinian or in Emersonian modesty. As a
man among men he had strong intellectual and even personal pride. But
above it he had true spiritual humility; which may consist with, and
derive support from, that virtue too much obscured by modern modesty,
namely “self-esteem, founded on justice and right, well managed.”
This kind of self-reliance enabled Milton to assign full value to
the moral division he found within himself. His “energetic dualism,”
as the reviewer calls it, his dramatic sense of the _real_ opposition
between the nature of lust, pride, and Chaos and the nature of purity,
humility, and Peace, was not “based on” transient religious concepts.
It was “based on” the duality he found at the centre of himself as well
as at the centre of European experience, Christian and pagan. He would
have found it also at the centre of ancient Buddhism, if he had known
this as we know it to-day. But, says my reviewer, “we cannot invent an
opposition we do not feel.” Very true. Nevertheless, with the aid of
right self-esteem and humility, with a patient critical reverence for
what is best in ourselves and in accumulated tradition, European and
Oriental, we may not only “feel” but realise, in thought and conduct,
an opposition we did not invent.

Only thus can we proceed to a spiritual use of our scientific modesty.
Over against the self-flattery of religious superstition, science
has revealed the indifference of a vast physical universe. Here is
wholesome seed for a fresh humility. But so far its growth in the
modern spirit is blighted; blighted much less by the old superstitions
which the modern religionist enjoys attacking than by the new
superstition which he himself has fostered--the bastard ideal of love.
This ideal, religiously derived from an illegitimate mixture of two
fallibles, democracy and St. John, infects to-day the blood of many
who, rejecting St. John and perhaps also democracy, believe loudly in
Sex; or who, tired of Sex also, believe in nothing because it seems
the sole alternative to the spurious all-immanent divinity of modern
love. This love, though masquerading as powerful and strenuous, is
essentially soft. It has succeeded in masking the Cross, not only
the Christian but the universal Cross, in soft flummeries. The hard
universe of science disowns it. And so does the severity of the divine
Laws. If we learn again to revere these in their full severity as we
find it in history (especially recent history) and in ourselves, to bow
before their awful beauty with a love that fears to call itself worthy
of casting out fear, then the outward laws can again become real images
of the inward Laws.

Outward nature with her unfathomable self-subsistence, her rigorous
detachment from the egoistic delusions of the human heart, and her
firm satisfactions for those who seek only to know and follow her
laws, can again be seen as a real though very distant representation
of the Divine Nature itself. The dual nature of man, freed from the
intervolving vapours of old metaphysical dualisms and new metaphysical
monisms, guarded from insidious loves, and cultivated with renewed
moral vigour, can be seen again as the isthmus between Time and
Eternity: our firm and fruitful land between unfathomable, unmixing,
but not unkindly seas.


FOOTNOTES

[25] Recently I attended on successive Sundays an extremely Catholic
and an extremely Protestant celebration of the Holy Communion. The
solemnity of the former was injured by the priest’s sermon, which
evinced the pumping process, the “defence-mechanism,” referred to
above. At the other service, the mound of bread-cubes that appeared on
the table below the pulpit, alongside a pitcher of grape-juice, was
suggestive, I fear, of the above mentioned junk-heaps. For the minister
interrupted his readings from old sacramental liturgies to explain how
much the ceremony rightly meant to his sect, and how much it wrongly
meant to the Catholics.

[26] Luke IV, 9-13.

[27] This word is borrowed from the late Baron Friedrich von Hügel, in
whose life and writings the truth of it is powerfully and beautifully
illustrated.

[28] His crucial period in early maturity, his “temptation in the
wilderness,” is examined in my article “On Emerson’s ‘Grace’ and
‘Self-Reliance’” in the _New England Quarterly_, Vol. II, No. 1, 1929.

[29] See the essays on Newman, Arnold, and Huxley in Robert Shafer’s
_Christianity and Naturalism_, 1926.

[30] See the chapter on him in Norman Foerster’s _American Criticism_,
1928.

[31] An interesting critique bearing on this subject is “The Modern
Distemper” by Professor Ralph Barton Perry in the _Saturday Review of
Literature_, June 1, 1929.

[32] Spenser’s _Faerie Queene_, Book I, canto 4. This great poetic
fable would be studied in our schools and colleges with deeper emotion
if its application to modern pride were not screened off by modern
pride itself.

[33] From _Parochial and Plain Sermons_, 1880, Vol. II, No. XXXI.

[34] _A Preface to Morals_, p. 326.

[35] From a review of my book _The Cycle of Modern Poetry_ in the
_Times Literary Supplement_ (London), June 20, 1929.




