LXVII

THE CRUEL CRANE OUTWITTED.


A tailor who used to make robes for the brotherhood was wont to
cheat his customers, and thus prided himself on being smarter
than other men. But once, on entering upon an important business
transaction with a stranger, he found his master in fraudulent
practices, and suffered a heavy loss.                                1

And the Blessed One said: "This is not an isolated incident in
the greedy tailor's fate; in other incarnations he suffered
similar losses, and by trying to dupe others ultimately ruined
himself.                                                             2

"This same greedy character lived many generations ago as a crane
near a pond, and when the dry season set in he said to the fishes
with a bland voice: 'Are you not anxious for your future welfare?
There is at present very little water and still less food in this
pond. What will you do should the whole pond become dry, in this
drought?'                                                            3

'Yes, indeed' said the fishes, 'what should we do?'                  4

"Replied the crane: 'I know a fine, large lake, which never
becomes dry. Would you not like me to carry you there in my
beak?' When the fishes began to distrust the honesty of the
crane, he proposed to have one of them sent over to the lake to
see it; and a big carp at last decided to take the risk for the
sake of the others, and the crane carried him to a beautiful lake
and brought him back in safety. Then all doubt vanished, and the
fishes gained confidence in the crane, and now the crane took
them one by one out of the pond and devoured them on a big
varana-tree.                                                         5

"There was also a lobster in the pond, and when it listed the
crane to eat him too, he said: 'I have taken all the fishes away
and put them in a fine, large lake. Come along. I shall take
thee, too!'                                                          6

'But how wilt thou hold me to carry me along?' asked the lobster.    7

'I shall take hold of thee with my beak,' said the crane.            8

'Thou wilt let me fall if thou carry me like that. I will not go
with thee!' replied the lobster.                                     9

'Thou needst not fear,' rejoined the crane; 'I shall hold thee
quite tight all the way.'                                           10

"Then said the lobster to himself: 'If this crane once gets hold
of a fish, he will certainly never let him go in a lake! Now if
he should really put me into the lake it would be splendid; but
if he does not, then I will cut his throat and kill him!' So he
said to the crane: 'Look here, friend, thou wilt not be able to
hold me tight enough; but we lobsters have a famous grip. If thou
wilt let me catch hold of thee round the neck with my claws, I
shall be glad to go with thee.'                                     11

"The crane did not see that the lobster was trying to outwit him,
and agreed. So the lobster caught hold of his neck with his claws
as securely as with a pair of blacksmith's pincers, and called
out: 'Ready, ready, go!'                                            12

"The crane took him and showed him the lake, and then turned off
toward the varana-tree. 'My dear uncle!' cried the lobster, 'The
lake lies that way, but thou art taking me this other way.'         13

"Answered the crane: 'Thinkest thou so? Am I thy dear uncle? Thou
meanest me to understand, I suppose, that I am thy slave, who has
to lift thee up and carry thee about with him, where thou
pleasest! Now cast thine eye upon that heap of fish-bones at the
root of yonder varana-tree. Just as I have eaten those fish,
every one of them, just so will I devour thee also!'                14

'Ah! those fishes got eaten through their own stupidity,'
answered the lobster, 'but I am not going to let thee kill me. On
the contrary, it is thou that I am going to destroy. For thou, in
thy folly, hast not seen that I have outwitted thee. If we die,
we both die together; for I will cut off this head of thine and
cast it to the ground!' So saying, he gave the crane's neck a
pinch with his claws as with a vise.                                15

"Then gasping, and with tears trickling from his eyes, and
trembling with the fear of death, the crane besought the lobster,
saying: 'O, my Lord! Indeed I did not intend to eat thee. Grant
me my life!'                                                        16

'Very well! fly down and put me into the lake,' replied the
lobster.                                                            17

"And the crane turned round and stepped down into the lake, to
place the lobster on the mud at its edge. Then the lobster cut
the crane's neck through as clean as one would cut a lotus-stalk
with a hunting-knife, and then entered the water!"                  18

When the Teacher had finished this discourse, he added: "Not now
only was this man outwitted in this way, but in other existences,
too, by his own intrigues."                                         19




LXVIII.

FOUR KINDS OF MERIT.


There was a rich man who used to invite all the Brahmans of the
neighborhood to his house, and, giving them rich gifts, offered
great sacrifices to the gods.                                        1

And the Blessed One said: "If a man each month repeat a thousand
sacrifices and give offerings without ceasing, he is not equal to
him who but for one moment fixes his mind upon righteousness."       2

The world-honored Buddha continued: "There are four kinds of
offering: first, when the gifts are large and the merit small;
secondly, when the gifts are small and the merit small; thirdly,
when the gifts are small and the merit large; and fourthly, when
the gifts are large and the merit is also large.                     3

"The first is the case of the deluded man who takes away life for
the purpose of sacrificing to the gods, accompanied by carousing
and feasting. Here the gifts are great, but the merit is small
indeed.                                                              4

"The gifts are small and the merit is also small, when from
covetousness and an evil heart a man keeps to himself a part of
that which he intends to offer.                                      5

"The merit is great, however, while the gift is small, when a man
makes his offering from love and with a desire to grow in wisdom
and in kindness.                                                     6

"Lastly, the gift is large and the merit is large, when a wealthy
man, in an unselfish spirit and with the wisdom of a Buddha,
gives donations and founds institutions for the best of mankind
to enlighten the minds of his fellow-men and to administer unto
their needs."                                                        7




LXIX.

THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD.


There was a certain Brahman in Kosambī, a wrangler and well
versed in the Vedas. As he found no one whom he regarded his
equal in debate he used to carry a lighted torch in his hand, and
when asked for the reason of his strange conduct, he replied:
"The world is so dark that I carry this torch to light it up, as
far as I can."                                                       1

A samana sitting in the market-place heard these words and said:
"My friend, if thine eyes are blind to the sight of the
omnipresent light of the day, do not call the world dark. Thy
torch adds nothing to the glory of the sun and thy intention to
illumine the minds of others is as futile as it is arrogant."        2

Whereupon the Brahman asked: "Where is the sun of which thou
speakest?" And the samana replied: "The wisdom of the Tathāgata
is the sun of the mind. His radiancy is glorious by day and
night, and he whose faith is strong will not lack light on the
path to Nirvāna where he will inherit bliss everlasting."            3




LXX.

LUXURIOUS LIVING.


While the Buddha was preaching his doctrine for the conversion of
the world in the neighborhood of Savatthi, a man of great wealth
who suffered from many ailmemts came to him with clasped hands
and said: "World-honored Buddha, pardon me for my want of respect
in not saluting thee as I ought, but I suffer greatly from
obesity, excessive drowsiness, and other complaints, so that I
cannot move without pain."                                           1

The Tathāgata, seeing the luxuries with which the man was
surrounded asked him: "Hast thou a desire to know the cause of
thy ailments?" And when the wealthy man expressed his willingness
to learn, the Blessed One said: "There are five things which
produce the condition of which thou complainest: opulent dinners,
love of sleep, hankering after pleasure, thoughtlessness, and
lack of occupation. Exercise self-control at thy meals, and take
upon thyself some duties that will exercise thy abilities and
make thee useful to thy fellow-men. In following this advice thou
wilt prolong thy life."                                              2

The rich man remembered the words of the Buddha and after some
time having recovered his lightness of body and youthful buoyancy
returned to the Worldhonored One and, coming afoot without horses
and attendants, said to him: "Master, thou hast cured my bodily
ailments; I come now to seek enlightenment of my mind."              3

And the Blessed One said: "The worldling nourishes his body, but
the wise man nourishes his mind. He who indulges in the
satisfaction of his appetites works his own destruction; but he
who walks in the path will have both the salvation from evil and
a prolongation of life."                                             4




LXXI.

THE COMMUNICATION OF BLISS.


Annabhāra, the slave of Sumana, having just cut the grass on the
meadow, saw a samana with his bowl begging for food. Throwing
down his bundle of grass he ran into the house and returned with
the rice that had been provided for his own food.                    1

The samana ate the rice and gladdened him with words of religious
comfort.                                                             2

The daughter of Sumana having observed the scene from a window
called out: "Good! Annabhāra, good! Very good!"                      3

Sumana hearing these words inquired what she meant, and on being
informed about Annabhāra's devotion and the words of comfort he
had received from the samana, went to his slave and offered him
money to divide the bliss of his offering.                           4

"My lord," said Annabhāra, "let me first ask the venerable man."
And approaching the samana, he said: "My master has asked me to
share with him the bliss of the offering I made thee of my
allowance of rice. Is it right that I should divide it with him?"    5

The samana replied in a parable. He said: "In a village of one
hundred houses a single light was burning. Then a neighbor came
with his lamp and lit it; and in this same way the light was
communicated from house to house and the brightness in the
village was increased. Thus the light of religion may be diffused
without stinting him who communicates it. Let the bliss of thy
offering also be diffused. Divide it."                               6

Annabhāra returned to his master's house and said to him: "I
present thee, my lord, with a share of the bliss of my offering.
Deign to accept it."                                                 7

Sumana accepted it and offered his slave a sum of money, but
Annabhāra replied: "Not so, my lord; if I accept thy money it
would appear as if I sold thee my share. Bliss cannot be sold; I
beg thou wilt accept it as a gift."                                  8

The master replied: "Brother Annabhāra, from this day forth thou
shalt be free. Live with me as my friend and accept this present
as a token of my respect."                                           9




LXXII.

THE LISTLESS FOOL.


There was a rich Brahman, well advanced in years, who, unmindful
of the impermanence of earthly things and anticipating a long
life, had built himself a large house.                               1

The Buddha wondered why a man so near to death had built a
mansion with so many apartments, and he sent Ānanda to the rich
Brahman to preach to him the four noble truths and the eightfold
path of salvation.                                                   2

The Brahman showed Ānanda his house and explained to him the
purpose of its numerous chambers, but to the instruction of the
Buddha's teachings he gave no heed.                                  3

Ānanda said: "It is the habit of fools to say, 'I have children
and wealth.' He who says so is not even master of himself; how
can he claim possession of children, riches, and servants? Many
are the anxieties of the worldly, but they know nothing of the
changes of the future."                                              4

Scarcely had Ānanda left, when the old man was stricken with
apoplexy and fell dead. The Buddha said, for the instruction of
those who were ready to learn: "A fool, though he live in the
company of the wise, understands nothing of the true doctrine, as
a spoon tastes not the flavor of the soup. He thinks of himself
only, and unmindful of the advice of good counsellors is unable
to deliver himself."                                                 5




LXXIII.

RESCUE IN THE DESERT.


There was a disciple of the Blessed One, full of energy and zeal
for the truth, who, living under a vow to complete a meditation
in solitude, flagged in a moment of weakness. He said to himself:
"The Teacher said there are several kinds of men; I must belong
to the lowest class and fear that in this birth there will be
neither path nor fruit for me. What is the use of a forest life
if I cannot by my constant endeavor attain the insight of
meditation to which I have devoted myself?" And he left the
solitude and returned to the Jetavana.                               1

When the brethren saw him they said to him: "Thou hast done
wrong, O brother, after taking a vow, to give up the attempt of
carrying it out;" and they took him to the Master.                   2

When the Blessed One saw them he said: "I see, O mendicants, that
you have brought this brother here against his will. What has he
done?"                                                               3

"Lord, this brother, having taken the vows of so sanctifying a
faith, has abandoned the endeavor to accomplish the aim of a
member of the order, and has come back to us."                       4

Then the Teacher said to him: "Is it true that thou hast given up
trying?"                                                             5

"It is true, O Blessed One!" was the reply.                          6

The Master said: "This present life of thine is a time of grace.
If thou fail now to reach the happy state thou wilt have to
suffer remorse in future existences. How is it, brother, that
thou hast proved so irresolute? Why, in former states of
existence thou wert full of determination. By thy energy alone
the men and bullocks of five hundred wagons obtained water in the
sandy desert, and were saved. How is it that thou now givest up?"    7

By these few words that brother was re-established in his
resolution. But the others besought the Blessed One, saying:
"Lord! Tell us how this was."                                        8

"Listen, then, O mendicants!" said the Blessed One; and having
thus excited their attention, he made manifest a thing concealed
by change of birth.                                                  9

Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was reigning in Kāsi, the
Bodhisatta was born in a merchant's family; and when he grew up,
he went about trafficking with five hundred carts.                  10

One day he arrived at a sandy desert many leagues across. The
sand in that desert was so fine that when taken in the closed
fist it could not be kept in the hand. After the sun had risen it
became as hot as a mass of burning embers, so that no man could
walk on it. Those, therefore, who had to travel over it took
wood, and water, and oil, and rice in their carts, and traveled
during the night. And at daybreak they formed an encampment and
spread an awning over it, and, taking their meals early, they
passed the day lying in the shade. At sunset they supped, and
when the ground had become cool they yoked their oxen and went
on. The traveling was like a voyage over the sea: a desert-pilot
had to be chosen, and he brought the caravan safe to the other
side by his knowledge of the stars.                                 11

Thus the merchant of our story traversed the desert. And when he
had passed over fifty-nine leagues he thought, "Now, in one more
night we shall get out of the sand," and after supper he directed
the wagons to be yoked, and so set out. The pilot had cushions
arranged on the foremost cart and lay down, looking at the stars
and directing the men where to drive. But worn out by want of
rest during the long march, he fell asleep, and did not perceive
that the oxen had turned round and taken the same road by which
they had come.                                                      12

The oxen went on the whole night through. Towards dawn the pilot
woke up, and, observing the stars, called out: "Stop the wagons,
stop the wagons!" The day broke just as they stopped and were
drawing up the carts in a line. Then the men cried out: "Why this
is the very encampment we left yesterday! We have but little wood
left and our water is all gone! We are lost!" And unyoking the
oxen and spreading the canopy over their heads, they lay down in
despondency, each one under his wagon. But the Bodhisatta said to
himself, "If I lose heart, all these will perish," and walked
about while the morning was yet cool. On seeing a tuft of
kusa-grass, he thought: "This could have grown only by soaking up
some water which must be beneath it."                               13

And he made them bring a spade and dig in that spot. And they dug
sixty cubits deep. And when they had got thus far, the spade of
the diggers struck on a rock; and as soon as it struck, they all
gave up in despair. But the Bodhisatta thought, "There must be
water under that rock," and descending into the well he got upon
the stone, and stooping down applied his ear to it and tested the
sound of it. He heard the sound of water gurgling beneath, and
when he got out he called his page. "My lad, if thou givest up
now, we shall all be lost. Do not lose heart. Take this iron
hammer, and go down into the pit, and give the rock a good blow."   14

The lad obeyed, and though they all stood by in despair, he went
down full of determination and struck at the stone. The rock
split in two and fell below, so that it no longer blocked the
stream, and water rose till its depth from the bottom to the brim
of the well was equal to the height of a palm-tree. And they all
drank of the water, and bathed in it. Then they cooked rice and
ate it, and fed their oxen with it. And when the sun set, they
put a flag in the well, and went to the place appointed. There
they sold their merchandise at a good profit and returned to
their home, and when they died they passed away according to
their deeds. And the Bodhisatta gave gifts and did other virtuous
acts, and he also passed away according to his deeds.               15

After the Teacher had told the story he formed the connection by
saying in conclusion, "The caravanleader was the Bodhisatta, the
future Buddha; the page who at that time despaired not, but broke
the stone, and gave water to the multitude, was this brother
without perseverance; and the other men were attendants on the
Buddha."                                                            16




LXXIV.

THE SOWER.


Bhāradvāja, a wealthy Brahman farmer, was celebrating his
harvest-thanksgiving when the Blessed One came with his
alms-bowl, begging for food.                                         1

Some of the people paid him reverence, but the Brahman was angry
and said: "O samana, it would be more fitting for thee to go to
work than to beg. I plough and sow, and having ploughed and sown,
I eat. If thou didst likewise, thou, too, wouldst have something
to eat."                                                             2

The Tathāgata answered him and said: "O Brahman, I, too, plough
and sow, and having ploughed and sown, I eat."                       3

"Dost thou profess to be a husbandman?" replied the Brahman.
"Where, then, are thy bullocks? Where is the seed and the
plough?"                                                             4

The Blessed One said: "Faith is the seed I sow: good works are
the rain that fertilizes it; wisdom and modesty are the plough;
my mind is the guiding-rein; I lay hold of the handle of the law;
earnestness is the goad I use, and exertion is my draught-ox.
This ploughing is ploughed to destroy the weeds of illusion. The
harvest it yields is the immortal fruit of Nirvāna, and thus all
sorrow ends."                                                        5

Then the Brahman poured rice-milk into a golden bowl and offered
it to the Blessed One, saying: "Let the Teacher of mankind
partake of the rice-milk, for the venerable Gotama ploughs a
ploughing that bears the fruit of immortality."                      6




LXXV.

THE OUTCAST.


When Bhagavat dwelt at Sāvatthi in the Jetavana, he went out with
his alms-bowl to beg for food and approached the house of a
Brahman priest while the fire of an offering was blazing upon the
altar. And the priest said: "Stay there, O shaveling; stay there,
O wretched samana; thou art an outcast."                             1

The Blessed One replied: "Who is an outcast?                         2

"An outcast is the man who is angry and bears hatred; the man who
is wicked and hypocritical, he who embraces error and is full of
deceit.                                                              3

"Whosoever is a provoker and is avaricious, has evil desires, is
envious, wicked, shameless, and without fear to commit wrong, let
him be known as an outcast.                                          4

"Not by birth does one become an outcast, not by birth does one
become a Brahman; by deeds one becomes an outcast, by deeds one
becomes a Brahman."                                                  5




LXXVI.

THE WOMAN AT THE WELL.


Ānanda, the favorite disciple of the Buddha, having been sent by
the Lord on a mission, passed by a well near a village, and
seeing Pakati, a girl of the Mātanga caste, he asked her for
water to drink.                                                      1

Pakati said: "O Brahman, I am too humble and mean to give thee
water to drink, do not ask any service of me lest thy holiness be
contaminated, for I am of low caste."                                2

And Ānanda replied: "I ask not for caste but for water;" and the
Mātanga girl's heart leaped joyfully and she gave Ānanda to
drink.                                                               3

Ānanda thanked her and went away; but she followed him at a
distance.                                                            4

Having heard that Ānanda was a disciple of Gotama Sakyamuni, the
girl repaired to the Blessed One and cried: "O Lord help me, and
let me live in the place where Ānanda thy disciple dwells, so
that I may see him and minister unto him, for I love Ānanda."        5

And the Blessed One understood the emotions of her heart and he
said: "Pakati, thy heart is full of love, but thou understandest
not thine own sentiments. It is not Ānanda that thou lovest, but
his kindness. Accept, then, the kindness thou hast seen him
practise unto thee, and in the humility of thy station practise
it unto others.                                                      6

"Verily there is great merit in the generosity of a king when he
is land to a slave; but there is a greater merit in the slave
when he ignores the wrongs which he suffers and cherishes
kindness and good-will to all mankind. He will cease to hate his
oppressors, and even when powerless to resist their usurpation
will with compassion pity their arrogance and supercilious
demeanor.                                                            7

"Blessed art thou, Pakati, for though thou art a Mātanga thou
wilt be a model for noblemen and noblewomen. Thou art of low
caste, but Brahmans may learn a lesson from thee. Swerve not from
the path of justice and righteousness and thou wilt outshine the
royal glory of: queens on the throne."                               8




LXXVII.

THE PEACEMAKER.


It is reported that two kingdoms were on the verge of war for the
possession of a certain embankment which was disputed by them.       1

And the Buddha seeing the kings and their armies ready to fight,
requested them to tell him the cause of their quarrels. Having
heard the complaints on both sides, he said:                         2

"I understand that the embankment has value for some of your
people; has it any intrinsic value aside from its service to your
men?"                                                                3

"It has no intrinsic value whatever," was the reply. The
Tathāgata continued: "Now when you go to battle is it not sure
that many of your men will be slain and that you yourselves, O
kings, are liable to lose your lives?"                               4

And they said: "Verily, it is sure that many will be slain and
our own lives be jeopardized."                                       5

"The blood of men, however," said Buddha, "has it less intrinsic
value than a mound of earth?"                                        6

"No," the kings said, "the lives of men and above all the lives
of kings, are priceless."                                            7

Then the Tathāgata concluded: "Are you going to stake that which
is priceless against that which has no intrinsic value whatever?"    8

The wrath of the two monarchs abated, and they came to a
peaceable agreement.                                                 9




LXXVIII.

THE HUNGRY DOG.


There was a great king who oppressed his people and was hated by
his subjects; yet when the Tathāgata came into his kingdom, the
king desired much to see him. So he went to the place where the
Blessed One stayed and asked: "O Sakyamuni, canst thou teach a
lesson to the king that will divert his mind and benefit him at
the same time?"                                                      1

And the Blessed One said: "I shall tell thee the parable of the
hungry dog:                                                          2

"There was a wicked tyrant; and the god Indra, assuming the shape
of a hunter, came down upon earth with the demon Mātali, the
latter appearing as a dog of enormous size. Hunter and dog
entered the palace, and the dog howled so wofully that the royal
buildings shook by the sound to their very foundations. The
tyrant had the awe-inspiring hunter brought before his throne and
inquired after the cause of the terrible bark. The hunter said,
"The dog is hungry," whereupon the frightened king ordered food
for him. All the food prepared at the royal banquet disappeared
rapidly in the dog's jaws, and still he howled with portentous
significance. More food was sent for, and all the royal
store-houses were emptied, but in vain. Then the tyrant grew
desperate and asked: 'Will nothing satisfy the cravings of that
woful beast?' 'Nothing,' replied the hunter, 'nothing except
perhaps the flesh of all his enemies.' 'And who are his enemies?'
anxiously asked the tyrant. The hunter replied: 'The dog will
howl as long as there are people hungry in the kingdom, and his
enemies are those who practise injustice and oppress the poor.'
The oppressor of the people, remembering his evil deeds, was
seized with remorse, and for the first time in his life he began
to listen to the teachings of righteousness."                        3

Having ended his story, the Blessed One addressed the king, who
had turned pale, and said to him:                                    4

"The Tathāgata can quicken the spiritual ears of the powerful,
and when thou, great king, hearest the dog bark, think of the
teachings of the Buddha, and thou mayst still learn to pacify the
monster."                                                            5




LXXIX.

THE DESPOT.


King Brahmadatta happened to see a beautiful woman, the wife of a
Brahman merchant, and, conceiving a passion for her ordered a
precious jewel secretly to be dropped into the merchant's
carriage. The jewel was missed, searched for, and found. The
merchant was arrested on the charge of stealing, and the king
pretended to listen with great attention to the defence, and with
seeming regret ordered the merchant to be executed, while his
wife was consigned to the royal harem.                               1

Brahmadatta attended the execution in person, for such sights
were wont to give him pleasure, but when the doomed man looked
with deep compassion at his infamous judge, a flash of the
Buddha's wisdom lit up the king's passion-beclouded mind; and
while the executioner raised the sword for the fatal stroke,
Brahmadatta felt the effect in his own mind, and he imagined he
saw himself on the block. "Hold, executioner!" shouted
Brahmadatta, "it is the king whom thou slayest!" But it was too
late! The executioner had done the bloody deed.                      2

The king fell back in a swoon, and when he awoke a change had
come over him. He had ceased to be the cruel despot and
henceforth led a life of holiness and rectitude. The people said
that the character of the Brahman had been impressed into his
mind.                                                                3

O ye who commit murders and robberies! The veil of self-delusion
covers your eyes. If ye could see things as they are, not as they
appear, ye would no longer inflict injuries and pain on your own
selves. Ye see not that ye will have to atone for your evil
deeds, for what ye sow that will ye reap.                            4




LXXX.

VĀSAVADATTĀ.


There was a courtesan in Mathurā named Vāsavadattā. She happened
to see Upagutta, one of Buddha's disciples, a tall and beautiful
youth, and fell desperately in love with him. Vāsavadattā sent an
invitation to the young man, but he replied: "The time has not
yet arrived when Upagutta will visit Vāsavadattā."                   1

The courtesan was astonished at the reply, and she sent again for
him, saying: "Vāsavadattā desires love, not gold, from Upagutta."
But Upagutta made the same enigmatic reply and did not come.         2

A few months later Vāsavadattā had a love-intrigue with the chief
of the artisans, and at that time a wealthy merchant came to
Mathurā, who fell in love with Vāsavadattā. Seeing his wealth,
and fearing the jealousy of her other lover, she contrived the
death of the chief of the artisans, and concealed his body under
a dunghill.                                                          3

When the chief of the artisans had disappeared, his relatives and
friends searched for him and found his body. Vāsavadattā,
however, was tried by a judge, and condemned to have her ears and
nose, her hands and feet cut off, and flung into a graveyard.        4

Vāsavadattā had been a passionate girl, but kind to her servants,
and one of her maids followed her, and out of love for her former
mistress ministered unto her in her agonies, and chased away the
crows.                                                               5

Now the time had arrived when Upagutta decided to visit
Vāsavadattā.                                                         6

When he came, the poor woman ordered her maid to collect and hide
under a cloth her severed limbs; and he greeted her kindly, but
she said with petulance: "Once this body was fragrant like the
lotus, and I offered thee my love. In those days I was covered
with pearls and fine muslin. Now I am mangled by the executioner
and covered with filth and blood."                                   7

"Sister," said the young man, "it is not for my pleasure that I
approach thee. It is to restore to thee a nobler beauty than the
charms which thou hast lost.                                         8

"I have seen with mine eyes the Tathāgata walking upon earth and
teaching men his wonderful doctrine. But thou wouldst not have
listened to the words of righteousness while surrounded with
temptations, while under the spell of passion and yearning for
worldly pleasures. Thou wouldst nor have listened to the
teachings of the Tathāgata, for thy heart was wayward, and thou
didst set thy trust on the sham of thy transient charms.             9

"The charms of a lovely form are treacherous, and quickly lead
into temptations, which have proved too strong for thee. But
there is a beauty which will not fade, and if thou wilt but
listen to the doctrine of our Lord, the Buddha, thou wilt find
that peace which thou wouldst have found in the restless world of
sinful pleasures."                                                  10

Vāsavadattā became calm and a spiritual happiness soothed the
tortures of her bodily pain; for where there is much suffering
there is also great bliss.                                          11

Having taken refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha,
she died in pious submission to the punishment of her crime.        12




LXXXI.

THE MARRIAGE-FEAST IN JAMBŪNADA.


There was a man in Jambūnada who was to be married the next day,
and he thought, "Would that the Buddha, the Blessed One, might be
present at the wedding."                                             1

And the Blessed One passed by his house and met him, and when he
read the silent wish in the heart of the bridegroom, he consented
to enter.                                                            2

When the Holy One appeared with the retinue of his many bhikkhus,
the host whose means were limited received them as best he could,
saying: "Eat, my Lord, and all thy congregation, according to
your desire."                                                        3

While the holy men ate, the meats and drinks remained
undiminished, and the host thought to himself: "How wondrous is
this! I should have had plenty for all my relatives and
friends. Would that I had invited them all."                         4

When this thought was in the host's mind, all his relatives and
friends entered the house; and although the hall in the house was
small there was room in it for all of them. They sat down at the
table and ate, and there was more than enough for all of them.       5

The Blessed One was pleased to see so many guests full of good
cheer and he quickened them and gladdened them with words of
truth, proclaiming the bliss of righteousness:                       6

"The greatest happiness which a mortal man can imagine is the
bond of marriage that ties together two loving hearts. But there
is a greater happiness still: it is the embrace of truth. Death
will separate husband and wife, but death will never affect him
who has espoused the truth.                                          7

"Therefore be married unto the truth and live with the truth in
holy wedlock. The husband who loves his wife and desires for a
union that shall be everlasting must be faithful to her so as to
be like truth itself, and she will rely upon him and revere him
and minister unto him. And the wife who loves her husband and
desires a union that shall be everlasting must be faithful to him
so as to be like truth itself; and he will place his trust in
her, he will provide for her. Verily, I say unto you, their
children will become like unto their parents and will bear
witness to their happiness.                                          8

"Let no man be single, let every one be wedded in holy love to
the truth. And when Māra, the destroyer, comes to separate the
visible forms of your being, you will continue to live in the
truth, and you will partake of the life everlasting, for the
truth is immortal."                                                  9

There was no one among the guests but was strengthened in his
spiritual life, and recognized the sweetness of a life of
righteousness; and they took refuge in Buddha, the Dharma, and
the Sangha.                                                         10



LXXXII.

A PARTY IN SEARCH OF A THIEF.


Having sent out his disciples, the Blessed One himself wandered
from place to place until he reached Uruvelā.                        1

On his way he sat down in a grove to rest, and it happened that
in that same grove there was a party of thirty friends who were
enjoying themselves with their wives; and while they were
sporting, some of their goods were stolen.                           2

Then the whole party went in search of the thief and, meeting the
Blessed One sitting under a tree, saluted him and said: "Pray,
Lord, didst thou see the thief pass by with our goods?"              3

And the Blessed One said: "Which is better for you, that you go
in search for the thief or for yourselves?" And the youths cried:
"In search for ourselves!"                                           4

"Well, then," said the Blessed One, "sit down and I will preach
the truth to you."                                                   5

And the whole party sat down and they listened eagerly to the
words of the Blessed One. Having grasped the truth, they praised
the doctrine and took refuge in the Buddha.                          6




LXXXIII.

IN THE REALM OF YAMARĀJA.


There was a Brahman, a religious man and fond in his affections
but without deep wisdom. He had a son of great promise, who, when
seven years old, was struck with a fatal disease and died. The
unfortunate father was unable to control himself; he threw
himself upon the corpse and lay there as one dead.                   1

The relatives came and buried the dead child and when the father
came to himself, he was so immoderate in his grief that he
behaved like an insane person. He no longer gave way to tears but
wandered about asking for the residence of Yamarāja, the king of
death, humbly to beg of him that his child might be allowed to
return to life.                                                      2

Having arrived at a great Brahman temple the sad father went
through certain religious rites and fell asleep. While wandering
on in his dream he came to a deep mountain pass where he met a
number of samanas who had acquired supreme wisdom. "Kind sirs,"
he said, "can you not tell me where the residence of Yamarāja
is?" And they asked him, "Good friend, why wouldst thou know?"
Whereupon he told them his sad story and explained his
intentions. Pitying his self-delusion, the samanas said: "No
mortal man can reach the place where Yama reigns, but some four
hundred miles westward lies a great city in which many good
spirits live; every eighth day of the month Yama visits the
place, and there mayst thou see him who is the King of Death and
ask him for a boon."                                                 3

The Brahman rejoicing at the news went to the city and found it
as the samanas had told him. He was admitted to the dread
presence of Yama, the King of Death, who, on hearing his request,
said: "Thy son now lives in the eastern garden where he is
disporting himself; go there and ask him to follow thee."            4

Said the happy father: "How does it happen that my son, without
having performed one good work, is now living in paradise?"
Yamarāja replied: "He has obtained celestial happiness not for
performing good deeds, but because he died in faith and in love
to the Lord and Master, the most glorious Buddha. The Buddha
says: 'The heart of love and faith spreads as it were a
beneficent shade from the world of men to the world of gods.'
This glorious utterance is like the stamp of a king's seal upon a
royal edict."                                                        5

The happy father hastened to the place and saw his beloved child
playing with other children, all transfigured by the peace of the
blissful existence of a heavenly life. He ran up to his boy and
cried with tears running down his cheeks: "My son, my son, dost
thou not remember me, thy father who watched over thee with
loving care and tended thee in thy sickness? Return home with me
to the land of the living." But the boy, while struggling to go
back to his playmates, upbraided him for using such strange
expressions as father and son. "In my present state," he said, "I
know no such words, for I am free from delusion."                    6

On this, the Brahman departed, and when he woke from his dream he
bethought himself of the Blessed Master of mankind, the great
Buddha, and resolved to go to him, lay bare his grief, and seek
consolation.                                                         7

Having arrived at the Jetavana, the Brahman told his story and
how his boy had refused to recognize him and to go home with him.    8

And the World-honored One said: "Truly thou art deluded. When man
dies the body is dissolved into its elements, but the spirit is
not entombed. It leads a higher mode of life in which all the
relative terms of father, son, wife, mother, are at an end, just
as a guest who leaves his lodging has done with it, as though it
were a thing of the past. Men concern themselves most about that
which passes away; but the end of life quickly comes as a burning
torrent sweeping away the transient in a moment. They are like a
blind man set to look after a burning lamp. A wise man,
understanding the transiency of worldly relations, destroys the
cause of grief, and escapes from the seething whirlpool of
sorrow. Religious wisdom lifts a man above the pleasures and
pains of the world and gives him peace everlasting."                 9

The Brahman asked the permission of the Blessed One to enter the
community of his bhikkhus, so as to acquire that heavenly wisdom
which alone can give comfort to an afflicted heart.                 10




LXXXIV.

THE MUSTARD SEED.


There was a rich man who found his gold suddenly transformed into
ashes; and he took to his bed and refused all food. A friend,
hearing of his sickness, visited the rich man and learned the
cause of his grief. And the friend said: "Thou didst not make
good use of thy wealth. When thou didst hoard it up it was not
better than ashes. Now heed my advice. Spread mats in the bazaar;
pile up these ashes, and pretend to trade with them."                1

The rich man did as his friend had told him, and when his
neighbors asked him, "Why sellest thou ashes?" he said: "I offer
my goods for sale."                                                  2

After some time a young girl, named Kisā Gotamī, an orphan and
very poor, passed by, and seeing the rich man in the bazaar,
said: "My lord, why pilest thou thus up gold and silver for
sale."                                                               3

And the rich man said: "Wilt thou please hand me that gold and
silver?" And Kisā Gotamī took up a handful of ashes, and lo! they
changed back into gold.                                              4

Considering that Kisā Gotamī had the mental eye of spiritual
knowledge and saw the real worth of things, the rich man gave her
in marriage to his son, and he said: "With many, gold is no
better than ashes, but with Kisā Gotamī ashes become pure gold."     5

And Kisā Gotamī had an only son, and he died. In her grief she
carried the dead child to all her neighbors, asking them for
medicine, and the people said: "She has lost her senses. The boy
is dead."                                                            6

At length Kisā Gotamī met a man who replied to her request: "I
cannot give thee medicine for thy child, but I know a physician
who can."                                                            7

And the girl said: "Pray tell me, sir; who is it?" And the man
replied: "Go to Sakyamuni, the Buddha."                              8

Kisā Gotamī repaired to the Buddha and cried: "Lord and Master,
give me the medicine that will cure my boy."                         9

The Buddha answered: "I want a handful of mustard-seed." And when
the girl in her joy promised to procure it, the Buddha added:
"The mustard-seed must be taken from a house where no one has
lost a child, husband, parent, or friend."                          10

Poor Kisā Gotamī now went from house to house, and the people
pitied her and said: "Here is mustard-seed; take it!" But when
she asked, "Did a son or daughter, a father or mother, die in
your family?" They answered her: "Alas! the living are few, but
the dead are many. Do not remind us of our deepest grief." And
there was no house but some beloved one had died in it.             11

Kisā Gotamī became weary and hopeless, and sat down at the
wayside, watching the lights of the city, as they flickered up
and were extinguished again. At last the darkness of the night
reigned everywhere. And she considered the fate of men, that
their lives flicker up and are extinguished. And she thought to
herself: "How selfish am I in my grief! Death is common to all;
yet in this valley of desolation there is a path that leads him
to immortality who has surrendered all selfishness."                12

Putting away the selfishness of her affection for her child, Kisā
Gotamī had the dead body buried in the forest. Returning to the
Buddha, she took refuge in him and found comfort in the Dharma,
which is a balm that will soothe all the pains of our troubled
hearts.                                                             13

The Buddha said:                                                    14

"The life of mortals in this world is troubled and brief and
combined with pain. For there is not any means by which those
that have been born can avoid dying; after reaching old age there
is death; of such a nature are living beings.                       15

"As ripe fruits are early in danger of falling, so mortals when
born are always in danger of death.                                 16

"As all earthen vessels made by the potter end in being broken,
so is the life of mortals.                                          17

"Both young and adult, both those who are fools and those who are
wise, all fall into the power of death; all are subject to death.   18

"Of those who, overcome by death, depart from life, a father
cannot save his son, nor kinsmen their relations.                   19

"Mark! while relatives are looking on and lamenting deeply, one
by one mortals are carried off, like an ox that is led to the
slaughter.                                                          20

"So the world is afflicted with death and decay, therefore the
wise do not grieve, knowing the terms of the world.                 21

"In whatever manner people think a thing will come to pass, it is
often different when it happens, and great is the disappointment;
see, such are the terms of the world.                               22

"Not from weeping nor from grieving will any one obtain peace of
mind; on the contrary, his pain will be the greater and his body
will suffer. He will make himself sick and pale, yet the dead are
not saved by his lamentation.                                       23

"People pass away, and their fate after death will be according
to their deeds.                                                     24

"If a man live a hundred years, or even more, he will at last be
separated from the company of his relatives, and leave the life
of this world.                                                      25

"He who seeks peace should draw out the arrow of lamentation, and
complaint, and grief.                                               26

"He who has drawn out the arrow and has become composed will
obtain peace of mind; he who has overcome all sorrow will become
free from sorrow, and be blessed."                                  27




LXXXV.

FOLLOWING THE MASTER OVER THE STREAM.

South of Sāvatthi is a great river, on the banks of which lay a
hamlet of five hundred houses. Thinking of the salvation of the
people, the World-honored One resolved to go to the village and
preach the doctrine. Having come to the riverside he sat down
beneath a tree, and the villagers seeing the glory of his
appearance approached him with reverence; but when he began to
preach, they believed him not.                                       1

When the world-honored Buddha had left Sāvatthi Sāriputta felt a
desire to see the Lord and to hear him preach. Coming to the
river where the water was deep and the current strong, he said to
himself: "This stream shall not prevent me. I shall go and see
the Blessed One," and he stepped upon the water which was as firm
under his feet as a slab of granite.                                 2

When he arrived at a place in the middle of the stream where the
waves were high, Sāriputta's heart gave way, and he began to
sink. But rousing his faith and renewing his mental effort, he
proceeded as before and reached the other bank.                      3

The people of the village were astonished to see Sāriputta, and
they asked how he could cross the stream where there was nether a
bridge nor a ferry.                                                  4

And Sāriputta replied: "I lived in ignorance until I heard the
voice of the Buddha. As I was anxious to hear the doctrine of
salvation, I crossed the river and I walked over its troubled
waters because I had faith. Faith, nothing else, enabled me to do
so, and now I am here in the bliss of the Master's presency."        5

The World-honored One added: "Sāriputta, thou hast spoken well.
Faith like thine alone can save the world from the yawning gulf
of migration and enable men to walk dryshod to the other shore."     6

And the Blessed One urged to the villagers the necessity of ever
advancing in the conquest of sorrow and of casting off all
shackles so as to cross the river of worldliness and attain
deliverance from death.                                              7

Hearing the words of the Tathāgata, the villagers were filled
with joy and believing in the doctrines of the Blessed One
embraced the five rules and took refuge in his name.                 8




LXXXVI.

THE SICK BHIKKHU.


An old bhikkhu of a surly disposition was afflicted with a
loathsome disease the sight and smell of which was so nauseating
that no one would come near him or help him in his distress. And
it happened that the World-honored One came to the vihāra in
which the unfortunate man lay; hearing of the case he ordered
warm water to be prepared and went to the sick-room to
administer unto the sores of the patient with his own hand,
saying to his disciples:                                             1

"The Tathāgata has come into the world to befriend the poor, to
succor the unprotected, to nourish those in bodily affliction,
both the followers of the Dharma and unbelievers, to give sight
to the blind and enlighten the minds of the deluded, to stand up
for the rights of orphans as well as the aged, and in so doing to
set an example to others. This is the consummation of his work,
and thus he attains the great goal of life as the rivers that
lose themselves in the ocean."                                       2

The World-honored One administered unto the sick bhikkhu daily so
long as he stayed in that place. And the governor of the city
came to the Buddha to do him reverence, and having heard of the
service which the Lord did in the vihāra asked the Blessed One
about the previous existence of the sick monk, and the Buddha
said:                                                                3

"In days gone by there was a wicked king who used to extort from
his subjects all he could get; and he ordered one of his officers
to lay the lash on a man of eminence. The officer little thinking
of the pain he inflicted upon others, obeyed; but when the victim
of the king's wrath begged for mercy, he felt compassion and laid
the whip lightly upon him. Now the king was reborn as Devadatta,
who was abandoned by all his followers, because they were no
longer willing to stand his severity and he died miserable and
full of penitence. The officer is the sick bhikkhu, who having
often given offence to his brethren in the vihāra was left
without assistance in his distress. The eminent man, however, who
was unjustly beaten and begged for mercy was the Bodhisatta; he
has been reborn as the Tathāgata. It is now the lot of the
Tathāgata to help the wretched officer as he had mercy on him."      4

And the World-honored One repeated these lines: "He who inflicts
pain on the gentle, or falsely accuses the innocent, will
inherit one of the ten great calamities. But he who has learned
to suffer with patience will be purified and will be the chosen
instrument for the alleviation of suffering."                        5

The diseased bhikkhu on hearing these words turned to the Buddha,
confessed his ill-natured temper and repented, and with a heart
cleansed from error did reverence unto the Lord.                     6




LXXXVII.

THE PATIENT ELEPHANT.


While the Blessed One was residing in the Jetavana, there was a
householder living in Sāvatthi known to all his neighbors as
patient and kind, but his relatives were wicked and contrived a
plot to rob him. One day they came to the householder and often
worrying him with all kinds of threats took away a goodly portion
of his property. He did not go to court, nor did he complain, but
tolerated with great forbearance the wrongs he suffered.             1

The neighbors wondered and began to talk about it, and rumors of
the affair reached the ears of the brethren in Jetavana. While
the brethren discussed the occurrence in the assembly hall, the
Blessed One entered and asked "What was the topic of your
conversation?" And they told him.                                    2

Said the Blessed One: "The time will come when the wicked
relatives will find their punishment. O brethren, this is not the
first time that this occurrence took place; it has happened
before", and he told them a world-old tale.                          3

Once upon a time, when Brahmadatta was king of Benares, the
Bodhisatta was born in the Himālaya region as an elephant. He
grew up strong and big, and ranged the hills and mountains, the
peaks and caves of the tortuous woods in the valleys. Once as he
went he saw a pleasant tree, and took his food, standing under
it.                                                                  4

Then some impertinent monkeys came down out of the tree, and
jumping on the elephant's back, insulted and tormented him
greatly; they took hold of his tusks, pulled his tail and
disported themselves, thereby causing him much annoyance. The
Bodhisatta, being full of patience, kindliness and mercy, took no
notice at all of their misconduct which the monkeys repeated
again and again.                                                     5

One day the spirit that lived in the tree, standing upon the
tree-trunk, addressed the elephant saying, "My lord elephant, why
dost thou put up with the impudence of these bad monkeys?" And he
asked the question in a couplet as follows:                          6

     "Why dost thou patiently endure each freak
     These mischievous and selfish monkeys wreak?"                   7

The Bodhisatta, on hearing this, replied, "If, Tree-sprite, I
cannot endure these monkeys' ill treatment without abusing their
birth, lineage and persons, how can I walk in the eightfold noble
path? But these monkeys will do the same to others thinking them
to be like me. If they do it to any rogue elephant, he will
punish them indeed, and I shall be delivered both from their
annoyance and the guilt of having done harm to others."              8

Saying this he repeated another stanza:                              9

     "If they will treat another one like me,
     He will destroy them; and I shall be free."                    10

A few days after, the Bodhisatta went elsewhither, and another
elephant, a savage beast, came and stood in his place. The wicked
monkeys thinking him to be like the old one, climbed upon bis
back and did as before. The rogue elephant seized the monkeys
with his trunk, threw them upon the ground, gored them with his
tusk and trampled them to mincemeat under his feet.                 11

When the Master had ended this teaching, he declared the truths,
and identified the births, saying: "At that time the mischievous
monkeys were the wicked relatives of the good man, the rogue
elephant was the one who will punish them, but the virtuous noble
elephant was the Tathāgata himself in a former incarnation."        12

After this discourse one of the brethren rose and asked leave to
propose a question and when permission was granted he said: "I
have heard the doctrine that wrong should be met with wrong and
the evil doer should be checked by being made to suffer, for if
this were not done evil would increase and good would disappear.
What shall we do?"                                                  13

Said the Blessed One: "Nay, I will tell you: Ye who have left the
world and have adopted this glorious faith of putting aside
selfishness, ye shall not do evil for evil nor return hate for
hate. Nor do ye think that ye can destroy wrong by retaliating
evil for evil and thus increasing wrong. Leave the wicked to
their fate and their evil deeds will sooner or later in one way
or another bring on their own punishment." And the Tathāgata
repeated these stanzas:                                             14

     "Who harmeth him that doth no harm
     And striketh him that striketh not,
     Shall gravest punishment incur
     The which his wickedness begot,--                              15

     "Some of the greatest ills in life
     Either a loathsome dread disease,
     Or dread old age, or loss of mind,
     Or wretched pain without surcease,                             16

     "Or conflagration, loss of wealth;
     Or of his nearest kin he shall
     See some one die that's dear to him,
     And then he'll be reborn in hell."                             17




THE LAST DAYS.


LXXXVIII.

THE CONDITIONS OF WELFARE.


When the Blessed One was residing on the mount called Vulture's
Peak, near Rājagaha, Ajātasattu the king of Magadha, who reigned
in the place of Bimbisāra, planned an attack on the Vajjīs, and
he said to Vassakāra, his prime minister: "I will root out the
Vajjīs, mighty though they be. I will destroy the Vajjīs; I will
bring them to utter ruin! Come now, O Brahman, and go to the
Blessed One; inquire in my name for his health, and tell him my
purpose. Bear carefully in mind what the Blessed One may say, and
repeat it to me, for the Buddhas speak nothing untrue."              1

When Vassakāra, the prime minister, had greeted the Blessed One
and delivered his message, the venerable Ānanda stood behind the
Blessed One and fanned him, and the Blessed One said to him:
"Hast thou heard, Ānanda, that the Vajjis hold full and frequent
public assemblies?"                                                  2

"Lord, so I have heard," replied he.                                 3

"So long, Ānanda," said the Blessed One, "as the Vajjis hold
these full and frequent public assemblies, they may be expected
not to decline, but to prosper. So long as they meet together in
concord, so long as they honor their elders, so long as they
respect womanhood, so long as they remain religious, performing
all proper rites, so long as they extend the rightful protection,
defence and support to the holy ones, the Vajjis may be expected
not to decline, but to prosper."                                     4

Then the Blessed One addressed Vassakāra and said: "When I
stayed, O Brahman, at Vesālī, I taught the Vajjis these
conditions of welfare, that so long as they should remain well
instructed, so long as they will continue in the right path, so
long as they live up to the precepts of righteousness, we could
expect them not to decline, but to prosper."                         5

As soon as the king's messenger had gone, the Blessed One had the
brethren, that were in the neighborhood of Rājagaha, assembled in
the service-hall, and addressed them, saying:                        6

"I will teach you, O bhikkhus, the conditions of the welfare of a
community. Listen well, and I will speak.                            7

"So lone, O bhikkhus, as the brethren hold full and frequent
assemblies, meeting in concord, rising in concord, and attending
in concord to the affairs of the Sangha; so long as they, O
bhikkhus, do not abrogate that which experience has proved to be
good, and introduce nothing except such things as have been
carefully tested; so long as their elders practise justice; so
long as the brethren esteem, revere, and support their elders,
and hearken unto their words; so long as the brethren are not
under the influence of craving, but delight in the blessings of
religion, so that good and holy men shall come to them and dwell
among them in quiet; so long as the brethren shall not be
addicted to sloth and idleness; so long as the brethren shall
exercise themselves in the sevenfold higher wisdom of mental
activity, search after truth, energy, joy, modesty, self-control,
earnest contemplation, and equanimity of mind,--so long the
Sangha may be expected not to decline, but to prosper.               8

"Therefore, O bhikkhus, be full of faith, modest in heart, afraid
of sin, anxious to learn, strong in energy, active in mind, and
full of wisdom."                                                     9




LXXXIX.

SĀRIPUTTA'S FAITH.


The Blessed One proceeded with a great company of the brethren to
Nālandā; and there he stayed in a mango grove.                       1

Now the venerable Sāriputta came to the place where the Blessed
One was, and having saluted him, took his seat respectfully at
his side, and said: "Lord! such faith have I in the Blessed One,
that methinks there never has been, nor will there be, nor is
there now any other, who is greater or wiser than the Blessed
One, that is to say, as regards the higher wisdom."                  2

Replied the Blessed One: "Grand and bold are the words of thy
mouth, Sāriputta: verily, thou hast burst forth into a song of
ecstasy! Surely then thou hast known all the Blessed Ones who in
the long ages of the past have been holy Buddhas?"                   3

"Not so, O Lord!" said Sāriputta.                                    4

And the Lord continued: "Then thou hast perceived all the
Blessed Ones who in the long ages of the future shall be holy
Buddhas?"                                                            5

"Not so, O Lord!"                                                    6

"But at least then, O Sāriputta, thou knowest me as the holy
Buddha now alive, and hast penetrated my mind."                      7

"Not even that, O Lord!"                                             8

"Thou seest then, Sāriputta, that thou knowest not the hearts of
the holy Buddhas of the past nor the hearts of those of the
future. Why, therefore, are thy words so grand and bold? Why
burstest thou forth into such a song of ecstasy?"                    9

"O Lord! I have not the knowledge of the hearts of all the
Buddhas that have been and are to come, and now are. I only know
the lineage of the faith. Just as a king, Lord, might have a
border city, strong in its foundations, strong in its ramparts
and with one gate only; and the king might have a watchman there,
clever, expert, and wise, to stop all strangers and admit only
friends. And on going over the approaches all about the city, he
might not be able so to observe all the joints and crevices in
the ramparts of that city as to know where such a small creature
as a cat could get out. That might well be. Yet all living beings
of larger size that entered or left the city, would have to pass
through that gate. Thus only is it, Lord, that I know the lineage
of the faith. I know that the holy Buddhas of the past, putting
away all lust, ill-will, sloth, pride, and doubt, knowing all
those mental faults which make men weak, training their minds in
the four kinds of mental activity, thoroughly exercising
themselves in the sevenfold higher wisdom, received the full
fruition of Enlightenment. And I know that the holy Buddhas of
the times to come will do the same. And I know that the Blessed
One, the holy Buddha of to-day, has done so now."                   10

"Great is thy faith, O Sāriputta," replied the Blessed One, "but
take heed that it be well grounded."                                11




XC.

PĀTALIPUTTA.


When the Blessed One had stayed as long as convenient at Nālandā,
he went to Pātaliputta, the frontier town of Magadha; and when
the disciples at Pātaliputta heard of his arrival, they invited
him to their village rest-house. And the Blessed One robed
himself, took his bowl and went with the brethren to the
rest-house. There he washed his feet, entered the hall, and
seated himself against the center pillar, with his face towards
the east. The brethren, also, having washed their feet, entered
the hall, and took their seats round the Blessed One, against the
western wall, facing the east. And the lay devotees of
Pātaliputta, having also washed their feet, entered the hall, and
took their seats opposite the Blessed One, against the eastern
wall, facing towards the west.                                       1

Then the Blessed One addressed the lay-disciples of Pātaliputta,
and he said:                                                         2

"Fivefold, O householders, is the loss of the wrong-doer through
his want of rectitude. In the first place, the wrong-doer, devoid
of rectitude, falls into great poverty through sloth; in the next
place, his evil repute gets noised abroad; thirdly, whatever
society he enters, whether of Brahmans, nobles, heads of houses,
or samanas, he enters shyly and confusedly; fourthly, he is full
of anxiety when he dies; and lastly, on the dissolution of the
body after death, his mind remains in an unhappy state. Wherever
his karma continues, there will be suffering and woe. This, O
householders, is the fivefold loss of the evil-doer!                 3

"Fivefold, O householders, is the gain of the well-doer through
his practice of rectitude. In the first place the well-doer,
strong in rectitude, acquires property through his industry; in
the next place, good reports of him are spread abroad; thirdly,
whatever society he enters, whether of nobles, Brahmans, heads
of houses, or members of the order, he enters with confidence and
self-possession; fourthly, he dies without anxiety; and, lastly,
on the dissolution of the body after death, his mind remains in a
happy state. Wherever his karma continues, there will be heavenly
bliss and peace. This, O householders, is the fivefold gain of
the well-doer."                                                      4

When the Blessed One had taught the disciples, and incited them,
and roused them, and gladdened them far into the night with
religious edification, he dismissed them, saying, "The night is
far spent, O householders. It is time for you to do what ye deem
most fit."                                                           5

"Be it so, Lord!" answered the disciples of Pātaliputta, and
rising from their seats, they bowed to the Blessed One, and
keeping him on their right hand as they passed him, they departed
thence.                                                              6

While the Blessed One stayed at Pātaliputta, the king of Magadha
sent a messenger to the governor of Pātaliputta to raise
fortifications for the security of the town.                         7

And the Blessed One seeing the laborers at work predicted the
future greatness of the place, saying: "The men who build the
fortress act as if they had consulted higher powers. For this
city of Pātaliputta will be a dwelling-place of busy men and a
center for the exchange of all kinds of goods. But three dangers
hang over Pātaliputta, that of fire, that of water, that of
dissension."                                                         8

When the governor heard of the prophecy of Pātaliputta's future,
he greatly rejoiced and named the city-gate through which the
Buddha had gone towards the river Ganges, "The Gotama Gate."         9

Meanwhile the people living on the banks of the Ganges arrived in
great numbers to pay reverence to the Lord of the world; and many
persons asked him to do them the honor to cross over in their
boats. But the Blessed One considering the number of the boats
and their beauty did not want to show any partiality, and by
accepting the invitation of one to offend all the others. He
therefore crossed the river without any boat, signifying thereby
that the rafts of asceticism and the gaudy gondolas of religious
ceremonies were not staunch enough to weather the storms of
Samsāra, while the Tathāgata can walk dry-shod over the ocean of
worldliness.                                                        10

And as the city gate was called after the name of the Tathāgata
so the people called this passage of the river "Gotama Ford."       11




XCI.

THE MIRROR OF TRUTH.


The Blessed One proceeded to the village Nādikā with a great
company of brethren and there he stayed at the Brick Hall. And
the venerable Ānanda went to the Blessed One and mentioning to
him the names of the brethren and sisters that had died,
anxiously inquired about their fate after death, whether they had
been reborn in animals or in hell, or as ghosts, or in any place
of woe.                                                              1

And the Blessed One replied to Ānanda and said:                      2

"Those who have died after the complete destruction of the three
bonds of lust, of covetousness and of the egotistical cleaving to
existence, need not fear the state after death. They will not be
reborn in a state of suffering; their minds will not continue as
a karma of evil deeds or sin, but are assured of final salvation.    3

"When they die, nothing will remain of them but their good
thoughts, their righteous acts, and the bliss that proceeds from
truth and righteousness. As rivers must at last reach the distant
main, so their minds will be reborn in higher states of existence
and continue to be pressing on to their ultimate goal which is
the ocean of truth, the eternal peace of Nirvāna.                    4

"Men are anxious about death and their fate after death; but
consider, it is not at all strange, Ānanda, that a human being
should die. However, that thou shouldst inquire about them, and
having heard the truth still be anxious about the dead, this is
wearisome to the Blessed One. I will, therefore, teach thee the
mirror of truth and let the faithful disciple repeat it:             5

"'Hell is destroyed for me, and rebirth as an animal, or a ghost,
or in any place of woe. I am converted; I am no longer liable to
be reborn in a state of suffering, and am assured of final
salvation.'                                                          6

"What, then, Ānanda, is this mirror of truth? It is the
consciousness that the elect disciple is in this world possessed
of faith in the Buddha, believing the Blessed One to be the Holy
One, the Fully-Enlightened One, wise, upright, happy,
world-knowing, supreme, the Bridler of men's wayward hearts, the
Teacher of gods and men, the blessed Buddha.                         7

"It is further the consciousness that the disciple is possessed
of faith in the truth, believing the truth to have been
proclaimed by the Blessed One, for the benefit of the world,
passing not away, welcoming all, leading to salvation, to which
through truth the wise will attain, each one by his own efforts.     8

"And, finally, it is the consciousness that the disciple is
possessed of faith in the order, believing in the efficacy of a
union among those men and women who are anxious to walk in the
noble eightfold path; believing this church of the Buddha, of the
righteous, the upright, the just, the law-abiding, to be worthy
of honor, of hospitality, of gifts, and of reverence; to be the
supreme sowing-ground of merit for the world; to be possessed of
the virtues beloved by the good, virtues unbroken, intact,
unspotted, unblemished, virtues which make men truly free,
virtues which are praised by the wise, are untarnished by the
desire of selfish aims, either now or in a future life, or by the
belief in the efficacy of outward acts, and are conducive to high
and holy thought.                                                    9

"This is the mirror of truth which teaches the straightest way to
enlightenment which is the common goal of all living creatures.
He who possesses the mirror of truth is free from fear; he will
find comfort in the tribulations of life, and his life will be a
blessing to all his fellow-creatures."                              10




XCII.

AMBAPĀLĪ.


Then the Blessed One proceeded with a great number of brethren to
Vesālī, and he stayed at the grove of the courtesan Ambapālī. And
he said to the brethren: "Let a brother, O bhikkhus, be mindful
and thoughtful. Let a brother, whilst in the world, overcome the
grief which arises from bodily craving, from the lust of
sensations, and from the errors of wrong reasoning. Whatever you
do, act always in full presence of mind. Be thoughtful in eating
and drinking, in walking or standing, in sleeping or waking,
while talking or being silent."                                      1

When the courtesan Ambapālī heard that the Blessed One was
staying in her mango grove, she was exceedingly glad and went in
a carriage as far as the ground was passable for carriages. There
she alighted and thence proceeding to the place where the Blessed
One was, she took her seat respectfully at his feet on one side.
As a prudent woman goes forth to perform her religious duties, so
she appeared in a simple dress without any ornaments, yet
beautiful to look upon.                                              2

And the Blessed One thought to himself: "This woman moves in
worldly circles and is a favorite of kings and princes; yet is
her heart calm and composed. Young in years, rich, surrounded by
pleasures, she is thoughtful and steadfast. This, indeed, is rare
in the world. Women, as a rule, are scant in wisdom and deeply
immersed in vanity; but she, although living in luxury, has
acquired the wisdom of a master, taking delight in piety, and
able to receive the truth in its completeness."                      3

When she was seated, the Blessed One instructed, aroused, and
gladdened her with religious discourse.                              4

As she listened to the law, her face brightened with delight.
Then she rose and said to the Blessed One: "Will the Blessed One
do me the honor of taking his meal, together with the brethren,
at my house to-morrow?" And the Blessed One gave, by silence, his
consent.                                                             5

Now, the Licchavi, a wealthy family of princely rank, hearing
that the Blessed One had arrived at Vesālī and was staying at
Ambapālī's grove, mounted their magnificent carriages, and
proceeded with their retinue to the place where the Blessed One
was. And the Licchavi were gorgeously dressed in bright colors
and decorated with costly jewels.                                    6

And Ambapālī drove up against the young Licchavi, axle to axle,
wheel to wheel, and yoke to yoke, and the Licchavi said to
Ambapālī, the courtesan: "How is it, Ambapālī, that you drive up
against us thus?"                                                    7

"My lords," said she, "I have just invited the Blessed One and
his brethren for their to-morrow's meal."                            8

And the princes replied: "Ambapālī! give up this meal to us for a
hundred thousand."                                                   9

"My lords, were you to offer all Vesālī with its subject
territory, I would not give up so great an honor!"                  10

Then the Licchavi went on to Ambapālī's grove.                      11

When the Blessed One saw the Licchavi approaching in the
distance, he addressed the brethren, and said: "O brethren,
let those of the brethren who have never seen the gods gaze upon
this company of the Licchavi, for they are dressed gorgeously,
like immortals."                                                    11

And when they had driven as far as the ground was passable for
carriages, the Licchavi alighted and went on foot to the place
where the Blessed One was, taking their seats respectfully by his
side. And when they were thus seated, the Blessed One instructed,
aroused, and gladdened them with religious discourse.               13

Then they addressed the Blessed One and said: "Will the Blessed
One do us the honor of taking his meal, together with the
brethren, at our palace to-morrow?"                                 14

"O Licchavi," said the Blessed One, "I have promised to dine
to-morrow with Ambapālī, the courtesan."                            15

Then the Licchavi, expressing their approval of the words of the
Blessed One, arose from their seats and bowed down before the
Blessed One, and, keeping him on their right hand as they passed
him, they departed thence; but when they came home, they cast up
their hands, saying: "A worldly woman has outdone us; we have
been left behind by a frivolous girl!"                              16

And at the end of the night Ambapālī, the courtesan, made ready
in her mansion sweet rice and cakes, and on the next day
announced through a messenger the time to the Blessed One,
saying, "The hour, Lord, has come, and the meal is ready!"          17

And the Blessed One robed himself early in the morning, took his
bowl, and went with the brethren to the place where Ambapālī's
dwelling-house was; and when they had come there they seated
themselves on the seats prepared for them. And Ambapālī, the
courtesan, set the sweet rice and cakes before the order, with
the Buddha at their head, and waited upon them till they refused
to take more.                                                       18

And when the Blessed One had finished his meal, the courtesan had
a low stool brought, and sat down at his side, and addressed the
Blessed One, and said: "Lord, I present this mansion to the order
of bhikkhus, of which the Buddha is the chief."                     19

And the Blessed One accepted the gift; and after instructing,
arousing, and gladdening her with religious edification, he rose
from his seat and departed thence.                                  20




XCIII.

THE BUDDHA'S FAREWELL ADDRESS.


When the Blessed One had remained as long as he wished at
Ambapālī's grove, he went to Beluva, near Vesālī. There the
Blessed One addressed the brethren, and said: "O mendicants, take
up your abode for the rainy season round about Vesālī, each one
according to the place where his friends and near companions may
five. I shall enter upon the rainy season here at Beluva."           1

When the Blessed One had thus entered upon the rainy season there
fell upon him a dire sickness, and sharp pains came upon him even
unto death. But the Blessed One, mindful and self-possessed, bore
his ailments without complaint.                                      2

Then this thought occurred to the Blessed One, "It would not be
right for me to pass away from life without addressing the
disciples, without taking leave of the order. Let me now, by a
strong effort of the will, subdue this sickness, and keep my hold
on life till the allotted time have come."                           3

And the Blessed One, by a strong effort of the will subdued the
sickness, and kept his hold on life till the time he fixed upon
should come. And the sickness abated.                                4

Thus the Blessed One began to recover; and when he had quite got
rid of the sickness, he went out from the monastery, and sat
down on a seat spread out in the open air. And the venerable
Ānanda, accompanied by many other disciples, approached where the
Blessed One was, saluted him, and taking a seat respectfully on
one side, said: "I have beheld, Lord, how the Blessed One was in
health, and I have beheld how the Blessed One had to suffer. And
though at the sight of the sickness of the Blessed One my body
became weak as a creeper, and the horizon became dim to me, and
my faculties were no longer clear, yet notwithstanding I took
some little comfort from the thought that the Blessed One would
not pass away from existence until at least he had left
instructions as touching the order."                                 5

And the Blessed One addressed Ānanda in behalf of the order,
saying:                                                              6

"What, then, Ānanda, does the order expect of me? I have preached
the truth without making any distinction between exoteric and
esoteric doctrine; for in respect of the truth, Ānanda, the
Tathāgata has no such thing as the closed fist of a teacher, who
keeps some things back.                                              7

"Surely, Ānanda, should there be any one who harbors the thought,
'It is I who will lead the brotherhood,' or, 'The order is
dependent upon me,' he should lay down instructions in any matter
concerning the order. Now the Tathāgata, Ānanda, thinks not that
it is he who should lead the brotherhood, or that the order is
dependent upon him.                                                  8

"Why, then, should the Tathāgata leave instructions in any matter
concerning the order?                                                9

"I am now grown old, O Ānanda, and full of years; my journey is
drawing to its close, I have reached the sum of my days, I am
turning eighty years of age.                                        10

"Just as a worn-out cart can not be made to move along without
much difficulty, so the body of the Tathāgata can only be kept
going with much additional care.                                    11

"It is only, Ānanda, when the Tathāgata, ceasing to attend to
any outward thing, becomes plunged in that devout meditation of
heart which is concerned with no bodily object, it is only then
that the body of the Tathāgata is at ease.                          12

"Therefore, O Ānanda, be ye lamps unto yourselves. Rely on
yourselves, and do not rely on external help.                       13

"Hold fast to the truth as a lamp. Seek salvation alone in the
truth. Look not for assistance to any one besides yourselves.       14

"And how, Ānanda, can a brother be a lamp unto himself, rely on
himself only and not on any external help, holding fast to the
truth as his lamp and seeking salvation in the truth alone,
looking not for assistance to any one besides himself?              15

"Herein, O Ānanda, let a brother, as he dwells in the body, so
regard the body that he, being strenuous, thoughtful, and
mindful, may, whilst in the world, overcome the grief which
arises from the body's cravings.                                    16

"While subject to sensations let him continue so to regard the
sensations that he, being strenuous, thoughtful, and mindful,
may, whilst in the world, overcome the grief which arises from
the sensations.                                                     17

"And so, also, when he thinks or reasons, or feels, let him so
regard his thoughts that being strenuous, thoughtful, and mindful
he may, whilst in the world, overcome the grief which arises from
the craving due to ideas, or to reasoning, or to feeling.           18

"Those who, either now or after I am dead, shall be lamps unto
themselves, relying upon themselves only and not relying upon any
external help, but holding fast to the truth as their lamp, and
seeking their salvation in the truth alone, and shall not look
for assistance to any one besides themselves, it is they, Ānanda,
among my bhikkhus, who shall reach the very topmost height! But
they must be anxious to learn."                                     19




XCIV.

THE BUDDHA ANNOUNCES HIS DEATH.


Said the Tathāgata to Ānanda: "In former years, Ānanda, Māra, the
Evil One, approached the holy Buddha three times to tempt him.       1

"And now, Ānanda, Māra, the Evil One, came again today to the
place where I was, and, standing beside me, addressed me in the
same words as he did when I was resting under the shepherd's
Nigrodha tree on the bank of the Nerañjarā river: 'Be greeted,
thou Holy One. Thou hast attained the highest bliss and it is
time for thee to enter into the final Nirvāna.'                      2

"And when Māra had thus spoken, Ānanda, I answered him and said:
'Make thyself happy, O wicked one; the final extinction of the
Tathāgata shall take place before long.'"                            3

And the venerable Ānanda addressed the Blessed One and said:
"Vouchsafe, Lord, to remain with us, O Blessed One! for the good
and the happiness of the great multitudes, out of pity for the
world, for the good and the gain of mankind!"                        4

Said the Blessed One: "Enough now, Ānanda, beseech not the
Tathāgata!"                                                          5

And again, a second time, the venerable Ānanda besought the
Blessed One in the same words. And he received from the Blessed
One the same reply.                                                  6

And again, the third time, the venerable Ānanda besought the
Blessed One to live longer; and the Blessed One said: "Hast thou
faith, Ānanda?"                                                      7

Said Ānanda: "I have, my Lord!"                                      8

And the Blessed One, seeing the quivering eyelids of Ānanda, read
the deep grief in the heart of his beloved disciple, and he asked
again: "Hast thou, indeed, faith, Ānanda?"                           9

And Ānanda said: "I have faith, my Lord."                           10

Than the Blessed One continued: "If thou hast faith, Ānanda, in
the wisdom of the Tathāgata, why, then, Ānanda, dost thou trouble
the Tathāgata even until the third time? Have I not formerly
declared to you that it is in the very nature of all compound
things that they must be dissolved again. We must separate
ourselves from all things near and dear to us, and must leave
them. How then, Ānanda, can it be possible for me to remain,
since everything that is born, or brought into being, and
organized, contains within itself the inherent necessity of
dissolution? How, then, can it be possible that this body of mine
should not be dissolved? No such condition can exist! And this
mortal existence, O Ānanda, has been relinquished, cast away,
renounced, rejected, and abandoned by the Tathāgata."               11

And the Blessed One said to Ānanda: "Go now, Ānanda, and assemble
in the Service Hall such of the brethren as reside in the
neighborhood of Vesālī."                                            12

Then the Blessed One proceeded to the Service Hall, and sat down
there on the mat spread out for him. And when he was seated, the
Blessed One addressed the brethren, and said:                       13

"O brethren, ye to whom the truth has been made known, having
thoroughly made yourselves masters of it, practise it, meditate
upon it, and spread it abroad, in order that pure religion may
last long and be perpetuated, in order that it may continue for
the good and happiness of the great multitudes, out of pity for
the world, and to the good and gain of all living beings!           14

"Star-gazing and astrology, forecasting lucky or unfortunate
events by signs, prognosticating good or evil, all these are
things forbidden.                                                   15

"He who lets his heart go loose without restraint shall not
attain Nirvāna; therefore, must we hold the heart in check, and
retire from worldly excitements and seek tranquillity of mind.      16

"Eat your food to satisfy your hunger, and drink to satisfy you
thirst. Satisfy the necessities of life like the butterfly that
sips the flower, without destroying its fragrance or its texture.   17

"It is through not understanding and grasping the four truths, O
brethren, that we have gone astray so long, and wandered in this
weary path of transmigrations, both you and I, until we have
found the truth.                                                    18

"Practise the earnest meditations I have taught you. Continue in
the great struggle against sin. Walk steadily in the roads of
saintship. Be strong in moral powers. Let the organs of your
spiritual sense be quick. When the seven kinds of wisdom
enlighten your mind, you will find the noble, eightfold path that
leads to Nirvāna.                                                   19

"Behold, O brethren, the final extinction of the Tathāgata will
take place before long. I now exhort you, saying: 'All component
things must grow old and be dissolved again. Seek ye for that
which is permanent, and work out your salvation with diligence.'"   20




XCV.

CHUNDA, THE SMITH.


And the Blessed One went to Pāvā.                                    1

When Chunda, the worker in metals, heard that the Blessed One had
come to Pāvā and was staying in his mango grove, he came to the
Buddha and respectfully invited him and the brethren to take
their meal at his house. And Chunda prepared rice-cakes and a
dish of dried boar's meat.                                           2

When the Blessed One had eaten the food prepared by Chunda, the
worker in metals, there fell upon him a dire sickness, and sharp
pain came upon him even unto death. But the Blessed One, mindful
and self-possessed, bore it without complaint.                       3

And the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ānanda, and said:
"Come, Ānanda, let us go on to Kusinārā."                            4

On his way the Blessed One grew tired, and he went aside from the
road to rest at the foot of a tree, and said: "Fold the robe, I
pray thee, Ānanda, and spread it out for me. I am weary, Ānanda,
and must rest awhile!"                                               5

"Be it so, Lord!" said the venerable Ānanda; and he spread out
the robe folded fourfold.                                            6

The Blessed One seated himself, and when he was seated he
addressed the venerable Ānanda, and said: "Fetch me some water, I
pray thee, Ānanda. I am thirsty, Ānanda, and would drink."           7

When he had thus spoken, the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed
One: "But just now, Lord, five hundred carts have gone across the
brook and have stirred the water; but a river, O Lord, is not far
off. Its water is clear and pleasant, cool and transparent, and
it is easy to get down to it. There the Blessed One may both
drink water and cool his limbs."                                     8

A second time the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ānanda,
saying: "Fetch me some water, I pray thee Ānanda, I am thirsty,
Ānanda, and would drink."                                            9

And a second time the venerable Ānanda said: "Let us go to the
river."                                                             10

Then the third time the Blessed One addressed the venerable
Ānanda, and said: "Fetch me some water, I pray thee, Ānanda, I am
thirsty, Ānanda, and would drink."                                  11

"Be it so, Lord!" said the venerable Ānanda in assent to the
Blessed One; and, taking a bowl, he went down to the streamlet.
And lo! the streamlet, which, stirred up by wheels, had become
muddy, when the venerable Ānanda came up to it, flowed clear and
bright and free from all turbidity. And he thought: "How
wonderful, how marvelous is the great might and power of the
Tathāgata!"                                                         12

Ānanda brought the water in the bowl to the Lord, saying: "Let
the Blessed One take the bowl. Let the Happy One drink the water.
Let the Teacher of men and gods quench his thirst."                 13

Then the Blessed One drank of the water.                            14

Now, at that time a man of low caste, named Pukkusa, a young
Malla, a disciple of Alāra Kālāma, was passing along the high
road from Kusinārā to Pāvā.                                         15

And Pukkusa, the young Malla, saw the Blessed One seated at the
foot of a tree. On seeing him, he went up to the place where the
Blessed One was, and when he had come there, he saluted the
Blessed One and took his seat respectfully on one side. Then the
Blessed One instructed, edified, and gladdened Pukkusa, the young
Malla, with religious discourse.                                    16

Aroused and gladdened by the words of the Blessed One, Pukkusa,
the young Malla, addressed a certain man who happened to pass by,
and said: "Fetch me, I pray thee, my good man, two robes of cloth
of gold, burnished and ready for wear."                             17

"Be it so, sir!" said that man in assent to Pukkusa, the young
Malla; and he brought two robes of cloth of gold, burnished and
ready for wear.                                                     18

And the Malla Pukkusa presented the two robes of cloth of gold,
burnished and ready for wear, to the Blessed One, saying: "Lord,
these two robes of burnished cloth of gold are ready for wear.
May the Blessed One show me favor and accept them at my hands!"     19

The Blessed One said: "Pukkusa, robe me in one, and Ānanda in the
other."                                                             20

And the Tathāgata's body appeared shining like a flame, and he
was beautiful above all expression.                                 21

And the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: "How wonderful
a thing is it, Lord, and how marvellous, that the color of the
skin of the Blessed One should be so clear, so exceedingly
bright! When I placed this robe of burnished cloth of gold on the
body of the Blessed One, lo! it seemed as if it had lost its
splendor!"                                                          22

The Blessed One said: "There are two occasions on which a
Tathāgata's appearance becomes clear and exceeding bright. In the
night, Ānanda, in which a Tathāgata attains to the supreme and
perfect insight, and in the night in which he passes finally away
in that utter passing away which leaves nothing whatever of his
earthly existence to remain."                                       23

And the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ānanda, and said:
"Now it may happen, Ānanda, that some one should stir up remorse
in Chunda, the smith, by saying: 'It is evil to thee, Chunda, and
loss to thee, that the Tathāgata died, having eaten his last meal
from thy provision.' Any such remorse, Ānanda, in Chunda, the
smith, should be checked by saying: 'It is good to thee, Chunda,
and gain to thee, that the Tathāgata died, having eaten his last
meal from thy provision. From the very mouth of the Blessed One,
O Chunda, have I heard, from his own mouth have I received this
saying, "These two offerings of food are of equal fruit and of
much greater profit than any other: the offerings of food which a
Tathāgata accepts when he has attained perfect enlightenment and
when he passes away by the utter passing away in which nothing
whatever of his earthly existence remains behind--these two
offerings of food are of equal fruit and of equal profit, and of
much greater fruit and much greater profit than any other. There
has been laid up by Chunda, the smith, a karma redounding to
length of life, redounding to good birth, redounding to good
fortune, redounding to good fame, redounding to the inheritance
of heaven and of great power." In this way, Ānanda, should be
checked any remorse in Chunda, the smith."                          24

Then the Blessed One, perceiving that death was near, uttered
these words: "He who gives away shall have real gain. He who
subdues himself shall be free, he shall cease to be a slave of
passions. The righteous man casts off evil; and by rooting out
lust, bitterness, and illusion, do we reach Nirvāna."               25




XCVI.

METTEYYA.


The Blessed One proceeded with a great company of the brethren to
the sāla grove of the Mallas, the Upavattana of Kusinārā on the
further side of the river Hiraññavatī, and when he had arrived he
addressed the venerable Ānanda, and said: "Make ready for me, I
pray you, Ānanda, the couch with its head to the north, between
the twin sāla trees. I am weary, Ānanda, and wish to be down."       1

"Be it so, Lord!" said the venerable Ānanda, and he spread a
couch with its head to the north, between the twin sāla trees.
And the Blessed One laid himself down, and he was mindful and
self-possessed.                                                      2

Now, at that time the twin sāla trees were full of bloom with
flowers out of season; and heavenly songs came wafted from the
skies, out of reverence for the successor of the Buddhas of old.
And Ānanda was filled with wonder that the Blessed One was thus
honored. But the Blessed One said: "Not by such events, Ānanda,
is the Tathāgata rightly honored, held sacred, or revered. But
the brother or the sister, the devout man or the devout woman,
who continually fulfils all the greater and the lesser duties,
walking according to the precepts, it is they who rightly honor,
hold sacred, and revere the Tathāgata with the worthiest homage.
Therefore, O Ānanda, be ye "constant in the fulfilment of the
greater and of the lesser duties, and walk according to the
precepts; thus, Ānanda, will ye honor the Master."                   3

Then the venerable Ānanda went into the vihāra, and stood leaning
against the doorpost, weeping at the thought: "Alas! I remain
still but a learner, one who has yet to work out his own
perfection. And the Master is about to pass away from me--he who
is so kind!"                                                         4

Now, the Blessed One called the brethren, and said: "Where, O
brethren, is Ānanda?"                                                5

And one of the brethren went and called Ānanda. And Ānanda came
and said to the Blessed One: "Deep darkness reigned for want of
wisdom; the world of sentient creatures was groping for want of
light; then the Tathāgata lit up the lamp of wisdom, and now it
will be extinguished again, ere he has brought it out."              6

And the Blessed One said to the venerable Ānanda, as he sat there
by his side: 7

"Enough, Ānanda! Let not thy self be troubled; do not weep! Have
I not already, on former occasions, told you that it is in the
very nature of all things most near and dear unto us that we must
separate from them and leave them?                                   8

"The foolish man conceives the idea of 'self,' the wise man sees
there is no ground on which to build the idea of 'self,' thus he
has a right conception of the world and well concludes that all
compounds amassed by sorrow will be dissolved again, but the
truth will remain.                                                   9

"Why should I preserve this body of flesh, when the body of the
excellent law will endure? I am resolved; having accomplished my
purpose and attended to the work set me, I look for rest!           10

"For a long time, Ānanda, thou hast been very near to me by
thoughts and acts of such love as never varies and is beyond all
measure. Thou hast done well, Ānanda! Be earnest in effort and
thou too shalt soon be free from the great evils, from
sensuality, from selfishness, from delusion, and from ignorance!"   11

And Ānanda, suppressing his tears, said to the Blessed One: "Who
shall teach us when thou art gone?"                                 12

And the Blessed One replied: "I am not the first Buddha who came
upon earth, nor shall I be the last. In due time another Buddha
will arise in the world, a Holy One, a supremely enlightened One,
endowed with wisdom in conduct, auspicious, knowing the universe,
an incomparable leader of men, a master of angels and mortals. He
will reveal to you the same eternal truths which I have taught
you. He will preach his religion, glorious in its origin,
glorious at the climax, and glorious at the goal, in the spirit
and in the letter. He will proclaim a religious life, wholly
perfect and pure; such as I now proclaim."                          13

Ānanda said: "How shall we know him?"                               14

The Blessed One said: "He will be known as Metteyya, which means
'he whose name is kindness.'"                                       15




XCVII.

THE BUDDHA'S FINAL ENTERING INTO NIRVĀNA.


Then the Mallas, with their young men and maidens and their
wives, being grieved, and sad, and afflicted at heart, went to
the Upavattana, the sāla grove of the Mallas, and wanted to see
the Blessed One, in order to partake of the bliss that devolves
upon those who are in the presence of the Holy One.                  1

And the Blessed One addressed them and said:                         2

"Seeking the way, ye must exert yourselves and strive with
diligence. It is not enough to have seen me! Walk as I have
commanded you; free yourselves from the tangled net of sorrow.
Walk in the path with steadfast aim.                                 3

"A sick man may be cured by the healing power of medicine and
will be rid of all his ailments without beholding the physician.     4

"He who does not do what I command sees me in vain. This brings
no profit. Whilst he who lives far off from where I am and yet
walks righteously is ever near me.                                   5

"A man may dwell beside me, and yet, being disobedient, be far
away from me. Yet he who obeys the Dharma will always enjoy the
bliss of the Tathāgata's presence."                                  6

Then the mendicant Subhadda went to the sāla grove of the Mallas
and said to the venerable Ānanda: "I have heard from fellow
mendicants of mine, who were deep stricken in years and teachers
of great experience: 'Sometimes and full seldom to Tathāgatas
appear in the world, the holy Buddhas.' Now it is said that
to-day in the last watch of the night, the final passing away of
the samana Gotama will take place. My mind is full of
uncertainty, yet have I faith in the samana Gotama and trust he
will be able so to present the truth that I may become rid of my
doubts. O that I might be allowed to see the samana Gotama!"         7

When he had thus spoken the venerable Ānanda said to the
mendicant Subhadda: "Enough! friend Subhadda. Trouble not the
Tathāgata. The Blessed One is weary."                                8

Now the Blessed One overheard this conversation of the venerable
Ānanda with the mendicant Subhadda. And the Blessed One called
the venerable Ānanda, and said: "Ānanda! Do not keep out
Subhadda. Subhadda may be allowed to see the Tathāgata. Whatever
Subhadda will ask of me, he will ask from a desire for knowledge,
and not to annoy me, and whatever I may say in answer to his
questions, that he will quickly understand."                         9

Then the venerable Ānanda said to Subhadda the mendicant: "Step
in, friend Subhadda; for the Blessed One gives thee leave."         10

When the Blessed One had instructed Subhadda, and aroused and
gladdened him with words of wisdom and comfort, Subhadda said to
the Blessed One:                                                    11

"Glorious Lord, glorious Lord! Most excellent are the words of
thy mouth, most excellent! They set up that which has been
overturned, they reveal that which has been hidden. They point
out the right road to the wanderer who has gone astray. They
bring a lamp into the darkness so that those who have eyes to see
can see. Thus, Lord, the truth has been made known to me by the
Blessed One and I take my refuge in the Blessed One, in the
Truth, and in the Order. May the Blessed One accept me as a
disciple and true believer, from this day forth as long as life
endures."                                                           12

And Subhadda, the mendicant, said to the venerable Ānanda: "Great
is thy gain, friend Ānanda, great is thy good fortune, that for
so many years thou hast been sprinkled with the sprinkling of
discipleship in this brotherhood at the hands of the Master
himself!"                                                           13

Now the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ānanda, and said: "It
may be, Ānanda, that in some of you the thought may arise, 'The
word of the Master is ended, we have no teacher more!' But it is
not thus, Ānanda, that you should regard it. It is true that no
more shall I receive a body, for all future sorrow has now
forever passed away. But though this body will be dissolved, the
Tathāgata remains. The truth and the rules of the order which I
have set forth and laid down for you all, let them, after I am
gone, be a teacher unto you. When I am gone, Ānanda, let the
order, if it should so wish, abolish all the lesser and minor
precepts."                                                          14

Then the Blessed One addressed the brethren, and said: "There
may be some doubt or misgiving in the mind of a brother as to the
Buddha, or the truth, or the path. Do not have to reproach
yourselves afterwards with the thought, 'We did not inquire of
the Blessed One when we were face to face with him.' Therefore
inquire now, O brethren, inquire freely."                           15

And the brethren remained silent.                                   16

Then the venerable Ānanda said to the Blessed One: "Verily, I
believe that in this whole assembly of the brethren there is not
one brother who has any doubt or misgiving as to the Buddha, or
the truth, or the path!"                                            17

Said the Blessed One: "It is out of the fullness of faith that
thou hast spoken, Ānanda! But, Ānanda, the Tathāgata knows for
certain that in this whole assembly of the brethren there is not
one brother who has any doubt or misgiving as to the Buddha, or
the truth, or the path! For even the most backward, Ānanda, of
all these brethren has become converted, and is assured of final
salvation."                                                         18

Then the Blessed One addressed the brethren and said: "If ye now
know the Dharma, the cause of all suffering, and the path of
salvation, O disciples, will ye then say: 'We respect the Master,
and out of reverence for the Master do we thus speak?'"             19

The brethren replied: "That we shall not, O Lord."                  20

And the Holy One continued:                                         21

"Of those beings who live in ignorance, shut up and confined, as
it were, in an egg, I have first broken the eggshell of ignorance
and alone in the universe obtained the most exalted, universal
Buddhahood. Thus, O disciples, I am the eldest, the noblest of
beings.                                                             22

"But what ye speak, O disciples, is it not even that which ye
have yourselves known, yourselves seen, yourselves realised?"       23

Ānanda and the brethren said: "It is, O Lord."                      24

Once more the Blessed One began to speak: "Behold now,
brethren," said he, "I exhort you, saying, 'Decay is inherent in
all component things, but the truth will remain forever!' Work
out your salvation with diligence!" This was the last word of the
Tathāgata. Then the Tathāgata fell into a deep meditation, and
having passed through the four jhānas, entered Nirvāna.             25

When the Blessed One entered Nirvāna there arose, at his passing
out of existence, a mighty earthquake, terrible and
awe-inspiring: and the thunders of heaven burst forth, and of
those of the brethren who were not yet free from passions some
stretched out their arms and wept, and some fell headlong on the
ground, in anguish at the thought: "Too soon has the Blessed One
died! Too soon has the Happy One passed away from existence! Too
soon has the Light of the world gone out!"                          16

Then the venerable Anuruddha exhorted the brethren and said:
"Enough, my brethren! Weep not, neither lament! Has not the
Blessed One formerly declared this to us, that it is in the very
nature of all things near and dear unto us, that we must separate
from them and leave them, since everything that is born, brought
into being, and organized, contains within itself the inherent
necessity of dissolution? How then can it be possible that the
body of the Tathāgata should not be dissolved? No such condition
can exist! Those who are free from passion will bear the loss,
calm and self-possessed, mindful of the truth he has taught us."    27

And the venerable Anuruddha and the venerable Ānanda spent the
rest of the night in religious discourse.                           28

Then the venerable Anuruddha said to the venerable Ānanda: "Go
now, brother Ānanda, and inform the Mallas of Kusinārā saying,
'The Blessed One has passed away: do, then, whatsoever seemeth to
you fit!'"                                                          29

And when the Mallas had heard this saying they were grieved, and
sad, and afflicted at heart.                                        30

Then the Mallas of Kusinārā gave orders to their attendants,
saying, "Gather together perfumes and garlands, and all the music
in Kusinārā!" And the Mallas of Kusinārā took the perfumes and
garlands, and all the musical instruments, and five hundred
garments, and went to the sāla grove where the body of the
Blessed One lay. There they passed the day in paying honor and
reverence to the remains of the Blessed One, with hymns, and
music, and with garlands and perfumes, and in making canopies of
their garments, and preparing decorative wreaths to hang thereon.
And they burned the remains of the Blessed One as they would do
to the body of a king of kings.                                     31

When the funeral pyre was lit, the sun and moon withdrew their
shining, the peaceful streams on every side were torrent-swollen,
the earth quaked, and the sturdy forests shook like aspen leaves,
whilst flowers and leaves fell untimely to the ground, like
scattered rain, so that all Kusinārā became strewn knee-deep with
mandāra flowers raining down from heaven.                           32

When the burning ceremonies were over, Devaputta said to the
multitudes that were assembled round the pyre:                      33

"Behold, O brethren, the earthly remains of the Blessed One have
been dissolved, but the truth which he has taught us lives in our
minds and cleanses us from all error.                               34

"Let us, then, go out into the world, as compassionate and
merciful as our great master, and preach to all living beings the
four noble truths and the eightfold path of righteousness, so
that all mankind may attain to a final salvation, taking refuge
in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha."                         35

And when the Blessed One had entered into Nirvāna, and the Mallas
had burned the body with such ceremonies as would indicate that
he was the great king of kings, ambassadors came from all the
empires that at the time had embraced his doctrine, to claim a
share of the relics; and the relics were divided into eight parts
and eight dāgobas were erected for their preservation. One dāgoba
was erected by the Mallas and seven others by the seven kings of
those countries, whose people had taken refuge in the Buddha.       36




CONCLUSION.


XCVIII.

THE THREE PERSONALITIES OF THE BUDDHA.


When the Blessed One had passed away into Nirvāna, the disciples
came together and consulted what to do in order to keep the
Dharma pure and uncorrupted by heresies.                             1

And Upāli rose, saying:                                              2

"Our great Master used to say to the brethren: 'O bhikkhus! after
my final entrance into Nirvāna you must reverence and obey the
law. Regard the law as your master. The law is like unto a light
that shines in the darkness, pointing out the way; it is also
like unto a precious jewel to gain which you must shun no
trouble, and be ready to bring any sacrifice, even, should it be
needed, your own fives. Obey the Dharma which I have revealed to
you; follow it carefully and regard it in no way different from
myself.'                                                             3

"Such were the words of the Blessed One.                             4

"The law, accordingly, which the Buddha has left us as a precious
inheritance has now become the visible body of the Tathāgata. Let
us, therefore, revere it and keep it sacred. For what is the use
of erecting dāgobas for relics, if we neglect the spirit of the
Master's teachings?"                                                 5

And Anuruddha arose and said:                                        6

"Let us bear in mind, O brethren, that Gotama Siddhattha has
revealed the truth to us. He was the Holy One and the Perfect One
and the Blessed One, because the eternal truth had taken abode in
him.                                                                 7

"The Tathāgata taught us that the truth existed before he was
born into this world, and will exist after he has entered into
the bliss of Nirvāna.                                                8

"The Tathāgata said:                                                 9

"'The truth is omnipresent and eternal, endowed with excellencies
innumerable, above all human nature, and ineffable in its
holiness.'                                                          10

"Now, let us bear in mind that not this or that law which is
revealed to us in the Dharma is the Buddha, but the entire truth,
the truth which is eternal, omnipresent, immutable, and most
excellent.                                                          11

"Many regulations of the Sangha are temporary; they were
prescribed because they suited the occasion and were needed for
some transient emergency. The truth, however, is not temporary.     12

"The truth is not arbitrary nor a matter of opinion, but can be
investigated, and he who earnestly searches for the truth will
find it.                                                            13

"The truth is hidden to the blind, but he who has the mental eye
sees the truth. The truth is Buddha's essence, and the truth will
remain the ultimate standard by which we can discern false and
true doctrines.                                                     14

"Let us, then, revere the truth; let us inquire into the truth
and state it, and let us obey the truth. For the truth is Buddha
our Master, our Teacher, our Lord."                                 15

And Kassapa rose and said:                                          16

"Truly thou hast spoken well, O brother Anuruddha. Neither is
there any conflict of opinion on the meaning of our religion. For
the Blessed One possesses three personalities, and every one of
them is of equal importance to us.                                  17

"There is the Dharma Kāya. There is the Nirmāna Kāya. There is
the Sambhoga Kāya.                                                  18

"Buddha is the all-excellent truth, eternal, omnipresent, and
immutable. This is the Sambhoga Kāya which is in a state of
perfect bliss.                                                      19

"Buddha is the all-loving teacher assuming the shape of the
beings whom he teaches. This is the Nirmāna Kāya, his
apparitional body.                                                  20

"Buddha is the all-blessed dispensation of religion. He is the
spirit of the Sangha and the meaning of the commands which he has
left us in his sacred word, the Dharma. This is the Dharma Kāya,
the body of the most excellent law.                                 21

"If Buddha had not appeared to us as Gotama Sakyamuni, how could
we have the sacred traditions of his doctrine? And if the
generations to come did not have the sacred traditions preserved
in the Sangha, how could they know anything of the great
Sakyamuni? And neither we nor others would know anything about
the most excellent truth which is eternal, omnipresent, and
immutable.                                                          22

"Let us then keep sacred and revere the traditions; let us keep
sacred the memory of Gotama Sakyamuni, so that people may find
the truth; for he whose spiritual eye is open will discover it,
and it is the same to every one who possesses the comprehension
of a Buddha to recognize it and to expound it."                     23

Then the brethren decided to convene a synod in Rājagaha in order
to lay down the pure doctrines of the Blessed One, to collect and
collate the sacred writings, and to establish a canon which
should serve as a source of instruction for future generations.     24




XCIX.

THE PURPOSE OF BEING.


Eternal verities dominate the formation of worlds and constitute
the cosmic order of natural laws. But when, through the
conflicting motion of masses, the universe was illumined with
blazing fire, there was no eye to see the light, no ear to listen
to reason's teachings, no mind to perceive the significance of
being; and in the immeasurable spaces of existence no place was
found where the truth could abide in all its glory.                  1

In the due course of evolution sentiency appeared and
sense-perception arose. There was a new realm of being, the realm
of soul-life, full of yearning, with powerful passions and of
unconquerable energy. And the world split in twain: there were
pleasures and pains, self and notself, friends and foes, hatred
and love. The truth vibrated through the world of sentiency, but
in all its infinite potentialities no place could be found where
the truth could abide in all its glory.                              2

And reason came forth in the struggle for life. Reason began to
guide the instinct of self, and reason took the sceptre of the
creation and overcame the strength of the brutes and the power of
the elements. Yet reason seemed to add new fuel to the flame of
hatred, increasing the turmoil of conflicting passions; and
brothers slew their brothers for the sake of satisfying the lust
of a fleeting moment. And the truth repaired to the domains of
reason, but in all its recesses no place was found where the
truth could abide in all its glory.                                  3

Now reason, as the helpmate of self, implicated all living beings
more and more in the meshes of lust, hatred, and envy, and from
lust, hatred, and envy the evils of wrongdoing originated. Men
broke down under the burdens of life, until the saviour appeared,
the great Buddha, the Holy Teacher of men and gods.                  4

And the Buddha taught men the right use of sentiency, and the
right application of reason; and he taught men to see things as
they are, without illusions, and they learned to act according to
truth. He taught righteousness and thus changed rational
creatures into humane beings, just, kind-hearted, and faithful.
And now at last a place was found where the truth might abide in
all its glory, and this place is the heart of mankind.               5

Buddha, O Blessed One, O Holy One, O Perfect One, thou hast
revealed the truth, and the truth has appeared upon earth and the
kingdom of truth has been founded.                                   6

There is not room for truth in space, infinite though it be.         7

There is not room for truth in sentiency, neither in its
pleasures nor in its pains; sentiency is the first footstep of
truth, but there is not room in it for the truth, though
sentiency may beam with the blazing glow of beauty and life.         8

Neither is there any room for truth in rationality. Rationality
is a two-edged sword and serves the purpose of love equally as
well as the purpose of hatred. Rationality is the platform on
which the truth standeth. No truth is attainable without reason.
Nevertheless, in mere rationality there is no room for truth,
though it be the instrument that masters the things of the world.    9

The throne of truth is righteousness; and love and justice and
good-will are its ornaments.                                        10

Righteousness is the place in which truth dwells, and here in the
hearts of mankind aspiring after the realization of
righteousness, there is ample space for a rich and ever richer
revelation of the truth.                                            11

This is the Gospel of the Blessed One. This is the revelation of
the Enlightened One. This is the bequest of the Holy One.           12

Those who accept the truth and have faith in the truth, take
refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha.                   13

Receive us, O Buddha, as thy disciples from this day hence, so
long as our life lasts.                                             14

Comfort, O holy Teacher, compassionate and all-loving, the
afflicted and the sorrow-laden, illumine those who go astray, and
let us all gain more and more in comprehension and in holiness.     15

The truth is the end and aim of all existence, and the worlds
originate so that the truth may come and dwell therein.             16

Those who fail to aspire for the truth have missed the purpose of
life.                                                               17

Blessed is he who rests in the truth, for all things will pass
away, but the truth abideth forever.                                18

The world is built for the truth, but false combinations of
thought misrepresent the true state of things and bring forth
errors.                                                             19

Errors can be fashioned as it pleases those who cherish them;
therefore they are pleasant to look upon, but they are unstable
and contain the seeds of dissolution.                               20

Truth cannot be fashioned. Truth is one and the same; it is
immutable.                                                          21

Truth is above the power of death; it is omnipresent, eternal,
and most glorious.                                                  22

Illusions, errors, and lies are the daughters of Māra, and great
power is given unto them to seduce the minds of men and lead them
astray upon the path of evil.                                       23

The nature of delusions, errors, and lies is death; and
wrong-doing is the way to perdition.                                24

Delusions, errors, and lies are like huge, gaudy vessels, the
rafters of which are rotten and wormeaten, and those who embark
in them are fated to be shipwrecked.                                25

There are many who say: "Come error, be thou my guide," and when
they are caught in the meshes of selfishness, lust, and evil
desires, misery is begot.                                           26

Yet does all life yearn for the truth and the truth only can cure
our diseases and give peace to our unrest.                          27

Truth is the essence of life, for truth endureth beyond the death
of the body. Truth is eternal and will still remain even though
heaven and earth shall pass away.                                   28

There are not different truths in the world, for truth is one and
the same at all times and in every place.                           29

Truth teaches us the noble eightfold path of righteousness, and
it is a straight path easily found by the truth-loving. Happy are
those who walk in it.                                               30




C.

THE PRAISE OF ALL THE BUDDHAS.

     All the Buddhas are wonderful and glorious.
     There is not their equal upon earth.
     They reveal to us the path of life.
     And we hail their appearance with pious reverence.              1

     All the Buddhas teach the same truth.
     They point out the path to those who go astray.
     The Truth is our hope and comfort.
     We gratefully accept its illimitable light.                     2

     Ah the Buddhas are one in essence,
     Which is omnipresent in all modes of being,
     Sanctifying the bonds that tie all souls together,
     And we rest in its bliss as our final refuge.                   3




TABLE OF REFERENCE.


THE GOSPEL OF BUDDHA CHAPTER AND VERSE (Gospel): I-III
  Sources: EA
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: Descent from heaven omitted
  Sources: LV; rGya, iii-iv
    Parallelisms: Klopstock's _Messias_ Gesang I

Gospel: IV
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1-147
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: IV, 6
  Sources: BSt, p. 64
    Parallelisms: Mark vii, 32, 37; Matth. xi, 5

Gospel: IV, 9
  Sources: Fo, vv. 22-24
    Parallelisms: Matth. ii, 1

Gospel: IV, 12
  Sources: Fo, vv. 39-40
    Parallelisms: Luke ii, 36

Gospel: IV, 17
  Sources: RB 150; RHB 52
    Parallelisms: Pseudo Matth. 23

Gospel: IV, 27
  Sources: Fo, v. 147
    Parallelisms: Luke ii, 52

Gospel: Omitted
  Sources: RHB, pp. 103-108
    Parallelisms: Matth. ii, 16

Gospel: V
  Sources: HM, p. 156; RB, p. 83; rGya, xii
    Parallelisms: --

  Sources: Fo, vv. 152-156
    Parallelisms: Luke ii, 46-47

Gospel: V, 9
  Sources: Fo, v. 164
    Parallelisms: Matth. iii, 16

Gospel: VI
  Sources: Fo, vv. 191-322
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: VI, 19-20
  Sources: BSt, pp. 79-80; RB, p. 23
    Parallelisms: Luke xi, 27-28

Gospel: VII
  Sources: Fo, vv. 335-417
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: VII, 7
  Sources: BSt, p. 5-6
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: VII, 18-19
  Sources: BSt, p. 18
    Parallelisms: Matt. xxiv, 35; Luke xxi, 33; Luke xvi, 17

Gospel: VII, 23-24
  Sources: BSt, p. 84
    Parallelisms: Luke iv, 5-8 [see also Matth. iv, 1-7 and Mark i, 13]

Gospel: VIII
  Sources: Fo, vv. 778-918
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: VIII, 15
  Sources: DP, v. 178
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: IX
  Sources: Fo, vv. 919-1035; Cf. "Arāda and Udraka" in Rhys Davids's
           _Dialogue_
    Parallelisms: Compare the results of modern psychology

Gospel: IX, 6
  Sources: MV. 1, 6, Secs. 36-38 [SB, xiii, p. 100]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: IX, 14
  Sources: QKM, pp. 83-86
    Parallelisms: Evolution theory

Gospel: IX, 15
  Sources: QKM, p. 133
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: IX, 16
  Sources: QKM, p. 111
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: X
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1000-1023
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: X, 4, 5
  Sources: SN, vv. 425, 439; SN, v. 445
    Parallelisms: Luke iv, 2-4; John iii, 46

Gospel: X, 11
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1024; Fo, vv. 1222-1224
    Parallelisms: Luke vii, 19; Matth ii, 3

Gospel: XI [See LXXXIX, 1-6]
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1026-1110
    Parallelisms: Luke iv, 2; Matth. iv, 1-7; Mark i, 13

Gospel: XII
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1111-1199
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XII, 8
  Sources: QKM, p. 79; SDP, vii [SB, xxi, p. 172]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XII, 11-15
  Sources: SDP, iii [SB, xxi, p. 90]; MV, i, 6 Secs. 19-28; Cf. OldG,
           pp. 227-228, OldE, p. 211; RhDB, pp. 106-107
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XII, 16
  Sources: BSt, pp. 103-104; Cf. DP, pp. 153-154; Db, p. 12
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XII, 20
  Sources: rGya, 355
    Parallelisms: Matth. v, 3-11

Gospel: XIII
  Sources: MV, i, 4
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XIV
  Sources: MV, i, 5
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XIV, 2
  Sources: MV, i, 3, Sec. 4
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XIV, 14
  Sources: MPN, iii, 44, 45; Cf. W, p. 87
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XV
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1200-1217; MV, i, 6, Secs. 1-9
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XVI
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1217-1279; MV, i, 6, Secs. 10-47
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XVI, 5
  Sources: SN, v. 248
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XVI, 6
  Sources: RhDB p. 131
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XVI, 7
  Sources: SN, v. 241
      Parallelisms: Matth. xv, 10

Gospel: XVII
  Sources: MV, i, 6, Sec. 10-47
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XVII, 10-12
  Sources: _Saniyuttaka Nikāya_, vol. iii, fol. sā, quoted by OldG,
           p. 364; OldE, p. 339
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XVII, 13-18
  Sources: MV, i, 11
    Parallelisms: --

  Sources: Fo, vv. 1297-1300
    Parallelisms: Luke ix, 1-6; Luke x, 1-24

Gospel: XVII, 15
  Sources: QKM, p. 264
    Parallelisms: Matth. v, 16

  Sources: QKM, p. 266
    Parallelisms: Matth. vii, 6

Gospel: XVIII
  Sources: MV, 1, 7; 8, 9; Fo, vv. 1280-1296
    Parallelisms: John iii, 2

Gospel: XVIII, 8
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1289-1290
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XVIII, 10
  Sources: Fo, v. 1292
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XIX
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1300-1334; MV, 1, 20-21
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XX
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1335-1379; MV, 1, 22
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XX, 19-20
  Sources: SN, v. 148; _Metta Sutta._ [An often quoted sentence.
           RhDB, p. 109, Hardy, "Legends and Theories of the Buddhas,"
           p. 212]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XX, 23
  Sources: RhDB, p. 62
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XX, 28
  Sources: Fo, v. 1733
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXI
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1380-1381; MV, 1, 22, Secs. 15-18
    Parallelisms: Matth. xxi, 1-11; Mark. xi, 1-10; Luke xix, 28-38;
                  John xii, 12-15

Gospel: XXII
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1382-1433; MV 1, 23-24; W, p. 89
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXII, 3-5
  Sources: MV, 1, 23, Secs. 13-14
    Parallelisms: -- Matth. xxi, 9; Mark xi, 9; John xii, 13

Gospel: XXIII, 10-20
  Sources: EA
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXIV
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1496-1521
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXV, 4
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1516-1517
    Parallelisms: Acts xx, 35

Gospel: XXV
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1522-1533, 1611-1671
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXVI, 1-7
  Sources: AN, iii, 134.
    Parallelisms: Compare the results of modern psychology

Gospel: XXVI, 8-13
  Sources: US, p. 112; W, p. xiv
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXVII
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1534-1610; HM, p. 204
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXVIII
  Sources: HM, p. 203 et seqq.; BSt, pp. 125-126
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXIX
  Sources: MV, i, 54; HM, 208-209
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXX
  Sources: MV, viii, 23-36 [SB, xvii, pp. 193-194]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXXI
  Sources: Fo vv. 1672-1673
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXXII
  Sources: HM, pp. 353-354
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXXII, 4-6
  Sources: W, pp. 443-444
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXXIII
  Sources: S42S; Fo, vv. 1757-1766; BP, p. 153
    Parallelisms: Matth. v, 28

Gospel: XXXIII, 9-11
  Sources: Fo vv. 1762-1763
    Parallelisms: Eph. vi, 13-17

  Sources: Fo, vv. 1763
    Parallelisms: Mark ix, 47; Matth. v, 29; Matth. xviii, 9

Gospel: XXXIV
  Sources: MV, viii, 15. [SB, xvii, pp. 219-225.]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXXIV, 24 [Last part of the verse.]
  Sources: Bgt, p. 211
    Parallelisms: Luke viii, 2; Matth. xiii, 24-27

Gospel: XXXV
  Sources: MV, ii
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXXVI
  Sources: MV, x, 1, 2, Sec. 1-2; Sec. 20
           C, vol iii, p. 139
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXXVII
  Sources: MV, x, 5-6, 2 Sec. 3-20
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXXVIII
  Sources: MV, v, 4
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXXVIII, 3
  Sources: BSt, p. 311
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXXVIII, 5
  Sources: MV, v, 4, 2 [SB, xvii, p. 18]
    Parallelisms: Matth. v, 46-47

Gospel: XXXIX
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1713-1734; HM, pp. 337-340
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXXIX, 4
  Sources: Bst, p. 200
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XXXIX, 7
  Sources: DP, v. 227; SB, x, p. 58 (cf. ChD, p. 122)
    Parallelisms: Matth. xi, 16, 19

Gospel: XL
  Sources: V, xviii, xx; W, pp. 184-186
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XLI
  Sources: MV, vi, 29 [SB, xvii, pp. 104-105.]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XLI, 12-13
  Sources: _Metta Sutta_; SN v. 148. [Cf. RhDB, p. 109]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XLII
  Sources: RB, pp. 68-69. [Cf. RhDB, p. 71 and OldG, 376-378.]
    Parallelisms: Mark iii, 14; Luke ix, 2

  Sources: Bgt, 212
    Parallelisms: Matth. xiii, 3 et seq.; Mark iv, 3-20

Gospel: XLIV
  Sources: TPN, p. 129
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XLV
  Sources: TPN, pp. 22-23 and p. 25
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XLVI
  Sources: S42S, 4
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XLVII
  Sources: SDP, x, xiii, xxvii
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XLVII, 23
  Sources: SDP, xxiv, 22. [SB, xxi, p. 416.]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XLVIII
  Sources: DP in SB, x
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XLVIII, 36-37
  Sources: DP, v. 5
    Parallelisms: Matth. v, 44

Gospel: XLVIII, 46
  Sources: SN, vv. 784-785, 885-888, 834 [SB, x, 149, 159, 169.]
    Parallelisms: Matth. xi, 29-30

Gospel: XLVIII, 47
  Sources: DP, v. 275
    Parallelisms: II Cor. vii, 7

Gospel: XLVIII, 55
  Sources: DP, v. 387
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XLIX
  Sources: SB, xi, pp. 157-203
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XLIX, 17
  Sources: SB, xi, pp. 173-174
    Parallelisms: Matth. xv, 14

Gospel: L
  Sources: SSP, pp. 297-320 [Cf. RhDB, 143.]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LI, 1-14; LI, 31-75
  Sources: MV, vi, 31. [SB, xvii, pp. 108-113.]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LI, 15-30
  Sources: EA [cf. QKM, pp. 254-257]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LII
  Sources: EA [cf. CBS, p. 15 and also MV, v]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LIII
  Sources: Compiled from HM, pp. 280 et seq.; Fo, v. 1682, 1683;
           W, p. 219; and QKM, pass.
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LIII, 18-23a
  Sources: QKM, p. 120
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LIII, 23b
  Sources: QKM, p. 148
    Parallelisms: John iii, 8

Gospel: LIII, 26-27
  Sources: QKM, p. 67
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LIII, 29-32
  Sources: QKM, pp. 73-74
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LIII, 47-59
  Sources: QKM, pp. 63, 83-86
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LIII, 53
  Sources: US and W, motto
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LIV, 1-2
  Sources: Fo, vv. 1208, 1228
    Parallelisms: Matth. v, 3-11

Gospel: LIV, 3
  Sources: _Brahmajāla Sutta_, quoted by RhD, p. 99
    Parallelisms: John xvi, 16; Matth. xxiv, 23

Gospel: LIV, 4
  Sources: Gospel: QKM, p. 114
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LIV, 5
  Sources: Fo, v. 1231
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LIV, 6-8
  Sources: rGya, p. 372
    Parallelisms: Matth. xi, 28

Gospel: LIV, 9
  Sources: S42S, 16
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LIV, 10
  Sources: QKM, p. 110
    Parallelisms: John xiv, 6; John xviii, 37

Gospel: LV
  Sources: SDP, v
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LVI
  Sources: _Mahā Rāhula Sutta_
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LVII
  Sources: S42S
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LVIII
  Sources: _Buddhist Catena_
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LIX
  Sources: SN, pp. 58-62; p, 25; p. 147; p. 54; MV, i, 3, Sec. 4 [cf.
           OldE, p. 118]; _Nidhikanda Sutta_, quoted by RhDB, p. 127
    Parallelisms: Matth. vi, 20

Gospel: LX, 7-8
  Sources: RhDB, p. 156
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LX, 12
  Sources: Beal, _Buddhism of China_, chap, xii
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LX, 18-23
  Sources: RhDB, p. 170
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LX, 27-28
  Sources: EH
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LX, 29
  Sources: QKM, p. 127
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LX, 31
  Sources: RhDB, pp. 175-176
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LX, 33
  Sources: RhDB,p. 173
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXI
  Sources: MPN, 111, 22. [SB, xx, p. 48-49.]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXI, 3-5
  Sources: _Chullavaggaxx_, 1-4. [SB, xx, 301-305]
    Parallelisms: Matth. v, 13

Gospel: LXI, 6-9
  Sources: _Sutra Dsauglun_ [cf. R. Seydel "_Das Ev. v. Jesu in s.
           Verb. z. Buddha-Sage_" pp. 184-185]
    Parallelisms: Matth. v, 1-2

Gospel: LXII
  Sources: EA
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXIII
  Sources: See O.C. xvii, pp. 353-354
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXIII, 7-9
  Sources: UG, vii, 14 seq.
    Parallelisms: Matth. xxv, 14 et seq.

Gospel: LXIV
  Sources: DP, v
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXV
  Sources: SDP, iv
    Parallelisms: Luke xv, 11 et seq.

Gospel: LXVI
  Sources: Bst, pp. 211, 299. [See PT, 11, 58.]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXVII
  Sources: Bst, pp. 315 et seq.
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXVIII
  Sources: ChD, pp. 88-89
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXVIII, 6
  Sources: ChD
    Parallelisms: Mark xii, 42-44

Gospel: LXIX
  Sources: ChD, p. 46
    Parallelisms: The Story of Diogenes and his Lantern

Gospel: LXX
  Sources: ChD, p. 134
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXI
  Sources: Bgp, pp. 107 et seq.
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXII
  Sources: ChD, p. 77
    Parallelisms: Luke xii, 20

Gospel: LXXIII
  Sources: Bst, p. 147
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXIII, 15
  Sources: BSt
    Parallelisms: Exodus xvii, 6

Gospel: LXXIV
  Sources: SN, pp. 11-15
    Parallelisms: Matth. xiii, 3 et seq.; Mark iv, 14

Gospel: LXXV
  Sources: SN, pp. 20 et seq.
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXVI
  Sources: Bf, p. 205.
    Parallelisms: John v, 5 et seq.

Gospel: LXXVII
  Sources: HM, pp. 317-319
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXVIII, LXXIX
  Sources: _Jātaka Tales_
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXX
  Sources: Bf, pp. 146 et seq.
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXXI
  Sources: _Fu-Pen-Hing-tsi-King_, tr. by S. Beal
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXXI, 7-10
  Sources: EA
    Parallelisms: John ii, 1 et seq.

Gospel: LXXXII
  Sources: MV, i, 14
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXXIII
  Sources: ChD, p. 130 et seq.
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXXIII, 5
  Sources: BP, p. 16
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXXIII, 5, 6, 9
  Sources: ChD and SS
    Parallelisms: Matth. xxii, 30

Gospel: LXXXIV, 1-14
  Sources: BP, pp. 98 et seqq.
    Parallelisms: Greek versions quoted by Jacob H. Thiessen, LKG.

Gospel: LXXXIV, 15-28
  Sources: SB, x, p. 106
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXXV
  Sources: ChD, pp. 50-51
    Parallelisms: Matth. v. 25, 29

Gospel: LXXXV, 6
  Sources: ChD, cf OC No. 470
    Parallelisms: Rom. iii, 28

Gospel: LXXXVI
  Sources: ChD, pp. 94-98
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXXVII
  Sources: C, ii p. 262
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXXVIII
  Sources: MPN, i [SB, xi, p. 1 et seqq.]
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: LXXXIX
  Sources: MPN, i, 19, 22; MV, vi, 28
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XC
  Sources: MPN, i, 16
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XCI
  Sources: MPN, ii, 9
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XCI, 6
  Sources: MPN
    Parallelisms: 1 Cor. 15, 55

Gospel: XCII
  Sources: MPN, 11, 12-24; Fo, vv. 1749-1753, 1768-1782
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XCIII
  Sources: MPN, ii, 27-35
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XCIV, 1
  Sources: BSt,p. 84
    Parallelisms: See Matth. iv, 1 and Mark i, 13

Gospel: XCIV, 2-13
  Sources: MPN, iii, 46-63
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XCV
  Sources: MPN, iv, 14-57
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XCV, 6
  Sources: MPN, iv, 25
    Parallelisms: John xix, 28

Gospel: XCV, 14-22
  Sources: MPN, iv, 47-52
    Parallelisms: Matth. xxvii, 2; Mark ix, 2

Gospel: XCVI
  Sources: MPN, v, 1-14, concerning Metteyya see EH s.v. RhDB, pp. 180,
           200; OldG, p. 153, etc.
    Parallelisms: John xiv, 26

Gospel: XCVII
  Sources: MPN, v, 52-69, and vi; Fo, vv. 2303-2310
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XCVII, 19-20; XCVII, 23-24
  Sources: _Mahātanhāsamkhaya-Sutta, Majjhima Nikāya_, vol. 1, p. 263,
           quoted by OldG, p. 349, E, p. 325.
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: XCVII, 22
  Sources: _Suttavibbanga, Parājika_ 1, pp. 1, 4 quoted by OldG,
           p. 349, E, p. 325
    Parallelisms: 1 Cor. xv, 20

Gospel: XCVIII
  Sources: EA, embodying later traditions, see EH and almost any other
           work on Buddhism.
    Parallelisms: The Christian Trinity dogma

Gospel: XCIX
  Sources: EA
    Parallelisms: --

Gospel: C
  Sources: EA, in imitation of a formula at present in use among Northern
           Buddhists
    Parallelisms: --



ABBREVIATIONS IN THE TABLE OF REFERENCE.


AN.--Añguttara Nikāya in Warren's Buddhism in Translations.

Bf.--Burnouf, Introduction à l'histoire du Bouddhisme Indien, Paris
1844.

Bgt.--The Life or Legend of Gautama, by the R. Rev. P. Bigandet.

BL.--Buddhist Literature in China by Samuel Beal.

BP.--Buddhaghosha's Parables. Translated by T. Rogers, London, 1870.

BSt.--Buddhist Birth Stories or Jātaka Tales. Translated by Rhys Davids.

C.--The Jātaka edited by Prof. E.B. Cowell, Cambridge.

CBS.--A Catena of Buddhist Scriptures from the Chinese by Samuel Beal.
London, 1871.

ChD.--[Chinese Dhammapada.] Texts from the Buddhist Canon, commonly
known as Dhammapada. Translated by S. Beal, London and Boston, 1878.

Dh.--The Dharma, or The Religion of Enlightenment by Paul Carus. 5th ed.
Chicago, 1907.

DP.--The Dhammapada. Translated from Pāli by F. Max Müller, Vol. X, Part
I, of the Sacred Books of the East. Oxford, 1881.

EA.--Explanatory Addition.

EH.--Handbook of Chinese Buddhism, by Ernest J. Eitel. London, 1888.

Fo.--The Fo-Sho-Hing-Tsan-King. A Life of Buddha by Asvaghosha,
translated from Sanskrit into Chinese by Dharmarakhsha, A.D. 420, and
from Chinese into English by Samuel Beal. Vol. XIX of the Sacred Books
of the East. Oxford, 1883.

G.--Reden Gotamo's by Karl Eugen Neumann.

HF.--Hymns of the Faith (Dhammapada) transl. by Albert J. Edmunds.

HM.--A Manual of Buddhism, by R. Spence Hardy.

LKG.--Die Legende von Kisāgotamī, by Jakob H. Thiessen. Breslau, 1880.

LV.--Lalita Vistara, translated into German by Dr. S. Lefmann. Berlin,
1874.

MPN.--The Mahāparinibbāna Suttanta. The Book of the Great Decease. Vol.
XI of the Sacred Books of the East. Oxford 1881.

MP.--The Mahāvagga. I-IV in Vol. XIII; V-X in Vol. XVII of the Sacred
Books of the East. Oxford, 1881-1882.

MY.--Outlines of the Mahāyāna as Taught by Buddha, by S. Kuroda. Tokyo,
Japan, 1893.

OC.--The Open Court, a monthly magazine, published by the Open Court
Publishing Company, Chicago.

OldG.--German Edition, Buddha, sein Leben, seine Lehre und seine
Gemeinde, by H. Oldenberg. Second Edition. Berlin, 1890.

OldE.--English translation, Buddha, His Life, His Doctrine, and His
Order by H. Oldenberg. London, 1882.

PT.--Pantschatantra, translated into German by Theodor Benfey. Two vols.
Leipsic, 1859.

QKM.--The Questions of King Milinda, translated from Pāli by T.W. Rhys
Davids, Vol. XXXV of the Sacred Books of the East. Oxford, 1890.

RB.-The Life of the Buddha from Thibetan Works, transl. by W.W.
Rockhill. London, 1884.

rGya.--rGya Tchee Roll Pa, Histoire du Bouddha Sakya Mouni, by Foucaux.
Paris, 1868.

RHB.--The Romantic History of Buddha from the Chinese Sanskrit, by S.
Beal. London, 1875.

RhDB.--Buddhism, by T.W. Rhys Davids, in the Series of Non-Christian
Religious Systems. London, 1890.

S42S.--Sutra of Forty-two Sections. Kyoto, Japan.

SB.-Sacred Books of the East.

SN.--Sutta Nipāta, translated from the Pāli by V. Fausböll. Part II,
Vol. X of the Sacred Books of the East. Oxford, 1881.

SS.--A Brief Account of Shin-Shiu by R. Akamatsu. Kyoto, Japan, 1893.

SSP.--Sept Suttas Pālis by M.P. Grimblot. Paris, 1876.

TPN.--Buddhistische Anthologie. Texte aus dem Pāli-Kanon. By Dr. Karl
Eugen Neumann. Leyden, 1892.

Ug.--Uttarādhyayana, translated by H. Jacobi. Vol. XLV of the Sacred
Books of the East.

US.--The Udāna by Major General D.M. Strong.

V.--Visuddhi-Magga in Warren's Buddhism in Translations.

W.--Buddhism in Translations by Henry Clarke Warren.


The original Pāli texts are published in the Journal of the Pāli Text
Society, London, Henry Frowde.




GLOSSARY OF NAMES AND TERMS.


[In the text of the present booklet all unnecessary terms have been
avoided. Whenever a good English equivalent could be found, the foreign
expression has been dropped. Nevertheless, the introduction not only of
many foreign-sounding names, but also of some of the original terms, was
unavoidable.

Now we have to state that the Eastern people, at least those of Hindu
culture during the golden age of Buddhism in India, adopted the habit of
translating not only terms but also names. A German whose name is
Schmied is not called Smith in English, but Buddhists, when translating
from Pāli into Sanskrit, change Siddhattha into Siddhartha. The reason
of this strange custom lies in the fact that Buddhists originally
employed the popular speech and did not adopt the use of Sanskrit until
about five hundred years after Buddha. Since the most important names
and terms, such as Nirvāna, Karma and Dharma, have become familiar to us
in their Sanskrit form, while their Pali equivalents, Nibbāna, Kamma and
Dhamma, are little used, it _appeared advisable to prefer for some terms
the Sanskrit forms_, but there are instances in which the Pāli, for some
reason or other, has been preferred by English authors [e. g. Krishā
Gautamī is always called Kisāgotamī], we present here in the Glossary
both the Sanskrit and the Pāli forms.

Names which have been Anglicised, such as "Brahmā, Brahman, Benares,
Jain, and karma," have been preserved in their accepted form. If we
adopt the rule of transferring Sanskrit and Pali words in their
stem-form, as we do in most cases (e.g. Nirvāna, ātman), we ought to
call Brahmā "Brahman," and karma "karman." But us us est tyrannus. In a
popular book it is not wise to swim against the stream.

Following the common English usage of saying "Christ," not "the Christ,"
we say in the title "Buddha," not "the Buddha."]

       *       *       *       *       *

Abni'ññā, _p._, Abhi'jññā, _skt._, supernatural talent. There are six
abhijññās which Buddha acquired when attaining perfect
enlightenment:--(i) the celestial eye, or an intuitive insight of the
nature of any object in any universe; (2) the celestial ear, or the
ability to understand any sound produced in any universe; (3) the power
of assuming any shape or form; (4) knowledge of all forms of
pre-existence of one's self and others; (5) intuitive knowledge of the
minds of all beings; and (6) knowledge of the finality of the stream of
life.

Acira'vatī, _p._ and _skt._, a river.

Agni, _p._ and _skt._, a god of the Brahmans, the god of fire.

Ajatasa'ttu, _p._, Ajatasa'tru, _skt._, the son of king Bimbisāra and
his successor to the throne of Magadha.

Alā'ra, _p._, Ārā'da, _skt._, a prominent Brahman philosopher. His full
name is Ālāra Kālāma.

Ambapā'lī, the courtesan, called "Lady Amra" in Fo-Sho-Hing-Tsan-King.
It is difficult for us to form a proper conception of the social
position of courtesans at Buddha's time in India. This much is sure,
that they were not common prostitutes, but ladies of wealth, possessing
great influence. Their education was similar to the hetairs in Greece,
where Aspasia played so prominent a part. Their rank must sometimes have
been like that of Madame Pompadour in France at the court of Louis XIV.
They rose to prominence, not by birth, but by beauty, education,
refinement, and other purely personal accomplishments, and many of them
were installed by royal favor. The first paragraphs of Khandhaka VIII of
the Mahāvagga [S. _B_., Vol. XVII, pp. 171--172] gives a fair idea of
the important role of courtesans in those days. They were not
necessarily venal daughters of lust, but, often women of distinction and
repute, worldly, but not disrespectable.

Amitā'bha, _p._ and _skt._, endowed with boundless light, from _amita_,
infinite, immeasurable, and _ābbā_, ray of light, splendor, the bliss of
enlightenment. It is a term of later Buddhism and has been personified
as Amitābha Buddha, or Amita. The invocation of the all-saving name of
Amitābha Buddha is a favorite tenet of the Lotus or Pure Land sect, so
popular in China and Japan. Their poetical conception of a paradise in
the West is referred to in Chapter LX. Southern Buddhism knows nothing
of a personified Amitābha, and the Chinese travellers Fa-hien and
Hiuen-tsang do not mention it. The oldest allusion to Amita is found in
the Amitāyus Sūtra, translated A.D. 148--170. [See Eitel, _Handbook_,
pp. 7--9.]

Āna'nda, _p._ and _skt._, Buddha's cousin and his favorite disciple. The
Buddhistic St. John (Johannes).

Anāthapi'ndika, _p._ and _skt._, (also called Anāthapi'ndada in _skt._)
literally "One who gives alms (pinda) to the unprotected or needy
(anātha)." Eitel's etymology "one who gives without keeping (anātha) a
mouthful (pinda) for himself" is not tenable. A wealthy lay devotee
famous for his liberality and donor of the Jetavana vihāra.

Annabhā'ra, _p._ and _skt._, literally "he who brings food"; name of
Sumana's slave.

Aññā'ta, _p._, Âjñā'ta, _skt._, literally "knowing", a cognomen of
Kondañña, the first disciple of Buddha.

Anuru'ddha, a prominent disciple of Buddha, known as the great master of
Buddhist metaphysics. He was a cousin of Buddha, being the second son of
Amritodana, a brother of Suddhodana.

A'rahat, _p._, Ar'hant, _skt._, a saint. (See also Saint in Index.)

Arati, dislike, hatred. The opposite of _rati_. The name of one of
Māra's daughters.

A'sita, _p._ and _skt._, a prophet.

A'ssaji, _p._, Aśvajit, _skt._, one of Buddha's disciples by whose
dignified demeanor Sāriputta is converted.

Ā'tman, _skt._, Atta, _p._, breath as the principle of life, the soul,
self, the ego. To some of the old Brahman schools the ātman constitutes
a metaphysical being in man, which is the thinker of his thoughts, the
perceiver of his sensations, and the doer of his doings. Buddha denies
the existence of an ātman in this sense.

Balā'ni, or pañca-balāni, _p._ and _skt._, (the singular is bala,
power), the five moral powers (also called panca-indriyani), which are:
Faith, energy, memory or recollection, meditation or contemplation, and
wisdom or intuition.

Beluva, a village near Vesālī.

Benares, the well-known city in India; Anglicised form of Vārānasī,
_skt._, and Bārānasī, _p._ (See Kāsī.)

Bha'gavat, _p._, Bha'gavant, _skt._, the man of merit, worshipful, the
Blessed One. A title of honor given to Buddha.

Bha'llika, _p._ and _skt._, a merchant.

Bhāradvā'ja, _p._ and _skt._, name of a Brahman.

Bhā'vanā, _p._ and _skt._, meditation. There are five principal
meditations: metta-bhavana, on love; karunā-bhāvanā, on pity;
mudita-bhavana, on joy; asubha-bhāvanā, on impurity; and upekhā-bhāvanā,
on serenity. [See Rhys Davids's _Buddhism_, pp. 170-171.]

Bhi'kkhu, _p._, bhi'kshu, _skt._, mendicant, monk, friar; the five
bhikkhus; bhikkhus doffed their robes; bhikkhus rebuked; bhikkhus
prospered; the sick bhikkhu.

Bhi'kkhunī, _p._, bhi'kshunī, _skt._, nun.

Bimbisā'ra, _p._ and _skt._, the king of Magadha; often honored with the
cognomen "Sai'nya," _skt._, or "Se'niya," i. e. "the warlike or
military."

Bo'dhi, _p._ and _skt._, knowledge, wisdom, enlightenment.

Bodhi-a'nga or Bojjha'nga, or Sa'tta Bojjha'nga, meditation on the seven
kinds of wisdom, which are:--energy, recollection, contemplation,
investigation of scripture, joy, repose, and serenity.

Bodhisa'tta, _p._, Bodhisa'ttva, _skt._, he whose essence (_sattva_) is
becoming enlightenment (_bodhi_). The term denotes (1) one who is about
to become a Buddha, but has not as yet attained Nirvāna; (2) a class of
saints who have only once more to be born again to enter into Nirvāna;
(3) in later Buddhism any preacher or religious teacher; appearance of;
Bodhisattas.

Bodhi-tree, the tree at Buddha-Gaya, species _ficus religiosa_.

Bra'hmā, Anglicised form of _skt._ stem-form _Brahman_ (nom. s.
_Brahmā_). The chief God of Brahmanism, the world-soul. See also
_Sahampati_; Brahmā, a union with; Brahmā, face to face; Brahmā's mind.

Brahmada'tta, _p._ and _skt._, (etym. given by Brahmā) name of a
mythical king of Kâshî, _skt._, or Kāsī.

Bra'hman, the priestly caste of the Indians. Anglicised form of
_Brahmana_ (_p._ and _skt._). Priests were selected from the Brahman
caste, but Brahmans were not necessarily priests; they were farmers,
merchants, and often high officials in the service of kings. Brahmans,
the two.

Buddha, _p._ and _skt._, the Awakened One, the Enlightened One--. Buddha
is also called Sakyamuni (the Sakya sage), Sakyasimha (the Sakya Lion),
Sugata (the Happy One), Satthar, nom. Satthâ, _p._; Shāstar, _skt._,
(the Teacher), Jina (the Conqueror), Bhagavat (the Blessed One),
Lokanātha (the Lord of the World), Sarvajña (the Omniscient One),
Dharmarāja (the King of Truth), Tathāgata, etc. [See Rh. Davids's B. p.
28.] B., faith in the; B., I am not the first; B. not Gotama; B., refuge
in the; B. remains, Gotama is gone; B. replies to the deva; B., the
sower; B., the teacher; B., the three personalities of; B., the truth;
B., truly thou art; B. will arise, another; B.'s birth; B.'s death; B.'s
farewell address; consolidation of B.'s religion; Buddhas, the praise of
all the; Buddhas, the religion of all the; Buddhas, the words of
immutable.

Cha'nna, _p._ and _skt._, prince Siddhattha's driver. Chu'nda, _p._ and
_skt._, the smith of Pāvā.

Dāgo'ba, modernised form of _skt._ Dhātu-ga'rbha, "relic shrine," (also
called Stūpa in Northern Buddhism) a mausoleum, tower containing relics,
a kenotaph.

Dā'namatī, and _skt._, name of a village. The word means "having a mind
to give."

De'va, _p._ and _skt._, any celestial spirit, a god especially of
intermediate rank, angel.--Deva, questions of the; Buddha replies
to the deva; Devas.

Devada'tta (etym. god-given) brother of Yasodharā and Buddha's
brother-in-law. He tried to found a sect of his own with severer rules
than those prescribed by Buddha. He is described undoubtedly with great
injustice in the Buddhist canon and treated as a traitor. [About his
sect see Rh. Davids's B. p. 181--182.]

Devapu'tta, _p._, Devapu'tra, _skt._, (etym. Son of a God) one of
Buddha's disciples.

Dhammapa'da, _p._, Dharmapa'da, _skt._

Dha'rma, _skt._, Dha'mma, _p._, originally the natural condition of
things or beings, the law of their existence, truth, then religious
truth, the law, the ethical code of righteousness, the whole body of
religious doctrines as a system, religion; let a man take pleasure in
the dharma; the goodness of the dharma.

Dharmakā'ya, _skt._, the body of the law.

Dharmarā'ja, _skt._, Dhammarā'ja, _p._, the king of truth.

Dīghā'vu, Dīrghā'yu, _skt._, the etymology of the word is "livelong."
Name of a mythical prince, son of king Dīghīti.

Dīghī'ti, _p._, Dīrghe'ti, _skt._, literally "suffer-long," Name of a
mythical king, father of prince Dīghā'vu.

Ganges, the well known river of India.

Gava'mpati, _p._, Gavā'mpati, _skt._, literally "lord of cows," a friend
of Yasa.

Ga'yā Kassapa, brother of the great Kassapa of Uruvelā.

Go'tama, _p._, Gau'tama, _skt._, Buddha's family name; Gotama denies the
existence of the soul; Gotama is gone, Buddha remains; Buddha
not Gotama; Gotama the samana; Gotama Siddhattha.

Gotamī, name of any woman belonging to the Gotama family. Kisā Gotamī.

Hinayā'na, _skt._, the small vehicle, viz., of salvation. A name
invented by Northern Buddhists, in contradistinction to Mahāyāna, to
designate the spirit of Southern Buddhism. The term is not used among
Southern Buddhists.

Hira'ññavatī, _p._, Hiran'yavatī, _skt._, a river.

I'ddhi, _p._, Ri'ddhi, _skt._, defined by Eitel as "the dominion of
spirit over matter." It is the adjusting power to one's purpose and the
adaptation to conditions. In popular belief it implies exemption from
the law of gravitation and the power of assuming any shape at will. (See
Iddhipāda.)

Iddhipā'da, _p._, Riddhipā'da, _skt._, the mode of attaining the power
of mind over matter, four steps being needed: (1) the will to acquire
it, (2) the necessary exertion, (3) the indispensable preparation of the
heart, and (4) a diligent investigation of the truth.

Indra, one of the principal Brahman gods.

Indriyā'ni or panc'-indriyāni, the five organs of the spiritual sense.
(See Balāni.)

I'si, _p._, Ri'shi, _skt._, a prophet or seer, an inspired poet, a
hermit having acquired wisdom in saintly retirement, a recluse or
anchorite.

Iś'vara, _skt._, I'ssara, (lit. independent existence) Lord, Creator,
personal God, a title given to Shiva and other great deities. In
Buddhistic scriptures as well as in Brahman the _skt._ Is'vara (not the
_p._ Issara) means always a transcendent or extramundane God, a personal
God, a deity distinct from, and independent of nature, who is supposed
to have created the world out of nothing.

Jain, modernised form of _skt._ Jaina; an adherent of the Jain-sect
which reveres Vardhamāna (Nātaputta) as Buddha. (See _Jainism_.)--48.

Jainism, a sect, founded by Vardhamāna, older than Buddhism and still
extant in India. It is in many respects similar to Buddhism. Buddha's
main objection to the Jains was the habit of their ascetics of going
naked. The Jains lay great stress upon ascetic exercises and
self-mortification which the Buddhists declare to be injurious.

Ja'mbu, _p._ and _skt._, a tree.

Jambū'nada, _p._, Jāmbū'nada, _skt._, a town of unknown site. (Also the
name of a mountain and of a lake.)

Ja'tila, _p._, "wearing matted hair." The Jatilas were Brahman ascetics.
Buddha converted a tribe of them, and Kassapa, their chief, became one
of his most prominent disciples.

Je'ta, the heir apparent to the kingdom of Sāvatthī.

Je'tavana, a vihāra.

Jhā'na, _p._, Dhyā'na, _skt._, intuition, beatic vision, ecstasy,
rapture, the result of samādhi. Buddha did not recommend trances as
means of religious devotion, urging that deliverance can be obtained
only by the recognition of the four noble truths and walking on the
noble eightfold path, but he did not disturb those who took delight in
ecstasies and beatific visions. Buddha's interpretation of the Dhyāna is
not losing consciousness but a self-possessed and purposive eradication
of egotism. There are four Dhyānas, the first being a state of joy and
gladness born of seclusion full of investigation and reflexion; the
second one, born of deep tranquillity without reflexion or
investigation, the third one brings the destruction of passion, while
the fourth one consists in pure equanimity, making an end of sorrow.
[See Rhys Davids's B. pp. 175--176.] In the Fo-Sho-hing-tsang-king, the
Dhyāna is mentioned twice only: first, III, 12, vv. 960--978, where
Ārāda sets forth the doctrine of the four Dhyānas which is not approved
of by Buddha, and secondly, at Buddha's death; when his mind is said to
have passed through all the Dhyānas.

Ji'na, _p._ and _skt._, the Conqueror, an honorary title of Buddha. The
Jains use the term with preference as an appellative of Vardhamāna whom
they revere as their Buddha.

Jī'vaka, _p._ and _skt._, physician to king Bimbisāra. According to
tradition he was the son of king Bimbisāra and the courtesan Salavatī.
We read in Mahāvagga VIII that after his birth he was exposed but saved;
then he became a most famous physician and cured Buddha of a troublesome
disease contracted by wearing cast off rags. He was an ardent disciple
of Buddha and prevailed upon him to allow the Bhikkhus to wear lay
robes.

Jo'tikkha, _p._, name of a householder, son of Subhadda.

Kālā'ma, _p._ and _skt._, (see Alāra).

Ka'nthaka, prince Siddhattha's horse.

Kapilava'tthu, _p._, Kapilava'stu, _skt._, the capital of the Sakyas,
the birthplace of Buddha.

Ka'rma, anglicised form of _skt._ stem-form _ka'rman_ (nom. s. _karma_),
the _p._ of which is _ka'mmam_. Action, work, the law of action,
retribution, results of deeds previously done and the destiny resulting
therefrom. Eitel defines karma as "that moral kernel [of any being]
which alone survives death and continues in transmigration." Karma is a
well-defined and scientifically exact term. Professor Huxley says, "In
the theory of evolution, the tendency of a germ to develop according to
a certain specific type, e.g., of the kidney bean seed to grow into a
plant having all the characters of _Phaseolus vulgaris_ is its 'karma.'
It is 'the last inheritor and the last result' of all the conditions
that have affected a line of ancestry which goes back for many millions
of years to the time when life first appeared on earth." We read in the
Anguttara Nikāya, Pancaka Nipāta: "My action (karma) is my possession,
my action is my inheritance, my action is the womb which bears me, my
action is the race to which I am akin [as the kidney-bean to its
species], my action is my refuge." [See the article "Karma and Nirvāna"
in _Buddhism and Its Christian Critics_, p. 131 ff.]

Kā'sī, _p._, Ka's'i, _skt._, the old and holy name of Benares.--104 et
seq., 192.

Ka'ssapa, _p._, Kā's'yapa, _skt._ (the etymology "He who swallowed
fire," is now rejected), a name of three brothers, chiefs of the
Jatilas, called after their residences, Uruvelā, Nadī, and Gayā. The
name Kassapa applies mainly to Kāssapa of Uruvelā, one of the great
pillars of the Buddhistic brotherhood, who took at once, after his
conversion, a most prominent rank among Buddha's disciples. [Kassapa of
Uruvelā is frequently identified with Mahā-Kassapa, the same who was
president of the council at Rājagaha, but H. Dharmapala states, on the
authority of the Anguttara Nikāya, that the two were altogether
different persons.]

Kha'ndha, _p._, Ska'ndha, _skt._, elements; attributes of being, which
are form, sensation, perception, discrimination, and consciousness.

Kile'sa, _p._, Kle'śa, _skt._, error.

Ki'sā Go'tamī, _p._, Kri'sha Gau'tamī, _skt._, the slim or thin Gotamī.
Name (i) of a cousin of Buddha, mentioned in Chap. VI, p. 16, (2) of the
heroine in the parable of the mustard seed.

Ko'lī, a little kingdom in the neighborhood of Kapilavatthu, the home of
Yasodharā.

Kond'añña, _p._, Kaundi'nya, _skt._, name of Buddha's first disciple,
afterwards called Ājñā'ta Kaundi'nya in _skt._ and Aññā'ta Konda'ñña in
_p._

Ko'sala, _p._ and _skt._, name of a country.

Kosa'mbī, _p._, Kausā'mbī, _skt._, a city.

Kusinā'rā, _p._, Kusina'gara, _skt._, a town.

Kūtada'nta, _p._ and _skt._, a Brahman chief in the village Dānamatī,
also called Khānumat; is mentioned in Sp. Hardy's _M.B._, p. 289 and in
_S.B.E._, Vol. XIX., p. 242 [Fo, v. 1682].--152-160. Cf. Rhys Davids's
_Dialogues_, pp. 173-179.

Li'cchavi, _p._ and _skt._, the name of a princely family.

Lu'mbinī, _skt._, a grove named after a princess, its owner.

Ma'gadha, _p._ and _skt._, name of a country.

Ma'gga, Mā'rga, _skt._, path; especially used in the Pāli phrase "Ariyo
atthangiko maggo," the noble eightfold path, which consists of: right
views, high aims, right speech, upright conduct, a harmless livelihood,
perseverance in well-doing, intellectual activity, and earnest thought.
[See _S.B.E_, Vol. XI, pp. 63 and 147.]

Mahārā'ja, the great king.

Mahāse'tu, the great bridge. A name invented by the author of the
present book to designate the importance of Christianity compared to the
Hīnayāna and Mahāyāna of Buddhism.

Mahāyā'na, the great vehicle, viz., of salvation. Name of the Northern
conception of Buddhism, comparing religion to a great ship in which men
can cross the stream of Samsāra to reach the shore of Nirvāna.

Ma'lla, _p._ and _skt._, name of a tribe.

Manasā'kata, _p._, Manasā'krita, _skt._, a village in Kosala.

Mandā'ra, _p._ and _skt._, a flower of great beauty.

Mā'ra, _p._ and _skt._, the Evil One, the tempter, the destroyer, the
god of lust, sin, and death.

Māra's daughters are always three in number but their names are
variously given as Tanhā, Arati, Rati (Dh. 164), and Tanhā, Arati, Ragā
(Ab. 44 etc.).

Mā'tali, _p._ and _skt._, name of a demon in the retinue of Yama.

Māta'nga, _p._ and _skt._, literally, of low birth; the Matanga caste
comprises mongrels of the lowest with higher castes.

Mā'thura, and _skt._, name of a place.

Mā'yā, _p._ and _skt._, Buddha's mother. (See Māyā-devī.) The term "veil
of Māyā," viz., the illusion of self, popularly known through
Schopenhauer, does not refer to Buddha's mother, but to the Vedantic
conception of māyā. The word means "charm, magic enhancement." The
similarity of sound in the names Māyā and Maria is curious.

Māyā-de'vī, also called Mahā-Māyā, or simply Māyā, _p._ and _skt._, the
wife of Suddhodana and mother of Buddha. She died in childbed, and
Buddha ascends to heaven to preach to her the good law and the gospel of
salvation.

Mette'yya, Maitre'ya, _skt._, etymology, "full of kindness"; the name of
the Buddha to come.

Moggallā'na, _p._, Maudgalyā'yana, _skt._, one of the most prominent
disciples of Buddha, a friend of Sāriputta.

Mu'ni, _skt._ and _p._, a thinker, a sage; especially a religious
thinker. Sakyamu'ni, the sage of the Sakyas, is Buddha.

Nadī'-Ka'ssapa, _p._, Nadī-Kā's'yapa, _skt._, brother of the great
Kassapa of Uruvelā.

Nā'dika, _p._ and _skt._, name of a village.

Nā'ga, _p._ and _skt._, literally serpent. The serpent being regarded as
a superior being, the word denotes a special kind of spiritual beings; a
sage, a man of spiritual insight; any superior personality. Nāga kings.

Nalagiri, name of an elephant.

Nāla'ndā, _p._ and _skt._, a village near Rājagaha.

Nanda, _p._, Siddhattha's halfbrother, son of Pajāpatī.

Na'ndā, daughter of a chief of shepherds, also called Sujātā.

Nātapu'tta, _Jain Prakrit_, Jñātapu'tra, _skt._, the son of Jñāta.
Patronym of Vardhamāna, the founder of Jainism.

Nerañjarā, Naira'ñjanā, _skt._, name of a river identified by some with
the Nilajan, by others with the Phalgu.

Nidā'na, _p._ and _skt._, cause. The twelve nidānas, forming the chain
of causation which brings about the misery in the world. [See Oldenberg,
_Buddha_, Engl. tr., pp 224--252].

Nigga'ntha, _p._, Nirgra'ntha, _skt._, literally "liberated from bonds";
a name adopted by the adherents of the Jaina sect;
Nigganthas, give also to the.

Nigro'dha, _p._, Nyagro'dha, _skt._, a tree, _ficus indica_ well known
for its air roots..

Nirmā'na Kā'ya, _skt._, the body of transformation.

Nirvā'na, _skt._, Nibbā'na, _p._, extinction, viz., the extinction of
self; according to the Hīnayāna it is defined as "extinction of
illusion," according to the Mayāyāna as "attainment of truth." Nirvāna
means, according to the latter, enlightenment, the state of mind in
which upādāna, kilesa, and tanhā are extinct, the happy condition of
enlightenment, peace of mind, bliss, the glory of righteousness in this
life and beyond, the eternal rest of Buddha after death. Buddha himself
has refused to decide the problem whether or not Nirvāna is a final
extinction of personality. When questioned, he indicated by his silence
that the solution is not one of those subjects a knowledge of which is
indispensable for salvation; where is Nirvāna?; Nirvāna not a locality; the city
of Nirvāna; the harvest, Nirvāna; the one aim, Nirvāna;
Samsāra and Nirvāna.

Okkā'ka, _p._, Ikshvā'ku, _skt._, the name of a mythological family from
which the chiefs of the Sakyas claim descent.

Pabba'jjā, _p._, pravra'jyā, _skt._, the act of leaving the world for
receiving admittance to the Order. The first step of the Buddhist
ordination. (See Upasa'mpadā.)

Pajā'patī, _p._, Prajā'patī or Mahā-Prajā'patī, _skt._, the sister of
Māyā-devī, second wife of Suddhodana, aunt and fostermother of Buddha.
She is also called by her husband's family name Gotamī (feminine form of
Gotama).

Pajjo'ta, _p._, Pradyo'ta, _skt._, name of a king of Ujjenī.

(Pakati, _p._) Pra'kriti, _skt._, name of a girl of low caste.

Pāramitā', _p._ and _skt._, perfection, or virtue. The six pāramitās
are: almsgiving, morality, patience, zeal or energy, meditation, and
wisdom.

Paribbā'jaka, _p._, Parivrā'jaka, _skt._, a sect belonging to the
Tīrthika school.

Pase'nadi, _p._, (Prase'najit, _skt._, also called Pasenit) king of
Kosala, residing at Sāvatthī.

Pātalipu'tra, _skt._, Pātalipu'tta, _p._, also called Pātaligāma, a city
on the Ganges north of Rājagaha and belonging to the kingdom of Magadha,
the frontier station against the Vriji (Vajji), the present Patna.
Buddha is reported to have predicted the future greatness of the place,
which is an important passage for determining the time in which the
account of Buddha's sojourn in Pātaliputra was written. It is still
uncertain, however, when Patna became the important centre which it is
now. It was the capital of the country when Megasthenes, the ambassador
of Seleucus Nicator, at the end of the third century B.C., visited
India. He gave in his book a detailed description of the city;
Pātaliputra, three dangers hang over.

Pātimo'kkha, _p._, Pratimo'ksha, _skt._, (usually spelt Prātimoksha in
Buddhistic Sanskrit,) literally "disburdenment." It is the Buddhist
confession. Rhys Davids says "that it almost certainly dates from the
fifth century B.C. Since that time--during a period that is of nearly
two thousand and three hundred years--it has been regularly repeated,
twice in each month, in formal meetings of the stricter members of the
Order. It occupies, therefore, a unique position in the literary history
of the world; and no rules for moral conduct have been for so long a
time as these in constant practical use, except only those laid down in
the Old Testament and in the works of Confucius" (p. 163).

Pā'vā, _p._ and _skt._, a village where Buddha took his last meal.

Pokkharasā'ti, _p._, Paushkarasā'ti, _skt._, a Brahman
philosopher.

Pubbārā'ma, _p._, Pūrvārā'ma, _skt._, the Eastern garden.

Pu'kkusa, _p._, Pu'kkasha or Pu'kkasa, _skt._, name of a low
caste.

Puññ'aji, _p._, Pu'nyajit, _skt._, a friend of Yasa.

Ragā, pleasure, desire or lust; a synonym of _rati_. The name of one of
Māra's daughters.

Rāhula, _p._ and _skt._, the son of Buddha, was admitted to the
fraternity while still a boy. Buddha gave him a lesson in truthfulness
[see Chapter LVI]. He is always named among the prominent disciples of
Buddha and is revered as the patron saint of novices.

Rainy season (see Vassa).

Rā'jā, _p._ and _skt._, nominative form of the stem rājan, a king (in
composition rāja).

Rājaga'ha, _p._, Rājagri'ha, _skt._, the capital of Magadha and
residence of king Bimbisāra.

Ra'tana, _p._, ra'tna, _skt._, "jewel."

Rati, love, liking; a synonym of _ragā_. The name of one of Māra's
daughters.

Saha'mpati, occurs only in the phrase "Brahmā Sahampati," a name
frequently used in Buddhist scriptures the meaning of which is obscure.
Burnouf renders it _Seigneur des êtres patients_; Eitel, Lord of the
inhabitable parts of all universes; H. Kern [in _S.B._, XXI, p. 5]
maintains that it is synonymous with Sikhin, which is a common term for
Agni.

Sa'kka, _p._, Śa'kra, _skt._, Lord; a cognomen of Indra.

Sa'kya, Śākya, _skt._, the name of a royal race in the northern
frontiers of Magadha.

Sakyamuni, _p._, Śakyamuni, _skt._, the Sākya sage; a cognomen of
Buddha.

Sā'la, _p._, Śā'la, _skt._, a tree, _vatica robusta_; sāla-grove;
sāla-trees.

Samā'dhi, _p._ and _skt._, trance, abstraction, self-control. Rhys
Davids says (_B._ _p._ 177): "Buddhism has not been able to escape from
the natural results of the wonder with which abnormal nervous states
have always been regarded during the infancy of science.... But it must
be added, to its credit, that the most ancient Buddhism despises dreams
and visions; and that the doctrine of Samādhi is of small practical
importance compared with the doctrine of the noble eightfold Path."
Eitel says (_Handbook_, p. 140): "The term Samādhi is sometimes used
ethically, when it designates moral self-deliverance from passion and
vice."

Sa'mana, _p._, Śrā'mana, _skt._, an ascetic; one who lives under the
vow; the Samana Gotama, the vision of a samana.

Sambho'ga-Kā'ya, _skt._, the body of Bliss.

Sammappadhā'na, _p._, Samyakpradhā'na, _skt._, right effort, exertion,
struggle. There are four great efforts to overcome sin, which are: (1)
Mastery over the passions so as to prevent bad qualities from rising;
(2) suppression of sinful thoughts to put away bad qualities which have
arisen; (3) meditation on the seven kinds of wisdom (Bojjhañga) in order
to produce goodness not previously existing, and (4) fixed attention or
the exertion of preventing the mind from wandering, so as to increase
the goodness which exists. [See the Mahāpadhāna-Sutta in the
_Dīgha-Nikāya_. Compare _B.B. St._, p. 89, and Rh. Davids's _Buddhism_,
pp. 172-173.]

Samsā'ra, _p._ and _skt._, the ocean of birth and death, transiency,
worldliness, the restlessness of a worldly life, the agitation of
selfishness, the vanity fair of life.

Sa'ngha, _p._ and _skt._, the brotherhood of Buddha's disciples, the
Buddhist church. An assembly of at least four has the power to hear
confession, to grant absolution, to admit persons to the priesthood,
etc. The sangha forms the third constituent of the Tiratana or three
jewels in which refuge is taken (the S. B. of the E. spell Sawgha);
sangha maybe expected to prosper.

Sa'ñjaya, _p._ and _skt._, a wandering ascetic and chief of that sect to
which Sāriputta and Moggallāna belonged before their conversion.

Sankhā'ra, _p._, Samskā'ra, _skt._, confection, conformation,
disposition. It is the formative element in the karma as it has taken
shape in bodily existence.

Sāripu'tta, _p._, Sāripu'tra, _skt._, one of the principal disciples of
Buddha; the Buddhistic St. Peter; Sāriputta's faith.

Sā'vaka, _p._, Srā'vaka, _skt._, he who has heard the voice (viz. of
Buddha), a pupil, a beginner. The name is used to designate (1) all
personal disciples of Buddha, the foremost among whom are called
Mahā-sāvakas, and (2) an elementary degree of saintship. A sāvaka is he
who is superficial yet in practice and comprehension, being compared to
a hare crossing the stream of Samsāra by swimming on the surface. [See
Eitel _Handbook_, p. 157.]

Sati-patthā'na, _p._, Smrityupasthā'na, _skt._, meditation; explained as
"fixing the attention." The four objects of earnest meditation are: (1)
the impurity of the body, (2) the evils arising from sensation, (3)
ideas or the impermanence of existence, and (4) reason and character, or
the permanency of the dharma. (Rh. D.B., p. 172.) The term is different
from "bhāvanā," although translated by the same English word. (_S.B._ of
the _E._ XI, p. 62.--211).

Sāva'tthi, _p._, Srāva'sti, _skt._, capital of Northern Kosala. It has
been identified by General Cunningham with the ruins of Sāhet-Māhet in
Oudh and was situated on the river Rapri, northwest of Magadha.

Se'niya, _p._, Sai'nya, _skt._, military, warlike, an honorary title
given to Bimbisāra the king of Magadha.

Siddha'ttha, _p._, Siddhā'rtha, _skt._, Buddha's proper name. Etymology,
"He who has reached his goal."

Sigā'la, _p._, Srigā'la, _skt._, literally, "jackal"; name of a Brahman
converted by Buddha.

Si'mha, _skt._, Sī'ha, _p._, literally, "lion." Name of a general, an
adherent of the Niggantha sect, converted by Buddha; Simha, a soldier;
Simha's question concerning annihilation.

So'ma, _p._ and _skt._, derived from the root _su_, to press in a
winepress; not as, according to Eitel, Chinese scholars propose from
"exhilarate (_su_) and mind (_mana_)." Name of a plant and of its
juice, which is intoxicating and is used at Brahmanical festivals; the
Soma drink is identified with the moon and personified as a deity.

Subā'hu, _p._ and _skt._, a friend of Yasa.

Subha'dda, _p._, Subha'dra, _skt._, name of a samana. Subha'dda,
Buddha's last convert, must not be confounded with another man of the
same name who caused dissension soon after Buddha's death.

Suddho'dana, _p._, Śuddho'dana, _skt._, Buddha's father. The word means
"possessing pure rice." Buddhists always represent him as a king, but
Oldenberg declares that this does not appear in the oldest records, and
speaks of him as "a great and wealthy land-owner." (See his _Buddha_,
English version, pp. 99 and 416--417).

Su'mana, _p._ and _skt._, name of a householder.

Suprabuddha, father of Devadatta.

Su'tta, _p._, Sū'tra, _skt._, literally" thread," any essay, or guide of
a religious character.

Tanhā, _p._, Tr'ishna, _skt._, thirst; the word denotes generally all
intense desire, cleaving and clinging with passion. The name of one of
Māra's daughters.

Tapu'ssa, _p._ and _skt._, a merchant.

Tāru'kkha, _p._, Tāru'kshya, _skt._, name of a Brahman
philosopher.

Tathā'gata, _p._ and _skt._, generally explained as "the Perfect One."
The highest attribute of Buddha; robe of the Tathāgata; soldiers of the
Tathāgata; the law the body of the Tathāgata; Tathāgatas are only
preachers.

Tiratana, _p._, Trira'tna, _skt._, the three jewels or the holy trinity
of the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha, a doctrine peculiar to
Northern Buddhism. (See Trikāya.)

Ti'tthiya, _p._, Tī'rthika, _skt._, a religious school of India in
Buddha's time.

Trikā'ya, the three bodies or personalities of Buddha, the Dharmakāya,
the Sambhoga-kāya, and the Nirmāna-kāya.

Uddaka, _p._, U'draka, _skt._, a Brahman philosopher.

Ujje'nī, _p._, Ujja'yinī, _skt._, name of a city.

Upādā'na, _p._ and _skt._, desire, a grasping state of mind. One of the
nidānas.

(Upagutta, _p._), Upagu'pta, _skt._, name of a Buddhist monk.

U'paka, _p._ and _skt._, name of a man, a Jain, who met Buddha, but was
not converted by him.

Upā'li, _p._ and _skt._, a prominent disciple of Buddha. Before his
conversion he was, according to the Buddhistic tradition, court-barber
to the king of the Sakyas.

Upasa'mpadā, _p._ and _skt._, admittance to the Buddhist brotherhood,
ordination. (See Pabbajā.)

Upava'ttana, Upava'rtana, _skt._, a grove in Kusinagara. The word means
a rambling-place, a gymnasium.

Upo'satha, _p._, Upava'satha, _skt._, the Buddhist sabbath. Rhys Davids
says (pp. 140--141): "The Uposatha days are the four days in the lunar
month when the moon is full, or new, or half way between the two. It is
the fourteenth day from the new moon (in short months) and the fifteenth
day from the full moon (in the long months), and the eighth day from
each of these. The corresponding Sanskrit word is Upavasatha, the
fast-day previous to the offering of the intoxicating soma, connected
with the worship of the moon. Instead of worshipping the moon, the
Buddhists were to keep the fast-day by special observance of the moral
precepts; one of many instances in which Gotama spiritualised existing
words and customs."; observe the Uposatha or Sabbath.

Uruve'lā, _p._, Urubi'lvā, _skt._, a place south of Patna on the banks
of the Nerañjara river, now Buddha Gayā. The residence of Kassapa, the
chief of the Jatilas.

Va'jji, _p._, Vri'ji, _skt._, name of a people living in the
neighborhood of Magadha; assemblies of the Vajji.

Va'rana, _p._ and _skt._, a tree; _Crataeva Roxburghii_.

Vardhamā'na, _skt._, Vaddhamā'na, _Jaina Prākrit_, proper name of the
founder of Jainism. Also called Jñātapu'tra in _skt._ and Nātapu'tta in
_Jaina Prākrit_.

Va'runa, _p._ and _skt._, a Brahman deity, the god of heaven and regent
of the sea; one of the guardians of the world.

Vāsavada'ttā, _p._ and _skt._, a courtesan of Mathurā.

Vāse'ttha, _p._, Vāsi'shtha, _skt._, name of a Brahman.

Va'ssa, _p._, Va'rsha, _skt._, rain, rainy season. During the rainy
season of Northern India, which falls in the months from June to
October, the samanas could not wander about, but had to stay in one
place. It was the time in which the disciples gathered round their
master, listening to his instructions. Thus it became the festive time
of the year. In Ceylon, where these same months are the fairest season
of the year, Buddhists come together and live in temporary huts, holding
religious meetings in the open air, reading the Pitakas and enjoying the
Jātakas, legends, and parables of Buddhism. [See Rhys Davids's _B._, p.
57.]

Vassakāra, _p._, Varshakā'ra, _skt._, lit. "rain-maker." Name of a
Brahman, the prime minister of the king of Magadha.

Ve'das; I know all the Vedas.

Veluva'na, _p._, Venuva'na, _skt._, a bamboo-grove at Rājagaha;
Veluvana vihāra.

Vesā'lī, _p._, Vaiśā'līī, _skt._, a great city of India, north of
Patna.

Vihā'ra, _p._ and _skt._, residence of Buddhist monks or priests; a
Buddhist convent or monastery; a Buddhist temple.

Vi'mala, _p._ and _skt._ (etym., the spotless), name of a friend of
Yasa.

Vi'naya.

Visā'khā, _p._, Viśā'khā, _skt._, a wealthy matron of Sāvatthi, one of
Buddha's most distinguished woman lay-disciples. Says Oldenberg,
_Buddha_, English translation, p. 167: "Every one invites Visākhā to
sacrificial ceremonies and banquets, and has the dishes offered to her
first; a guest like her brings luck to the house."; eight boons of
Visākhā; gladness of Visākhā.

Ya'ma, _p._ and _skt._, also called Yama-rā'ja, death, the god of
death.

Ya'sa, Ya'śas, _skt._, the noble youth of Benares, son of a wealthy man
and one of Buddha's earliest converts.

Yaso'dharā, _p._, Ya'śodharā, _skt._, wife of Prince Gotama Siddhattha
before he became Buddha. She became one of the first of Buddhist nuns.
[See Jātaka, 87--90; Commentary on Dhammapada, vv. 168, 169: Bigandet,
156--168; Spence Hardy's _Manual_, 198--204; Beal, pp. 360--364: _B.
Birth Stories_, 127.]




INDEX.


     Abstain from impurity.
     Abstinence.
     Abode in me, truth has taken its.
     Abodes of truth.
     Abolish all the lesser.
     Abolished, omens.
     About to pass away.
     Absolution.
     Abuse, the sermon on.
     According to their deeds.
     Address, Buddha's farewell.
     Adoration be to thee.
     Aim, one, one essence, one law.
     Aim, the one, Nirvāna.
     Aim, the preacher's sole.
     All creatures received the message in their own language.
     Alone, let a man walk (see also Solitary).
     Altercations.
     Always in danger of death.
     Ambrosia, lake of.
     Angels rejoice.
     Anger, by love overcome.
     Annihilation.
     Annihilation of egotism.
     Annihilation, Simha's question concerning.
     Another Buddha will arise.
     Anxious to learn, must be.
     Anxious to learn the truth, be.
     Apoplexy, struck by.
     Appearance of Bodhisatta.
     Appearance, the glory of his.
     Appeared, the saviour.
     Appeased not by hatred, hatred.
     Are all paths saving paths?
     Artisans, the chief of the.
     Asceticism.
     Ascetics, naked.
     Ashes.
     Assemblies of the Vajji.
     Assemblies, various kinds of.
     Assured of final salvation.
     Astrology and forecasting by signs forbidden.
     Ātman and the _I_.
     Atone for your evil deeds, you will have to.
     Atonement by blood.
     Audience, like unto the color of my.
     Avoid dying, not any means to.

     Bad deeds easy to do.
     Bamboo grove.
     Bathing in the Ganges.
     Battle of life.
     Battle, the elephant no longer fit for.
     Battles, fight your.
     Be married unto the truth.
     Be ye lamps unto yourselves
     Beauty, to restore to you a nobler.
     Becoming, gradual.
     Bee collects nectar, the.
     Being, the purpose of.
     Beings, preach to all.
     Beneath, water gurgling.
     Best, truth is.
     Better bore out both eyes.
     Blessed One, has to suffer, the;
       Blessed One, refuge in the;
       Blessed One swooned, the;
       Blessed One walked unshod, the,
       Blessed One, wearisome to the.
     Blind man.
     Blind men.
     Blind received sight.
     Blind, the man born.
     Blind, truth is hidden to the.
     Blind, your eyes are.
     Bliss be diffused, let the.
     Bliss, the communication of.
     Bliss where suffering is.
     Blood, atonement by.
     Blood has no cleansing power.
     Blood, shedding of.
     Blow, give the rock a good.
     Blow off the impurities.
     Body of flesh? Why preserve this.
     Body of the law;
       the body of the law will endure.
     Body, the worldling nourishes his.
     Bonds that tie all souls together.
     Boons of Visākhā, eight.
     Brahmā.
     Brahman.
     Brahman lore, the substance of.
     Bridler of men's hearts.
     Bright, the sun is.
     Bright, thinkers are;
       warriors are bright.
     Bubble.
     Buddhahood, omens of;
       signs of Buddhahood.
     Burning, every thing is.
     Butterfly, like the.
     By deeds one becomes an outcast.

     Calamities, ten great.
     Carp not.
     Cart, as a worn out.
     Cast-off rags.
     Caste, I ask not for.
     Cause of further migrations.
     Cause of selfhood, the, Found!.
     Cease by hatred, hatred does not.
     Ceremony.
     Chance.
     Change, grief at; self is change.
     Charity, rich in returns;
       the sermon on.
     Charms are treacherous.
     Chastity.
     Cherish no hatred.
     Chickens should break the eggshell.
     Chief of the artisans, the.
     Children, I am your father, ye are.
     City of Nirvāna, the.
     Cleanses from error, the truth.
     Cleansing power, blood has no.
     Cleaving to self.
     Cloth of gold, robes of.
     Cloud, like a.
     Cloud of good qualities.
     Coil, the.
     Color of my audience, like unto the.
     Combination, individuality a;
       combination subject to separation.
     Come forth into the light.
     Come into the world to befriend.
     Come to teach life.
     Commandments, see the ten evils.
     Communication of bliss, the.
     Complete surrender of self.
     Compounds will be dissolved.
     Comprehension of things, truth the correct.
     Concord, two ways of re-establishing;
       meeting in concord;
       re-establishment of concord.
     Conditions of welfare, eight.
     Confer the ordination.
     Confession of trespasses.
     Conquerors, the greatest of.
     Conquest of self.
     Consolidation of Buddha's religion.
     Contact of the object and senses.
     Continuity, sameness and.
     Coop, the fowl in the.
     Correct comprehension of things, truth the.
     Correlatives.
     Courtesan.
     Covet not.
     Crane, the wild;
       the cruel crane.
     Creatures, all, received the message in their own language.
     Criminal, punishment of the.
     Criminal's act, punishment the fruit of the.
     Crossed the river.
     Crossed the stream, he had.
     Cultivate good-will.
     Culture of the mind.

     Danger of death, always in.
     Dangers hang over Pātaliputta, three.
     Dark, do not call the world.
     Dart of lust, the.
     Dead are many, the.
     Dead not saved by lamentation.
     Deaf and dumb speak, the.
     Death, always in danger of;
       Buddha's death;
       fate after death;
       death is near;
       no escape from;
       in the domain of death;
       self is death;
       thoughtlessness, the path of death.
     Deeds, according to their;
       bad deeds easy to do;
       by deeds one becomes an outcast;
       passed away according to his deeds.
     Deeper, dig.
     Delusion and truth.
     Delusions.
     Denies the existence of the soul, Gotama.
     Desert, a waterless;
       rescue in the desert;
       a sandy desert.
     Desire, the extinction of evil.
     Desolation, a hopeless.
     Despot, the.
     Destiny of warriors.
     Destroyed, hell is.
     Devadatta, sect of.
     Die until, etc., I shall not;
       truth cannot die.
     Died in the faith, he.
     Diffused, let the bliss be.
     Dig deeper.
     Disciple, the first woman lay-.
     Disciple, a, flagged.
     Dissatisfied, the people.
     Dissolution, necessity of.
     Dissolved, compounds will be.
     Distinction, without.
     Doctrine, preach the, glorious in the beginning, the middle, and end;
       my doctrine is like the great ocean;
       doctrine like unto fire;
       doctrine like unto water.
     Doffed their robes, the bhikkhus.
     Dog, the hungry.
     Domain of death, in the.
     Do not call the world dark.
     Do not rely on external help.
     Do not scold.
     Door of immortality.
     Draught-ox, exertion is a.
     Drink, the refreshing, perception of truth.
     Drinking? Is the water not fit for.
     Dumb, the deaf and, speak.
     Dust, like one who flings.
     Dust of worldliness.
     Dwelling-place, wisdom has no.
     Dying, not any means to avoid.

     Each day one hemp-grain.
     Earnestness is the goad;
       earnestness is the path of immortality.
     Earth, peace on.
     Earthquake.
     East, face towards the.
     Eating of flesh, the.
     Ecstasy, the song of.

     Eddies of transmigration.
     Efficacy, rituals have no.
     Egg-shell, chickens should break the;
       I have first broken the eggshell.
     Eggs, hen brooding over.
     Ego, the;
       ego, an illusion;
       the instability of the ego.
     Egotism, the annihilation of.
     Eight boons of Visākhā.
     Eight conditions of welfare.
     Eight wonderful qualities.
     Eightfold path, the.
     Eightfold, the best way is the.
     Eldest, I am the.
     Elephant, powerful;
       the elephant no longer fit for battle.
     Elevate the mind.
     Emaciated from fasts.
     Embrace of truth, the.
     Emptiness and immaterial life.
     Enabled me to do so, faith.
     Endure, thoughts will.
     Enemy, his greatest.
     Enlightened Teacher, refuge in the.
     Entities, souls not separate and self-existent.
     Envy not.
     Epidemic.
     Eradication of self.
     Error, self an;
       error be thou my guide.
     Error, truth cleanses from.
     Errors.
     Escape from death, no.
     Essence of life, truth is the;
       one in essence;
       one essence, one law, one aim.
     Eternal, truth the image of the.
     Everlasting life.
     Evil actions, thou canst not escape the fruit of.
     Everything is burning.
     Evil by good, overcome;
       evil deeds, you will have to atone for your;
       ignorance the root of evil;
       pain is the outcome of evil;
       evil powers no surrender;
       evil of lust, avoid.
     Evolution;
       in the course of evolution.
     Exertion is a draught-ox.
     Existence is spiritual, all;
       thirst for existence and selfhood.
     Expulsion, sentence of.
     External help, do not rely on.
     Extinction of self, the, salvation;
       the extinction of sinful desire;
       the extinction of thirst.
     Eye, the, ātman and;
       eye of truth;
       mental eye;
       spiritual eye.
     Eyes, better bore out both.

     Face to face, Brahmā;
       the universe face to face;
       face to face with him.
     Face towards the east.
     Facing towards the west.
     Faith alone can save;
       faith enabled me to do so;
       hast thou faith;
       he died in the faith;
       faith is the seed;
       faith in the Buddha;
       Sāriputta's faith.
     Falter not, wise people.
     Famine.
     Farewell address, Buddha's.
     Fashion themselves, wise people.
     Fashioned, truth cannot be.
     Fasts, emaciated from.
     Fate after death.
     Father and son;
       father I reverence my father;
       ye are my children, I am your father.
     Faults of others, the.
     Fell upon him, sickness.
     Fetch me some water.
     Few, the living are.
     Fight your battles.
     Fire, doctrine like unto.
     Fire, sermon on.
     First broken the egg-shell, I have.
     First Buddha, I am not the.
     First lay-member, the.
     First women lay-disciples, the.
     Fish, the giddy.
     Fit for battle, the elephant no longer.
     Fit for drinking? Is the water now.
     Fit to live, more.
     Five meditations.
     Five roots of mind, the.
     Five wishes of Bimbisāra.
     Fivefold gain;
       fivefold loss.
     Flagged, a disciple.
     Flagging, religious zeal.
     Flame, sameness of the.
     Flesh, the eating of;
       thorn in the;
       let the flesh waste away;
       why preserve this body of flesh?
     Flings dust, like one who.
     Flowers out of season;
       lotus flowers;
       mandara flowers.
     Following the Master over the stream.
     Fool;
       the listless fool.
     Foolish, pleasures destroy the;
       foolish talk.
     Forbidden, miracles.
     Forecasting by signs forbidden, astrology and.
     Found! the cause of selfhood;
       found the truth.
     Foundation of the Kingdom of Righteousness.
     Four kinds of offering;
       four kinds of merit;
       four simples;
       the four quarters;
       the four noble truths;
       the four signs;
       where four roads cross.
     Fowl in the coop, the.
     Fragrant like the lotus.
     Free your mind of ignorance.
     Fruit of evil actions, thou canst not escape the;
       the fruit of immortality;
       the fruit of the criminal's act punishment.
     Fruits, ripe.

     Ganges, bathing in the.
     Giddy fish, the.
     Gift of religion, the.
     Gift, the king's.
     Give also to the Nigganthas;
       give, if thou art asked;
       give the rock a good blow.
     Gives away, he who, etc..
     Giving away.
     Glad tidings.
     Gladness of Visākhā.
     Glorious in the beginning, middle, and end, preach the doctrine;
       the truth is glorious.
     Glory of his appearance, the;
       the truth in all its glory.
     Goad, earnestness is the.
     Goal, the.
     Gods and men, teacher of.
     Goes out to wage war.
     Gold, robes of cloth of.
     Gone into the yoke.
     Good qualities, cloud of;
       happiness is the outcome of good;
       overcome evil by good;
       good tidings;
       cultivate goodwill;
       good works are rain.
     Gotama Gate.
     Governs all things, karma.
     Grace, the time of.
     Gradual becoming.
     Grant me my life.
     Great is thy faith.
     Great understanding, muni of.
     Greatest enemy, his;
       the greatest of conquerors.
     Greedy tailor, the.
     Grief at change;
       overcome grief;
       selfish in my grief.
     Grounded, that it be well.
     Grove, bamboo.
     Guide, error be thou my.
     Guiding-rein, mind is the.

     Happily, let us live.
     Happiness is the outcome of good;
       vanity of worldly happiness.
     Happy, he is altogether;
       make thyself happy.
     Hard times teach a lesson.
     Harvest Nirvāna, the;
       thou wilt reap the harvest sown in the past.
     Hast thou faith?
     Hatred appeased not by hatred;
       cherish no hatred;
       hatred ceases by love;
       hatred does not cease by hatred.
     He promoted him higher.
     He who gives away, etc..
     He who walks righteously is ever near me.
     Hearts, bridler of men's.
     Heaven, hope of, a mirage;
       like one who spits at heaven;
       pleasures of self in heaven.
     Heavenly songs.
     Hell is destroyed.
     Helmet of right thought.
     Help, do not rely on external;
       now my lot to help.
     Hemp-grain, each day one.
     Hen brooding over egg.
     Hereafter, the.
     Heresies.
     Hermit, layman and.
     Higher, he promoted him.
     Hold fast to the truth.
     Holiness better than sovereignty.
     Homage, worthiest.
     Honor, so great an.
     Honored be his name.
     Hope of heaven a mirage.
     Hopeless desolation, a.
     Hungry dog, parable of the.

     I am not the first Buddha;
       I am the eldest;
       I am the truth;
       I am thirsty;
       I ask not for caste;
       I have first broken the egg-shell;
       no room for the I;
       I reverence my father;
       I shall not die until, etc.;
       such faith have I;
       the I perishable;
       the I, the soul;
       the thought of I;
       the transmission of the soul and the I.
     Idea of self, the.
     Identity;
       identity and non-identity;
       identity of self;
       where is the identity of my self?
     Idle talk, invocations are.
     If thou art asked, give.
     Ignorance, free your mind of;
       ignorance the root of evil.
     Illimitable light.
     Illusion, self an;
       the ego an illusion.
     Illustration by a lamp;
       illustration by a letter.
     Image of the eternal, truth the.
     Immaterial life, emptiness and.
     Immeasurable light.
     Immolation.
     Immortal, life;
       the immortal path.
     Immortality;
       door of immortality;
       earnestness is the path of immortality;
       immortality in transiency;
       immortality in truth;
       the fruit of immortality;
       the water of immortality;
       truth and immortality.
     Immutable, the words of Buddha.
     Impure is nakedness.
     Impurity, abstain from;
       purity and impurity belong to oneself.
     Impurities, blow off the.
     In the course of evolution.
     Incantations;
       incantations have no saving power.
     Incarnation of the truth.
     Individuality a combination;
       the wheel of individuality.
     Inexhaustible life.
     Instability of the ego, the.
     Instruction, words of.
     Instruments.
     Invocations;
       invocations are idle talk.
     Is it wrong to go to war?

     Jewel, a;
       precious crown jewel.
     Jewels and worldliness.
     Jungle, a pathless.

     Karma governs all things.
     Keep my hold on life.
     Kill not.
     King Bimbisāra.
     King of kings;
       king of truth;
       powerful king.
     Kingdom of Righteousness, Foundation of the.
     Kingdom of truth.
     King's gift, the.
     Kings, Nāga.
     Knew me not, they.
     Knowledge remains.
     Kusa-grass.

     Lake of Ambrosia.
     Lake, still, like a.
     Lame walk, the.
     Lamentation, dead not saved by.
     Lamp, illustration by a.
     Lamps unto yourselves, be ye.
     Land, pure.
     Language, all creatures received the message in their own.
     Last word.
     Law, body of the;
       one aim, one essence, one law;
       the law the body of the Tathāgata;
       the body of the law will endure.
     Laws are temporary, many.
     Laws of righteousness, obediene to the.
     Lay disciples, the first women.
     Lay member, the first.
     Lay robes.
     Layman and hermit.
     Layman, priest and, alike.
     Leaning against the doorpost.
     Learn, must be anxious to.
     Learning, availeth not.
     Lesser, abolish all the.
     Lesson given to Rāhula.
     Lesson, hard times teach a.
     Let a man walk alone.
     Let the bliss be diffused.
     Let the flesh waste away.
     Let us go into the world.
     Let us live happily.
     Let us obey the truth.
     Let your light shine forth.
     Letter, illustration by a.
     Letter, in the.
     Lie not.
     Life, battle of;
       come to teach;
       life everlasting;
       grant me my life;
       keep my hold on life;
       life immortal;
       inexhaustible life;
       reason in the struggle for life;
       seek thou the life that is of the mind;
       truth is life;
       life yearns for the truth.
     Light, come forth into the;
       illimitable light;
       immeasurable light;
       let your light shine forth.
     Like a still lake.
     Like unto the color of my audience.
     Lily, the, on a heap of rubbish.
     Lineage of the faith.
     Lintel, leaning against the.
     Listen to both parties.
     Listless fool, the.
     Little by little.
     Live happily, let us.
     Live, more fit to.
     Lives of men.
     Living are few, the.
     Living, luxurious.
     Living in paradise.
     Lobster.
     Locality? is wisdom a.
     Locality, Nirvāna not a.
     Logic holds universally.
     Lord, glorious.
     Lord, pass away.
     Loss, fivefold.
     Lost, a treasure that can never be.
     Lost son, the.
     Lot to help, now my.
     Lotus-flower in water, the.
     Lotus-flowers.
     Lotus, fragrant like the.
     Love, hatred ceases by;
       love of truth;
       overcome anger by love;
       the world filled with love.
     Lust, the dart of.
     Luxurious living.

     Macarisms.
     Made up of thoughts.
     Magic power.
     Main, rivers reach the.
     Make thyself happy.
     Maker, Issara, the.
     Maker, the, self.
     Man, a blind.
     Man born blind, the.
     Man, who is the strong?
     Mango-grove.
     Many, the dead are.
     Married unto the truth, be.
     Master, out of reverence for the.
     Master over the stream, following the.
     May be expected to prosper, Sangha.
     _Me_, this is done by.
     Meats remained undiminished.
     Medicines.
     Meditation (see bhāvana and sati-patthāna in the Glossary).
     Meeting in concord.
     Men, blind;
       teacher of gods and men;
       the lives of men.
     Men's hearts, bridler of.
     Mental eye.
     Merit, four kinds of.
     Merit, the order (sangha) the sowing ground of.
     Message in their own language, all creatures received the.
     Migrations, cause of further.
     Mind, Brahmā's;
       culture of;
       elevate the mind;
       mind is the guiding rein;
       seek thou the life that is of the mind;
       the five roots of mind;
       there is mind.
     Mind, we the result of.
     Miracle-mongers.
     Miracles.
     Miracles forbidden.
     Mirage, hope of heaven a.
     Mirage, the cause of self a.
     Mirror of truth, the.
     Mission, the preachers.
     Moon, the, shines by night.
     Moral powers.
     Moral sense.
     More fit to live.
     More, sin no.
     Mortification not the right path.
     Mortification profitless.
     Mortification vain.
     Mother, a.
     Muni of great understanding.
     Mustard seed, the.

     Naked ascetics.
     Nakedness, impure is.
     Name, honored be his.
     Nature of religion consists in worship and sacrifice, the.
     Nature of the rope, the.
     Nature of self, the.
     Near me, he who walks, righteously is ever.
     Necessity of dissolution.
     Nectar, the bee collects.
     Needed, the one thing that is.
     Noble, eightfold path, the.
     Noble truths, the four.
     Non-action.
     Non-existence of the soul.
     Non-identity, identity and.
     Not any means to avoid dying.
     Not worthy of yellow robes.
     Nothing remains.
     Nothing will remain.
     Nothingness stares me in the face.
     Nourishes his mind, the wise man.
     Novices, precepts for the.
     Now is the time to seek religion.
     Now my lot to help.

     Obedience to the laws of righteousness.
     Obey the truth, let us.
     Object and senses, contact of.
     Observe the Uposatha or Sabbath.
     Ocean;
       rivers in the ocean;
       my doctrine is like the great ocean.
     Offering, four kinds of.
     Omens abolished.
     Omens of Buddhahood.
     One hemp-grain each day.
     One in essence.
     One, the truth is but.
     One thing that is needed, the.
     Oneself, purity and impurity belong to.
     Order, rules for the.
     Order, the, (sangha) the sowing-ground of merit.
     Ordination, [see also Pabbajjā and Upasampadā
     in the Glossary].
     Others art thou thyself.
     Others, the faults of.
     Our water is all gone.
     Outcast, the;
       by deeds one becomes an outcast;
       who is an outcast?
     Outcome of evil, pain is the.
     Outcome of good, happiness is the.
     Outwitted.
     Overcome anger by love.
     Overcome evil by good.
     Overcome grief.
     Ox led to slaughter.

     Pain is the outcome of evil.
     Parable.
     Parable of the hungry dog.
     Paradise in the West, the;
       living in paradise;
       the paradise of the pure land.
     Parties, listen to both.
     Party in search of a thief, a.
     Pass away, about to;
       people pass away;
       the truth will never pass away.
     Passed away according to his deeds.
     Passion, rain and.
     Past, thou wilt reap the harvest sown in the.
     Path of transmigration, weary;
       sign of the right;
       the eightfold;
       the immortal path;
       the noble eightfold path;
       mortification not the path;
       walk in the noble path;
       a pathless jungle;
       are all paths saving? [See also Maggo in the Glossary.]
     Peace on earth.
     Peacemaker, the.
     People dissatisfied, the;
       people pass away;
       wise people falter not;
       wise people fashion themselves.
     Perception of truth, the refreshing drink.
     Perishable, the _I_.
     Personalities of Buddha, the three.
     Pestilence.
     Physician;
       the best physician;
       without beholding the physician.
     Pit, treasure laid up in a deep.
     Pity me not.
     Plantain-tree.
     Pleasure, he who lives for;
       let a man take pleasure in the dharma.
     Pleasures destroy the foolish;
       pleasures of self in heaven;
       why do we give up the pleasures of the world;
       religious wisdom lifts above pleasures.
     Potter;
       potter, vessels made by the.
     Power, incantations have no;
       magic power.
     Powerful elephant.
     Powerful king.
     Powers, moral.
     Practise the truth.
     Praise of all the Buddhas, the.
     Prayers;
       prayers vain repetitions.
     Preach the doctrine, glorious in the beginning, middle, and end;
       preach to all beings.
     Preacher's mission, the;
       the preacher's sole aim.
     Preachers, Tathāgatas are only.
     Precepts;
       precepts for the novices;
       ten precepts;
       walk according to the precepts.
     Precious crown jewel.
     Precious jewel, a.
     Priceless, the lives of men are.
     Priest and layman alike.
     Prince, test of the.
     Problem of the soul, the.
     Profitless, mortification.
     Prohibitions.
     Promoted him higher, he.
     Propound the truth.
     Prosper, sangha may be expected to.
     Prospered, bhikkhus.
     Punishment of the criminal.
     Punishment, the fruit of the criminal's act.
     Puppets on a string.
     Pure land, the paradise of the.
     Purity and impurity belong to oneself.
     Purpose of being, the.
     Purpose, speak to the.

     Qualities, cloud of good;
       eight wonderful qualities.
     Quality, the thing and its.
     Quarrels.
     Quarters, the four;
       the six quarters.
     Question concerning annihilation.
     Questioned, the sages.
     Questions of the deva.

     Rabbit rescued from the serpent.
     Rags, cast-off.
     Rāhula, lessons given to.
     Rain and passion.
     Rain fell.
     Rain, good works are.
     Rare in the world.
     Reap the harvest sown in the past, thou wilt.
     Reap what we sow, we.
     Reason,as the helpmate of self.
     Reason in the struggle for life.
     Reason, no truth is attainable without.
     Reasoning ceases.
     Rebirth without transmigration of self.
     Rebuked, the bhikkhus.
     Received the message in their own language, all creatures.
     Re-establishing concord, two ways of.
     Re-establishment of concord.
     Reform to-day.
     Refreshing drink, the, perception of truth.
     Refuge in the Blessed One.
     Refuge in the Buddha.
     Refuge in the Enlightened Teacher.
     Refuge is his name.
     Rejoice, angels.
     Religion, Buddha's, consolidation of;
       now is the time to seek religion;
       seeing the highest religion;
       the gift of all religion;
       worship and sacrifice the nature of religion;
       thou tearest down religion.
     Religious man, the, and truth;
       religious wisdom lifts above pleasures;
       religious zeal flagging.
     Rely on yourselves.
     Remain in thy station;
       nothing will remain;
       the truth will remain.
     Repetitions, prayers vain.
     Reprove, do not.
     Rescue in the desert.
     Restore to you a nobler beauty, to.
     Revere the traditions.
     Reverence for the Master, out of.
     Reverence my father, I.
     Rice-milk.
     Rich in returns, charity.
     Righteous cause, war in a.
     Righteousness, foundation of the kingdom of;
       source of all righteousness;
       the kingdom of righteousness;
       the throne of truth is righteousness.
     Right path, mortification not the.
     Right path, sign of the.
     Right thought, helmet of.
     Ripe fruits.
     Rituals have no efficacy.
     River, crossed the.
     Rivers in the ocean.
     Rivers reach the main.
     Roads cross, where four.
     Robe of the Tathāgata.
     Robes, lay;
       robes of cloth of gold;
       the bhikkhus doffed their robes.
     Rock a good blow, give the.
     Room for the _I_, no.
     Root of evil, ignorance the.
     Roots of mind, the five.
     Rope, the nature of the.
     Rubbish, the lily on a heap of.
     Rules for the order.

     Sabbath;
      observe the Uposatha or Sabbath.
     Sacrifice;
       sacrifice of self;
       the nature of religion, worship and sacrifice.
     Sacrifices;
       sacrifices cannot save.
     Sages questioned, the.
     Saint, a sinner can become a.
     Salvation alone in the truth;
       assured of final;
       salvation the extinction of self;
       work out your salvation.
     Sameness and continuity.
     Sandy desert, a.
     Save, faith alone can.
     Saving paths? Are all paths.
     Saving power, incantations have no.
     Saviour of others, a.
     Saviour appeared, the.
     Saviour, truth the.
     Scepticism.
     Schism, the.
     Search of a thief, a party in.
     Season, flowers out of.
     Season, rainy.
     Sect of Devadatta.
     Seed, faith is the.
     Seeing the highest religion.
     Seek thou the life that is of the mind.
     Self;
       self an error;
       self an illusion;
       self and the cause of troubles;
       self and truth; self begets selfishness;
       cleaving to self;
       complete surrender of self;
       eradication of self;
       self-extinction,
       identity of self;
       illusion of self;
       pleasures of self in heaven;
       self is change;
       self is death;
       self-mortification;
       my self has become the truth;
       reason as the helpmate of self;
       rebirth without the transmigration of self;
       sacrifice of self;
       the conquest of self;
       the extinction of self, salvation;
       the idea of self;
       self, the maker;
       the nature of self;
       self, the veil of Māyā;
       truth and self;
       truth guards him who guards his self;
       thou clingest to self;
       where is the identity of my self;
       compounds lack a self.
     Selfhood, the cause of, found.
     Selfhood, thirst for existence and.
     Selfish is my grief.
     Selfishness, self begets.
     Selfishness, surrender.
     Sense, moral.
     Senses and object, contact of.
     Sentence of expulsion.
     Sentiency, truth vibrated through.
     Separation, combination subject to.
     Sermon on abuse, the;
       the sermon on charity;
       sermon on fire.
     Serpent, rabbit rescued from the.
     Seven kinds of wisdom.
     Sevenfold higher wisdom.
     Shaveling.
     Shedding of blood.
     Shine forth, let your light.
     Shines by night, the moon.
     Sick bhikkhu, the.
     Sickness fell upon him.
     Sight, blind received.
     Sign of the right path.
     Signs forbidden, astrology and forecasting by;
       signs of Buddhahood;
       the four signs.
     Sin, struggle against.
     Sinner can become a saint, a.
     Six quarters, the.
     Slaughter.
     Slaughter, ox led to.
     Smith, Chunda, the.
     Snake, no rope.
     So great an honor.
     Soldier, a, Simha.
     Soldier of truth, a.
     Soldiers of the Tathāgata.
     Solitary.
     Son, the lost.
     Son, father and.
     Song of ecstasy.
     Songs, heavenly.
     Sorcerers.
     Sorrow compared with a sword.
     Soul, Gotama denies the existence
     of the;
       non-existence of the soul;
       the _I_ the soul;
       the problem of the soul;
       the Buddhist conception of soul, viii.
     Souls not separate and self-existent entities.
     Soup, a spoon tastes not the flavor of the.
     Source of all righteousness.
     Sovereignty, holiness better than.
     Sow that you will reap, what you.
     Sow, we reap what we.
     Sower, the.
     Sowest, others will reap what thou.
     Sowing-ground of merit, the order (sangha) the.
     Speak, the deaf and dumb.
     Speak to the purpose.
     Speaking untruths.
     Speculations.
     Spells forbidden.
     Spirit, in the.
     Spiritual, all existence is.
     Spiritual eye.
     Spits at heaven, like one who.
     Spoon, a, tastes not the flavor of the soup.
     Spread the truth.
     Staircase, a.
     Stares me in the face, nothingness.
     Station, remain in thy.
     Steal not.
     Stream, following the Master over the.
     Stream, he had crossed the.
     String, puppets on a.
     Strong man, who is the?
     Struck by apoplexy.
     Struggle against sin.
     Struggle for life, reason in the.
     Struggle must be.
     Subject to separation, combination.
     Substance, the, of Brahman lore.
     Such a one will wander rightly in the world.
     Such faith have I.
     Suffer, the Blessed One had to.
     Suffering, bliss where there is.
     Sun is bright, the.
     Sun of the mind, the.
     Superstition.
     Supplications forbidden.
     Supplications have no effect.
     Suprabuddha.
     Surrender.
     Surrender selfishness.
     Surrender to evil powers, no.
     Swear not.
     Sweet, wrong, appears.
     Swooned, the Blessed One.
     Sword, sorrow compared with.

     Tailor, the greedy.
     Talents. [See Abhīññā in the Glossary.]
     Talk, foolish.
     Tastes not the flavor of the soup, a spoon.
     Teach the same truth.
     Teacher, the;
       teacher of gods and men;
       the teacher unknown;
       we have no teacher more.
     Temporary, many laws are.
     Ten commandments, the.
     Ten great calamities.
     Ten precepts.
     Terms of the world, such are the.
     Test of the prince.
     That it be well grounded.
     There is mind.
     They knew me not.
     Thief, a party in search of a.
     Thinkers are bright.
     Thing and its quality, the.
     Things as they are.
     Thirst for existence and selfhood.
     Thirst, the extinction of.
     Thirsty, I am;
       water for the thirsty.
     This is done by me.
     Thorn in the flesh.
     Thou art the Buddha;
       thou canst not escape the fruit of evil actions;
       thou clingest to self;
       thou tearest down religion;
       thou wilt reap what thou sowest.
     Thought, helmet of right;
       the thought of _I_.
     Thoughtlessness the path of death.
     Thoughts continue;
       made up of thoughts,
       thoughts of love;
       thoughts will endure.
     Three dangers hang over Pātaliputta.
     Three personalities of Buddha, the.
     Three vows.
     Three woes, the.
     Thyself, others art thou.
     Tidings, glad; good tidings.
     Tie all souls together, bonds that.
     Time of grace, the.
     Time to seek religion, now is the.
     Times, hard, teach a lesson.
     To-day, reform.
     Together, bonds that tie all souls.
     Traditions, revere the.
     Transiency, immortality in.
     Transmigration, eddies of;
       rebirth without the transmigration of self;
       weary path of transmigration.
     Transmission of the soul and the _I_.
     Treacherous, charms are.
     Treasure laid up in a deep pit.
     Treasure that can never be lost, a.
     Trespasses, confession of.
     Troubles, the cause of, and self.
     Truly thou art Buddha.
     Trumpeter.
     Trust in truth.
     Truth, a soldier of;
       abodes of truth;
       be anxious to learn the truth;
       be married unto the truth;
       Buddha the truth;
       delusion and truth;
       eye of truth;
       glorious is the truth;
       hold fast to the truth;
       I am the truth;
       immortality in truth;
       incarnation of the truth;
       kingdom of truth;
       let us obey the truth;
       life yearns for the truth;
       love of truth;
       my self has become the truth;
       no truth is attainable without reason;
       perception of truth, the refreshing drink;
       practise the truth;
       propound the truth;
       salvation alone in the truth;
       spread the truth;
       teach the same truth;
       the embrace of truth;
       the king of truth;
       the mirror of truth;
       the throne of truth is righteousness;
       the religious man and truth;
       the truth cleanses from error;
       the truth found;
       the truth has been made known to me;
       the truth will never pass away;
       the truth will remain;
       the world is built for truth;
       there is but one truth;
       trust in truth;
       truth and immortality;
       truth and self;
       truth cannot be fashioned;
       truth cannot die;
       truth dawns upon me;
       truth guards him who guards his self;
       truth has taken its abode in me;
       truth in all its glory;
       truth is best;
       truth is hidden to the blind;
       truth is life;
       truth is one;
       truth is the essence of life;
       truth the correct comprehension of all things;
       truth the image of the eternal;
       truth the saviour;
       truth vibrated through sentiency.
     Truthful, be.
     Truths, the four noble.
     Twelve nidānas, the.
     Two ways of re-establishing concord.
     Tyrant.
     Unclean, the vessel has become.
     Undiminished, meats remained.
     Unguents.
     Union of what we know not.
     Union with Brahmā.
     Universally, logic holds.
     Universe, face to face.
     Unknown teacher, the.
     Unshod, the Blessed One walked.
     Untruths, speaking.

     Vain, mortification.
     Vain repetitions, prayers.
     Vanities.
     Vanity;
       vanity of worldliness;
       vanity of worldly happiness.
     Various kinds of assemblies.
     Veil of self-delusion, the.
     Vessel has become unclean, the.
     Vessels;
       vessels made by the potter.
     Vibrated through sentiency, truth.
     Victor, the greater.
     Vision a samana, the.
     Vows, three.

     Walk according to the precepts;
       let a man walk alone;
       the lame walk;
       walk in the right path.
     Wander rightly in the world, such a one will.
     War, goes out to wage;
       is it wrong to go to war?;
       war in a righteous cause.
     Warriors are bright.
     Warriors, destiny of.
     Water, doctrine like unto;
       fetch me some water;
       is the water now fit for drinking?;
       our water is all gone;
       the lotus-flower in water;
       water gurgling beneath;
       water for the thirsty;
       the water of immortality.
     Waterless desert, a.
     Ways, the best of, is eightfold.
     We have no teacher more.
     Wearisome to the Blessed One.
     Weary path of transmigration.
     Welfare, eight conditions of.
     Well, the woman at the.
     West, facing towards the;
       the paradise in the West.
     What we know not, a union of;
       what you sow that you will reap.
     Wheel, the;
       the wheel of individuality.
     Where does the wind dwell?;
       where four roads cross;
       where is Nirvāna?;
       where is the identity of my self?
     Which is the true self?
     Who is an outcast?
       who is the strong man?
     Why do we give up the pleasures of the world?
     Why preserve this body of flesh?
     Wild crane, the.
     Wind, as a great.
     Wind dwell? where does the.
     Wisdom has no dwelling-place;
       is wisdom a locality?;
       religious wisdom lifts above pleasure;
       seven kinds of wisdom;
       sevenfold higher wisdom.
     Wise man nourishes his mind, the;
       wise people falter not;
       wise people fashion themselves.
     Wishes, five, of Bimbisāra.
     Without beholding the physician.
     Woes, the three.
     Woman, a worldly;
       if you see a woman;
       the woman at the well.
     Women as a rule are, etc.;
       the first women lay-disciples.
     Word, last;
       word of the Buddhas.
     Words of Buddhas immutable, the.
     Work out your salvation.
     World dark, do not call the;
       world filled with love;
       let us go into the world;
       rare in the world;
       such a one will wander rightly in the world;
       such are the terms of the world;
       the world is built for truth;
       come into the world to befriend;
       why do we give up the pleasures of the world?
     Worldliness, dust of;
       jewels and worldliness;
       vanity of worldliness.
     Worldling nourishes his body, the.
     Worldly happiness, vanity of;
       a worldly woman.
     Worn-out cart, as a.
     Worship.
     Worship and sacrifice, the nature of religion.
     Worthiest homage.
     Worthy of yellow robes, not.
     Wrong appears sweet.


     Yasa.
     Yellow robes, not worthy of.
     Yoke, gone into the.
     Your eyes are blind.
     Yourselves, be ye lamps unto;
       rely on yourselves;
       yourselves have known.

     Zeal flagging, religious.

[Names and terms must be looked up in the Glossary, where references
to pages of the present book are separated by a dash from the explanation.]




REMARKS ON THE ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE GOSPEL OF BUDDHA.


Upon the task of illustrating _The Gospel of Buddha_, I have spent three
years, the first of which was entirely devoted to preparation. By the
kind assistance of Dr. Hans Schnorr von Carolsfeld, Director of the
Royal Court and State Library at Munich, I was enabled to make very
extensive use of the treasures of this institution, and I am under great
obligations to him for the courtesies extended to me. Above all I
endeavored to obtain a solid foundation for my work by acquiring a clear
conception of the personality of the Buddha from religious, historical
and artistic standpoints and by familiarizing myself with all the
Buddhist dogmas, symbols and religious observances.

Detailed studies of Indian costume, armor, decoration, architecture and
the arrangement of dwellings and gardens, as well as the fauna and flora
of the country, were likewise indispensable. Not only modern documents,
explorers' reports and photographs of ancient ruins provided me with
available material, but also some old Dutch works of the seventeenth
century.

The two main sources of our knowledge of ancient Buddhist art will
always remain the monuments of Gandhāra, and the cave dwellings of
Buddhist monks in Ajantā and other places. The former bear witness to
the extraordinary influence of Greek art on Buddhism; and the latter are
rich in wonderful fresco paintings of the classical period of Buddhist
art. A description of all the caves as well as a selection of the best
mural paintings in colored pictures are to be found in Griffith's
elegant work _The Paintings in the Buddhist Cave Temples of Ajanta_[1]
and some reproductions from it have been made further accessible in Dr.
Carus's _Portfolio of Buddhist Art_.[2] The two great expositions in
Munich, "Japan and Eastern Asia in Art" and "Expositions of the
Masterpieces of Mohammedan Art," 1910, were very instructive to me from
the point of view of art history, containing invaluable material
conveniently arranged from the great museums, royal treasures and
private collections from London, Paris, Berlin, Vienna, St. Petersburg,
Moscow, and Cairo. In the former the great wave of the marvelous
Buddhist faith which had been flowing towards China for two millenniums
and which had brought new life from China to Japan was evidenced in many
rare pieces. Yet almost more fruitful for my purpose was the exposition
of Mohammedan art. It displayed wonderful Persian and Indian book-making
and lacquer work, tapestries, ceramics, fabrics, armor and metal work.
To be sure these were exclusively of Mohammedan manufacture, but many
large museums and institutions (native and foreign), collectors and
explorers had sent also chests of Buddhist works, which, not falling
within its compass, had been excluded from the exhibition, but were
placed at my disposal in the so-called Library Department reserved for
students.

Indian art has been greatly neglected by archeologists and connoisseurs
at the expense of the so-called classic style, and explorers seem to be
more interested in the geographical and political conditions of the
country, or even look down with contempt and lack of understanding on
the early artistic monuments of India, although they have enriched our
European middle ages. Thus there are great gaps in the history of Indian
art which I was obliged to fill up for myself, and certainly a very
different kind of study was needed to illustrate a Gospel of Buddha than
for a pictorial construction of the life of a Plato or a Jesus.

Fräulein Emily von Kerckhoff, an artistic and highly cultured lady of
Laren in Northern Holland, sailed on November 9, 1909, to join her
family in Java where she remained for some time. Her journey occurring
just at this time was of great help to me, for she complied with all my
wishes in the most accommodating manner and filled up many gaps in my
knowledge of India.

In Colombo she became acquainted with the Dias Bandaranaike and other
refined Singhalese families, who were very friendly in answering my
questions. Further she met Sister Sudham Machari of Upasikarama,
Peradeniya Road, Kandy, a prominent Singhalese nun, who with the
assistance of Lady Blake, the wife of a former governor, had founded the
first modern Buddhist nunnery in Ceylon where she now lives as lady
superior. She is well posted on Buddhism, for she has studied Pāli,
Sanskrit, and Burmese for nine years in Burma, and has received
ordination. Through her, Fräulein von Kerckhoff had an opportunity to
visit the temple in Kandy where the strange relic of the "Sacred Tooth
of Buddha" is preserved, and on this occasion was able to obtain some
leaves from the sacred Bodhi tree which I wished to possess. She also
became acquainted in Kandy with Dr. Kobekaduwe Tikiri Banda, a
Singhalese physician who belonged to a Buddhist family and is the son of
a Kandian chief. He had studied in England for a long time and possesses
a remarkable knowledge of the country and people of India and Ceylon, by
which I thus had an opportunity to profit.

Fräulein von Kerckhoff gathered further material for my purposes in
Gampola, a place in the mountains about an hour's ride from Kandy, on
the occasion of a visit to the family of the district judge, Mr. De
Livera, and by the acquaintance with Mr. J.B. Yatawara Rata-Mahatmaya,
Governor of the District and a zealous Buddhist, who has translated into
English part of the Jātakas (stories of the various rebirths of Buddha)
in collaboration with the late Prof. Max Müller, of Oxford.

Later, in December, 1910, she sent me leaves from the Bodhi tree at
Anuradhapura, the sacred city of the Buddhists, where there are ruins of
ancient palaces and temples, and where stands that Bodhi tree which
Mahinda, the first Buddhist apostle in Ceylon, is said to have planted
from a branch of the sacred Bodhi tree in Buddhagaya under which Buddha
attained enlightenment.

With regard to customs, habits and usages at princely courts I received
information, though to be sure referring mainly to Java, through Prince
Paku Alam, his uncle Prince Noto, his sisters and other relatives, all
of whom talked Dutch fluently with Fräulein von Kerckhoff. She was also
kind enough to send me all the interesting photographs she could find of
famous Indian temples and ruins, views of native life, types and
landscapes, pictures of the newly excavated temple ruins of Sarnath,
where Buddha first preached after attaining enlightenment, and
particularly also of the splendid temple of Boro-Budur. (She also went
to Japan in search of traces of Buddhism for me).

By means of the Hagenbeck Indian ethnological exposition (Oct. 1911, in
Munich) I was able to study types of the different Indian races and
castes from nature, and this in addition to a personal observation of
the features of Indians in the harbors of Genoa and Venice enabled me to
draw my figures according to nature from genuine Indian models.

However, all these studies slightly influenced the externalities only of
the whole series of pictures, for the knowledge obtained by detailed
study had been covered to a remarkable extent at the beginning when I
made my first sketches on the first inspiration. Still they have proved
of great value to me since they gave me the assurance that historical
fidelity has been preserved in my work.

Munich, Bavaria.

OLGA KOPETZKY.


[1] Two volumes, 1896, Published by order of the Secretary of State for
India in Council.

[2] Chicago, Open Court Publishing Company.

During the time of printing "The Gospel of Buddha" the following
valuable works on Indian art have come under my notice:

Ānanda K. Coomaraswamy: The Arts and Crafts of India and Ceylon. E.B.
Havell: The Ideals of Indian Art; Indian Sculpture and Painting. Dr.
Curt Glaser: Die Kunst Ost-Asiens (Leipzig, Insel-Verlag).




