CHAPTER XXX.

THEFTS.


Thefts without violence should be punished by fine. He who enriches
himself at another’s expense ought to suffer at his own. But, as theft is
generally only the crime of wretchedness and despair, the crime of that
unhappy portion of mankind to whom the right of property (a terrible,
and perhaps not necessary right[67]) has left but a bare subsistence;
and as pecuniary penalties increase the number of criminals above the
number of crimes, depriving the innocent of their bread in order to give
it to the wicked, the fittest punishment will be that kind of servitude
which alone can be called just, namely, the temporary servitude of a
man’s labour and person for the compensation of society, the personal
and absolute dependence due from a man who has essayed to exercise
an unjust superiority over the social compact. But when the theft is
accompanied with violence, the punishment also should be a combination
of corporal and servile punishment. Some previous writers have shown the
evident abuse that arises from not distinguishing punishments for thefts
of violence from those for thefts of cunning, thus making an absurd
equation between a large sum of money and the life of a man. For they
are crimes of a different nature; and in politics, as in mathematics,
this axiom is most certain, that between heterogeneous quantities the
terms of difference are infinite; but it is never superfluous to repeat
what has hardly ever been put into practice. Political machinery more
than anything else retains the motion originally given to it, and is the
slowest to adapt itself to a fresh one.




CHAPTER XXXI.

SMUGGLING.


Smuggling is a real crime against the sovereign and the nation; but its
punishment should not be one of disgrace, because its commission incurs
no disgrace in public opinion.

But why does this crime never entail disgrace upon its author, seeing
that it is a theft against the prince, and consequently against the
nation? I answer, that offences which men do not consider can be
committed against themselves do not interest them enough to produce
public indignation against their perpetrator. Smuggling is an offence
of this character. Men in general, on whom remote consequences make
very feeble impressions, do not perceive the harm that smuggling can
do them, nay, often they enjoy a present advantage from it. They only
perceive the injury done to the sovereign; they are not interested,
therefore, in withdrawing their favour from a smuggler as much as they
are in doing so from a man who commits a theft in private life, who
forges a signature, or brings upon them other evils. The principle is
self-evident, that every sensitive being only interests himself in the
evils which he knows. This crime arises from the law itself; since the
benefit it promises increases with the increase of the import duty, and
therefore the temptation and the facility of committing it increases with
the circumference of territory to be guarded and the small size of the
prohibited wares. The penalty of losing both the prohibited goods, and
whatever effects are found with them, is most just; but its efficacy will
be greater in proportion as the import duty is lower, because men only
incur risks relative to the advantage derivable from the prosperous issue
of their undertaking.

But ought such a crime to be let go unpunished in the case of a man who
has no effects to lose? No: there are kinds of smuggling of so much
importance to the revenue (which is so essential and so difficult a part
of a good system of laws), that such a crime deserves a considerable
punishment, even imprisonment or servitude; but imprisonment and
servitude conformable to the nature of the crime itself. For example,
the prison of the tobacco-smuggler ought not to be the same as that of
the assassin or the thief; and the labours of the former, limited to the
work and service of the very treasury he wished to defraud, will be the
punishments most conformable to the nature of his crime.




CHAPTER XXXII.

OF DEBTORS.


The good faith of contracts and the security of commerce compel the
legislator to assure to creditors the persons of insolvent debtors. But
I think it important to distinguish the fraudulent from the innocent
bankrupt, the former of whom should receive the same punishment as that
assigned to false coiners, since it is no greater crime to falsify a
piece of coined money, the pledge of men’s mutual obligations, than
to falsify those obligations themselves. But the innocent bankrupt—he
who, after a searching inquiry, has proved before his judges that
the wickedness or misfortune of some one else, or the inevitable
vicissitudes of human prudence, have despoiled him of his substance—for
what barbarous reason ought such an one to be thrown into prison, and
deprived of the only poor benefit that remains to him, a barren liberty,
in order to suffer the agonies of the really guilty, and, in despair at
his ruined honesty, to repent perhaps of that innocence, by which he
lived peacefully under the protection of those laws that it was not in
his power not to offend against? Laws, too, dictated by the powerful
by reason of their rapacity, and endured by the feeble by reason of
that hope, which generally glimmers in the human heart, and leads us
to believe that unfavourable contingencies are reserved for others,
favourable ones for ourselves! Men left to their natural feelings love
cruel laws, however much, as subject to them themselves, it might be for
their individual interest that they should be mitigated; because their
fear of being injured by others is greater than their desire to inflict
injuries themselves.

To return to the innocent bankrupt. Granting that his obligation should
not be extinguishable by anything short of total payment; granting that
he should not be suffered to withdraw from it without the consent of the
parties interested, nor to transfer under the dominion of other laws his
industry, which should perforce be employed, under penalties, to enable
him to satisfy his creditors in proportion to his profits; what fair
pretext, I ask, can there be, such as the security of commerce or the
sacred right of property, to justify the deprivation of his liberty? Such
a deprivation is only of use, when it is sought to discover the secrets
of a supposed innocent bankrupt by the evils of servitude, a most unusual
circumstance where a rigorous inquiry is instituted. I believe it to be a
maxim in legislation, that the amount of political inconveniences varies
directly in proportion to the injury they do the public, and inversely in
proportion to the difficulty of their proof.

It would be possible to distinguish a case of fraud from a grave fault, a
grave fault from a light one, and this again from perfect innocence; then
to affix to the first the penalties due for crimes of falsification; to
the second lesser penalties, but with the loss of personal liberty; and,
reserving for the last degree the free choice of the means of recovery,
to deprive the third degree of such liberty, whilst leaving it to a man’s
creditors. But the distinction between grave and light should be fixed by
the blind impartiality of the laws, not by the dangerous and arbitrary
wisdom of a judge. The fixings of limits are as necessary in politics as
in mathematics, equally in the measurement of the public welfare as in
the measurement of magnitudes.[68]

How easily might the farseeing legislator hinder a large part of culpable
bankruptcy, and relieve the misfortunes of the industrious and innocent!
The public and open registration of all contracts; freedom to every
citizen to consult them in well-kept documents; a public bank formed by
wisely-apportioned taxes upon prosperous commerce, and intended for the
timely relief of any unfortunate and innocent member of the company;—such
measures would have no real drawback and might produce numberless
advantages. But easy, simple, and great laws, which await but the signal
of the legislator, in order to scatter riches and strength through a
nation—laws which would be celebrated from generation to generation in
hymns of gratitude—are either the least thought of or the least desired
of all. An uneasy and petty spirit, the timid prudence of the present
moment, and a circumspect stiffness against innovations, master the
feelings of those who govern the complex actions of mankind.




