CHAPTER XXI.

ASYLUMS OF REFUGE.


There remain two questions for me to examine: the first, whether asylums
of refuge are just, and whether international agreements of extradition
are expedient or not. There should be no spot within the boundaries of
any country independent of the laws. Every citizen should be followed
by their power, as every substance is followed by its shadow. There is
only a difference of degree between impunity and the right of asylum;
and as the effective influence of punishment consists more in its
inevitability than in its violence, asylums do more to invite to crimes
than punishments do to deter from them. The multiplication of asylums is
the formation of so many petty sovereignties; for where there are no laws
to command, there it is easy for new laws, opposed to the general laws of
a country, to be formed, and consequently for a spirit opposed to that of
the whole collective social body to arise. All history shows that from
asylums have issued great revolutions in States and in the opinions of
mankind.

Some persons have maintained that a crime, that is, an action contrary
to the laws, is punishable wherever committed, as if the character of
subject were indelible, or, in other words, synonymous with, nay, worse
than, the character of slave; as if a man could be the subject of one
kingdom and the resident of another, or as if his actions could without
contradiction be subordinate to two sovereign powers and to two legal
systems often contradictory. So some think that a cruel action done, say,
at Constantinople is punishable at Paris, for the abstract reason that
he who offends humanity deserves to have collective humanity for his
enemy, and merits universal execration; as if judges were the avengers
of human sensibility in general, and not rather of the covenants that
bind men together. The place of punishment is the place of the crime,
because there, and there only, is it a compulsory duty to injure an
individual, to prevent an injury to the public. A villain, but one who
has not broken the covenants of the society of which he was not a member,
may be an object of fear, and for that reason be expelled and exiled by
the superior power of that society; but he cannot be legally and formally
punished, since it is for the laws to avenge, not the intrinsic malice of
particular actions, but the violation of compacts.

But whether the international extradition of criminals be useful I would
not venture to decide, until laws more in conformity with the needs of
humanity, until milder penalties, and until the emancipation of law from
the caprice of mere opinion, shall have given security to oppressed
innocence and hated virtue; until tyranny shall have been confined,
by the force of universal reason which ever more and more unites the
interests of kings and subjects, to the vast plains of Asia; however much
the conviction of finding nowhere a span of earth where real crimes were
pardoned might be the most efficacious way of preventing their occurrence.




CHAPTER XXII.

OF PROSCRIPTION.


The second question is, whether it is expedient to place a reward on the
head of a known criminal, and to make of every citizen an executioner
by arming him against the offender. Either the criminal has fled from
his country or he is still within it. In the first case the sovereign
encourages the commission of a crime and exposes its author to a
punishment, being thereby guilty of an injury and of an usurpation of
authority in the dominions of another, and authorising other nations
to do the same by himself. In the second case the sovereign displays
his own weakness, for he who has the power wherewith to defend himself
seeks not to purchase it. Moreover, such an edict upsets all ideas of
morality and virtue, which are ever ready to vanish from the human
mind at the very slightest breath. Now the laws invite to treachery,
and anon they punish it; with one hand the legislator tightens the
bonds of the family, of kindred, and of friendship, whilst with the
other he rewards whosoever violates and despises them; always in
self-contradiction, he at one moment invites to confidence the suspicious
natures of men, and at another scatters mistrust broadcast among them.
Instead of preventing one crime, he causes a hundred. These are the
resources of weak nations, whose laws are but the temporary repairs of
a ruined building that totters throughout. In proportion as a nation
becomes enlightened, good faith and mutual confidence become necessary,
and tend ever more to identify themselves with true policy. Tricks,
intrigues, dark and indirect paths, are for the most part foreseen, and
the general quickness of all men collectively over-reaches and blunts
that of single individuals. The very ages of ignorance, in which public
morality inclines men to obey the dictates of private morality, serve
as instruction and experience for the ages of enlightenment. But laws
which reward treachery and stir up clandestine hostility by spreading
mutual suspicion among citizens, are opposed to this union of private and
public morality, a union which is so necessary, and to the observance of
which individuals might owe their happiness, nations their peace, and
the universe a somewhat longer period of quiet and repose from the evils
which at present pervade it.




CHAPTER XXIII.

PROPORTION BETWEEN CRIMES AND PUNISHMENTS.


Not only is it the general interest that crimes should not be committed,
but that they should be rare in proportion to the evils they cause
to society. The more opposed therefore that crimes are to the public
welfare, and the more numerous the incentives to them, the stronger
should be the repellent obstacles. This principle accordingly establishes
the necessity of a certain proportion between crimes and punishments.

If pleasure and pain are the motors of sensitive beings, if the invisible
lawgiver of humanity has decreed rewards and punishments as one of the
motives to impel men to even their noblest endeavours, the inexact
distribution of these motives will give rise to that contradiction, as
little noticed as it is of common occurrence, namely, that the laws
punish crimes which are entirely of their own creation. If an equal
penalty is attached to two crimes of unequal injury to society, the
greater crime of the two, if it promise a greater advantage than the
other, will have no stronger motive in restraint of its perpetration.
Whoever, for example, sees the same punishment of death decreed for the
man who kills a pheasant and the man who slays his fellow or falsifies
an important document, will draw no distinction between such crimes;
and thus moral sentiments, the product only of many ages and of much
bloodshed, the slowest and most difficult attainment of the human mind,
dependent, it has been thought, on the aid of the most sublime motives
and on a parade of the gravest formalities, will be destroyed and lost.

It is impossible to prevent all the disorders that may arise in the
universal conflict of human passions. Their increase depends on that of
population and on the crossings of private interests, which cannot be
directed with geometrical exactness to the public welfare. In political
arithmetic the calculation of probabilities must be substituted for
mathematical exactness. Glance at the history of the world, and you
will see disorders increase with the increase of the bounds of empire;
thus national feeling being to the same extent diminished, the general
inducement to crime increases with the greater interest of each
individual in such disorders, and on this account the necessity for
aggravating penalties ever continues to increase.

That force, similar to the force of gravitation, which constrains us
to seek our own well-being, only admits of counteraction in proportion
to the obstacles opposed to it. The effects of this force make up the
confused series of human actions; if these clash together and impede one
another, punishments, which I would call _political obstacles_, prevent
bad effects from resulting, without destroying the impelling cause, which
lies in the sensibility inseparable from humanity; and the legislator, in
enacting them, acts the part of a clever architect, whose function it is
to counteract the tendency of gravitation to cause a building to fall,
and to bring to bear all the lines which contribute to its strength.

Given the necessity of the aggregation of mankind, and given the
covenants which necessarily result from the very opposition of private
interests, a scale of offences may be traced, beginning with those which
tend directly to the destruction of society, and ending with acts of
the smallest possible injustice committed against individual members
of it. Between these extremes are comprised all the actions opposed to
the public welfare which are called crimes, and which by imperceptible
degrees decrease in enormity from the highest to the lowest. If
the infinite and obscure combinations of human actions admitted of
mathematical treatment, there ought to be a corresponding scale of
punishments, varying from the severest to the slightest penalty. If there
were an exact and universal scale of crimes and punishments, we should
have an approximate and general test by which to gauge the degrees of
tyranny and liberty in different governments, the relative state of the
humanity or wickedness of different nations. But the wise legislator will
rest satisfied with marking out the principal divisions in such a scale,
so as not to invert their order, nor to affix to crimes of the first
degree punishments due to those of the last.




