CHAPTER IV.

THE PROBLEMS OF PENOLOGY.


If we would bring to the study of Beccaria’s treatise the same
disposition of mind with which he wrote it, we must enter upon the
subject with the freest possible spirit of inquiry, and with a spirit of
doubtfulness, undeterred in its research by authority however venerable,
by custom however extended, or by time however long. It has been from too
great reverence for the wisdom of antiquity that men in all ages have
consigned their lives and properties to the limited learning and slight
experience of generations which only lived for themselves and had no
thought of binding posterity in the rules they thought suitable to their
own times. Beccaria sounded the first note of that appeal from custom
to reason in the dominion of law which has been, perhaps, the brightest
feature in the history of modern times, and is still transforming the
institutions of all countries.

The object, therefore, of this chapter is chiefly negative, being none
other than to raise such mistrust of mere custom, and so strong a sense
of doubt, by the contradictions apparent in existing laws and theories,
that the difficulties of their solution may tempt to some investigation
of the principles on which they rest.

That Penology is still only in its experimental stage as a science,
in spite of the progress it has made in recent times, is clear from
the changes that are so constantly being made in every department of
our penal system. We no longer mutilate nor kill our criminals, as
our ancestors did in the plenitude of their wisdom; we have ceased to
transport them, and our only study now is to teach them useful trades
and laborious industry. Yet whether we shall better bring them to love
labour by compulsory idleness or by compulsory work, whether short
imprisonment or long is the most effective discipline, whether seclusion
or association is least likely to demoralise them, these and similar
questions have their answers in a quicksand of uncertainty. This only
may experience be said to have yet definitely proved, that very little
relation exists in any country between the given quantity of crime and
the quantity or severity of punishment directed to its prevention. It has
taken thousands of years to establish this truth, and even yet it is but
partially recognised over the world.

It would appear at first sight that there could be little to say about
crimes and punishments, so obvious and self-evident seem the relations
that exist between them. Many people still believe in an innate sense
of justice in mankind, sufficient always to prevent wide aberrations
from equity. Is it, they might ask, conceivable that men should ever
lose sight of the distinction between the punishment of guilt and the
punishment of innocence?—that they should ever punish one equally with
the other? Yet there is no country in the world which in its past or
present history has not involved the relations of a criminal in the
punishment inflicted on him; and in savage countries generally it is
still common to satisfy justice with vengeance on some blood-relation of
a malefactor who escapes from the punishment due to his crime.

It would also seem to demand no great insight to perceive that a
voluntary intention must be a universal attribute of a criminal action.
No one would think of punishing a man who in his sleep killed another,
although, if the injury to society be the measure of punishment, his
crime is equivalent to intentional homicide. Yet at Athens an involuntary
murderer was banished until he could, give satisfaction to the relatives
of the deceased; and in China, though the penal code generally separates
intentional from accidental crimes, anyone who kills a near relation
by accident or commits certain kinds of arson by accident undergoes
different degrees of banishment and a fixed number of bamboo strokes.[40]

Even inanimate objects or animals it has been thought through many ages
reasonable to punish. In Athens an axe or stone that killed anyone
by accident was cast beyond the border; and the English law was only
repealed in the present reign which made a cartwheel, a tree, or a beast,
that killed a man, forfeit to the State for the benefit of the poor. The
Jewish law condemned an ox that gored anyone to death to be stoned, just
as it condemned the human murderer. And in the middle ages pigs, horses,
or oxen were not only tried judicially like men, with counsel on either
side and witnesses, but they were hung on gallows like men, for the
better deterrence of their kind in future.[41]

These customs had doubtless their defenders, and left the world not
without a struggle. It must have cost some one, whosoever first
questioned the wisdom of hanging animals or murdering a criminal’s
relations, as much ridicule as it cost Beccaria to question the efficacy
of torture or the right of capital punishment. But the boldness of
thought in that unknown reformer was probably lost sight of in the
arrogance of his profanity, and he doubtless paid with his own neck for
his folly in defending the pig’s.

It may be said that all such absurdities are past; that the Jews, the
Athenians, the Chinese, the Europeans of the middle ages can scarcely
be cited as reasonable beings; that they had no rational theory of
punishment, and that their errors have been long since discarded. But at
least their example suggests that even in our own system there may be
inconsistencies and blemishes which custom and authority hide from our
eyes.

Penal laws are the expression of the moral sentiments of mankind, and
either are as variable as the other. In Holland it was once a capital
offence to kill a stork, and in England to cut down a man’s cherry-tree.
For a Roman lady to drink wine was as heinous a sin as adultery, for
either of which she incurred the extreme sentence of the law. In Athens
idleness was for a long time punishable; though to a Spartan an Athenian
fined for idleness seemed to be punished for keeping up his dignity.
In Mexico drunkenness was a graver crime than slander; for whilst the
slanderer lost his ears or lips, the drunken man or woman was clubbed or
stoned to death.

But if penal laws thus express the wide variability of human morality,
they also contribute to make actions moral or immoral according to the
penalties by which they enforce or prevent them. For not only does
whatever is immoral tend to become penal, but anything can be made
immoral by being first made penal; and hence indifferent actions often
remain immoral long after they have ceased to be actually punishable.
Thus the Jews made Sabbath-breaking equally immoral with homicide or
adultery, by affixing to each of them the same capital penalty; and the
former offence, though it no longer forms part of any criminal code,
has still as much moral force against it as many an offence directly
punishable by the law.

But perhaps the best illustrations of the tendency of actions to
retain the infamy, attached to them by a past condition of fanatical
punishments, are the cases of suicide and child-killing. Could a Greek of
the classical period, or a cultivated historian like Plutarch reappear on
earth, nothing would strike him more vividly than the modern conception
or recent treatment of these crimes. According to Plutarch, Lycurgus, the
great Spartan lawgiver, met his death by voluntary starvation, from the
persuasion that even the deaths of lawgivers should be of use to mankind,
and serve them with an example of virtue and greatness; and Seneca held
that it was the part of a wise man not to live as long as he could but
as long as he ought. With what astonishment, then, would not Plutarch or
Seneca read of recent European punishments for suicide—of Lady Hales
losing the estate she was jointly possessed of with her husband, the
Judge, because he drowned himself; of the stake and the cross-roads; of
the English law which still regards suicide as murder, and condemns one
of two men who in a mutual attempt at self-destruction survives the other
to the punishment of the ordinary murderer! Is it possible, he would ask,
that an action which was once regarded as among the noblest a man could
perform, has really come to be looked upon with any other feeling than
one of pity or a sad respect?

The case of infanticide suggests similar thoughts. When we remember that
both Plato and Aristotle commended as a valuable social custom that
which we treat as a crime; when we recall the fact that the life of a
Spartan infant depended on a committee of elders, who decided whether it
should live or perish, we shall better appreciate the distance we have
travelled, or, as some would say, the progress we have made, if we take
up some English daily paper and read of some high-minded English judge
sentencing, at least formally, some wretched woman to death, because, in
order to save her child from starvation or herself from shame, she has
released it from existence. Yet the feeling, of which such a sentence
is the expression, is often extolled as one of the highest triumphs of
civilisation; and the laws, as if there were no difference between adult
and infant life, glory in protecting the weakness of a child by their
merciless disregard for the weakness of its mother.

But at least, it will be thought, we have by this time arrived at some
principles about punishment which correspond with the eternal truths of
equity. Is not Equality, for instance, one of the primary essentials of
punishment? Does it not stand as a penal axiom with almost the sanction
of a moral law that all men should suffer equally for equal crimes? Yet,
if by equality be meant the same punishment, the same kind of labour,
the same term of servitude, the same pecuniary fine—and this is the only
thing it can mean—what more obvious than that the same punishment for
rich and poor, for young and old, for strong and weak, for men and women,
for educated and uneducated, will bring to the constitution of a penal
code the utmost inequality the imagination can conceive? Beccaria insists
that the law can do no more than assign the same extrinsic punishment to
the same crime; that is, the same punishment, regardless of all other
external considerations; and he calls for the infliction of the same
punishment on the nobleman as on the commoner. Let it be so; but the same
punishment is no longer an equal one; and hence from this very demand
for equality springs the demand for its very opposite, for what Bentham
calls the _equability_ of punishment; that is, consideration for the
different circumstances of individual criminals. So that the same nominal
punishment not being the same real one, equality of punishment appears to
be a chimera, and the law, which punishes, say, a distinguished officer
less severely than it punishes a costermonger for the same crime, errs
perhaps really less from actual equality than if it condemned both to
precisely the same punishment.

Again, Proportion between crime and punishment seems to be another
natural demand of equity. Yet it is evident that it is only approximately
possible, and will vary in every age and country according to the
prevalent notions of morality. Is imprisonment for a year, or
imprisonment for life, or for how long, a fair and proportionate
punishment for perjury? Who shall decide? Shall we submit it to the
opinion of the judges? But has not Romilly left on record the story of
the two men tried by two different judges for stealing some chickens, who
were sentenced respectively one to imprisonment for two months, and the
other to transportation? Shall we then give up all attempt at proportion
and apply the same deterrent as equally efficacious against slight or
grave offences? Draco, when asked why he made death the punishment
for most offences that were possible, is said to have replied, ‘Small
ones deserve it, and I can find no greater for the gravest.’ The same
reasoning was for a long time that of our own law; and in Japan, where
every wrong act was one of disobedience to the Emperor, and accordingly
of equal value, the same penalty of death for gambling, theft, or murder,
obviated all difficulties with regard to a proportion which is easier to
imagine than it is to define.

Analogy between crime and punishment is another idea which, except in
the case of death for death, has been relegated from the practice of
most criminal laws. Yet the principle has in its favour the authority of
Moses, the authority of the whole world and of all time, that punishment
should, if possible, resemble the crime it punishes in kind; so that
a man who blinds another should be blinded himself, he who disfigures
another be disfigured himself. Thus in the old-world mythology, Theseus
and Hercules inflict on the evil powers they conquer the same cruelties
their victims were famous for; Termenus having his skull broken because
with his own skull he broke the heads of others; and Busiris, who
sacrificed others, being himself sacrificed in his turn. Both Montesquieu
and Beccaria also advocate analogy in punishment, and so does Bentham
to some degree; there being, indeed, few greater contrasts between the
theories of the great English jurist and modern English practice than
that the former should not have deprecated some suffering by burning as a
penalty analogous to the crime of arson, and that he should have advised
the transfixing of a forger’s hand or of a calumniator’s tongue by an
iron instrument before the public gaze as good and efficient punishments
for forgery and slander.

These are some of the difficulties of the subject, which teach us the
necessity of constant open-mindedness with regard to all ideas or
practices connected with criminal law. But, would we further examine our
established notions, we should consider a statement from Hobbes which
goes to the very root of the theory of punishment.

‘In revenges or punishments,’ says Hobbes, ‘men ought not to look at the
greatness of the evil past, but the greatness of the good to follow,
whereby we are forbidden to inflict punishment with any other design than
for the correction of the offender and the admonition of others.’ And
over and over again the same thing has been said, till it has come to be
a commonplace in the philosophy of law, that the object of punishment is
to reform and deter. As was once said by a great legal authority, ‘We
do not hang you because you stole a horse, but that horses may not be
stolen.’[42] Punishment by this theory is a means to an end, not an end
in itself.

Yet, supposing it were proved to-morrow that punishment fails entirely of
the ends imputed to it; that, for example, the greater number of crimes
are committed by criminals who have been punished already; that for one
chance of a man’s reformation during his punishment there are a hundred
in favour of his deterioration; and that the deterrent influence of his
punishment is altogether removed by his own descriptions of it; shall we
suppose for a moment that society would cease to punish, on the ground
that punishment attained none of its professed ends? Would it say to the
horse-stealer, ‘Keep your horse, for nothing we can do to you can make
you any better, nor deter others from trying to get horses in the same
way?’

Or to take a stronger case. A deserter from the ranks escapes to his
home, breaks into it at night, robs an infirm father of all the savings
he has provided for his old age, and in a struggle for their possession
so injures him that he dies. Must the law disclaim all indignation, all
resentment, in the punishment it inflicts, and say to such a ruffian
that it only deals hard with him in order to warn others by his example,
and with the pious hope of making a good man of him in the future? If
resentment is ever just, is it wrong to give it public expression? If it
is natural and right in private life, why should it be a matter of shame
in public life? If there is such a thing as just anger for a single man,
does it become unjust when distributed among a million?

As a matter of fact the law affords a very clear proof, that its real
purpose is to administer retributive justice and that punishment has no
end beyond itself, by its careful apportionment of punishment to crime,
by its invariable adjustment between the evil a man has done and the evil
it deals out to him in return. For what purpose punish offences according
to a certain scale, for what purpose stay to measure their gravity, if
merely the prevention of crime is the object of punishment? Why punish
a slight theft with a few months’ imprisonment and a burglary with as
many years? The slight theft, as easier to commit, as more tempting
accordingly, should surely have a harder penalty affixed to it than a
crime which, as it is more difficult, is also less probable and less in
need of strong counter-inducements to restrain it. That the law never
reasons in this way is because it weighs offences according to their
different degrees of criminality, or, in other words, because it feels
that the fair _retaliation_ for the burglary is not a fair _retaliation_
for the theft.

If, moreover, the prevention of crime is the chief object of punishment,
why wait till the crime is committed? Why not punish before, as a
certain Turk in Barbary is said to have done, who, whenever he bought
a fresh Christian slave, had him forthwith suspended by his heels and
bastinadoed, that the severe sense of his punishment might prevent him
from committing in future the faults that should merit it?[43] Why
should we ever let a man out of prison who has once entered one? Is he
not then a hundred times more likely to violate the law than he was
before; and is he ever more dangerous to society than when he has once
suffered for the public example, and been released from the discipline
that was intended to reform him? It is still true, as Goldsmith said
long ago, that we send a man to prison for one crime and let him loose
again ready to commit a thousand. And so it is, that of the 74,000 souls
who make up our criminal classes, whilst about 34,000 of them fill our
prisons and reformatories, there is still an army of 40,000 at large in
our midst, whom we class as _known thieves_, _receivers of stolen goods_,
and _suspected persons_.[44]

A child’s simple philosophy of punishment therefore is after all the
correct one, when it tells you without hesitation that the reason a man
is punished for a bad action is simply ‘because he deserves it.’ The
notion of desert in punishment is based entirely on feelings of the
justice of resentment. So that the primary aim of legal punishment is
precisely the same as may be shown historically to have been its origin,
namely, the regulation by society of the wrongs of individuals. In all
early laws and societies distinct traces may be seen of the transition
of the _vendetta_, or right of private revenge, from the control of the
person or family injured by a crime to that of the community at large.
The latter at first decided only the question of guilt, whilst leaving
its punishment to the pleasure of the individuals directly concerned
by it. Even to this day in Turkey sentences of death for murder run as
follows: So-and-so is condemned to death _at the demand of the victim’s
heirs_; and such sentences are sometimes directed to be carried out in
their presence.[45] By degrees the community obtained control of the
punishment as well, and thus private might became public right, and the
resentment of individual injuries the Retributive Justice of the State.

The recognition of this regulation of resentment as the main object of
punishment affords the best test for measuring its just amount. For
that amount will be found to be just which is necessary; that is to
say, which just suffices for the object it aims at—the satisfaction
of general or private resentment. It must be so much, and no more, as
will prevent individuals from preferring to take the law into their own
hands and seeking to redress their own injuries. This degree can only
be gathered from experience, nor is it any real objection to it, that it
must obviously be somewhat arbitrary and variable. Both Wladimir I., the
first Christian Czar of Russia, and Wladimir II. tried the experiment of
abolishing capital punishment for murder; but the increase of murders
by the _vendetta_ compelled them to fall back upon the old modes of
punishment.[46] Some centuries later the Empress Elizabeth successfully
tried the same experiment, without the revival of the _vendetta_, the
state of society having so far altered that the relations of a murdered
man no longer insisted on the death of his murderer. But had Elizabeth
abolished all legal punishment for murder—had she, that is, allowed no
public _vendetta_ of any kind—undoubtedly the _vendetta_ would have
become private again.

By the same rule, in the case of theft, the value of the thing stolen,
with some equivalent for the trouble of its recovery, taken from the
offender or made a lien on his earnings, appears to be all that justice
can demand. Sir Samuel Romilly, himself second to none as a lawyer,
wrote seventy years ago: ‘If the restitution of the property stolen,
and only a few weeks’ or even but a few days’ imprisonment were the
unavoidable consequence of theft, no theft would ever be committed.’
Yet the following sentences are taken at random from authentic English
sources: three months’ imprisonment for stealing a pipe, six months for
stealing a penny, a twelvemonth for stealing an umbrella, five years’
penal servitude for stealing some stamps from a letter, seven years for
stealing twopence. In such cases the principle of vindictiveness exceeds
the limits of necessity, and therefore of justice; whilst the law loses
all its dignity as the expression of unimpassioned resentment.

Is it possible, then, so beforehand to apportion punishments to crimes
that when a crime is committed it shall be but necessary to refer to a
code and at once detect its appropriate punishment? Or must the law be
general in its language, and leave a wide margin to the discretion of the
judge? Beccaria would have the judicial function confined solely to the
ascertainment of the fact of a crime, its punishment preordained by the
law. On the other hand it is said, that it is impossible to anticipate
every case that may arise; that no two cases are ever alike; that it
is better to leave the nice adjustment of penalties to the wisdom and
impartiality of a judge, and only limit his discretion by rules of a most
expansive description.

The Chinese penal code of 1647 is probably the nearest approach to
Beccaria’s conception, and nothing is more marvellous than the precision
with which it apportions punishments to every shade of crime, leaving
no conceivable offence, of commission or omission, without its exact
number of bamboo strokes, its exact pecuniary penalty, or its exact term
or distance of banishment. It is impossible in this code to conceive any
discretion or room for doubt left to the judicial officers beyond the
discovery of the fact of an alleged crime. But what is practicable in
one country is practicable in another; so that the charge so often urged
against thus eliminating judicial discretion, that it is fair in theory
but impossible in practice, finds itself at direct issue with the facts
of actual life.[47]

But although the laws of every country thus recognise in different
degrees the retributive nature of punishment, by their constant attention
to its apportionment to crime, there is another corollary of the
desirability of a just proportion between the two, which has never been,
nor is ever likely to be, accepted: namely, that from the point of view
of the public interest, which in theory is the only legal view, it is no
mitigation of a crime that it is a first offence, nor any aggravation of
one that it is the second.

For since the observance of some regular proportion between crime and
punishment, whatever that proportion may be, constitutes the first
principle of an equitable code; and since the most important thing in
public morality is a fixed penal estimate for every class of crime; it
is above all things desirable that the law should always adhere to such
proportion and estimate, by concerning itself solely with the crime
and not with the criminal. The injury to the public is precisely the
same whether a criminal has broken the law for the first time or for
the thousandth and first; and to punish a man more severely for his
second offence than for his first, because he has been punished before,
is to cast aside all regard for that due proportion between crime and
punishment which is after all the chief ingredient of retributive
justice, and to inflict a penalty often altogether incommensurate with
the injury inflicted on the public.

For instance, the injury to the public is no greater the hundredth time
a man steals a rabbit than it is the first. The public may be interested
in the prevention of poaching, but it is not interested in the person
of the poacher, nor in the number of times he may have broken the law.
The law claims to be impersonal—to treat offences as they affect the
State, not as they affect individuals; to act mechanically, coldly, and
dispassionately. It has, therefore, simply to deal with the amount of
injury done by each specific offence, and to affix to it its specific
penalty, regardless of all matters of moral antecedents. The repetition
of an offence may make its immorality the greater, but its criminality
remains the same, and this only is within the province of the law.

It is the specific crime, not the fact that it is a second or third
felony, which is injurious. Neither a community nor an individual suffer
more from the commission of a crime by a man who commits it for the
second time than from its commission by a man who has never committed it
before. If two brothers are each robbed of a pound apiece on two several
occasions, the one who is robbed each time by the same criminal suffers
no more than the one who is robbed each time by different criminals.
Still less is the public more injured in one case than in the other.
Therefore the former brother is entitled for his second loss to no more
restitution than the other, nor has any more claim on society for the
infliction of a severer punishment on his behalf than that inflicted for
the second loss of his brother.

A few stories may be taken as illustrative of thousands to indicate the
mischief and travesty of justice which arises from the neglect of this
principle, and from the custom of making a legal inquiry into moral
antecedents.

A farm labourer, with a wife and four children, and earning eleven
shillings a week, was imprisoned in the county gaol for two months for
the theft of a pound of butter. Soon after his release sickness entered
his home, and to supply his children’s wants he again yielded to
temptation and stole twelve duck’s eggs. For this he was sentenced to
seven years’ penal servitude; or rather not for this theft, but because
he had already incurred a severe punishment for a theft of some butter.
The sentence was most perfectly lawful, but was it not perfectly unjust?

Almost any number of the ‘Times’ will illustrate the same thing. Take
the account of the Middlesex Sessions of February 24, 1880. There we
find the case of a man and woman sentenced to seven and five years’
penal servitude respectively. What enormities had they committed? The
man had stolen three-halfpence from somebody; and the woman, who was a
laundress, had stolen two skirts, of the value of six shillings, from a
vendor of sheep’s trotters. The man had incurred previously seven years’
penal servitude for a robbery with violence, and the woman had three
times in her life been sentenced to imprisonment. But is it just that,
because a man has been severely punished once, no rule nor measure shall
be observed with him if he incur punishment again? And might not a vendor
of sheep’s trotters have been satisfied, without a laundress becoming a
burden to the State?

It will be said, of course, that the practice of giving increased
sentences where there have been previous convictions prevails all over
the world and in all states of civilisation. But in that very fact lies
the strength of the argument against it. By the Roman law a third case
of theft, however slight, exposed a man to death.[48] By the laws of St.
Louis the man who stole a thing of trifling value lost an ear the first
time, a foot the second, and was hung the third. By the criminal code
of Sardinia in the fifteenth century, asses were condemned to lose one
ear the first time they trespassed on a field not their master’s, and
their second ear for a second offence. But enough of such instances. The
practice is undoubtedly universal; but so at one time were ordeals and
tortures. May not, then, the practice be, like them, part and parcel of
a crude state of law, such as was unavoidable in its emergence to better
things, but such as it is worth some effort to escape from?

There are, however, certain limitations even to the supposed universality
of the custom. For the Roman jurists did not consider a re-conviction as
a circumstance in itself which justified aggravation of punishment; and
all that can be gathered from some fragments in the Pandects and Code is,
that some particular cases of repeated crimes were punished more severely
than a first offence. But they were crimes _of the same kind_; and a man
whose first crime was a theft and whose second was an assault would
not have incurred an aggravated penalty. It is the same to-day in the
Austrian, Tuscan, and a few other codes: a second crime is only punished
more severely as a second crime when it is of the same kind as the first,
so that it would not suffice to prove simply a previous conviction
for felony irrespective of the particular sort. There is also another
limitation that has sometimes been recognised, for in the Roman law the
rule of an increased penalty fell to the ground, if three years elapsed
without offence between the punishment for one crime and the commission
of a second.[49]

If it be said that a second conviction makes it necessary for society
to protect itself by stronger measures against a member who thus defies
its power, it may be asked whether this is not an application of exactly
the same reasoning to the crimes of individuals, which as applied to
the crimes of all men generally led our ancestors so far astray in the
distribution of their punishments. Nothing could have been more plausible
than their reasoning: ‘The punishment in vogue does not diminish the
crime, therefore increase the punishment.’ But nothing could have been
less satisfactory than the result, for with the increase of punishment
that of crime went hand in hand. The same reasoning is equally plausible
in the case of individuals, with the same perplexing question resulting
in the end: ‘How comes it that, in spite of the threatened greater
punishment, the majority of criminals are yet old offenders?’

It is unhappily no mere theory, that the majority of crimes are
committed precisely by those who risk most in committing them; by
those, that is, who commit them with the aggravated penalty full in
view. By the existing law (of which both the Criminal Code- and the
Penal Servitude-Commissioners have proposed the mitigation) anyone
convicted of felony after a previous conviction for felony is liable to
penal servitude for life, or to imprisonment with hard labour for four
years, with one or more whippings. The minimum punishment for a second
conviction of felony is seven years. Yet, with the knowledge of such
increased punishments before their eyes, with the full consciousness of
their liabilities as old offenders, official statistics show that of both
the male and female convicts in the English convict prisons _considerably
more than half have incurred previous convictions_.[50] Of the male
convicts in 1878, 79 per cent., and of the female 89 per cent., were
cases of reciduous crime. May it not, then, be argued from such a failure
of the system to an error in the principle on which it rests? For is it
not evident that the aggravated penalty does as little to deter as the
original punishment does to reform?

But undoubtedly punishment, although in its origin and present intention
vindictive, must exercise a certain preventive force against crime,
and this preventive force can scarcely be estimated, for that which is
prevented is, of course, not seen. But the efficiency of punishment as a
deterrent is proportioned to its certainty, and there is a large element
of uncertainty that can never be eliminated. For every malefactor there
are two hopes: first, that he may escape detection or apprehension;
secondly, that he may escape conviction. That his hopes of impunity are
not without reason greater than his fears of punishment the following
facts attest.

In a period of ten years, from 1867 to 1876, the total number of
principal indictable offences committed in the metropolis against
property—and these constitute the great majority of crimes—were
117,345. But the apprehensions for these offences were only 26,426,
the convictions only 19,242. In other words, the chances against
apprehension for such crimes as burglary or larceny are four to one in
favour of the criminal, whilst the chances against his conviction and
punishment are fully as high as six to one. When we thus find that only
16 per cent. of such crimes receive any punishment, the remaining 84
per cent. escaping it altogether, and that only 22 per cent. are even
followed by apprehension, we shall the more admire the general efficacy
of our criminal machinery, in which prevention by punishment plays so
small a part.[51]

But punishment bears much the same relation to crime in the country at
large that it does in the metropolis. Let one year be taken as a fair
sample of all. The total number of indictable offences of all kinds
_reported to the police_ in 1877-8 was 54,065. For these offences only
24,062 persons were apprehended. Of these latter only 16,820 were held to
bail or committed for trial; and of these again 12,473 were convicted and
punished.[52] So that, though the proportion of convictions to the number
of prisoners who come to trial is about 75 per cent., the proportion of
convictions, that is, of punishments, to the number of crimes committed
is so low as 23 per cent. Of the 54,065 crimes reported to the police
in one year 41,592 were actually committed with impunity; and thus the
proportion which successful crime of all sorts bears to unsuccessful is
rather more than as four to one.[53] So that there is evident truth in
what a good authority has said: ‘Few offences comparatively are followed
by detection and punishment, and with a moderate degree of cunning an
offender may generally go on for a long time with but feeble checks, if
not complete impunity.’[54]

Against this general uncertainty of punishment, which no severity in the
law can affect or make up for, the only certainty of punishment dependent
on the law is in the event of conviction. But even this certainty is of
a very qualified nature, for it depends on sentiments of due proportion
between a crime and its penalty, which in no two men are the same. Every
increase of severity in punishment diminishes its certainty, since it
holds out to a criminal fresh hopes of impunity from the clemency of his
judges, prosecutors, or jury.

But there is a still further uncertainty of punishment, for it is as well
known in the criminal world as elsewhere that the sentence pronounced in
court is not the real sentence, and that neither penal servitude for
five years nor penal servitude for life mean necessarily anything of
the sort. The humanity of modern legislation insists on a remission of
punishment, dependent on a convict’s life in the public works prisons,
in order that the element of hope may brighten his lot and perchance
reform his character. This remission was at first dependent simply on
his conduct, which was perhaps too generously called good where it was
hard for it to be bad; now it depends on his industry and amount of
work done. Yet the element of hope might be otherwise assured than by
lessening the certainty of punishment, say, by associating industry
or good conduct with such little privileges of diet, letter-writing,
or receiving of visits, as still shed some rays of pleasure over the
monotony of felon-life. It should not be forgotten, that the Commission
of 1863, which so strongly advocated the remissibility of parts of penal
sentences, did so in despite of one of its principal members, against
no less an authority than the Lord Chief Justice, then Sir Alexander
Cockburn.[55] The very fact of the remissibility of a sentence is an
admission of its excessive severity; for to say that a sentence is never
carried out is to say that it need never have been inflicted.

The question, therefore, arises, Does crime depend to any appreciable
extent on imprisonment at all, or on the length or shortness of
sentences?

The right to ask such a question derives itself from recent experience.
In 1853 the country decided to shorten terms of penal servitude as
compared with those of the then expiring system of transportation, for
which they were to be substituted. Four years later it was resolved
to equalise terms of penal servitude with those formerly given of
transportation, though transportation for seven years was still to have
its equivalent in three of penal servitude. Then came the garrotting
year, 1862, in consequence of which the minimum term of penal servitude
was raised to five years, whilst no sentence of penal servitude, after
a previous conviction of felony, was to be for less than seven years.
Now again the tide has turned in favour of shorter sentences, and it is
officially proposed to relinquish the latter minimum of servitude as too
severe, and as leading in practice to sentences of simple imprisonment,
which on the other hand are declared to be too slight.

In such a zigzag path has our penal legislation been feeling, and is
still feeling, its way, with evident misgiving of that principle of
repression, as false as it is old, that an increase of crime can only be
met by an increase of punishment.

There seem to be three principal reasons why, under our present system,
crime still keeps its general level, irrespective of all changes in our
degrees of punishment.

In the first place, our public works prisons, however excellent for
their material results, are so many schools of crime, where for the one
honest trade a man learns by compulsion he acquires a knowledge of three
or four that are dishonest. ‘I have become acquainted,’ says a released
convict, ‘with more of what is bad and evil, together with the schemes
and dodges of professional thieves and swindlers, during the four years
I served the Queen for nothing, than I should have done in fifty years
outside the prison walls.’ ‘The association rooms at Dartmoor are as bad
as it is possible for anything to be … they are really class-rooms in the
college of vice, where all are alike students and professors. The present
system in most instances merely completes the man’s vicious and criminal
education, instead of in the slightest degree reforming him.’[56] It has
been attempted in various ways to obviate this difficulty, by diminishing
opportunities of companionship; but the real demoralisation of prison
life is probably due less to the actual contact of bad men with one
another than to the deadened sense of criminality which they derive
from the feeling of numbers, just as from the same cause the danger of
drowning is forgotten on the ice. Prisoners in gangs lose all shame of
crime, just as men in armies forget their native horror of murder.

In the second place, a large proportion of the habitual criminal class
is formed of weak-minded or imbecile persons, notorious for the repeated
commission of petty thefts, crimes of violence and passion, and confessed
to be ‘not amenable to the ordinary influences of self-interest or
fear of punishment.’[57] It is now proposed to separate this class of
prisoners from others; but is punishment operative on them at all? Is not
their proper place an asylum?

In the third place, there is the discharge from prison; and truly, if the
prevention of crime be a main object of society, it is just when a man
is released from prison that, from a social point of view, there would
seem most reason to send him there. For even if, whilst in prison, he has
learned no dishonest means of livelihood, how shall he, when out of it,
set about obtaining an honest one? If temptation was too strong for him
when all doors were open to him, is it likely to be less strong when most
are closed? Will it not be something like a miracle, if, with two pounds
paid to him on his discharge and his railway fare paid home, he eat for
any considerable time the bread of honesty, and sleep the sleep of the
just?

That these causes do to a great extent defeat the preventive effect of
our penal laws, is proved by the tale of our criminal statistics, which
reveal the fact that most of our crime is committed by those who have
once been punished, and that of general crime about 77 per cent. is
committed with impunity. But if so large a proportion of crimes pass
unpunished altogether, it is evident that society depends much less for
its general security upon its punishments than is commonly supposed.
Might it not, therefore, still further relax such punishments, which
are really a severe tax on the great majority of honest people for the
repression of the very small proportion who constitute the dishonest part
of the community?[58]

For if punishment is weak to prevent crime, it is strong to produce it,
and it is scarcely open to doubt that its productive force is far greater
than its preventive. Our terms of imprisonment compel more persons to
enter a career of crime than they prevent from pursuing one, that being
often the only resource left for those who depend on a criminal’s labour.
Whether in prison or the workhouse, such dependents become a charge
to society; nor does it seem reasonable, that if one man under sore
temptation steals a loaf, a hundred other men who do no such thing must
contribute to keep, not only the prisoner himself, but his family too, in
their daily bread for so long a time as it pleases the law to detain him
from earning his and their necessary subsistence.

Since, therefore, there is more to fear from a punished than from an
unpunished criminal, there is the less reason to regret the general
impunity of crime. There is indeed a large class of crimes for the
prevention of which more would be done, by leaving them to their natural
consequences, and to the strong power against them which the general
interests and moral feelings of mankind will always enforce, than by
actual punishment. It is particularly crimes of dishonesty which are
best punished by the mere fact of their discovery. By the Norwegian law
if an offender holds any official place he is punished, not by fine
or imprisonment, but by the loss of his office and all the privileges
connected with it.[59] And if we imagine a country without any legal
penalty at all for theft or dishonesty, thieves and their tribe would
soon find their proper punishment, by that process of social shifting,
which would drive them to the most deleterious or dangerous occupations
of life even more effectually than it so drives them at present. The less
dependence is placed on the penal sanctions of crime, the stronger do the
moral restraints from it become.

It is against crimes affecting the person that punishments are most
desirable and their vindictive character most justly displayed. Personal
violence calls for personal detention or personal chastisement; and the
principle of analogy in punishment is most appropriate in the case of a
man who maltreats his wife or abuses his strength against any weakness
greater than his own. Punishment in such cases is a demand of natural
justice, whether anyone is affected by the example or not, and whether
or not the man himself is improved by it. Not only is it the best means
of enforcing that personal security which is one of the main functions
of the State, but it is an expression of that sense of moral reprobation
which is so necessary to the good order of society.

Repression by the law seems likewise the only means of preventing that
large class of actions which affect the general character and tone of
a country, whilst they injuriously affect no individual in particular.
The protection of creatures too feeble to protect themselves justifies,
under this head, the legal punishment of cruelty to animals. It is idle
to say that the law can do nothing against the average moral sense of
the community, for the law is often at first the only possible lever of
our moral ideas. Were it not for the law we should still bait bulls and
bears, and find amusement in cock-throwing; and till the law includes
hares and pigeons within the pale of protection drawn so tenderly round
bulls and bears, no moral sense is likely to arise against the morbid
pleasures of coursing and pigeon-shooting.

That the punishments of long custody by which we now defend our lives
and properties are out of all proportion to the real needs of social
existence is indicated by such a fact as that no increase of crime used
to attend the periodical release of prisoners which was for long, if
it is not still, customary in Russia at the beginning of each reign.
Neither in India, when on the Queen’s assumption of the title of Empress,
a pardon was granted to about one-tenth of the prison population, did
any increase of crime ensue, as, according to all criminal reasoning,
it should have done, if the safety of society depends on the custody
of the criminal class.[60] In Sweden a low rate of crime seems to be a
direct consequence of a low scale of punishment. Of those condemned to
_travaux forcés_, which may vary from a period of two months to a period
for life, 64 per cent. are condemned for one year, and only 3 per cent.
are condemned for seven years;[61] whilst sentences to the latter period
in England form between 50 and 60 per cent. of the sentences to penal
servitude.

But if the custody of the criminal class has been overrated as a
preventive of crime, or regarded as the sole preventive instead of one
amongst many, it does not follow that crime on that account must be left
to itself. It only follows that we should trust to punishment less and to
other agencies more in our war with crime, and that we should seek to
check the latter at its source, not in its full stream, by attending to
the improvement of the general conditions of life. It is quite certain,
for instance, that the spread of education, of which Beccaria wrote in
terms of such despair, means the diminution of crime; and as the majority
of crimes are committed between the ages of twenty and forty, it may be
predicted that from the present year onwards the great Act of 1870 will
bear increasing fruit in lowering our criminal statistics. More too may
be hoped for from the electric light than from any multiplication of
prisons.

There are a few obvious remedies by which the inducements to crime might
be easily diminished. In 1808 Sir Samuel Romilly brought in a bill, to
provide persons tried and acquitted of felony with compensation, at the
discretion of the judge, for the loss they incurred by their detention
and trial. This was objected to, on the ground that the payment of such
compensation out of the county rates would discourage prosecutions; and
the only justice done to men falsely accused from that day to this is the
authorisation given to goal-governors in 1878 to provide prisoners, who
have been brought from another county for trial at the assizes and have
been acquitted, with means of returning to their own homes. Something
more than this is required to save a man so situated from falling into
real crime.

One thing that might be done, which would also serve at the same time to
keep a prisoner’s family from want, the main source of crime, would be
the formation of a Prisoners’ Fund, for his and their benefit. For this
there is a precedent in a quite recent Act. For the Act, which abolished
the forfeiture of a felon’s property, enabled the Crown to appoint an
administrator of it, for the benefit of the persons injured by the crime
and the felon’s family, the property itself and its income reverting
ultimately to the convict or to his representatives. There could,
however, be no objection in justice to the forfeiture of a proportionate
part of every felon’s property, such forfeiture to be dedicated to the
formation of a fund, out of which assistance should be given, both to
the families of prisoners during their custody and to the prisoners
themselves on their discharge.[62] Such a fund might be still further
increased by the substitution of a lien on a man’s wages or income for
many minor offences now punished, but not prevented, by imprisonment.

By the present English law a person convicted of more offences than one
may be sentenced for each offence separately, the punishment of each one
in succession taking effect on the expiration of the other. By this law
(which the Criminal Code Commissioners propose to alter) imprisonment
may be spread over the whole of a lifetime. On this point the Chinese
law again offers a model, for it enacts that when two or more offences
are proved against a man, they shall all be estimated together, and
the punishment of all the lesser offences be included in that of the
principal charge, not in addition to it So also if the offences are
charged at different times, and the punishment of one has been already
discharged, there is no further punishment for the other subsequent
charges, unless they be charges of greater criminality, in which case
only the difference between the punishments can be legally incurred.[63]
But this of course presupposes a definite scale of crimes and punishments.

Such are some of the problems connected with penology, which best
illustrate the imperfection of its hitherto attained results. Only one
thing as yet seems to stand out from the mist, which is, that closely
associated as crime and punishment are both in thought and speech, they
are but little associated in reality. The amount of crime in a country
appears to be a given quantity, dependent on quite other causes than
the penal laws directed to its repression. The efficiency of the latter
seems proportioned to their mildness, not to their severity; such
severity being always spoiled by an inevitable moderation in practice.
The conclusion, therefore, would seem to be, that a short simple code,
with every punishment attached to every offence, with every motive for
aggravation of punishment stated, and on so moderate a scale that no
discretion for its mitigation should be necessary, would be the means
best calculated to give to penal laws their utmost value as preventives
of crime, though experience proves that as such preventives their place
is a purely secondary one in a really good system of legislation.




FOOTNOTES

[1] By a Cabinet Order of June 3, 1740. See Carlyle’s _Frederick the
Great_, iii. 7.

[2] Pike, _History of Crime in England_, ii. 283, 346.

[3] Beccaria was born in 1738, and his book appeared in 1764. Therefore
he was only 26. The 28 must refer to the time he wrote the letter.

[4] _Lettre 80._

[5] _I Piaceri della Immaginazione_, in his collected works by Villari,
p. 546.

[6] Villari, _Opere di Beccaria_, 547.

[7] It is published in the Haarlem edition of the _Dei Delitti_, 1766.

[8] The letter is in Diderot’s _Œuvres_, ix. 451-66.

[9] See the two volumes of their _Lettere_ published at Milan by Dr. C.
Casati, 1880.

[10] _Lettere_, ii. 221: ‘Il suo libro d’oro sicuro è chiuso.’

[11] _Lettere_, ii. 150.

[12] Pietro had sent some of his manuscripts to Morellet, perhaps in
the hope that the latter would offer to translate them. Anyhow Beccaria
brought back no compliments to Pietro from Paris, and the key to Pietro’s
feelings lies in the words he wrote to his brother the day after
Beccaria’s return: ‘Non mi ha detto una sillaba che mostri che alcuno
sappia in Parigi, che io sono al mondo.’

[13] _Lettere_, i. 391; ii. 70, 127, 151, 211, 295. It is satisfactory
for this point to be settled, for even so lately as 1862, Sig. Cantù, in
his work on Beccaria, attributes the _Risposta_ to him, saying that all
the intrinsic proofs are in favour of its being his work. P. 58.

[14] _Ibid._ ii. 159.

[15] _Lettere_, ii. 225.

[16] Morellet, _Mémoires_, i. 167: ‘Revenu à Milan il a fait peu de
chose, et sa fin n’a pas répondu à son début, phénomène commun parmi les
gens de lettres d’Italie, qui ont un premier feu bien vif, mais qui, à 25
et 30 ans, se désabusent comme Salomon et reconnaissent que la science
est vanité, sans avoir attendu d’être aussi savant que lui.’

[17] Cantù, Beccaria, 42.

[18] In a book called _Cautio Criminalis_, published in 1718.

[19] Jardine’s _Reading on Torture_.

[20] Tooke’s _Catharine II._, 441-8. Rambaud’s _Russie_, 476. ‘Dans
l’instruction pour la confection du nouveau Code, Catharine II., suivant
sa propre expression, avait _pillé_ les philosophes d’Occident, mais
surtout Montesquieu et Beccaria.’

[21] Morellet, _Mémoires_, i. 165.

[22] _General C. Lee’s Memoirs._

[23] This fact rests on the authority of a gentleman of Pisa, who told
it to Dr. Rush, the so-called ‘American Æsculapius,’ who wrote against
capital punishment towards the end of the last century.

[24] By Gustavus III. It had, however, been discontinued long before, as
Beccaria speaks of it as non-existent when he wrote.

[25] Turnbull’s _Visit to Philadelphia Prison_, 1797.

[26] _Times_, March 1, 1880.

[27] For most of the above facts the writer is indebted to the papers
published by the Howard Association, kindly sent to him by the Secretary,
Mr. Tallack.

[28] Diodorus Siculus, i. 65: ἀντὶ γὰρ τοῦ θανάτου τοὺς καταδικασθέντας
ἠνάγκαζε λειτουργεῖν ταῖς πόλεσι δεδεμένους.

[29] Gibbon, c. 48: ‘During his government of twenty-five years the
penalty of death was abolished in the Roman Empire.’ A.D. 1118-1143.

[30] Beccaria doubtless got the expression from Helvetius, who used it in
his _L’Esprit_, i. 228, 291.

[31] _Vicar of Wakefield_, c. 27; and _Citizen of the World_, letter 79.
Johnson was more outspoken in the _Rambler_, No. 114 (1751), in which he
advocated the restriction of capital punishment to cases of murder.

[32] Lord Kames’ _Historical Law Tracts_. _Criminal Law._ 1776.

[33] _Enquiry into the Late Increase of Robbers_ (1751).

[34] Meredith’s speech of May 13, 1777, in _Parl. Deb._, xix. 239.

[35] Lecky’s _England_, i. 506.

[36] Speech, May 11, 1810.

[37] Romilly’s _Memoirs_, ii. 322.

[38] Hansard, and Campbell’s _Chief Justices_, iii. 233. The arguments
are almost Paley’s word for word.

[39] Stephen’s _English Criminal Law_, 156, 178.

[40] Sir G. Staunton’s _Penal Code of China_, 347, 416.

[41] See several instances in Baring Gould’s _Curiosities of Olden
Times_, in the chapter on Queer Culprits.

[42] So Seneca, _De Ira._, i. 16: ‘Nemo prudens punit quia peccatum
est, sed ne peccetur. Revocari enim præterita non possunt, futura
prohibentur.’ Compare _ibid._, ii. 31, and Plato, _Laws_, xi. 934 A.

[43] The same is the philosophy of the nursery-rhyme book:—

      ‘That’s Jack. Lay a stick on his back.
      What’s he done? I cannot say.
    We’ll find out to-morrow, and beat him to-day.’

So said also a more serious authority, Periander, tyrant of Corinth,
sometimes counted among the Seven Wise Men of Greece: μὴ μόνον τοὺς
ἀμαρτάνοντας άλλὰ καὶ τοὺς μέλλοντας κόλαζε. ‘Punish not only those who
have done wrong, but those who are going to.’

[44] _Judicial Statistics_, 1878, xi.

[45] White’s _Three Years in Constantinople_, ii. 331.

[46] Pierson, _Aus Russland’s Vergangenheit_, 31, 32.

[47] See Sir G. Staunton’s _Penal Code of China_, lxxi. 278-9, 285, 345,
367, 381, 449, for tables apportioning punishment to different crimes
according to an exact mathematical scale. There is no reason to suppose
that this scale was never acted upon, even if it is not observed now,
about which there is no good evidence.

[48] Farinaccius: ‘Potest pro tribus furtis, quamvis minimis, pœna mortis
imponi.’ The philosophy of this was, that to do anything twice was the
same as doing it frequently: ‘Quod bis fit, frequenter fieri dicitur.’

[49] The French have two words, _récidive_ and _récidiver_, to signify a
relapse into crime, the word being applied as a metaphor from medicine,
where it means the recurrence of a disease. In English we might adopt the
word _reciduous_ to express renewed acts of crime after punishment.

[50] The figures for May 1878 are: Men, 8,983; of these only 2,064 had
had no previous conviction of any kind, 4,672 had had sentences short of
penal servitude, and 2,247 penal servitude sentences. Of the 1,226 women,
124 had never been convicted before, 635 had had sentences short of penal
servitude, 567 penal servitude sentences.—(_P.S. Report_, iii. 1170. See
also ii. 206, 296, 364.)

[51] _Penal Servitude Acts Commission_, 1879, vol. iii. 1195-6.

[52] _Judicial Statistics_, 1878, xvi. 45.

[53] The same seems to be also true of France. ‘Quoi de plus important
que ce fait, qu’en moyenne annuelle 30,000 crimes ou délits restent
impunis parce que les auteurs en sont inconnus, et 10,000 environ parce
que les charges portées contre les accusés ou prévenus ont été jugées
insuffisantes.’—LEGOYT, _La France et l’Étranger_, i. 406.

[54] Hill, _Crime_, 28.

[55] _Memorials of Millbank_, ii. 274-5.

[56] The author of _Five Years’ Penal Servitude_. With this testimony
agrees thoroughly that of the Chaplain of Parkhurst Prison (_P.S. Rep._
iii. 707-8), that of the Governor of Portland Prison (ii. 164-5), and
that of the Governor of Spike Island (iii. 814-5).

[57] _Penal Servitude Report_, i. 43.

[58] If we include offences proceeded against summarily with the
indictable offences reported, about 2 per cent. of the population may be
counted as dishonest.

[59] _Strafgesetzbuch_, c. vi. 33.

[60] Wheeler, _Imperial Assemblage at Delhi_, 1877, 124, 127.

[61] _Congrès pénitentiaire international._ Tableau xii.

[62] There is a precedent for such a law in the legislation of Leopold,
Grand Duke of Tuscany: ‘Les malheureux injustement emprisonnés et
reconnus innocents devaient être indemnisés au moyen d’un fonds formé par
les amendes, mésure équitable et profondément humaine.’—LOISELEUR, _Hist.
des Peines_, 336.

[63] Staunton’s _Penal Code of China_, 29.




DEI DELITTI E DELLE PENE.

BY THE

MARQUIS CESARE BECCARIA.

_TRANSLATED._

    ‘In rebus quibuscumque difficilioribus non expectandum ut quis
    simul et serat et metat, sed præparatione opus est, ut per
    gradus maturescant.’—BACON.




_TO THE READER._


Some remnants of the laws of an ancient conquering people, which a
prince who reigned in Constantinople some 1,200 years ago caused to
be compiled, mixed up afterwards with Lombard rites and packed in the
miscellaneous volumes of private and obscure commentators—these are what
form that set of traditional opinions which from a great part of Europe
receive nevertheless the name of laws; and to this day it is a fact,
as disastrous as it is common, that some opinion of Carpzovius, some
old custom pointed out by Clarus, or some form of torture suggested in
terms of complacent ferocity by Farinaccius, constitute the laws, so
carelessly followed by those, who in all trembling ought to exercise
their government over the lives and fortunes of men. These laws, the
dregs of the most barbarous ages, are examined in this book in so far as
regards criminal jurisprudence, and I have dared to expose their faults
to the directors of the public happiness in a style which may keep at a
distance the unenlightened and intolerant multitude. The spirit of frank
inquiry after truth, of freedom from commonplace opinions, in which this
book is written, is a result of the mild and enlightened Government under
which the Author lives. The great monarchs, the benefactors of humanity,
who are now our rulers, love the truths expounded, with force but without
fanaticism, by the obscure philosopher, who is only roused to indignation
by the excesses of tyranny, but is restrained by reason; and existing
abuses, for whosoever well studies all the circumstances, are the satire
and reproach of past ages, and by no means of the present age or of its
lawgivers.

Whoever, therefore, shall wish to honour me with his criticisms, I
would have begin with a thorough comprehension of the purpose of my
work—a purpose which, so far from diminishing legitimate authority,
will serve to increase it, if opinion can effect more over men’s minds
than force, and if the mildness and humanity of the government shall
justify it in the eyes of all men. The ill-conceived criticisms that have
been published against this book are founded on confused notions, and
compel me to interrupt for a moment the arguments I was addressing to my
enlightened readers, in order to close once for all every door against
the misapprehensions of timid bigotry or against the calumnies of malice
and envy.

There are three sources of the moral and political principles which
govern mankind, namely, revelation, natural law, and social conventions.
With regard to their principal object there is no comparison between
the first and the other two, but they all resemble one another in
this, that they all three conduce to the happiness of this present
mortal life. To consider the different relations of social conventions
is not to exclude those of revelation and natural law; rather it is
the thousandfold changes which revelation and natural law, divine and
immutable though they be, have undergone in the depraved mind of man, by
his own fault, owing to false religions and arbitrary notions of virtue
and vice, that make it appear necessary to examine, apart from all other
considerations, the result of purely human conventions, expressed or
implied, for the public need and welfare: this being an idea in which
every sect and every moral system must necessarily agree; and it will
always be a laudable endeavour, which seeks to constrain the headstrong
and unbelieving to conform to the principles that induce men to live
together in society. There are, then, three distinct kinds of virtue and
vice—the religious, the natural, and the political. These three kinds
ought never to conflict, although all the consequences and duties that
flow from any one of them do not necessarily flow from the others. The
natural law does not require all that revelation requires, nor does the
purely social law require all that natural law requires; but it is most
important to distinguish the consequences of the conventional law—that
is, of the express or tacit agreements among men—from the consequences
of the natural law or of revelation, because therein lies the limit of
that power, which can rightly be exercised between man and man without
a special mandate from the Supreme Being. Consequently the idea of
political virtue may, without any slur upon it, be said to be variable;
that of natural virtue would be always clear and manifest, were it not
obscured by the stupidity or the passions of men; whilst the idea of
religious virtue remains ever one and the same, because revealed directly
from God and by Him preserved.

It would, therefore, be a mistake to ascribe to one, who only discusses
social conventions and their consequences, principles contrary either to
natural law or to revelation, for the reason that he does not discuss
them. It would be a mistake, when he speaks of a state of war as anterior
to a state of society, to understand it in the sense of Hobbes, as
meaning that no obligation nor duty is prior to the existence of society,
instead of understanding it as a fact due to the corruption of human
nature and the want of any expressed sanction. It would be a mistake
to impute it as a fault to a writer who is considering the results of
the social compact that he does not admit them as pre-existent to the
formation of the compact itself.

Divine justice and natural justice are in their essence immutable and
constant, because the relation between similar things is always the
same; but human or political justice, being nothing more than a relation
between a given action and a given state of society, may vary according
as such action becomes necessary or useful to society; nor is such
justice easily discernible, save by one who analyses the complex and very
changeable relations of civil combinations. When once these principles,
essentially distinct, become confused, there is no more hope of sound
reasoning about public matters. It appertains to the theologian to fix
the boundaries between the just and the unjust, in so far as regards the
intrinsic goodness or wickedness of an act; to fix the relations between
the politically just and unjust appertains to the publicist; nor can the
one object cause any detriment to the other, when it is obvious how the
virtue that is purely political ought to give place to that immutable
virtue which emanates from God.

Whoever, then, I repeat, will honour me with his criticisms, let him not
begin by supposing me to advocate principles destructive of virtue or
religion, seeing that I have shown that such are not my principles; and
instead of his proving me to be an infidel or a rebel, let him contrive
to find me a bad reasoner or a shortsighted politician; but let him not
tremble at every proposition on behalf of the interests of humanity; let
him convince me either of the inutility or of the possible political
mischief of my principles; let him prove to me the advantage of received
practices. I have given a public testimony of my religion and of my
submission to my sovereign in my reply to the Notes and Observations; to
reply to other writings of a similar nature would be superfluous; but
whoever will write with that grace which becomes honest men, and with
that knowledge which shall relieve me from the proof of first principles,
of what character soever, he shall find in me not so much a man who is
eager to reply as a peaceable lover of the truth.




