CHAPTER XXIV.

THE MEASURE OF PUNISHMENTS.


We have seen that the true measure of crimes is the injury done to
society. This is one of those palpable truths which, however little
dependent on quadrants or telescopes for their discovery, and fully
within the reach of any ordinary intelligence, are yet, by a marvellous
combination of circumstances, only recognised clearly and firmly by
some few thinkers, belonging to every nationality and to every age. But
Asiatic ideas, and passions clothed with authority and power, have,
generally by imperceptible movements, sometimes by violent assaults on
the timid credulity of mankind, dissipated those simple notions, which
perhaps formed the first philosophy of primitive communities, and to
which the enlightenment of this age seems likely to reconduct us, but
to do so with that greater sureness, which can be gained from an exact
investigation into things, from a thousand unhappy experiences, and from
the very obstacles that militate against it.

They who have thought that the criminal’s intention was the true measure
of crimes were in the wrong. For the intention depends on the actual
impression of things upon a man, and on his precedent mental disposition,
things which vary in all men and in each man, according to the very
rapid succession of his ideas, his passions, and his circumstances. It
would, therefore, be necessary to form not only a particular code for
each citizen, but a fresh law for every crime. Sometimes with the best
intentions men do the greatest evil to society; and sometimes with the
very worst they do it the greatest good.

Others again measure crimes rather by the rank of the person injured
than by their importance in regard to the public weal. Were this the
true measure of crimes, any act of irreverence towards the Supreme Being
should be punished more severely than the assassination of a monarch,
whereas the superiority of His nature affords an infinite compensation
for the difference of the offence.

Lastly, some have thought that the gravity of an act’s sinfulness should
be an element in the measure of crimes. But an impartial observer of the
true relations between man and man, and between man and God, will easily
perceive the fallacy of this opinion. For the former relationship is one
of equality; necessity alone, from the clash of passions and opposing
interests, having given rise to the idea of the _public utility_, the
basis of human justice. But the other relationship is one of dependence
on a perfect Being and Creator, who has reserved to Himself alone the
right of being at the same time legislator and judge, and can alone
unite the two functions without bad effects. If He has decreed eternal
punishments to those who disobey His omnipotence, what insect shall
dare to take the place of Divine justice, or shall wish to avenge that
Being, who is all-sufficient to Himself, who can receive from things no
impression of pleasure nor of pain, and who alone of all beings acts
without reaction? The degree of sinfulness in an action depends on the
unsearchable wickedness of the heart, which cannot be known by finite
beings without a revelation. How, then, found thereon a standard for the
punishment of crimes? In such a case men might punish when God pardons,
and pardon when God punishes. If men can act contrary to the Almighty by
offending Him, they may also do so in the punishments they inflict.




CHAPTER XXV.

THE DIVISION OF PUNISHMENTS.


Some crimes tend directly to the destruction of society or to the
sovereign who represents it; others affect individual citizens, by
imperilling their life, their property, or their honour; whilst others,
again, are actions contrary to the positive or negative obligations which
bind every individual to the public weal.

Any action that is not included between the two above-indicated extremes
can only be called a _crime_ or punished as such by those who find their
interest in so calling it. The uncertainty of these limits has produced
in different nations a system of ethics contrary to the system of laws,
has produced many actual systems of laws at total variance with one
another, and a quantity of laws which expose even the wisest man to the
severest penalties. Consequently the words _virtue_ and _vice_ have
become of vague and variable meaning, and from the uncertainty thus
surrounding individual existence, listlessness and a fatal apathy have
spread over political communities.

The opinion that each citizen should have liberty to do whatsoever is
not contrary to the laws, without fear of any other inconvenience than
such as may arise from the action itself—this is the political dogma
that should be believed by the people and promulgated by the chief
magistrates, a dogma as sacred as that of the incorrupt guardianship
of the laws, without which there can be no legitimate society; a just
compensation to mankind for their sacrifice of that entire liberty of
action which belongs to every sensitive being, and is only limited by the
extent of its force. This it is that forms liberal and vigorous souls,
and enlightened minds; that makes men virtuous with that virtue which can
resist fear, and not with that flexible kind of prudence which is only
worthy of a man who can put up with a precarious and uncertain existence.

Whosoever will read with a philosophical eye the codes and annals of
different nations will find almost always that the names of _virtue_ and
_vice_, of _good citizen_ and _criminal_, are changed in the course of
ages, not in accordance with the changes that occur in the circumstances
of a country, and consequently in conformity with the general interest,
but in accordance with the passions and errors that have swayed different
legislators in succession. He will observe full often, that the passions
of one age form the basis of the morality of later ones; that strong
passions, the offspring of fanaticism and enthusiasm, weakened and, so
to speak, gnawed away by time (which reduces to a level all physical and
moral phenomena) become little by little the prudence of the age, and a
useful instrument in the hand of the strong man and the clever. In this
way the vaguest notions of honour and virtue have been produced; for they
change with the changes of time, which causes names to survive things; as
also with the changes of rivers and mountains, which form frequently the
boundaries of moral no less than of physical geography.




