PART II. ANALYSIS


HIS REVERENCE FOR LAW--CONSCIENCE

Deeply set within the heart of Lincoln in this last inaugural was his
binding sense of right. This obligation was civic. The speech can be
described as a statement of what a loyal citizen under confederate law
is bound to do, when his civic loyalty is put to a final test. It is
an illustration of obedience facing rebellion. It is an exposition of
a confederate's duty, when confederates secede. It is a civilian's
announcement of the law that is singly and surely sovereign, when the
sole alternative in the Nation's life is dissolution or blood. It is a
revelation of the law that still prevails among and above a Republic
of freemen, when all law is faced by the challenge and defiance of
war.

Here is a supreme exhibit of a solid co-efficient in Lincoln's
character. It shows in a commanding way how moral duty held dominion
in his life. He had no predilection for war. That he must face its
menace, or forswear his fealty to his freeman's covenant, was a
pathetic fate. And when in that alternative he upheld his oath and
endured the war, it is past all denial that he was bowing under an
inexorable constraint. He was plainly ordering his speech and conduct
in submission to an all-commanding, all-reviewing moral regimen. His
will was listening to a moral behest. His judgment was pondering a
moral choice. His eye was forecasting a moral award. He was shaping
sovereign issues with a sovereign responsibility.

This experience and this expression of Lincoln's life unearths
foundations in his character which demand precise examination. What
was the nature of the law which held and swayed the soul of Lincoln
with such an overmastering control? Whence came its authority? Wherein
rested its validity? Is there record of its origin and authorship?
Where is it recorded? By whose hand was it transcribed? Precisely what
are its so imperative terms?

In attempting an answer, one's first impulse is to say that in this
address Lincoln was speaking as citizen and official, as subject and
chief executive of an openly organized civil government, with written
Constitution and laws; and that what he was saying in this inaugural
address contained and involved no more and no less than those
regulations expressed; that he simply adopted and echoed what they
defined and described; that the sole and only authority he assumed to
cite or urge was this well-known published law of the land; and that
in those open records one may find in fullness and precision the full
definition of the nature and validity, the authority and authorship
and origin, the very terms and abiding form of all the moral mandates
he here obeyed.

In such a statement there is abounding truth. Lincoln explicitly shows
explicit allegiance in all his political life to the dominion of our
national law. He revered our Constitution. And that the Constitution
should likewise be revered by all was all he gave his life to realize.
Grounded as that Constitution was upon our American Bill of Rights,
acknowledging as it did that all men were created equal, owning as it
openly did the sovereignty of the popular will, and allowing no other
lord, he found within its reverent and reverend affirmations the
dignity, authority, and power all-sufficient and supremely valid for
him as a fellow-citizen among his fellowmen.

But in such a statement something is left unsaid. As one listens
through this address to Lincoln's voice, he instantly and continuously
feels that he is hearing there no mere echo of quoted words. There is
in the vibrant tone a note that is original. His voice is his own. His
words are of his own selection. His phrases were fashioned by himself.
His paragraphs embody the shape and bear the stamp of his peculiar and
painstaking invention and argument. In his utterance are the
inflection and accent, the very passion of unforced and independent
conviction. He speaks as one who finds within himself, in some true
sense, the authority for what he says.

But not merely are his words valid for himself, as he shapes his
ordered speech. They are irrepressible. His convictions throb with
urgency. The constraint to which he bows is enthroned and exercised
within. The law he obeys is just as truly a law he ordains. But on
either view it is a mandate which he humbly and grandly obeys. It is
an imperative to which he yields his life.

Just here emerges another phase of his amenability to law. It operates
as an impulse to plead. It drives him to the rostrum, and makes of him
one of the foremost masters of public address our civic life and
history have produced. As Lincoln voices this address he is speaking
not merely to himself, nor for himself, nor to ease and unburden his
mind, nor yet to open and indicate his view. As he spoke those words
his eye was fixed upon a mighty multitude of his fellowmen. As he
unfolded his thought before their attentive, waiting minds, it was as
though a banner were being unfurled to symbolize and signify to a
Nation's multitudes the sovereign duty of all true patriots. In that
transaction he became undeniably prophet and lawgiver to the Nation.
The obligations that supremely bind his life he urges and attests as
binding with equal and evident urgency upon the millions upon millions
of the members in the same free and solemn political league. When his
speech is done, he would have all who hear conjoined indefeasibly with
him in loyalty to his law. Every sentence of the address bears
evidence of this design. He is aiming to bring the Nation's conscience
and will to embody and obey the identical mandates that govern him.

But his appeal is vestured in ideal deference. He deals with law. But
he does not command. Throughout his solemn exposition there is no note
or hint of dictatorship of any sort. Not a breath in any accent
suggests any undertaking to coerce. He simply strives, as a man with
his friend, to persuade.

And yet as he sets forth his speech, within the comely apparel of its
courteous words gleams the regal form of duty, imperial offspring of
inflexible law. Those words were no empty phrasings of indifferent
platitudes, disposed and pronounced to dignify a passing pageant in
the formal rounds of our civic life. They trembled with anxiety. He
spoke of nothing less than the Nation's life and death, the Nation's
duty, and the Nation's doom. The honor of the Republic was being
sternly tried, to see if it was sound or rotten in its very heart.
Lincoln was dealing with things that all men owned to be above all
price. He was striving, as for life, to achieve agreement as to duties
that should transcend all possible denial. He was trying to fasten
upon every American conscience constraints that no American conscience
could possibly escape.

Here is a cognizance of law and deference before its claims that is
curiously composite, if not complex, or even innerly contraposed. He
acknowledges the written Constitution to bind all citizens with
supreme authority; and gives his solemn oath to honor, uphold, and
execute its plain behests. He as plainly betrays the presence within
his individual breast of a moral sovereign to which he bows with just
as loyal reverence. And before every man with whom he pleads he orders
his behavior, even while he pleads, as before a throne whose moral
majesty he has no right or power to nullify. And yet within the terms
embodying such a deference he expounds the genesis and justifies the
conduct of a long-drawn civil conflict, in which his own official
decrees can be carried out only by the aid of the death and desolation
entailed by war. And when, despite death-dealing guns and deferential
pleas alike, vast multitudes of men, even all the captains and armies
of the South, despise his arguments and defy his arms, he continues to
urge his convictions and appeals, and to reinforce his words with war.

Can such a complex attitude be shown and seen to rest in moral
harmony? Were his conscience, and the Constitution, and his deference
before other men, and his summons of the land to arms equally and
alike compelling morally, all indeed morally akin? Beneath the
unsparing gaze of his conscience-searching eye, under all the awful
testing of his loyalty to oath, in all his patient and persistent
pleadings for other men's agreement, and through all the torture and
distress of war, what explanation and account can be given of any
obligation adequate to bind and justify his course? Instinct himself
with deference, and averse to any form of tyranny, how could he so
rigidly refuse to yield? Prone toward conciliation in every fiber of
his life, how did he inwardly, how could he openly vindicate his
unbending determination to uphold his faith, and carry through the
war?

This forces a final and vital inquiry touching the nature of the law
that was so regnant and compelling in Lincoln's personal life; and
that he was struggling here in this address with such consuming
desire, and by the unabetted efficiency of oral appeal, to implant in
other breasts. From Lincoln's balanced words it stands apparent that
the problems bound up in this inquiry beleaguered him on every side.
His throbbing syllables, and the tactics by which his sentences are
arranged, attest impressively that while he was facing problems too
profound for human thought to solve, he was also facing laws that he
could not escape, and dared not disobey. It was not for his kind heart
to sanction and encompass such a war, and stand so solidly against the
solid South, while yet behaving with so unfeigned respect for every
other man, except beneath compulsion of a law supremely gentle and
invincibly severe. He was plainly viewing some behest too plain to be
denied, too sacred to be disobeyed, too insistent to be withheld, and
yet too reverend and benign to suffer any champion to be rude--a
behest around whose throne hung sanctions, true to fact, waiting to
adjudge, certain to descend.

In the effort now to trace in the soul of Lincoln the birth and growth
and manly stature of this deep sense of law, some things stand plain.
In this, his consciousness of sovereign duty and supreme allegiance,
Lincoln stands entire. In this address will and thought and sentiments
combine. He is not swept against his will. What he decides he eagerly
desires. And with his will and wish his best intelligence co-operates.
If any man essay to overthrow his argument, he has the total Lincoln
to overturn. Determined, impassioned, and convinced, he confronts all
men, whether they be adversaries or friends. In his contention and
defense his being is completely unified. He is employing upon his
master task his total strength. Distressful, dark and difficult as is
his environment and time, he suffers and ponders and resolves, with
forces undivided, none reserved. With such convictions, such desires,
and such determination, the assurance in his onset was in itself
triumphant.

Upon what foundations now for such unyielding confidence and appeal
did Lincoln take his stand? For Lincoln's own deliberate reply, let
all men read again, and then again, and still again, this second
inaugural address. Those words are appareled with a beautiful charity.
But from deep within their kindliness resounds the clear, firm voice
of heaven-ordered, all-prevailing law--a law that comprehends beneath
its strong and high dominion the long career of American slavery,
defining its sin, awarding its doom, and dealing justly with the
contending imprecations and the pleading intercessions that strangely
voice the deep confusion of embattling hosts. American slavery, its
sin and doom--in his exposition of that dark theme, Lincoln gave his
exposition of all-compelling law.

All men were created equal. The right of all men to liberty is
likewise a primitive endowment. Upon this one broad base, and upon no
other, did Lincoln ever set up any claim to voice for himself, or for
his fellowman, a civic obligation. To that creative decree can be
traced all the civic appeals that Lincoln ever made. In fixing there
the ground of every plea, he had indomitable assurance of faith that
he was defining and declaring for every man an irreducible and
ineffaceable moral law. All men were created equal. All men were
divinely entitled to be free. That fiat of God Americans had tried and
dared to invalidate. Its authority it was now the Almighty's purpose,
by the obedient hand of Lincoln, to reinaugurate. Its simple terms,
that had forever been indelible, were now to be made universally
legible, and everywhere visible, by the obedient consent of all his
fellowmen.

In all of this the chiefest thing to note is that this same
all-commanding moral law is born within. Written precepts and
published constitutions are but transcriptions. They are not original.
They are only copies. Not at the tip of a moving pen, but in our
forefathers' reverent and independent hearts, did our noble
Constitution come to birth. And in the time of Lincoln it was in
Lincoln's heart that this venerable law was born again. In the heart
of Washington, in the heart of Lincoln, in the heart of every man, as
fashioned and over-shadowed evermore by God, all moral regimen has its
stately origin.

To this grave oracle, deep within Lincoln's Godlike soul, did Lincoln
fashion utterance. To this same reverend oracle, deep-lodged within
the Godlike soul of every listener, Lincoln made appeal. Here is all
the urgency of all his argument. Here is the secret of all his
confidence. Herein alone shines all his moral majesty.

Something such was Lincoln's exposition to himself, and to his time,
of the majesty and mandatory force of civic law. Its authority rests
in God. Its validity rests as well in man. It has been written down
most nobly in our Constitution and Bill of Rights. Its terms spell
freedom and equality for all. In the light of our common human
sentiments, kindling within us from heavenly fires, its printed copies
may be easily revised. And while its concrete regulations are far too
manifold for any general document to possibly contain, its dictates
are all as concrete and corresponsive to our human civic life as is
the heaven-born and reverent human friendliness with which the life of
Lincoln was continually graced.

Deferring then to future pages all specific analysis and appraisal of
the pregnant interior wealth of Lincoln's sense of moral obligation,
two momentous affirmations touching Lincoln's reverence for law lie
already right at hand. The law he reverenced held high and wide
dominion. It shaped and swayed and judged at once and alike both his
own and his Nation's destiny.

And its terms were plain. It was no timid, dusky lamp, held in
trembling hand, throwing uncertain rays, and flickering towards
extinction. The law that shines in this inaugural is a glowing,
radiant orb, bringing day when first it dawned, and shedding still
full light of day over all the earth.


HIS JEALOUSY FOR LIBERTY--FREE-WILL

This second inaugural address had its birth in the breast of a man
freeborn, and resolute to remain forever free. To find within this
speech this living seed, to trace and sketch its bursting growth, and
to gather up its fruit, is well worth any toil or cost. To begin with,
this speech is undeniably Lincoln's own. That in any sense it was born
of any other man's dictation, Lincoln would never admit, and no other
man would ever affirm. As its words gain voice, every listener feels
that Lincoln was their only author, and that even in their utterance,
though in the living presence of an un-numbered multitude, this
speaker was standing in a majestic solitude. That exposition of the
war, of the Union, and of slavery was of and by and for himself. What
he was uttering was original. The convictions he affirmed were his
personal faith. The decision his words so delicately veiled was his
personal resolve. The issue towards which they aimed was the outlook
of his lone heart's hope. The appeal he voiced was warmed and winged
by his own desire. The argument he so deftly inwrought was his
invention and device. The words he singled out were his selection.
The total aspect and onset and effect of the address, as it looked and
worked on the day of its delivery, and as it looks and works today,
were of his unforced and free election and intent. All the volume,
burden and design of those pregnant, urgent, far-seeing paragraphs are
the first hand product of a freeborn man, adapted and addressed to men
freeborn.

Here is for any student of ethics an imposing spectacle. For here is a
commanding demonstration that mortal man is in very deed a responsible
author of moral deeds. That this inaugural scene gives this stupendous
truth an indeniable vindication, no man may lightly undertake to
disapprove. But within that undeniable verity are involved all the
mighty revolutions of a moral universe.

This import of this speech can never be made too plain. To this end
let any reader note the fact that in that stern day, and in this plain
speech, Lincoln faced, and that under a pitiless compulsion, an
exigent alternative. When he penned, and when he spoke its freighted
words, he stood in the very brunt of war. His thoughts were tracing
battle lines. His eye was fixed on bayonets. Before him stood
far-ranging ranks of men in mutual defiance, men at variance upon
fundamental things, men in conflict over claims irreconcilable by God
or man. By no device of argument or of compromise could those
contending claims become identical, or even mutually tolerant. Men's
paths had parted. Armies had taken sides. Difference had deepened into
intolerance; intolerance had heightened into hate; and hate had flared
up into war. Secession had proclaimed that the Union must dissolve,
that confederates were foes, that one Nation must be two. And men
based their reasons for rending the land and for rallying ranks in
arms, upon opposing views of God's decree, and of the nature of men.
One side claimed that God ordained that black men should be slaves.
This claim the other side denied; and avowed instead that God in his
creation and endowment of the human race ordained that all men should
be equal and free. So appalling and so passing plain in our political
life was the alternative which this inaugural had to confront.

Equally plain upon the face of this inaugural is the fact that, in the
presence of that dread and stern alternative, Lincoln made a choice.
He picked his flag. He chose the banner of the free. The standard of
the slaveholder he spurned. Responsibly, deliberately, he selected
where to stand, fully and consciously purposing that in such selection
he was enlisting and employing all the voluntary powers of his life.
Here was conscious choice. He did select. He did reject. He could have
taken another, an oppugnant stand, as many a familiar confederate did.
Two paths were surely possible. And they did undeniably diverge. That
divergence he soberly surveyed, and traced down through all its
devious ways to their final consequence. In act and motive, in
judgment and intent, he was self-poised, self-determined, self-moved.
When, in this second inaugural scene, removed from his former
inaugural oath by four imperious years of sobering and awakening
thought, but facing still a frowning South, he swore a second time to
preserve, protect and defend the Constitution--that was a freeman's
choice. And it was Lincoln's own. Between his soul and heaven, as he
registered that resolve, no third authority intervened. As he stood
and published and defined that reiterated pledge, his soul was
sovereignly, supremely free.

And within that sovereign freedom its even-balanced deliberation
should not be overlooked. Those days that filed between those two
inaugurals had been replete with studied meditation. The mighty
problems precipitated by the war he had taken and turned and poised
and sought to estimate and solve in every possible way. He pondered
every ounce of their awful gravity. He paced the total course of their
development. He knew our history, with all its ideals and all its
errors by heart. He inspected with peculiar carefulness the drift and
trend of our national career. It is doubtful if any one ever studied
so incessantly the current of our affairs, or peered so anxiously and
with such far-sighted calculation into the hidden and distant issues
of the stupendous enterprise in which he was predestined to act so
commanding a part. So when his free decision was ushered forth and
projected among the contending determinations of his day, to play its
part, it was the ripe conclusion of a thoughtful mind, like the
well-poised verdict of a judge.

And his free choice was resolute. His will was without wavering. The
side he made his own was forced to face the musketry and forts, the
arsenals and fleets, of a would-be nation of angry, determined
men--men who would rather die than yield. The choice he made involved
the shedding of human blood. This he sadly knew. In four endless years
he had been compelled to defend his resolution with arms. And now as
he volunteered his oath a second time, his free decision involved
again the frightful corollary of war. This meant that within his
voluntary oath was a conscious determination, too vigorous and
resolute for any threat to daunt, for any form of terror to reverse.
His choice was no feeble leaning to one side. Into its formation and
into its fulfillment poured all the energy of his life. It was vastly,
radically more than impulse, or propensity, or easy, unconsidered
inclination. It was a freeman's choice, poised and edged and
energized by a freeman's will. It had firmness like the firmness of
the hills.

This choice of Lincoln was ponderous. His exercise of freedom, as
shown in this inaugural, was dealing, not with things indifferent, not
with trifles void of moral moment, nor with empty, immaterial
suppositions. When Lincoln shaped and welcomed to himself this
preference, he was handling nothing less than the affronts of human
arrogance, the greed of human avarice, the cruelty of human slavery,
and a confederate's disloyalty. That preference was his free election
to enthrone within himself, and within all other men, the stability of
a firm allegiance, the grace of human friendliness, the worthy
valuation of human souls, and the surpassing beauty of a true
humility. It was between such values that his election took its shape.
His decision dealt with things primary, enduring, and universal. It
was concerned with the elemental affections and convictions of men,
while all the time supremely respecting the decrees and judgments of
Almighty God. Upon such a level, and amid such values, did the will of
Lincoln trace out its path. It was a Godlike energy, sovereign,
soberminded, original, free.

But though this freedom of Lincoln, as it reigns through this
inaugural, was individually his own, and wrought out into precise
experience in personal singleness and independency, by no manner of
means was he standing in this scene in moral isolation. He was beset
about and wrought upon from many sides by mighty moral energies. For
one thing, a vast Republic held him fast in the bonds of loyal
citizenship. It was a Republic composed of freemen, to be sure. But
those freemen were by no means a miscellany of mutually indifferent
and disconnected units. They had formed a Union. That Union had a
definite and inviolable integrity. That corporate integrity laid an
unrenounceable obligation upon all its membership. It was the sacred
respect for the sacred honor of that political bond that proved a man
a patriot. To assert the freeman's right to cast aside those bonds
proved a man a traitor, and gendered unto bondage. Here unfolds a
veritable mesh of moral obligations--obligations of compelling
potency. It was precisely in defence and demonstration of those
enveloping claims that Lincoln advocated and prosecuted a defensive
but relentless war.

The South resented all such claims. They were resolute that national
bonds should be defied, that their authority should be annulled. And
this they urged explicitly in the very name of freedom. This defiant
protest Lincoln's opposite preference had to face. This involved his
mind in the study of a problem that is never out of date--a study that
will test any student's moral honesty to the quick. Lincoln's
championship of moral liberty had to grapple, in the counter
championship of Southern arms, a type and sort of freedom that he
forever disowned for himself, and that he could never consent to in
any other man. This drove him into the study of the nature of a human
soul and the nature of social bonds. This inquiry uncovered two
foundation rocks, laid deep by our forefathers beneath the fabric of
our republic, supports to human honor and stability which no man nor
any confederation of men can undermine and overthrow without turning
upside down the fundamental supports of harmony and honor among
civilians that are free. These two foundation rocks are the divine
design that all men should be equal and free; and the certain
corollary that governments among men derive their just powers from the
consent of the governed. The equality of freemen when they stand
apart, and their free consent, when they join in a political
league--these are the immovable pillars of character and order among
intelligent men. Upon such foundations this government has been
placed. That sure basis the South assailed. In the name of freedom
that assault must be repulsed. The national environment, the national
integrity, the national honor, the existence of the Nation, conceived
as it was in liberty, made all such liberty as the South preferred,
not a freeman's right, but a sorry simulation, a moral wrong.
Government of the people, by the people, was freedom to the core, the
core of civic righteousness. In such a government popular and
everlasting allegiance was elemental uprightness. Among freemen, the
cornerstone of civics is a plighted troth to liberty.

Thus Lincoln argued. And with him to argue thus was to obey. As thus
conceived, obedience to his civic pledge went hand in hand with
liberty. Enlistment under a government and laws framed by
fellow-freemen was to him no limitation of his personal rights.
Instead it involved and assured for every bondman a full emancipation,
and for every freeman full title forever to every unalienable right.
Such a view was indeed ideal, as Lincoln soberly knew; but for that
ideal every power of his kingly manhood was ready to struggle and
suffer and serve. To bind his hand to such a league was his free
choice. To live in loyalty to such a bond was a living pride and joy.
Such an agreement was to the end of his days unresented and
unconstrained.

But it cost him dearly. No indentured bonds-man ever wrought out sorer
toil. None ever suffered through longer, heavier, sadder days. It wore
away his life. The war was to his tender soul, as he termed it, "a
dreadful scourge." But as he interpreted its trend, its certain
winnings outvalued and outweighed its woe. It was freely and
willingly, not by any irksome and alien coercion, that he opened his
soul to all its sorrows, and poured out all his strength to direct and
hasten its consummation. He saw unerringly that it had to do with
government by free consent, with the tenure of a freeman's oath, with
the validity of a freeman's right. And by a preference that in his
freeman's breast was irrepressible, he selected with an open,
far-ranging eye to take his place in that terrific conflict in the
very brunt, that the Nation and all the world and coming ages might
see and enjoy its happy issue in a Union built and compacted
indissolubly upon the inviolable oaths and rights of men who are free.

This was Lincoln's law of liberty. It secures to men their freedom;
but it binds those freemen in a league. Their civic life is not a
solitude. It is a covenant.

But when freemen form a league, their solemn oath, as this inaugural
shows, embodies awful sanctions. From such a league and covenant,
seven confederate parts were affirming and defending their right to
secede, and that by force of arms. This forced freedom to a final
definition, and a final test. What follows when a Republic fails? What
form of civic order lies beyond, when a league of freemen is violently
dissolved? Where will freedom find sure footing, when the fundamental
laws of freemen are defied? On this stern question Lincoln fixed his
eye. And as his vision cleared and deepened, he grew to see that if
freedom among men could ever survive, a freeman's mutual covenant must
be inviolate. A freeman's compact must be kept, else on all the earth
freedom could find no resting place. If this should ever be denied,
that denial must be sternly smitten to the ground. Thus for the very
cause of freedom, and as a freeman, Lincoln was driven into war. He
was put where he had no other choice. He was forced to fight.

But in that war the havoc and disaster were mutual. Both sides
suffered terribly. The conflict dealt out torture that neither party
could evade. It was mighty ponderings on these conditions that wrung
from Lincoln's heart the heart of this inaugural, wherein he traces
with a humble, deep-searching carefulness the cause of all the war to
that prolonged infraction of the law of liberty in the lot of the
American slave; and the guilt of that enormous sin to North and South
alike; and the moral explanation of the sorrows of the war to the
judgments of Almighty God.

Herein he learned that among freemen freedom is in no sense arbitrary
and absolute. Laws lie in its very being. Their presence is
spontaneous indeed, as is every impulse of their promulgation and
rule. But they must be obeyed. If their self-framed mandates are
disobeyed, then freemen are no longer free. If freemen dare to bind
and rob their fellows and aggrandize their own advantages, then the
yoke they bind on other men, by a sanction no mortal can escape, will
be bound upon their own necks, until their false advantages are all
surrendered, and the freedom that is claimed by anyone is given
equally to every other man. To the fulfillment and preservation of
that law Lincoln freely bowed his life. This is the core of this
address. Thus Lincoln illustrates true liberty. In the crucible of war
was his vision of the worth of freedom finally refined. It was through
a costly sacrifice of peace. But it was alone and all for freedom, for
freedom and for nothing else, that his peace and ours was sacrificed.

This exposition of Lincoln's pure ideal of independent, virile manhood
has embraced, in passing, a phase of the vast environment in which he
felt his manhood framed, that calls for separate remark--the relation
of his human freedom to the rule of God. The war is traced in this
address to a threefold origin: it was projected in the resolution of
the South that slavery should be given leave to spread; it was
accepted in the decision of the North that the present bounds of
slavery should not be passed; the whole affair was overturned, and the
war was over-ruled in the purpose of Almighty God, that North and
South, as a single Nation, guilty in common for slavery as a national
sin, should make full requital for all its cruelty. In this thought of
Lincoln, the conflicting purposes of the North and the South, and his
own determination too, were being made to bow beneath the mightier
dominion of Almighty God. In the realm of human politics this is a
rare and notable confession. And that it was published beneath the
open sky, at noon, before a peopled Nation's open eye, as a thoughtful
explanation of his inaugural oath as president of a mighty government
upon the earth, must be conceded to mightily enhance its notability.
It lacks but little of rising to the rank of prophecy. But equally
notable with its publicity is its conscious, free submissiveness.
Clear to discern, he is also prompt to own the over-mastering rule of
God. His attitude in this inaugural is an attitude of explicit
subordination to a higher power. But it is clear as day that this
subordination is voluntary. There is no sign of reluctance or
unwillingness, as though he were being forced, not even though all
expectations of his own were being over-ruled in the inscrutable plans
of God. This address reveals this man in a mood and tone of complete
submission, ready for rebuke, surrendering all his ways to God. This
posture of acquiescence, in God's revolution of his plans, and
reconstruction of his hopes, is the factor to notice here, as we
examine the actual operation of Lincoln's will. Above his private
liberty, above his high official authority, above the great Republic
in which his own decisions merge, reigns the hidden hand of God. To
the power and majesty of that unseen sway he summons every dignity
and every desire of his own to render unreserved obedience.

In seeing and saying this, however, one must never omit to observe and
add that Lincoln's eye observed with solemn joy a precious moral
meaning in the divine omnipotence. Heaven's unexpected guidance and
consummation of the war were only adding clarity and emphasis to the
principle of liberty. It only drove the demonstration home, and that
with irresistible cogency, that human bondage must be avenged. And so
in fact Lincoln's solemn reverence for the divine control was a girdle
confirming the strength of the fine jealousy that guarded for himself
and for all mankind the sacredness and the majesty of the human will.
Within the deeper deeps of his own free preference he coincided and
co-operated with the will of God. His obedience to God, his allegiance
to his civic covenant, and his individual, cherished preference
coalesce ideally; while each, without any diversion or loss, preserves
its own integrity.

Thus with life-exhausting, sacrificial toil, with genuine originality,
ever exemplifying in his chastened life all the burden of his thought,
by a decisive choice between divergent paths, with the careful
deliberateness of a full-grown man, with unconquerable determination,
gravely sensible of every ponderous consequence, in unbroken and
intimate companionship with all his fellow-men, with vision sharp to
detect and uncover every simulation and counterfeit of his wish,
through solemn fellowship with redemptive sorrows, bowing without
repugnance to every sanction that free equality enjoins, and in humble
reverence for the all-commanding, all-subduing will of God, Lincoln
here unfolds the central and infolded implications in his
all-consuming jealousy to be free.


HIS KINDLINESS--LOVE

A genuine and generous goodwill to other men breathes warmly through
this second inaugural, as the glowing breath of life pervades the
bodily frame of a living child. This manifests itself, as seen in his
impassioned zeal for freedom, in a vivid consciousness of
companionship. He felt his life and destiny interlaced inseparably
with all Americans, nay with all the world of human kind. With this
widely expanded and ever expanding Republic, he felt himself in these
inaugural scenes peculiarly identified. In that great pageant he was
deeply sensible of holding the central place. His inaugural oath,
though his single, individual act, announced his conscious purpose to
be the Nation's head. In that station his person became supremely
representative. It was for him to incorporate nobly, mightily,
judicially, the national dignity, authority, and design.

Many phases of this profound coincidence of the life of Lincoln with
the Nation's life come into sight whenever his life's career is
carefully reviewed. But among all the illustrations of his
self-submergence deep within the overflowing fullness of our national
history, there is one that demonstrates his tender kindliness beyond
all possibility of refutation. This is his profound participation with
the Nation in her fate because of slavery. Around this awful issue
circles all the thought of this, as of the first address. That this
puissant co-efficient of our national history was somehow the cause of
the existing war he said that all men felt. He registered his own
opinion that all the sorrows of the war were in requital for that sin.
Into those sorrows no man entered more profoundly than did Lincoln
himself. They sobered all his joy. They solemnized him utterly. It is
true few heard his groans. In his patience he was mainly silent. None
ever heard him make complaint. All impulse to resentment was subdued.
But the nation's sorrows were on his heart. Through all those days he
was our confessor, self-sacrificed, sorrow-laden, faithful absolutely,
but uncomplaining. Upon his head an angry, unanimous South, and many
thousands in the North dealt vengeful, malicious blows, denying him
all joy, crying out against him ruthlessly. All this he bore, as
though he heard them not, and continued day and night to seek the
Nation's peace. With marvelous freedom from malice himself, with
fullness of charity for all, he taught a Nation how a Nation's sorrows
should be patiently borne. And yet through all the days, in all this
land, no man was more purely innocent of the Nation's sin of slavery
than this same man. Here is friendship. Here is neighborly compassion
written large. This is generosity, untinctured with any selfish
reservation. Amid all the sorrows and fortunes of our history no sight
is half as pathetic as this deep, free, silent companionship of
Lincoln with his Nation's griefs in the deepest period of her
affliction. And yet he almost seemed to cherish his fate. He bore it
all so quietly, and with such a steady heart and eye, that in his
seeming calm we are unconscious of his pain. He gives no hint of
faltering and drawing back. He even strove repeatedly to lure the
Nation to his side, to enter into sacrificial fellowship with the
hapless South. But to nothing of this would the people hear.

This commanding fact, the moral mutualness of the innocent Lincoln's
sorrows with the sorrows of a guilty land, is a primary factor in this
historic scene. From such a moral complication momentous questions
emerge. How can such confusion of moral issues be ever justified? Why
do guilty and innocent suffer and sorrow alike? In such a glaring
moral inequality how could Lincoln himself ever bring his candid mind
to honestly acquiesce? Why should a later generation suffer vengeance
for their father's sins? Why the black man's fate? How can moral
judgments diverge so hopelessly upon such basic moral themes? If God's
judgment is just, why are his judgments upon such inhumanity so long
delayed? How about those kindred sufferings of those earlier days that
for total generations were unavenged? Questions such as these must
have risen in Lincoln's mind as he drained his bitter cup. Such
questions are not to be evaded or suppressed. It should rather be said
that Lincoln's undeniable gentleness in enduring, as the Nation's
head, and for his country's sake, a Nation's curse for a national sin
forces just such questions into sharpest definition, and focuses them
insistently and unavoidably before every thoughtful eye. They are
shaped and fastened here solely to render aid in indicating, as they
undeniably do, the supreme refinement of Lincoln's friendliness. He
held by kindly fellowship with his fellowmen, even when that
fellowship involved his innocent life in the moral shame and pain of
their reprobation and woe. Here is an interchange of guilt and
innocence, in Lincoln's undeniable experience, undeniably resolved and
harmonized. Here is human kindliness, triumphant, transcending all
debate.

Around this exalted illustration of the strength and purity of
Lincoln's benevolence cluster many statements eager to be heard. His
kindness showed in many ways, but they were all but varying, accordant
forms of pure neighborliness. His mastery of all malice, his unfailing
charity, the kindliness of his cherished hope, his companionship with
others' sorrow, his longings for peace at home and among all men, his
pity for the bereft, his tenderness before our human wounds, his
reluctance to go to war, his championship of the oppressed, his
willingness to bear another's blame, his silence before abuse, his
mighty predilections towards universal friendliness, are all
concordant and coincident types and forms of his prevailing,
spontaneous companionship with men. Each phase deserves elaborate
description. But it is in closer keeping with the treatment here to
name some general qualities of his kindliness, qualities that are
common to all its forms.

His friendliness was immediate. When human needs appealed for comfort
and aid, it was not his way to send a deputy. He appeared himself.
Here is something nothing less than marvelous. An intimate friend of
all, he stood in conscious touch with all the Nation's citizenship. At
first thought this may seem to be in consequence and by means of his
eminence and office as the people's president. As chief executive of
the people's will, and as foremost representative citizen, he stood
for every man in that man's place; and his universal friendliness
found open avenues to every individual citizen's consciousness. Here
is truth. But this truth only partially meets this case. The
operations of his benevolence were somehow independent of space and
time. His tours while president were short and few. Back and forth
between the White House, the war office, and the soldier's home he
wore a historic path. It is almost overwhelmingly sad to realize how
almost all his movements while president were within the
sorrow-shadowed walls and the hidden solitudes of his official home.
As said before, he seemed to exist apart from men, in a pathetic
isolation. Nevertheless, it is plain to all that Lincoln's
uncalculating generosity reached, like the shining of the sun, to the
limits of the land. It is most surprising when one thinks. But when
one thinks, it is most clear that there was in Lincoln's kindliness a
Nation-wide capacity for intimacy. In the open genial presence of his
good-will all men feel they have an immediate and equal share. And
this holds true whether one is near enough to feel the warmth of his
living breath, or whether half a continent intervenes.

This fact forces into view and consciousness the pure excellence of
his love. It was in its nature deeply real. He did in verity live
close to every man. He wore no distant air. He practised no reserve.
He felt and proved himself to be the kin of all. His pictured face and
published speech were a perfect symbol, a convincing pledge to every
honest man of close and equal partnership. His ways are often said to
have been homely. But their very homeliness was all human and all
humane. And in his presence, or in the presence of any truthful
impress or echo of his life, no honest nature but feels itself
instantly at ease and quite at home. This habitude in him of
overcoming distance, and absence, and all other obstacles to his
far-ranging love, and winning entrance everywhere into the affections
of all kindly men, is a notable stamp upon the total texture of his
friendliness. He stood with men in personal partnership, immediate,
intimate, real.

And in all his intimate and immediate fellowship with men his personal
contribution was entire. In his co-partnership he had no treasure too
precious to invest. He gave his all. Imposing, almost impossible as is
the meaning of these words, all mankind do recognize, and that with
wondering reverence, that when Lincoln rose to take the presidential
oath, he held nothing back. In his service of the Union he invested
his life, his honor, his hope, even all he had. It was little else he
had to give. His lineage was of the lowliest. His education was of the
meagerest, and wholly a by-achievement. In social graces he was quite
unversed and unadorned. He was no flatterer. The fawner's dialect he
never knew. He would not boast. To beg he was ashamed. He was too
honest for any knavery. Pure integrity was his only asset. As he took
his stand at the presidential post, he stood without a single
decoration, unsupported, all alone. It was literal truth that when he
took his official oath the only bond he had to furnish was his naked
honor. But that possession was no counterfeit. Its value did not
fluctuate. It was solid gold. In his honest rating, the plighted faith
in the words of his official pledge was beyond all price. As he
discerned and understood the crisis of his day, the Nation's very
being was at mortal stake. And when in that momentous hour she
summoned him to take the presidency, she laid sovereign requisition
upon his total being. And when he obeyed the call, he invested all. No
reserve of his possession was kept in hiding for his refuge and
reimbursement, in case the Nation failed. He ventured all he had, even
all his honor. And this complete consignment by Lincoln to the
Nation's use of all his moral wealth, of all his pure and priceless
personal worth, was an act of unalloyed benignity. It was for the
Nation's welfare that he devoted himself. It was that the Union might
be preserved, and that all men might be free, that he plighted his
integrity.

This investment of Lincoln's friendliness for the well-being of all
the land, even of all the men therein, was not alone immediate,
winning direct attachment to every man; nor merely all-absorbing on
Lincoln's part, impressing into kindly service every value and every
capacity of his total life; it also enshrined a deathless hope.
Lincoln's patriotic devotedness was no venture of a day or of a
decade. Lincoln's good-will looked far ahead. He had a passion for
immortality. His total effort and aim in all his generous endeavors
and hopes, as he served in his public life, can be defined as a
sovereign aspiration that our government should be so guided and
chastened in all its life that the Union should never be dissolved. To
his kindly heart no possible event seemed more appalling than that
this hope should fail. So far as his words reveal, this central,
sovereign passion of his glowing heart was all but exclusively
patriotic. He apparently forgot himself in his wistful anxious hope
that the Nation's peace might long endure. His faith in the Union's
indestructibility may be said to spring out of his undying continual
love for his fellowman. Indeed just here seems to be the birthplace of
all his prophetic ponderings over the final issues of our civic life.
The very stature of the government which his ideal conceived and which
he thankfully saw that our Republic designed, was deemed by him to be
copied from nothing other than the divinely fashioned moral nature
which he found alike in himself and in all his fellowmen. Deep within
his friendly heart he cherished the vision of a Republic of freemen
leagued together indissolubly as mutual friends. It was to realize and
certify that hope that he dedicated his life. And when he pledged and
sealed that offering, it was with no design that the seal should ever
be broken, or the pledge be ever recalled. Here is another primary
quality of Lincoln's friendliness. It was inwrought with personal
durability. Grounded as was his civic hope in the freedom and
conscience of Godlike men, it was impossible for him to consent that
such a hope should ever encounter defeat or decay. Deep and sure
within its essential nature were the urgent promptings and the soaring
promise of immortality.

These observations upon the immediate directness, the integral
whole-heartedness, and the deathless eagerness of Lincoln's
friendliness, if thoughtfully compared together, reveal that these
distinctive phases of his outpouring good-will are in nature
identically the same, and spring from an identical source. This
essential coincidence, this mutual convergence deserves attention. It
intimates wherein the very essence and being of his neighborly
kindness consists. And in Lincoln's life this indication of the
precise whereabouts and substance of the essential and innermost
quality and being of human kindliness is certain and clear, as in
hardly any other man. His benignance in his dealings with men is of
well-nigh unparalleled openness and freedom from all admixture and
alloy. Lincoln's kindness embodies and conveys Lincoln's self. In
every favor from him he is in the gift. In the center of all the
friendliness that is characteristic of Lincoln, Lincoln himself stands
erect and entire, offering and commending in every case his
full-sized, undivided self. This is the core and this the
circumference, this is the sum and this the substance of his
good-will. It is rich with all his personal wealth, solid with all his
personal worth. In him an act of friendship was an inauguration of
personal copartnership. In his good-will was all the energy of his
life. In his benefactions he gave himself. Just so with his
compassions. With the sorrows of humanity it was his way to enter into
personal fellowship. This was the form and being of all his
generosity. His mastery over all malice when facing a foe, his
abounding charity when judging a wrong, his hearty gladness in the
presence of human joy, his cordial ways in greeting friends, his
fatherly affection for his boy, his love for his native land, his pity
in presence of the bereft, his sadness at sight of wounds, his
readiness to share evenly with all his Nation all that guilty Nation's
painful discipline--all this variety and plenitude of ample,
open-hearted tenderness towards other men was alike and always the
complete and conscious contribution of himself. In brief, in full, and
finally, Lincoln's friendliness, through all its beautiful
versatility, was a free and facile, a full and total, personal
self-devotion. This is the common content giving all its value to all
the forms of his human kindliness.


HIS PURENESS--LIFE

In the exposition just foregoing, the thought has been drawn into
allusions to Lincoln's premonitions or aspirations towards
immortality, for the Union, if not for himself. This was in the course
of an effort to find the spring-head of his kindliness. And it
culminated in the suggestion that deep within Lincoln's being there
was enshrined an assurance, however unconfessed or even half
unconscious, of personal immortality. And that from within this shrine
of living hope, common to him with every man, he drew his inspiration
and his very pattern of a national Union and a national peace that
would endure forever.

Here is something that calls for examination, for in this we touch a
radical quality of Lincoln's moral being. This eager craving after
permanence was in him an appetite that could never be fed or satisfied
by any things that perish. In itself and in its nutriment there is an
irrepealable call for something indefeasable, something utterly
superior to all fear of death, something never amenable to any form of
dissolution or decay, something spiritually pure, and essentially
kindred to the essential being of a deathless soul.

The matter may be approached to start with by saying some things
negatively. Lincoln was centrally in no sense a materialist. He was
indeed firmly sensitive to the physical majesties of this continent,
though in his day they were hardly half disclosed. He calculated with
carefulness our material capacities for expansion in power and wealth.
He foresaw our certain outward growth into a puissant Nation, the
coveted and ample resort and refuge and home of hordes of men from
other lands. In his own well-seasoned and resourceful physique he felt
and knew the worth of physical virility. He could thoughtfully compute
the glittering values, the goodly financial revenues, the days and
months and total seasons of physical idleness and delights that accrue
to human owners from the unrequited toil of human slaves. And in the
current civil war he completely understood that no less a concern than
the perpetuity of the American Union was pending upon contests largely
consisting of encounters of physical prowess, of tests of muscular
endurance and strength.

But not in calculations such as these did his thoughtful studies of
human welfare take ultimate resort, or find final rest. His conception
of the ideal state, of the ideal citizen, of the ideal life, was not
constructed or inspired from carnal elements. He noted with life-long
sadness the sordid baseness inseparably attending the fact of owning
or being a slave. He deeply saw that those battles in the Wilderness
were no mere conflicts of beasts. And never could he imagine or allow
that his personal weight, and force, and worth were ratable by
gymnastic tests. It was not upon things like these that Lincoln's
attention and hope were fixed, when his hopes and plans for our
prosperity took form. To the whole world of his material environment
he was marvelously indifferent. On every perusal of his life one
grieves at the story of his poverty, and the sad infrequency and
meagerness in his daily life of the pleasures and recreations which
are for the comfort and happiness of men in material things. But in
this he seems as though unconscious of any disappointment. For
himself as for the Nation, and for the Nation as for himself, his
satisfaction and confidence were not born and fed of things that
perish in their use. Luxury in food or attire, however toothsome or
attractive to other natures, stirred but the feeblest hankerings, if
any at all, in him. Towards sensualism of any sort, whether gluttony,
drunkenness or lust, his sound and temperate manliness did not
incline. And in his estimate of personal character his eye and respect
did not rest in outer attitudes, on printed, age-long codes of manner.
He was no slave of stately ceremonies, or artificial etiquette. Nor in
religion did he bind his tongue to creeds however hoary, nor to
rituals however august. He swore not by the oaths of any sect, however
ancient and renowned. Neither in this mountain nor in that did he
worship God.

But on the other hand, and now to speak affirmatively, Lincoln lived
no penury-stricken life. The resources within his personality were
well-nigh incalculable. Few men in all our national catalogue have
been endowed by God with so sterling and abundant interior wealth. And
of all American patriotic benefactors few indeed have left in their
single individual name and right such priceless legacies to their
native land. What is life? What is human life? Wherein, completely and
precisely wherein, is man distinguishable from the beast? For answer,
study Lincoln and see. In the full development of such a study many
massive verities will unfold. But the feature in Lincoln's manhood,
which this chapter is set apart to designate and clarify, is the
simple purity, the elemental spirituality of all his elemental traits.
His dominant sentiments, his primary convictions, his main and
all-mastering decisions were never born to die. They were instinct
with life, with life indeed, a life never failing, ever more abundant
and free.

This interior vitality, this unalloyed and undecaying purity may be
described one way as a real idealism. But in ascribing idealism to
Lincoln, it needs to be said at once that Lincoln's idealism, real and
glorious as it must surely be confessed to be, was transparently and
unvaryingly practical. In one way it may be defined as hope. A waiting
hope was a standard characteristic of Lincoln's attitude. His
sorrowful eye held fast to things as yet unrealizable. It is
impressive to see how often and how fondly he mentioned the future,
the "vast future," as he termed it, of our American career. The secret
of the beauty and of the power of some of his loftiest and most
spontaneous rhetoric is due to just this solemn eagerness towards the
coming days. As one comes to study more intently into the outlay of
his heroic strength, his struggle and toil are seen to be leashed
about his consuming wish that the Nation in its undivided might could
be unified about the speedy fulfillment of his prophetic aims. He
never forgot the mighty lesson, nor lost the living inspiration of his
own advancement from humblest station of ignorance and toiling poverty
to the presidency. That transformation he loved to humbly hold before
the attention of his fellow Americans, as a pattern of what might
anywhere occur again. He loved to linger upon the possibilities of
upward movement in the ranks of all laboring men. Large place and
honorable position were given to this arousing theme in his first
annual message to Congress. This general topic--the far-set, soaring
possibilities of human betterment--held constant and commanding
eminence in the ranging measure of his eagle-searching thought. For
the Nation, and for its every inhabitant, he was a true idealist.

But Lincoln's idealism, again be it said, was no wild indulgence of a
vagrant and untrained imagination. It was utterly sober-minded. It
took its form and found its force in the center of his sanest
thoughtfulness. The terms in which its description has just been
illustratively traced show it to be perfectly rational, and even
matter-of-fact. Lincoln's idealism was nothing else but a heedful
interpretation of the proper destiny of man. It was a reflection in
terms of carefulest thought, albeit also in the guise of ardent hope,
of the essential lineaments in the nature of man. And no human
portrait by any artist was ever truer to fact, while yet tinged with
fancy, pure and free. In all his picturing of things yet to be, but
not yet in hand, his eye was fastened with an anatomist's intentness
upon the actual human nature imperishably present in every man.
Nothing that Lincoln's idealism ever proposed ever diverged from the
bounds of the original fiat creating all men equal and free. That
undeniable initial verity, itself the keystone of our national
Constitution and Bill of Rights, supplied to Lincoln's hope its total
and only inspiration. In those ancient and elemental realities,
realities that deeply underlie and long outlast all the cults and
customs and centuries which human thought is so prone to differentiate
and divide, Lincoln detected solid foundations and ample warrant for
age-long, undissolving expectations. In every human face there are
outlines that are forever indelible. These unfailing lineaments
Lincoln had the eye to see. And what is vastly more, he had the
courage and the honesty to adopt them as the pattern of the platform,
and to voice them as the notes of the battle-peal of his
statesmanship. And this he did right wittingly, knowing assuredly that
therein his vision had caught the gleam of things eternal; that
therein he had made discovery that man, even the humblest of his
race, could claim to be, as he phrased it to a company of blacks,
"kindred to the great God who made him." This amounts to saying that
Lincoln's statesmanship may be completely and precisely defined as the
studied and deliberate exploitation, upon the field of politics, of
those forces, central and common in all mankind, that are Godlike,
immortal, spiritual.

Here we reach a definition that outlines with close precision a trait
of Lincoln's full-formed character that held a primary place in
winning for Lincoln his immortal renown. He attached himself to things
themselves immortal. His ideal hope had no admixture of clay, nor even
of gold. He made no composition or compromise with anything that dies.
His supreme desire was of a nature never to decay. It was pure with
the deathless purity of the human soul. To this pure principle,
eternal loyalty to the immortal dignity of man, he signed and sealed
his soul's allegiance with bonds that even death could never relax.
Such statements describe a primary co-efficient in Lincoln's ethical
life. Abjuring the unnumbered allurements of the material world,
allurements whose fascinations unfailingly fade, and reposing his
confidence wholly in treasures that time and use only brighten and
refine, Lincoln reveals in the realm of ethics the singular excellence
of an ideal that can kindle in an immortal man an immortal hope.
Purging every sort of baseness out of the central life, and enthroning
an all-refining pureness in the sovereign desires and visions and
designs, he has inaugurated in the field of civics an idealism that
will honor every man, fit actual life, and endure forever. Personal
pureness, this pervades the life of Lincoln as crystalline beauty
pervades a block of marble.

This refining trait in Lincoln, this inner hunger for his living
soul's true nutriment, this thirst for the pure, perennial springs,
finds signal illustration in the closing sentence of this last
inaugural, where he pleads with all his fellow-citizens to so conduct
all civic interests as to secure among ourselves and with all Nations
a "lasting peace." That craving after permanence in civic harmony
betokens an impulse towards immortality; and rests down, as the entire
inaugural explains, upon that only basis of enduring civic quietude,
an honest and universal recognition and respect for those indelible
and universal lineaments of personal dignity which the Creator of men
has traced upon every human soul--lineaments from which the obscuring
dross of centuries was being purged in the Providential fires of an
awful war. Just this was the meaning of the war, as Lincoln understood
its work. That earth-born sordidness which marked all slaves as common
chattels, was being burnt out of our national life, as our basest
national sin. Thenceforth, forevermore, it was Lincoln's living hope
that all mankind might peacefully agree to supremely cherish and
mutually respect those human values that human unfriendliness, and
centuries of contempt, however deeply they may obscure, can never
obliterate. Upon such enduring foundations, and upon such foundations
alone, Lincoln clearly saw, could human peace endure.

And upon this same foundation rests his first inaugural as well. In
all those months of special study, ensuing between his election in
November of 1860 and his inauguration in March in 1861, and for an
ample seven years before, Lincoln was feeling after civic perpetuity.
And when he stood before the Nation to publish his first inaugural
address, his supreme concern was fixed upon the threatened and
impending ruin of the Republic. He there faced a menacing South,
irreconcilable, and resolute for dissolution or blood. That outcrying
situation brought final issues near. Must the Union perish? Could the
Union endure? Civic dissolution or civic perpetuity--this was the
immediate, the unrelieved, the ominous alternative. In the fiery heat
of civic hate, flaming into civil war, Lincoln had to seek for civic
principles that hate could not subvert, nor the fires of war consume;
principles too strong to admit defeat, too pure to be dissolved.

Never did a statesman bend over a graver task, nor with a more honest
and patient heart, nor with a mind more divinely fashioned and
furnished to comprehend and penetrate the actual case in hand. As in a
chemist's alembic, he fused and tried our Constitution and all our
history. Into that first inaugural he incorporated the issues of his
thought. And this was its simple, sole result:--Slavery is "the only
substantial dispute." With the people is "ultimate justice." With God
is "ultimate truth." We are not "enemies." We are "friends." In this
supreme dispute let us confer and legislate as friends, and then as
friends live together in an amity that shall be perpetual. This is the
uncompounded essence of his first inaugural, as of all his political
philosophy. In universal freedom, by mutual persuasion, and in even
friendliness, let our Union forever endure. Here again is a
statesman's publication and heroic defense of a pure, immortal hope,
voiced in an appeal and upheld by arguments as spiritual and pure as
the inmost being and utmost destiny of the living souls of men.

No study of the transcendent momentum in Lincoln's life of spiritual
realities can fairly overlook his speech in Peoria, October 16, 1854.
It is, as he said at the time, "substantially" a repetition of an
address at Springfield, twelve days before. It "made Lincoln a power
in national politics." It was the commanding beginning of his
commanding career. That year, 1854, began the convulsion which made
him president, involved the war, and ended in his violent death. As
matters stood on New Year of 1854, slavery was, by act of Congress in
the Missouri Compromise of 1820, thenceforth forbidden to spread
anywhere in United States territory north of the southern boundary of
Missouri. In the early half of 1854 Senator Douglas drove through
Congress a bill, creating the territory of Nebraska, which declared
the Compromise prohibition of 1820 "inoperative and void." Thenceforth
slavery might spread anywhere. This is the "repeal" of the Missouri
Compromise.

That "repeal" brought Lincoln to his feet. And from the day of that
Peoria speech Lincoln was, to seeing eyes, a man of destiny. For, not
for that day, nor for that century, nor for this continent alone did
Lincoln frame and join that speech. Let any logical mind attempt a
logical synthesis of that address, marking well what affirmations are
supreme. Not out of conditions that vary with the latitudes, nor out
of opinions that change as knowledge improves, and not from sentiments
that bloom and fade as do the passing flowers, was that address
constructed. It handles things eternal. Its central propositions
outwear the centuries. Its conclusions are compounded from stuff that
is indestructible. And the piers upon which they rest are as steadfast
as the everlasting hills. Freedom, union, perpetuity were its only
positive themes. Let us "save the Union" was its central call; and
"so" save it as to "make and keep it forever worth the saving"--so
save it "that the succeeding generations of free, happy people, the
world over, shall rise up and call us blessed to the latest
generations." The perpetual Union of freemen--this was his one pure
hope. Of this freedom slavery was a "total violation." Such a Union
the principle of secession made forever impossible. And in the
continual presence of tyranny, and under ever impending threats of
disruption, perpetuity in peace was an impossibility. Liberty,
equality, loyalty--only upon these enduring verities could
self-government ever be built, or ever abide. Here is stability. Here
is harmony. Here are truths "self-evident." Against cruelty,
disloyalty, and pride these eternal principles are in "eternal
antagonism." And when the two collide, "shocks and throes and
convulsions must continually follow." Against human slavery, and all
that human slavery entails, humanity instinctively and universally
revolts. It is condemned by human righteousness and human sympathy
alike. "Repeal the Missouri Compromise, repeal all compromises, repeal
the Declaration of Independence, repeal all past history, you still
cannot repeal human nature."

Thus Lincoln bound together the arguments of this appeal. The
irrepealability of the human sympathies in the nature of all men, the
undeniable humanity of the black, self-government built upon the
creative fiat of freedom and equality for all--upon these enduring
propositions a Nation could be built whose resources either to
eliminate all evils, pacify all convulsions, and resolve all debates,
or to achieve a lasting progress, dignity and peace, would be
inexhaustible. Thus, at the very start, his eye pierced through the
political turmoil of his time, fixing in the central place before the
Nation's gaze those "great and durable" elements which "no statesman
can safely disregard."

Plainly notable in all this is that powerful and habitual proclivity
in Lincoln to find out and publish abroad those civic propositions and
principles that are inwrought with perpetuity. He was straining and
toiling towards a triumph that time could never reverse. Foundations
that were sure to shift, or disintegrate, or sink away, he was
resolute to overturn, and clear away. He chose and strove to toil and
speak for the immortal part in man, for ages yet to come, and for the
immediate justice of Almighty God. And so he fashioned forth a
programme that, like the programme of the Hebrew prophets,
circumvented death.


HIS CONSTANCY--TRUTH

This second inaugural contains a fine example of free and reasoned
reliability. It is in fact, in its total stature, a stately exhibit of
deliberate steadfastness. Let this short document be read, meanwhile
remembering that other inaugural document, and not forgetting all the
unspeakable strain and struggles of those four intervening years. The
man who spoke in 1861, and the man who speaks now again in 1865,
stands forth in the heart of those bewildering confusions of our
political life, a living embodiment of civic constancy. In his person
national firmness stands enshrined. In those ripe convictions, in
those cool and poised determinations, in those ardent, prophetic
desires--steadfast, consistent, and sure--are traceable the rock-like
foundations of our confederate Republic. In those inaugurals stands a
monument not liable soon to crumble away. But within that monument
insuring its durability, rests as within and upon a steadfast throne,
Lincoln's everlasting fidelity.

To win clear vision of this fine trait, let one read again this second
inaugural, and locate truly the center of gravity of its second
paragraph. There Lincoln is tracing in broad, plain strokes the origin
and on-coming of the war. In the center of his steady thought the
interest centrally at stake was the Union. On the one hand he recalls
his own address at his first inauguration, "devoted," as he says,
"altogether to saving the Union without war." On the other hand, he
recalls "insurgent agents" seeking to destroy it without war. War was
deprecated and dreaded by both parties. But one would make war rather
than let the Nation survive. And the other would accept war rather
than let the Nation perish. "And the war came." As a register of
Lincoln's capacity for free, intelligent stability, no passing glance
can in any sense exhaust or apprehend the depth and sweep and energy
of those last four words. When loyalty to the Union was the issue and
interest at stake, Lincoln would "accept war." "And the war came."

When Lincoln voiced those four words, his eye was looking back through
four dreadful, bloody years--years, whether in prospect or in
reminiscence, fit to make any human heart recoil. But as he surveys
those scenes of hate and carnage and desolation, retracing and
reckoning again the sum of their awful sorrow and cost, and rehearses
again his resolution to "accept the war," it is without a shadow or a
hint of wavering or remorse. In fact he is recalling that fateful day
of four years before with an eye to review and vindicate that fateful
resolve. At the end of those eventful and sorrow-laden years, he is as
steady as at their start. Not by the breadth of a hair have his
footing and purpose, his judgment and endeavor been made to swerve.
Then as now, now as then, his loyalty is absolute. And in that sturdy
loyalty of that lone man a seeing eye discerns nothing less than the
unbending majesty of a Nation's self-respect. It is the Nation's
sacred honor that he has in sacred charge. In him the integrity of the
Nation at large finds a champion and a living voice. In his firm-set
decision the Nation's destiny takes shape. In those short pregnant
words the proud consistency of our total national career, and his
superb reliability, become, instantly and for all time, freely, nobly,
and completely identified. This is not to say that in the teeming
history of those eventful years Lincoln's mind and will and sentiments
had stood in stolid immobility. He freely concedes that the years have
brought him lessons he had never foreseen. And his central attitude in
this second scene is a reverent inquiry into the ways of Him whose
purposes transcend all human wisdom, and require full centuries to
complete. But strong and clear within his reverent and lowly
acceptance of divine rebukes, stands unbent and unchanged his
steadfast, invincible pledge to reveal, on his own and on his Nation's
behalf, the sovereign grandeur of civic reliability.

In his first message to Congress this integral trait of his personal
and official life finds majestic and most definite explication. It is
the passage explaining to Congress, in precise and minute recital,
just how the war began. It deals with those ominous events in
Charleston harbor, centering about heroic Major Anderson, a federal
officer, and within Fort Sumter, a federal fort. That assault upon a
national garrison by Confederate guns was no haphazard event. At just
that moment, and in just that spot the national crisis became acute.
Upon that spot, and upon those events Lincoln's eye was fixed with a
physician's anxiety. There he knew he could feel the pulse of the
resentment and resolution of the South. Day and night he held his
finger upon its feverish beat. And as the fever rose, he marked with
exactest attentiveness its registration of one condition of the
Southern heart:--Was that heart so hot with civic hate that, when
every lesser issue was set aside, and the only issue under review was
the right of the Republic to stand by its officers and its flag, then
those Southern leaders would fire upon those officials in a federal
fort, and pull down that flag upon federal soil? If in a federal fort
the major in command, and his uniformed men, while making no
aggression nor voicing any threat, but acting only as peaceful
exponents of the Nation's authority, and being in exigent need of
food, were to be visited by a national transport bearing nought but
bread, upon such a ship, upon such a mission, would seceding soldiers
open fire? If they would, and if that onslaught passed without rebuke,
then that Nation's federal integrity was dissolved. Such was the
unmixed issue, and so sharply edged was its final and decisive
definition under Lincoln's hand. And on his part there was here no
accident. With foresight, and by careful design Lincoln "took pains"
to make the problem plain. With impressive and ideal carefulness he
guided the action of his own heart to its final resolution, and
predetermined the final verdict of the world.

In the last supreme alternative, when government agents stand in need
of food, and citizens who repudiate all loyalty fire upon government
transports freighted only with bread, what shall a government do? This
was the naked question that Lincoln faced, when he decided to accept
and prosecute the war. Upon this one plain question, and upon his one
convinced determination he massed and compacted his first
Congressional address. Right well he understood its point, its
gravity, and its range. And surpassing well was he fitted to be the
man to frame and demonstrate the true reply. In all the land no finer,
firmer exemplar of elemental constancy could ever have been found to
guide and cheer the Nation's course in this extremest test of
elemental self-respect. Let those words be written and read again. It
was a test of national self-respect, elemental and supreme. It was a
question that concerned, as Lincoln saw and said, "the whole family
of man." "Government of the people, by the same people"--can or
cannot such a government "maintain its own integrity against its own
domestic foes?" Can it "maintain its own integrity?" Can it master
"its own domestic foes?" Can men who assume their self-control be
trusted to maintain their self-respect? Here is a problem that is in
verity elemental and supreme. What, in very deed and in solid fact,
what is civic reliability? Where, among all the governments by men,
where can steadfastness, civic steadfastness be found? Nowhere,
Lincoln had the eyes to see; nowhere, but in the civic constancy of
men at once governing and governed. Only thus and only there, only so
and only here, in this heaven-favored land, did Lincoln see, can any
government of men by men find fundamental base and final form that
shall be consistent, stable, and real. This is government indeed. Here
is elemental, civic verity. A community held in common self-control
upon the basis of common self-respect--such a union alone has
constancy. This is the sublime and radical civic truth that Lincoln
forged out upon his steadfast heart, as he bent with mighty ponderings
over those scenes in Charleston harbor, and reviewed and expounded
their pregnant implications in his initial message to Congress in
1861.

In many ways this constancy of Lincoln rewards attentive thought. For
one thing, it was radiant with intelligence. Indeed in him the two
became identified. As thus conceived, it shows as pure and clear
consistency. His fully tried reliability was the well-poised balance
of a mind long-schooled in the art of steadiest deliberation. When
Lincoln held immutably fast, it was due to his invincible faith that
the conviction to which he clung involved abiding truth. This quality
tempered all his firmness. Just here one finds the genesis and motive
of all his skilled invention of reasoned, pleading speech. Lincoln's
prevailing power of urgent argument roots in the deep persistency of
his convinced belief. It was because of an impassioned confidence, an
assurance that was vibrant with a note of triumph, that his grasp of
any ruling purpose was so unwaveringly firm. This was his mood and
attitude in all the major contentions of his life. To the central
tenets that those contentions involved he held with all the firmness
of the rooted hills. Touching those primary principles in his
character and politics his mind and faith seem to have attained an
absolute confirmation. And from those settled positions he could never
be moved. Constancy in him was nothing more nor less than the
energetic affirmation of intellectual rectitude.

His steadfastness, thus, was a mental poise. It can be defined as
ripened judgment, a conclusion of thought, safeguarded on every side
by a discernment not easily confused, by a penetration not easy to
escape. This involved a wonderful flexibility. While steadfast unto
the grade of immutability, where honor was involved, no student of his
ways could call him obstinate. While firm and strong enough to hold
the Nation to her predestined course upon an even keel, he held her
helm with a gentle, pliant grasp. Being in every mental trait
inherently honest and deliberate, he could at once be resolute and
free.

This blend within his being of thoughtfulness and determination, of
openness and immutability, this candid, conscientious, mental poise,
this Godlike apprehension of the larger equilibrium, qualified him
peculiarly to interpret the major movements of his time, to trace in
the deep, prevailing sentiments of the human soul the chart of our
national destiny.

Here is in Lincoln something wonderful. Among the millions of his
fellowmen he counts but one. But in the range and grasp of his
thought, in the eager passion of his heart, in the controlling power
of his commanding will, he comprehends them all. Stable and heedful at
once, he could challenge unanswerably every man's esteem. His symbol
is the firm, benignant oak, the sheltering, abiding hills. Thus he
stood to help and hold, to serve and rule among his fellowmen. Thus he
wrought coherence into our great career. Thus he linked together those
mighty political events with a logic which succeeding times have
proved powerless to refute, but strong and glad to confirm. He had
marvelous capacity to divine. With him to reason was to illuminate.
Things bewilderingly obscure, within his thought and speech grew
plain. He was our prime interpreter. He explained the Nation to
itself. But in every such elucidation the Nation was made to
co-operate. His instinctive, habitual attitude toward other men was
that of a conferee. He was sensitively open to complaints and appeals.
Delegations and private supplicants always found him courteous. This
courtesy was never formal. To a degree altogether noteworthy the words
of other men found entrance into the counselings of his mind. He was
not merely accessible. He was impressible, sensitive, quick to
appreciate and honor the sentiments of another man. With the earnest
plea of balanced, honest argument, hailing from whatever source, he
was facile to correspond. His judgments and decisions were amenable to
estimates wholly novel to him. Indeed, to an almost astonishing degree
his major movements were commensurate with the progress and pace of
the national events that environed his life. In some of his mightiest
accomplishments he seemed to do little more than register the
conclusions of the national mind.

All this is to say that Lincoln's constancy was poise, not obstinacy;
a well-reflected equilibrium, not a stiff rigidity. All his steadiness
was studied. Never can it be said of Lincoln that his verdicts were
snap judgments. On the contrary, with him deliberation and delay were
so habitual and so excessively indulged, while pondering some massive,
political perplexity, that the patience of some of our greatest
statesmen repeatedly broke down, and he was charged repeatedly with
criminal, and all but wanton indifference, inertia, and neglect. But
never was sorer libel. Through it all he was only too intent. Through
it all his eye refused to sleep, while his steady and steadying mind
pursued the vexing task, until its permanent solution stood clear. And
then, with his eye steadily single to the guiding hand of God, to the
Nation's immortal weal, and to his own unsurrendered integrity, he
would publish and fulfill his studied and sturdy resolve. Upon the
basis of these internal mental conquests did all his firmness rest.
Hence his life-long evenness and freedom from fluctuation.

But this challenges still further study. Given this notable blending
in his mental habits of independent stalwartness and amenability to
others' views, what is the inmost secret and explanation of his
undeniable consistency? It lay in his human sincerity. His affinity
with his neighbor was a reality. The Nation's deepest concerns were as
deeply his own. Hence his ultimate convictions, though ripening in a
single decade, proved to be in deep and enduring agreement with the
ultimate convictions of the Nation at large, though requiring a full
century to mature. The sentiments that were essentially his own were
seen, when openly published upon his lips, to be the sentiments
essential and common to his fellowmen. His personal aspiration was a
national goal. His personal character was a national type. Truly
representative, he was at the same time as truly unique. Always
facing towards other men, he always stood erect.

This was Lincoln's constancy. It was not the stubbornness of an
arbitrary will, although his will had regal energy. It was not a
frigid intellectualism, although in mental penetration he could not be
surpassed. It was not a tide of swelling enthusiasm, although the
supreme emotion of his heart was the passion of an ideal patriotism.
His commanding constancy, potent to compose a Nation's turbulence, was
but the outer stature of his typical interior integrity. It was the
open assertion and attestation of his personal self-respect.

Thus Lincoln's convictions and verdicts were unfailingly his own. And
thus those verdicts and convictions had continental breadth. Dealing
with a Nation's destiny, he came to be clothed with a Nation's
majesty. In his own great heart, as in a Nation's crucible, he
assembled and resolved the Nation's complexities; and in his own pure
desire, as in a Nation's purified hopes, he defined and described our
national goal. Of all things narrow and peculiar, of all things
partisan and sectional, he purged his eye, until with malice toward
none, with charity for all, with reverence towards God, he could see
the total vastness of the things with which he had to deal.

Here is a loyalty worthy of the name--the plighted troth of one in
whom the Nation's noblest hopes stand forth already realized, assured,
secure. This defines and describes the force at play in this last
inaugural. In the volume of those words Lincoln's message and
Lincoln's manhood were identical. Its utterance was the voice of his
self-respect. Herein Lincoln the patriot and Lincoln the man are one.
Here was Lincoln's standard. His search for verity was a study of
himself--of himself as true kindred of God and of his fellowmen. This
is the core of Lincoln's honesty. This is the key to Lincoln's
constancy. This is the secret of Lincoln's authority. This was the
goal of Lincoln's quest for verity. This was for Lincoln the one
reality. As child of the one great God, as closest kin of every man,
he is our model champion and exemplar of the one abiding
truth--personal self-respect. That this should be held unperverted and
preserved intact was in the thought of Lincoln the primal equity, the
very substance of a man's integrity.


HIS HUMILITY--WORTH

The name of Lincoln is linked inseparably with the lot of the slave.
That the fortune of the lowly might be improved was the supreme
enterprise of his life. As conceived by him, that enterprise concerned
all men. Not for black men alone, and not alone for men in literal and
evident bonds, was this, his major interest, engaged. Quite as keenly,
nay even more, was his heart concerned for his closer kinsmen of Saxon
blood, who never felt the slave driver's lash. But even here his
prevailing inclination was a kindly solicitude for people of meager
comfort, culture and liberty. Towards men whose fortune was adverse,
and from whom more favored ones were prone to turn their face, his
heart was prone to be compassionate. His very instincts seemed
inclined to make the poor his intimates. And when he stood among the
lowly, he never showed a sign that he had entered the shadow of any
shame. Richly dowered with nobility himself, himself superior to every
fortune, incapable of subjugation by any fate, a master owned among
the mightiest, the dominant function of his life was ministration.
This was his ambition. And it was sovereign. His towering aspiration
was that the needy be relieved, that poor men might have means, that
bondmen might be free.

This was a soaring, imperial wish. But it sent him where men were most
down-trodden and overborne. It forced his name and reputation to
become identified with the gross and low condition of the rudest, most
untutored mortals of our land, the humble Afro-American slave. This
lowly fellowship he never attempted to disguise nor consented to
disclaim. He rather seemed to welcome whatever burden or reproach it
might seem to involve. Before and against the white man who held the
whip, beside and befriending the black who felt its lash, he chose to
take, and persisted to keep, his stand. Many a time was this
co-partnership flung in Lincoln's face with stinging words as a
mongrel, shameful thing--with most vigorous persistence by Douglas in
their famous debates. But it was not in Lincoln to desert and disown
the poor, nor yet to apologize, nor to retort, nor even to reply. As
champion and companion of the despised and embondaged victims of the
white man's greed and contempt, Lincoln stands by the negro, as full
of resoluteness, and as free from shame, as though defending his own
home.

Here is genuine humility, not an attitude assumed, but a virtue
inwrought. That this rare and Christian grace was planted deep in
Lincoln's heart, and pervaded the total fullness of his life, may be
argued from the very texture of his last inaugural. Upon just this
point that document deserves minute attention. From the vantage ground
of April 4, 1865, and from the point of view of slavery, that address
is a profound and most commanding interpretation of the philosophy and
phenomena of our American life. The war, God's Providence, and
slavery--they are its sovereign themes. God's Providence shaping into
national discipline the tragedy of the war; slavery "somehow" its
deepest, fateful "cause:" there are thoughts for thoughtful men, who
may wish to understand the meaning of our national life. The point to
notice here is to observe how in Lincoln's mind in 1865, the course,
and curse, and fate of slavery connect. It is nothing less than a
profound elucidation of outstanding American events. It intimates
impressively how Lincoln's mind had brooded and pondered over the lot
of the African slave. He had reckoned all the value of their
unrequited toil. The marks of their bruises and wounds were seared
upon his soul. And of all the meaning of that sore humiliation, in
terms of our national destiny and of the Divine dominion, he became
the supreme and sympathetic expositor. In his unfolding of that
meaning was infolded the master motive of his life. Under the hand of
God he was having bitter but submissive share in setting forever right
the cruel, age-long wrongs of the African slave. That such sentiments
should take such shape at such a time is signal demonstration that
they were the central sentiments of his heart. He was highly
designated to a humble task; and he knew no higher honor than to keep
close friendship with the poor, until his high commission stood
complete. And to this close affiliation of lowliest lives with the
loftiest aims and issues of his great career, he devotes well-nigh the
whole of his inaugural address as our Nation's president to expound,
therein betraying no slightest sign that he sees in that alliance the
slightest incongruity. In that defense and championship of the rights
that were elemental to men, though the most despised, he saw his
highest dignity as president. And to that lowly aim he shaped and
pledged his policy, his party, his fortune, and his fame.

In truth this affinity of Lincoln with his neighbor in need was the
very fruitage of the fortune of his life. He was fitted and
predestined for it by his birth. His station was of the lowliest. His
setting-up was pathetically scant. All his discipline was cruelly
stern. In ease and plenty he had no share. Of sweets and luxury he had
no taste. Born of parents pitifully poor, nurtured in painful penury,
poorly sheltered, scantily clad, accustomed to neglect, intimate with
want, trained to disappointment, toiling in untamed scenes against
hard odds with rudest tools, the kindred and daily familiar of
unassuming men, denied the commonest aids to personal refinement, he
was to the atmosphere and temperament of genuine, undisguised humility
native born, and fully bred. From such a hopeless start, in such a
hostile environment, he made his way alone. It can be said with almost
literal truth that he never had any help. His only friend was his
modest, resolute heart. His winnings were all by wrestling--and the
struggle never relaxed. When every antagonist had been met and
overthrown, and his gaunt stature stood in the Nation's arena alone
and undefeated, then upon that unbent but unpretending form his Nation
and his Nation's God laid a burden, such as no man in all our history
had ever borne. When beneath that great final task he meekly bowed,
its superhuman responsibility and weight were all-sufficient to crush
forever all vain-glorious pride, if in his tried heart any pride had
ever entered, and having entered had still remained. Before the
majesty of his commission, and amid the inscrutable perplexities of
each unparalleled day, he must always be fain, even though never
forced, to walk humbly among his people, and before his God. From
birth to death, by fortune and by Providence, as though by
overmastering fate, he was fashioned for humility.

From all these grounds he was predisposed to modesty. Over against the
vastness of his task, facing daily all its formidable difficulties,
and sensible evermore of his infinite insufficiency, the posture of
his spirit and the tone of his daily speech unfailingly betokened a
moderate estimate of his personal significance. The overspreading
majesty of the work to which he set his hand, always towering vividly
before his thought, kept vividly active the consciousness that he was
quite incompetent to accomplish aught, except the God of Nations
tendered daily help.

As thus inclined and thus disposed in body and in mind, he became a
man of prayer. That he should often fall upon his knees was but the
consequence of his daily discovery that his burdens and his strength
were widely incommensurate.

Many times those supplications seemed as though unheard. The heavens
gave no sign. Then malice raged against him. But then his
unsurrendered faith in God, his reverence for his task, and his
sobering estimate of himself would show as meekness. It was not his
way to retaliate or rail. In darkness, before delay, and beneath
abuse, he bore and suffered long without complaint. In this pathetic
quietness his humility becomes heroic.

This bent towards lowliness, tempered through and through, as it was,
with his clear intelligence, saved him from vaunting and all vanity.
There was habitually in his posture a grave solidity. This often
seemed like carefulness and caution. But it was born of modesty. If
there was ever a time when ever a man might be suffered to boast, the
date of this second inaugural was the time, and the author of that
inaugural was the man. The hour of that address marked the opening of
Lincoln's second presidential term. It was the crowning vindication of
his presidential policy. After four years of war the national poll at
the last electoral vote had shown the North stronger in men than when
the war began. The status of the South was desperate. But five weeks
lay between him and the surrender of Lee. Lincoln was not lacking in
foresight, nor in careful calculation. His skill therein was
preeminent. Wary, discerning, resolute, his assurance of ultimate
victory no doubt firm and clear, no breath of boasting was given vent.
Instead, with almost painful reserve, he modestly said, "With high
hope for the future, no prediction in regard to it is ventured."
Lincoln was one of those rarest of men, invincible in resolution, at
the same time invincible in reserve.

This inner mood of modesty showed in all his outer furnishing. It was
not his way to publish his distinction. For him to signalize his
primacy by any decoration would be an incongruity. In any group of men
where precedence was emphasized he was ill at ease. Any attempt by him
to designate his official elevation by some gilded ornament or plume
would have been grotesque. His eyes were not lofty nor his heart
haughty. His feet were for the furrow. His hands were for the axe. His
lips were for friendly salutation of all the people on the street. Any
outer token, intended to mark him for separation or any superiority,
would have excited nothing but sorrow in him. Fabrics however costly
and rare, jewels however brilliant and pure, designed and disposed for
distinction and display, awakening envy and unrest quite as much as
admiration and delight, were not for him. Plain man among the
lowliest, true nobleman among the noblest, he wore all his honors in
uttermost innocence of all parade.

Nor were the features of Lincoln ever intended to be employed as
instruments of scorn. Into the hellish ministry of curling contempt
those gracious lips could never be impressed. His heart was far too
kindly; and that were safeguard enough. But his unalloyed humility was
far too potent to ever encourage or permit in him any indulgence of
disdain. Truly lowly himself, it was not in him to coldly despise any
of his fellowmen. Just here his humility displayed its sterling
honesty. And just here his honor and his glory blend. Here is his sure
title to nobility--a title that neither time nor eternity can ever
tarnish or bedim. By every right is this nobility his. By his earthly
fortune, as by a hard, relentless fate, his lot was cast among the
poor; and by that same appointment the lot of all earth's poor has
gained perennial dignity. But he graced those ranks also as a
volunteer. By his own consent, with sovereign free selection, he
elected to sustain and overcome all the impediments of the station of
his birth, and so to demonstrate the full capacity of the humblest
human life for high endeavor and desire. Thus he was alike and at once
filled with a deep compassion, and free from high contempt. Here lies
the firm foundation of his proud renown. This is the true birthmark of
his nobility. He was above the baseness and the meanness of scorning
any brother man.

And so he avoided arrogance. It was not the way of Lincoln to forever
reiterate, if even to allow, his own importance. He was acutely
sensitive, to the meaning and worth of an honorable renown. Especially
was his cool, gray eye awake to the future issues of the pregnant
deeds of his teeming times. But therein his eager concern was a
patriot's anxiety--an anxiety in which he mingled his fortune and fame
with the destiny of his native land. Therein the jealousy of his
desire for the national welfare burned away, as in sacrificial fires
and upon a sacred altar, all ambitions for himself. At any cost to
others, or through any other man's neglect, it was not in the heart of
Lincoln to demand and heap together honors or advantages for himself.
Well might he be justified, if ever such a course were fair, in
claiming for himself exceptional rewards. Chief executive of a great
Republic, commander-in-chief of the army and navy of the North,
assured of the major momentum of military success, in immediate reach
of vast and ever increasing resources, whether for war or peace,
chosen the second time to be the Nation's head, charged the second
time to consummate the Nation's perpetual unity--surely he had ample
guaranty for imputing to his own sole hand, in a supreme degree,
mighty prowess, imposing achievements, a vast and spreading authority
and power. At such a time and amid such surroundings, a generous
measure of self-aggrandizement would have seemed quite warranted and
well sustained. But never was a mighty commander freer from that
uncomely fault. The mention of victory makes him strangely unmindful
of himself. The thought of his vast authority makes him the lowliest
in the land. Lincoln was not arrogant. He made no effort after
aggregated honors, however deserved, much less after honors unearned.
In particular he showed no inclination to appropriate another's fame.
For one thing, he knew too well the awful cost of magistracy. The
right to be commander-in-chief of a Nation's resources and arms, so
coveted a right in aspiring men, became transmuted in the cup which
Lincoln drank into a terrible, an almost impossible responsibility.
Nor was it of his nature to subtract from other men for his own
increase. At the price of a brother's freedom, or happiness, or life,
the gaining of ease, or wealth, or joy of any sort for himself would
be far too dear. In the soul of Lincoln extortion could find no soil.
His mien among men was that of indulgent ministry, not of exacting
mastery. With the lower level and the lesser meed he could be well
content. Morbid jealousy for his own acclaim, hungry greed for
another's reward, satisfaction in plaudits that were undeserved, or
comfort from robbery or extortion of any sort were sentiments for
which the refined and genuine modesty of Lincoln had no appetite or
taste. The honors that surrounded and invested him were up-springing,
spontaneous and free; in no least measure accumulated, artificial or
enforced.

The native purity of Lincoln's lowliness shows best in his reverence
for God. He lived in a daily consciousness of Providence. As a
statesman he was thoroughly a man of God, full of a patriot's adoring
and acquiescent thankfulness, as he watched and studied the wonderful
unfolding of God's just and kindly government of this most favored
land. This mood of humble reverence was deeply wrought. It was of the
texture of his character. It was not a vesture or a posture, a gesture
or a phrase, assumed here and discarded there, and often counterfeit.
It was essential, like his integrity, pervading and indeed controlling
all his responsible life. And it was wholly undisguised. In his most
formal public documents--papers in which statesmen as a rule make
scant allusion to Deity--Lincoln's allusions to God are their most
imposing feature. Beyond all contradiction, Lincoln enacted his public
responsibilities in the fear of God. This was the beginning of his
wisdom. Just this is the secret of the sanity of this last inaugural.
And it is the secret of its immortal beauty. And it is the girdle of
its strength. In framing its central argument, and thereby steadying
the Nation's heart in the convulsions of war, he was expounding the
hidden ways of God. There grew a mighty paragraph. It reads smoothly
now. But when it passed through Lincoln's lips, it was the issue of a
hard-pent agony. When he voiced those words he stood before an altar,
and made confession, like a very priest, for both North and South. All
the land had behaved with unbecoming confidence. All alike were under
discipline. God was in dominion. Even in their prayers both North and
South had been contending against the Lord. The prayers of both could
not be answered. That of neither had been answered fully. The Almighty
had his own purposes. The expectations of all had gone astray. The
contending struggles of either side, despite their contending prayers,
were being turned by the judgments of God against them both into a
terrible national chastisement. So Lincoln discerned, and so he
humbly, vicariously confessed. But beneath this high dominion his
heart too had been bowed down, and overwhelmed, and chastened sore.
Repeatedly his counsels had been overturned, and his expectations had
been reversed; and that too, as he devoutly believed, by the
over-ruling purposes of God. Hence, as in this inaugural scene he
faced the future, though he was head of a puissant people, he behaved
like a little child. In a chastened sense of the mystery and authority
of the overruling designs of Almighty God, he forebore to boast. And
then he said in rhythmic words of almost prophetic majesty, and in the
attire of all but sacrificial humility: "Fondly do we hope--fervently
do we pray--that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away.
Yet, if God wills that it continue until all the wealth piled by the
bondman's two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be
sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid
by another drawn with the sword, as was said three thousand years ago,
so still it must be said, 'The judgments of the Lord are true and
righteous altogether.'"

This is indeed in prophetic strain. But he forbears to prophesy. He
longed with sacrificial eagerness for national prosperity, in lasting
freedom and unison and happiness. As he renewed his official pledge to
preserve, protect, and defend the world's greatest charter of
equality and freedom for all mankind, his heart and hope held high and
firm. But his total being was subdued. God had crossed his path. The
long-drawn war was God's rebuke. The Nation had gone sadly astray. The
Almighty had taken her waywardness in hand. His purposes were in
control. And He was supreme. And His ways were unrevealed. Lincoln
stood to his task unflinchingly, ready either for sorrow or relief,
ready either for death or life, as the Most High might appoint.

Here is statesmanship indeed. But it is altogether unique. A mighty
Nation's executive head, discerning, devoted, and devout, holding in
his steady hand the charge of a Nation's destiny, pledging in the
Nation's name to lay upon the altar, if need be for the Nation's
honor, the Nation's life, and there before the altar waiting humbly
upon God. Many a theme of profoundest purport opens instantly into
view. Just now our eye is fixed upon its illustration of humility.

On the one hand, and in the first place, its exhibition of the dignity
of pure manhood is sublime. In this inaugural scene, beneath the awful
stress of a Nation in war, upon the basis of the pledged covenant of
the free, invincible faith that a free Republic can sustain and
fulfill all its solemn responsibility, and with unquenchable hope in
the vast and unseen future of his land, Lincoln took his stand, and
held his ground, and put on record before God and all the world his
reverent and resolute oath. Here is manhood, noble, majestic,
decisive, free--a manhood that embraces the worth, voices the hope,
and confronts with open breast the destiny of the race.

But in this same scene these mighty energies pause. Lincoln
consciously faces God. For himself and for the Nation he makes humble
acknowledgment that the Lord is Almighty and Most High. And to God's
full sovereignty he yields spontaneous consent. With lowliest
submission and confession he concedes and declares that all his
rebukes and all his rule are in righteousness.

Here is a place where any man may properly pause. Here the orbit of
our proudest being strikes its verge. Here God and manhood meet. Here
human power faints. Here human resolution halts. Here human foresight
dims. Here human wisdom becomes a void. Here all our pride becomes
perforce humility; and all our counselings merge in faith. Here human
grandeur touches its outer rim.

But here, too, human eyes awaken. Here human aspirations rise. Here
human wisdom becomes newly informed. Here human forecasts brighten
into hope. Here human strength revives. Here human purpose tightens.
Here in reverence human wisdom begins. Here in human lowliness appears
a Godlike dignity. Here our human stature shows its noblest. Lincoln
is at the utmost bound of his knowledge, and his liberty; and yet he
is displaying just here a discernment and a decision of the most
exalted type--a discernment, however, whose insight is a vision of
faith, and a decision whose resolve is an exercise of trust. In this
scene statesmanship is transmuted into religion, undefiled and pure.
Man in his loftiest hope and uttermost need, and God in his
transcendent royalty of equity and goodwill meet face to face, and
stand in open, free and friendly covenant. Here is at once a portrait
of true humility, and the acme of high nobility. Here in childlike
trust and childlike faith the wisdom and the freedom of man attain
their goal. Here statesmanship and reverence, wisdom and trust,
freedom and acquiescence, dignity and lowliness harmonize and
interblend. And in the unison either one remains uncompounded and
pure.

Here many questions press to be resolved. This signal scene in
Lincoln's career--what has it to say about the inner nature of man?
What about the nature of God? What about the nature of our human
insight into the essential qualities of things? What about the
relation of will to thought? What about the sovereignty of character?
When human character touches the limit of human life, is it facing
night or day? These are ultimate inquiries. And they are immediate.
For answer to these inquiries, let Lincoln and Hegel meet. And let the
Nations listen to their replies; and so discern what problems clear,
where dignity and lowliness convene. For here is a shining scene,
where any man may see that in a lowly heart wisdom and nobility may
sit together as on a throne. Modesty like Lincoln's is a courtly
grace. Reverence such as his beseems a prince. Such humility,
reflecting with heavenly beauty the immediate presence of God, may
clothe a mighty man, and hold the center of a mighty scene, without
unseemliness, and it wants not intelligence. This at least this scene
makes clear.




