II

ETHICAL INSTRUCTION IN THE SCHOOLS


Within a few years a strong demand has arisen for ethical teaching in
the schools. Teachers themselves have become interested, and wherever
they are gathered the question, "What shall this teaching be?" is
eagerly discussed. The educational journals are full of it. Within a
year there have been published seven books on the subject. Several of
them--it would be hardly an exaggeration to say all--are books of marked
excellence. Seldom does so large a percentage of books in a single year,
in a single country, and on a single subject reach so high a level of
merit. I shall not criticise them, however, nor even engage in the
popular discussion of which they form a part. That discussion concerns
itself chiefly with the methods by which ethics may be taught. I wish to
go behind this controversy and to raise the previous question whether
ethics should be taught to boys and girls at all.

Evidently there are strong reasons why it should be. Always and
everywhere it is important that men should be good. To be a good
man!--it is more than half the fulfilment of life. Better to miss fame,
wealth, learning, than to miss righteousness. And in America, too, we
must demand not the mere trifle that men shall be good for their own
sakes, but good in order that the life of the state may be preserved. A
widespread righteousness is in a republic a matter of necessity. Where
all rule all, each man who falls into evil courses infects his neighbor,
corrupting the law and corrupting still more its enforcement. The
question of manufacturing moral men becomes, accordingly, in a
democracy, urgent to a degree unknown in a country where but a few
selected persons guide the state.

There is also special urgency at the present time. The ancient and
accredited means of training youth in goodness are becoming, I will not
say broken, but enfeebled and distrusted. Hitherto a large part of the
moral instruction of mankind has been superintended by the clergy. In
every civilized state the expensive machinery of the Church has been set
up and placed in the hands of men of dignity, because it has been
believed that by no other engine can we so effectively render people
upright. I still believe this, and I am pretty confident that a good
many years will pass before we shall dispense with the ennobling
services of our ministers. And yet it is plain that much of the work
which formerly was exclusively theirs is so no longer. Much of it is
performed by books, newspapers, and facilitated human intercourse.
Ministers do not now speak with their old authority; they speak merely
as other men speak; and we are all asking whether in the immense
readjustment of faith now going on something of their peculiar power of
moral as well as of intellectual guidance may not slip away.

The home too, which has hitherto been the fundamental agency for
fostering morality in the young, is just now in sore need of repair. We
can no longer depend upon it alone for moral guardianship. It must be
supplemented, possibly reconstructed. New dangers to it have arisen. In
the complex civilization of city life, in the huge influx of untutored
foreigners, in the substitution of the apartment for the house, in the
greater ease of divorce, in the larger freedom now given to children, to
women, in the breaking down of class distinctions and the readier
accessibility of man to man, there are perils for boy and girl which did
not exist before. And while these changes in the outward form of
domestic life are advancing, certain protections against moral peril
which the home formerly afforded have decayed. It would be curious to
ascertain in how many families of our immediate time daily prayers are
used, and to compare the number with that of those in which the holy
practice was common fifty years ago. It would be interesting to know how
frequently parents to-day converse with their children on subjects
serious, pious, or personal. The hurry of modern life has swept away
many uplifting intimacies. Even in families which prize them most, a few
minutes only can be had each day for such fortifying things. Domestic
training has shrunk, while the training of haphazard companions, the
training of the streets, the training of the newspapers, have acquired a
potency hitherto unknown.

It is no wonder, then, that in such a moral crisis the community
turns to that agency whose power is already felt beneficently in a
multitude of other directions, the school. The cry comes to us
teachers, "We established you at first to make our children wiser;
we want you now for a profounder service. Can you not unite moral
culture with intellectual?" It may be; though discipline of the passions
is enormously more difficult than discipline of the mind. But at any
rate we must acknowledge that our success in the mental field is
largely staked on our success in the moral. Our pupils will not learn
their lessons in arithmetic if they have not already made some
progress in concentration, in self-forgetfulness, in acceptance of
duty. Nor can we touch them in a single section of their nature and hope
for results. Instruction must go all through. We are obliged to treat
each little human being as a whole if we would have our treatment
wholesome. And then too we have had such successes elsewhere that we
may well feel emboldened for the new task. Nearly the whole of life
is now advantageously surveyed in one form or another in our schools
and colleges; and we have usually found that advance in instruction
develops swiftly into betterment of practice. We teach, for example,
social science and analyze the customs of the past; but soon we find
bands of young men and women in all the important cities criticising
the government of those cities, suggesting better modes of voting, wiser
forms of charity; and before we know it the community is transformed.
We cannot teach the science of electricity without improving our
street-cars, or at least without raising hopes that they may some
day be improved. Each science claims its brother art. Theory creeps
over into action. It will not stay by itself; it is pervasive,
diffusive. And as this pervasive character of knowledge in the lower
ranges is perceived, we teachers are urged to press forward its
operation in the higher also. Why have we no school-books on human
character, the highest of all themes? Once direct the attention of our
pupils to this great topic, and may we not ultimately bring about
that moral enlargement for which the time waits?

I have stated somewhat at length the considerations in behalf of ethical
instruction in the schools because those considerations on the whole
appear to me illusory. I cannot believe such instruction feasible. Were
it so, of course it would have my eager support. But I see in it grave
difficulties, difficulties imperfectly understood; and a difficulty
disregarded becomes a danger, possibly a catastrophe. Let me explain in
a few words where the danger lies.

Between morals and ethics there is a sharp distinction, frequently as
the two words are confused. Usage, however, shows the meaning. If I call
a man a man of bad morals, I evidently mean to assert that his conduct
is corrupt; he does things which the majority of mankind believe he
ought not to do. It is his practice I denounce, not his intellectual
formulation. In the same way we speak of the petty morals of society,
referring in the phrase to the small practices of mankind, the
unnumbered actions which disclose good or bad principles unconsciously
hidden within. It is entirely different when I call a man's ethics bad.
I then declare that I do not agree with his comprehension of moral
principles. His practice may be entirely correct. I do not speak of
that; it is his understanding that is at fault. For ethics, as was long
ago remarked, is related to morals as geometry to carpentry: the one is
a science, the other its practical embodiment. In the former,
consciousness is a prime factor; from the latter it often is absent
altogether.

Now what is asked of us teachers is that we invite our pupils to direct
study of the principles of right conduct, that we awaken their
consciousness about their modes of life, and so by degrees impart to
them a science of righteousness. This is theory, ethics; not morals,
practice; and in my judgment it is dangerous business, with the
slenderest chance of success. Useless is it to say that the aim of such
instruction need not be ethical, but moral. Whatever the ultimate aim,
the procedure of instruction is of necessity scientific. It operates
through intelligence, and only gets into life so far as the instructed
intelligence afterward becomes a director. This is the work of books and
teachers everywhere: they discipline the knowing act, and so bring
within its influence that multitude of matters which depend for
excellent adjustment on clear and ordered knowledge. Such a work,
however, is evidently but partial. Many matters do not take their rise
in knowledge at all. Morality does not. The boy as soon as born is
adopted unconsciously into some sort of moral world. While he is growing
up and is thinking of other things, habits of character are seizing him.
By the time he comes to school he is incrusted with customs. The idea
that his moral education can be fashioned by his teacher in the same way
as his education in geography is fantastic. It is only his ethical
training which may now begin. The attention of such a boy may be called
to habits already formed; he may be led to dissect those habits, to pass
judgment on them as right or wrong, and to inquire why and how they may
be bettered. This is the only power teaching professes: it critically
inquires, it awakens interest, it inspects facts, it discovers laws. And
this process applied in the field of character yields ethics, the
systematized knowledge of human conduct. It does not primarily yield
morals, improved performance.

Nor indeed is performance likely to be improved by ethical enlightenment
if, as I maintain, the whole business of self-criticism in the child is
unwholesome. By a course of ethical training a young person will, in my
view, much more probably become demoralized than invigorated. What we
ought to desire, if we would have a boy grow morally sturdy, is that
introspection should not set in early and that he should not become
accustomed to watch his conduct. And the reason is obvious. Much as we
incline to laud our prerogative of consciousness and to assert that it
is precisely what distinguishes us from our poor relations, the brutes,
we still must acknowledge that consciousness has certain grave defects
when exalted into the position of a guide. Large tracts of life lie
altogether beyond its control, and the conduct which can be affected by
it is apt--especially in the initial stages--to be rendered vague, slow,
vacillating, and distorted. Only instinctive action is swift, sure, and
firm. For this reason we distrust the man who calculates his goodness.
We find him vulgar and repellent. We are far from sure that he will keep
that goodness long. If I offer to shake hands with a man with precisely
that degree of warmth which I have decided it is well to express, will
he willingly take my hand? A few years ago there were some nonsense
verses on this subject going the rounds of the English newspapers. They
seemed to me capitally to express the morbid influence of consciousness
in a complex organism. They ran somewhat as follows:

  The centipede was happy, quite,
      Until the toad for fun
  Said, "Pray which leg comes after which?"
  This worked her mind to such a pitch
  She lay distracted in a ditch.
      Considering how to run.

And well she might! Imagine the hundred legs steered consciously--now it
is time to move this one, now to move that! The creature would never
move at all, but would be as incapable of action as Hamlet himself. And
are the young less complex than centipedes? Shall their little lives be
suddenly turned over to a fumbling guide? Shall they not rather be
stimulated to unconscious rectitude, gently led into those blind but
holy habits which make goodness easy, and so be saved from the perilous
perplexities of marking out their own way? So thought the sagacious
Aristotle. To the crude early opinion of Socrates that virtue is
knowledge, he opposed the ripened doctrine that it is practice and
habit.

This, then, is the inexpugnable objection to the ethical instruction of
children: the end which should be sought is performance, not knowledge,
and we cannot by supplying the latter induce the former. But do not
these considerations cut the ground from under practical teaching of
every kind? Instruction is given in other subjects in the hope that it
may finally issue in strengthened action, and I have acknowledged that
as a fact this hope is repeatedly justified. Why may not a similar
result appear in ethics? What puts a difference between that study and
electricity, social science, or manual training? This: according as the
work studied includes a creative element and is intended to give
expression to a personal life, consciousness becomes an increasingly
dangerous dependence. Why are there no classes and text-books for the
study of deportment? Is it because manners are unimportant? No, but
because they make the man, and to be of any worth must be an expression
of his very nature. Conscious study would tend to distort rather than to
fashion them. Their practice cannot be learned in the same way as
carpentry.

But an analogy more enlightening for showing the inaptitude of the
child for direct study of the laws of conduct is found in the case of
speech. Between speech and morals the analogies are subtle and wide. So
minute are they that speech might almost be called a kind of vocal
morality. Like morality, it is something possessed long before we are
aware of it, and it becomes perfect or debased with our growth. We
employ it to express ourselves and to come into ordered contact with our
neighbor. By it we confer benefits and by it receive benefits in turn.
Rigid as are its laws, we still feel ourselves free in its use, though
obliged to give to our spontaneous feelings forms constructed by men of
the past. Ease, accuracy, and scope are here confessedly of vast
consequence. It has consequently been found a matter of extreme
difficulty to bring a young person's attention helpfully to bear upon
his speech. Indirect methods seem to be the only profitable ones.
Philology, grammar, rhetoric, systematic study of the laws of language,
are dangerous tools for a boy below his teens. The child who is to
acquire excellent speech must be encouraged to keep attention away from
the words he uses and to fix it upon that which he is to express.
Abstract grammar will either confound the tongue which it should ease,
or else it will seem to have no connection with living reality, but to
be an ingenious contrivance invented by some Dry-as-dust for the torture
of schoolboys.

And a similar pair of dangers await the young student of the laws of
conduct. On the one hand, it is highly probable that he will not
understand what his teacher is talking about. He may learn his lesson;
he may answer questions correctly; but he will assume that these things
have nothing to do with him. He becomes dulled to moral distinctions,
and it is the teaching of ethics that dulls him. We see the disastrous
process in full operation in a neighboring field. There are countries
which have regular public instruction in religion. The argument runs
that schools are established to teach what is of consequence to
citizens, and religion is of more consequence than anything else.
Therefore introduce it, is the conclusion. Therefore keep it out, is the
sound conclusion. It lies too near the life to be announced in official
propositions and still to retain a recognizable meaning. I have known a
large number of German young men. I have yet to meet one whose religious
nature has been deepened by his instruction in school. And the lack of
influence is noticeable not merely in those who have failed in the
study, but quite as much in those who have ranked highest. In neither
case has the august discipline meant anything. The danger would be
wider, the disaster from the benumbing influence more serious, if
ethical instruction should be organized; wider, because morality
underlies religion, and insensitiveness to the moral claim is more
immediately and concretely destructive. Yet here, as in the case of
religion, of manners, or of speech, the child will probably take to
heart very little of what is said. At most he will assume that the
text-book statement of the rules of righteousness represents the way in
which the game of life is played by some people; but he will prefer to
play it in his own way still. Young people are constructed with happy
protective arrangements; they are enviably impervious. So in expounding
moral principles in the schoolroom, I believe we shall touch the child
in very few moral spots. Nevertheless, it becomes dulled and hardened if
it listens long to sacred words untouched.

But the benumbing influence is not the gravest danger; analogies of
speech suggest a graver still. If we try to teach speech too early and
really succeed in fixing the child's attention upon its tongue, we
enfeeble its power of utterance. Consciousness once awakened, the child
is perpetually inquiring whether the word is the right word, and
suspecting that it is not quite sufficiently right to be allowed
free passage. Just so a momentous trouble appears when the moral
consciousness has been too early stirred. That self-questioning spirit
springs up which impels its tortured possessor to be continually
fingering his motives in unwholesome preoccupation with himself.
Instead of entering heartily into outward interests, the watchful
little moralist is "questioning about himself whether he has been as
good as he should have been, and whether a better man would not have
acted otherwise." No part of us is more susceptible of morbidness
than the moral sense; none demoralizes more thoroughly when morbid.
The trouble, too, affects chiefly those of the finer fibre. The
majority of healthy children, as has been said, harden themselves
against theoretic talk, and it passes over them like the wind. Here
and there a sensitive soul absorbs the poison and sets itself
seriously to work installing duty as the mainspring of its life. We all
know the unwholesome result: the person from whom spontaneity is
gone, who criticises everything he does, who has lost his sense of
proportion, who teases himself endlessly and teases his friends--so
far as they remain his friends--about the right and wrong of each
petty act. It is a disease, a moral disease, and takes the place in
the spiritual life of that which the doctors are fond of calling
"nervous prostration" in the physical. Few countries have been so
desolated by it as New England. It is our special scourge. Many here
carry a conscience about with them which makes us say, "How much
better off they would be with none!" I declare, at times when I see
the ravages which conscientiousness works in our New England stock, I
wish these New Englanders had never heard moral distinctions
mentioned. Better their vices than their virtues. The wise teacher will
extirpate the first sproutings of the weed; for a weed more difficult
to extirpate when grown there is not. We run a serious risk of
implanting it in our children when we undertake their class instruction
in ethics.

Such, then, are some of the considerations which should give us pause
when the public is clamoring at our schoolhouse doors and saying to us
teachers, "We cannot bring up our children so as to make them righteous
citizens. Undertake the work for us. You have done so much already that
we turn to you again and entreat your help." I think we must sadly
reply, "There are limits to what we can do. If you respect us, you will
not urge us to do the thing that is not ours. By pressing into certain
regions we shall bring upon you more disaster than benefit."

Fully, however, as the dangers here pointed out may be acknowledged,
much of a different sort remains also true. Have we not all received a
large measure of moral culture at school? And are we quite content to
say that the greatest of subjects is unteachable? I would not say this;
on the contrary, I hold that no college is properly organized where the
teaching of ethics does not occupy a position of honor. The college, not
the school, is the place for the study. It would be absurd to maintain
that all other subjects of study are nutritious to man except that of
his own nature; but it is far from absurd to ask that a young man first
possess a nature before he undertakes to analyze it. A study useless for
developing initial power may still be highly profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness. Youth
should be spontaneous, instinctive, ebullient; reflection whispers to
the growing man. Many of the evils that I have thus far traced are
brought about by projecting upon a young mind problems which it has not
yet encountered in itself. Such problems abound in the later teens and
twenties, and then is the time to set about their discussion.

But even in college I would have ethical study more guarded than the
rest. Had I the power, I would never allow it to be required of all. It
should be offered only as an elective and in the later years of the
course. When I entered college I was put in my freshman year into a
prescribed study of this sort. Happily I received no influence from it
whatever. It passed over and left me untouched; and I think it had no
more effect on the majority of my classmates. Possibly some of the more
reflective took it to heart and were harmed; but in general it was a
mere wasting of precious ointment which might have soothed our wounds if
elected in the senior year. Of course great teachers defy all rules;
and under a Hopkins, a Garman, or a Hyde, the distinctions of elective
and prescribed become unimportant. Yet the principle is clear: wait till
the young man is confronted with the problems before you invite him to
their solution. Has he grown up unquestioning? Has he accepted the moral
code inherited from honored parents? Can he rest in wise habits? Then
let him be thankful and go his way untaught. But has he, on the other
hand, felt that the moral mechanism by which he was early guided does
not fit all cases? Has he found one class of duties in conflict with
another? Has he discovered that the moral standards obtaining in
different sections of society, in different parts of the world, are
irreconcilable? In short, is he puzzled and desirous of working his way
through his puzzles, of facing them and tracking them to their
beginnings? Then is he ripe for the study of ethics.

Yet when it is so undertaken, when those only are invited to partake of
it who in their own hearts have heard its painful call, even then I
would hedge it about with two conditions. First, it should be pursued as
a science, critically, and the student should be informed at the outset
that the aim of the course is knowledge, not the endeavor to make better
men. And, secondly, I would insist that the students themselves do the
work; that they do not passively listen to opinions set forth by their
instructor, but that they address themselves to research and learn to
construct moral judgments which will bear critical inspection. Some
teachers, no doubt, will think it wisest to accomplish these things by
tracing the course of ethics in the past, treating it as a historical
science. Others will prefer, by announcing their own beliefs, to
stimulate their students to criticise those beliefs and to venture on
their own little constructions. The method is unimportant; it is only of
consequence that the students themselves do the ethicizing, that they
trace the logic of their own beliefs and do not rest in dogmatic
statement. Yet such an undertaking may well sober a teacher. I never see
my class in ethics come to their first lecture that I do not tremble and
say to myself that I am set for the downfall of some of them. In every
such studious company there must be unprepared persons whom the teacher
will damage. He cannot help it. He must move calmly forward, confident
in his subject, but knowing that because it is living it is dangerous.




