XV

WOMEN'S EDUCATION AT THE WORLD'S FAIR[16]


Few persons have stood in the Court of Honor at Chicago and felt the
surpassing splendors gathered there, without a certain dismay over its
swiftly approaching disappearance. Never in the world before has beauty
been so lavish and so transient. Probably in all departments of the Fair
a hundred million dollars have been spent. Now the nation's holiday is
done, the little half-year is over, and the palaces with their widely
gathered treasures vanish like a dream. Is all indeed gone? Will nothing
remain? Wise observers perceive some permanent results of the
merry-making. What these will be in the busy life of men, others may
decide: I point out chiefly a few of the beneficial influences of the
great Fair on the life of women.

The triumph of women in what may be called their detached existence,
that is, in their guidance of themselves and the separated affairs of
their sex, has been unexpectedly great. The Government appointed an
independent Board of Lady Managers who, through many difficulties,
gathered from every quarter of the globe interesting exhibits of
feminine industry and skill. These they gracefully disposed in one of
the most dignified buildings of the Fair, itself a woman's design. Here
they attractively illustrated every aspect of the life of women,
domestic, philanthropic, commercial, literary, artistic, and traced
their historic advance. Close at hand, in another building also of their
own erection, they appropriately appeared as the guardians and teachers
of little children. Their halls were crowded, their dinners praised,
their reception invitations coveted. Throughout they showed organizing
ability on a huge scale; they developed noteworthy leaders; what is
more, they followed them, and they have quarrelled no more, and have
pulled wires less, than men in similar situations; their courage, their
energy, their tact in the erection of a monument to woman were
astonishing; and the efforts of their Central Board were efficiently
seconded by similar companies in every state. As in the Sanitary and
Christian Commissions and the hospital service of the war, in the
multitude of women's clubs, the Woman's Christian Temperance Union, the
King's Daughters, the associations for promoting women's suffrage, so
once more here women found an opportunity to prove their ability as a
banded sex; and it is clear that they awakened in the nation a deeper
respect for their powers.

But the very triumph does away with its further necessity. Having amply
proved what they can do when banded together, women may now the more
easily cease to treat themselves as a peculiar people. Henceforth they
are human beings. Women's buildings, women's exhibits, may safely become
things of the past. At any future fair no special treatment of women
is likely to be called for. After what has been achieved, the
self-consciousness of women will be lessened, and their sensitiveness
about their own position, capacity, and rights will be naturally
outgrown. The anthropologist may perhaps still assemble the work of a
single sex, the work of people of a single color, or of those having
blue eyes. But ordinary people will find less and less interest in
these artificial classifications, and will more and more incline to
measure men's and women's products by the same scale. Even at Chicago
large numbers of women preferred to range their exhibits in the common
halls rather than under feminine banners, and their demonstration of
the needlessness of any special treatment of their sex must be reckoned
as one of the most considerable of the permanent gains for women from
the Fair.

If, then, women have demonstrated that they are more than isolated
phenomena, that they should indeed be treated as integral members of the
human family, in order to estimate rightly the lasting advantages they
have derived from the Fair we must seek those advantages not in
isolations but in conjunctions. In the common life of man there is a
womanly side and a manly side. Both have profited by one splendid event.
Manufactures and transportation and mining and agriculture will
hereafter be different because of what has occurred at Chicago; but so
will domestic science, the training of the young, the swift intellectual
interest, the finer patriotism, the apprehension of beauty, the moral
balance. It is by growth in these things that the emancipation of women
is to come about, and the Fair has fostered them all in an extraordinary
degree.

Although the Fair was officially known as a World's Fair, and it did
contain honorable contributions from many foreign countries, it was, in
a sense that no other exhibition has been before, a nation's fair. It
was the climacteric expression of America's existence. It gathered
together our past and our present, and indicated not uncertainly our
future. Here were made visible our beginnings, our achievements, our
hopes, our dreams. The nation became conscious of itself and was strong,
beautiful, proud. All sections of the country not only contributed their
most characteristic objects of use and beauty, but their inhabitants
also came, and learned to know one another, and their land. During the
last two years there has hardly been a village in the country which has
not had its club or circle studying the history of the United States. No
section has been too poor to subscribe money for maintaining national
or state pride. In order to see the great result, men have mortgaged
their farms, lonely women have taken heavy life insurance, stringent
economy will gladly be practised for years. A friend tells me that she
saw an old man, as he left the Court of Honor with tears in his eyes,
turn to his gray-haired wife and say, "Well, Susan, it paid even if it
did take all the burial money."

Once before, we reached a similar pitch of national consciousness,--in
war. Young, unprepared, divided against ourselves, we found ourselves
able to mass great armies, endure long strains, organize campaigns,
commissariats, hospitals, in altogether independent ways, and on a scale
greater than Europe had seen. Then men and women alike learned the value
of mutual confidence, the strength of cooperation and organization. Once
again now, but this time in the interest of beauty and of peace, we have
studied the art of subordinating fragmentary interests to those of a
whole. The training we have received as a nation in producing and
studying the Fair, must result in a deeper national dignity, which will
both free us from irritating sensitiveness over foreign criticism, and
give us readiness to learn from other countries whatever lessons they
can teach. Our own provinces too will become less provincial. With
increased acquaintance, the East has begun to drop its toleration of the
West, and to put friendliness and honor in its place. No more will it
be believed along the Atlantic coast that the Mississippi Valley cares
only for pork, grain and lumber. As such superstitions decay, a more
trustful unity becomes possible. The entire nation knows itself a
nation, possessed of common ideals. In this heightened national dignity,
women will have a large and ennobling share.

But further, from the Fair men, and women with them, have acquired a new
sense of the gains that come from minute obedience to law. Hitherto, "go
as you please" has been pretty largely the principle of American life.
In the training school of the last two years of preparation and the six
months of the holding of the Fair, our people, particularly our women,
have been solidly taught the hard and needful lesson that whims,
waywardness, haste, inaccuracy, pettiness, personal considerations, do
not make for strength. Wherever these have entered, they have flawed the
beautiful whole, and flecked the honor of us all. Where they have been
absent results have appeared which make us all rejoice. Never in so wide
an undertaking was the unity of a single design so triumphant. As an
unknown multitude cooperated in the building of a mediaeval cathedral, so
throughout our land multitudes have been daily ready to contribute their
unmarked best for the erection of a common glory. We have thus learned
to prize second thoughts above first thoughts, to league our lives and
purposes with those of others, and to subordinate the assertion of
ourselves to that of a universal reason. Hence has sprung a new trust in
one another and a new confidence in our future. The friendliness of our
people, already rendered natural by our democratic institutions, has
received a deeper sanction. How distinctly it was marked on the faces of
the visitors at the Fair! I was fortunate enough to spend several hours
there on Chicago Day, when nearly seven hundred and fifty thousand
people were admitted. The appearance of those plain, intelligent, happy,
helpful thousands, all strangers and all kind, was the most encouraging
sight one woman had at the Fair. It has been said that the moral
education of a child consists in imparting to him the three qualities,
obedience, sympathy, dignity. These all have been taught by the Fair,
and women, more swiftly perceptive than men, have probably learned their
lesson best.

One more profound effect of the Fair upon human character must be
mentioned, on character in those features which are of especial
importance to women. Our people have here gained a new sense of beauty,
and of beauty at its highest and rarest, not the beauty of ornament and
decoration, but that of proportion, balance, and ordered suitability of
parts. Every girl likes pretty things, but the rational basis of beauty
in the harmonious expression of use, and in furnishing to the eye the
quiet satisfaction of its normal demands, seldom attracts attention. At
Chicago these things became apparent. Each building outwardly announced
its inner purpose. Each gained its effect mainly by outline and balance
of masses rather than by richness of detail. Each was designed in
reference to its site and to its neighbor buildings. Almost every one
rested the eye which it still stimulated. Color, form, purpose,
proportion, sculpture, vegetation, stretches of water, the brown earth,
all cooperated toward the happy effect. What visitor could see it and
not have begotten in him the demand for beauty in his own surroundings?
It is said that the Centennial Exhibition affected the domestic
architecture and the household decoration of the whole eastern seaboard.
The Fair will do the same, but it will bring about a beauty of a higher,
simpler sort. In people from every section, artistic taste has been
developed, or even created; and not only in their houses, but in the
architecture of their public buildings and streets shall we see the
results of this vision of the White City by the Lake. Huddled houses in
incongruous surroundings will become less common. At heart we Americans
are idealists, and at a time when the general wealth is rapidly
increasing, it is an indescribable gain to have had such a training of
the aesthetic sense as days among the great buildings and nights on the
lagoons have brought to millions of our people. The teachability of the
common American is almost pathetic. One building was always crowded--the
Fine Arts Building; yet great pictures were the one thing exhibited with
which Americans have hitherto had little or no acquaintance. This
beauty, connected essentially with the feminine side of life, will
hereafter, through the influence of the Fair, become a more usual
possession of us all.

If such are the permanent gains for character which women in common with
men, yet even more than they, have derived from the Fair, there remain
to be considered certain helps which have been brought to women in some
of their most distinctive occupations. Of course they have had here an
opportunity to compare the different kinds of sewing-machines, pianos,
type-writers, telegraphs, clothes-wringers, stoves, and baby-carriages,
and no doubt they will do their future work with these complicated
engines more effectively because of such comparative study. But there
are three departments which ancestral usage has especially consecrated
to women, and to intelligent methods in each of these the Fair has given
a mighty impulse. These three departments are the care of the home, the
care of the young, and the care of the sick, the poor, and the
depraved.

At Philadelphia in 1876 Vienna bread was made known, and the native
article, sodden with saleratus, which up to that time had desolated the
country, began to disappear. The results in cookery from the Chicago
Exhibition will be wider. They touch the kitchen with intelligence at
more points. Where tradition has reigned unquestioned, science is
beginning to penetrate, and we are no longer allowed to eat without
asking why and what. This new "domestic science"--threatening word--was
set forth admirably in the Rumford Kitchen, where a capital thirty-cent
luncheon was served every day, compounded of just those ingredients
which the human frame could be demonstrated to require. The health-food
companies, too, arrayed their appetizing wares. Workingmen's homes
showed on how small a sum a family could live, and live well.
Arrangements for sterilizing water and milk were there, Atkinson
cookers, gas and kerosene stoves. The proper sanitation of the home
was taught, and boards of health turned out to the plain gaze of the
world their inquisitorial processes. Numberless means of increasing
the health, ease, and happiness of the household with the least
expenditure of time and money were here studied by crowds of despairing
housekeepers. Many, no doubt, were bewildered; but many, too, went away
convinced that the most ancient employment of women was rising to the
dignity and attractiveness of a learned profession.

When it is remembered that nine tenths of the teachers of elementary
schools are women, it can be seen how important for them was the
magnificent educational exhibit. Here could be studied all that the age
counts best in kindergarten, primary, grammar, high and normal schools,
and in all the varieties of training in cookery, sewing, dressmaking,
manual training, drawing, painting, carving. Many of the exhibitors
showed great skill in making their methods apprehensible to the
stranger.

And then there were the modes of bodily training, and the lamentable
image of the misformed average girl; and in the children's building
classes could actually be seen engaged in happy exercise, and close at
hand appliances for the nursery and the playground. Nor in the enlarged
appliances for woman's domestic life must those be omitted which tell
how cheaply and richly the girl may now obtain a college training like
her brother, and become as intelligent as he. No woman went away from
the educational exhibits of the Fair in the belief that woman's sphere
was necessarily narrow.

There is no need to dilate on the light shed by the Fair upon problems
of sickness, poverty, and crime. Everybody knows that nothing so
complete had been seen before. The Anthropological Building was a museum
of these subjects, and scattered in other parts of the Fair was much to
interest the puzzled and sympathetic soul. One could find out what an
ideal hospital was like, and how its service and appliances should be
ordered. One studied under competent teachers the care of the dependent
and delinquent classes. One learned to distinguish surface charity from
sound. As men grow busier and women more competent, the guidance of
philanthropy passes continually more and more into the gentler hands.
Women serve largely on boards of hospitals, prisons, charities, and
reforms, and urgently feel the need of ampler knowledge. The Fair did
much to show them ways of obtaining it.

Such are the permanent results of the Fair most likely to affect
women. They fall into three classes: the proofs women have given of
their independent power, their ability to organize and to work toward
a distant, difficult, and complex end; the enlargement of their
outlook, manifesting itself in a new sense of membership in a
nation, a more willing obedience to law, and a higher appreciation of
beauty; and, lastly, the direct assistance given to women in their
more characteristic employments of housekeeping, teaching, and
ministering to the afflicted. That these are all, or even the most
important, results which each woman will judge she has obtained, is not
pretended. Everybody saw at the Fair something which brought to
individual him or her a gain incomparable.

And, after all, the greatest thing was the total, glittering, murmurous,
restful, magical, evanescent Fair itself, seated by the blue waters,
wearing the five crowns, served by novel boatmen, and with the lap so
full of treasure that as piece by piece it was held up, it shone, was
wondered at, and was lost again in the pile. This amazing spectacle will
flash for years upon the inward eye of our people, and be a joy of their
solitude.


FOOTNOTES:

  [16] Published in _The Forum_ for December, 1891.




