XIV

WOMEN'S EDUCATION IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY[15]


One of the most distinctive and far-reaching movements of the nineteenth
century is that which has brought about the present large opportunities
for the higher education of women. Confining itself to no country, this
vast movement has advanced rapidly in some, slowly and timidly in
others. In America three broad periods mark its progress: first, the
period of quiescence, which ends about 1830; second, the period of
agitation, ending with the civil war; the third, though far as yet from
completion, may be called the period of accomplishment.

For the first two hundred years in the history of our country little
importance was attached to the education of women, though before the
nineteenth century began, twenty-four colleges had been founded for the
education of men. In the early years of this century private schools for
girls were expensive and short-lived. The common schools were the only
grades of public instruction open to young women. In the cities of
Massachusetts, where more was done for the education of boys than
elsewhere, girls were allowed to go to school only a small part of the
year, and in some places could even then use the schoolroom only in the
early hours of the day, or on those afternoons when the boys had a
half-holiday. Anything like a careful training of girls was not yet
thought of.

This comparative neglect of women is less to be wondered at when we
remember that the colleges which existed at the beginning of this
century had been founded to fit men for the learned professions,
chiefly for the ministry. Neither here nor elsewhere was it customary to
give advanced education to boys destined for business. The country,
too, was impoverished by the long struggle for independence. The
Government was bankrupt, unable to pay its veteran soldiers. Irritation
and unrest were everywhere prevalent until the ending of the second war
with England, in 1815. Immediately succeeding this began that great
migration to the West and South-west which carried thousands of the
most ambitious young men and women from the East to push our frontiers
farther and farther into the wilderness. Even in the older parts of
the country the population was widely scattered. The people lived for
the most part in villages and isolated farms. City life was uncommon. As
late as 1840 only nine per cent of the population was living in
cities of 8000 or more inhabitants. Under such conditions nothing more
than the bare necessities of education could be regarded.

But this very isolation bred a kind of equality. In district schools it
became natural for boys and girls to study together and to receive the
same instruction from teachers who were often young and enthusiastic.
These were as a rule college students, granted long winter vacations
from their own studies that they might earn money by teaching village
schools. Thus most young women shared with their brothers the best
elementary training the country afforded, while college education was
reserved for the few young men who were preparing for the ministry or
for some other learned profession.

From the beginning it had been the general custom of this country to
educate boys and girls together up to the college age. To-day in less
than six per cent of all our cities is there any separate provision of
schools for boys and girls. This habitual early start together has made
it natural for our men and women subsequently to read the same books, to
have the same tastes and interests, and jointly to approve a large
social freedom. On the whole, women have usually had more leisure than
men for the cultivating of scholarly tastes.

The first endowment of the higher education of women in this country was
made by the Moravians in the seminary for girls which they founded at
Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, in 1749. They founded another girls' seminary
at Lititz in 1794. Though both of these honorable foundations continue
in effective operation to-day, their influence has been for the most
part confined to the religious communion of their founders. In 1804 an
academy with wider connections was founded at Bradford, Massachusetts,
at first open to boys and girls, since 1836 limited to girls. From that
time academies and seminaries for girls increased rapidly. One of the
most notable was Troy Seminary, founded by Emma Hart Willard and
chartered in 1819. Miss Willard drew up broad and original plans for the
higher education of girls, laid them before President Monroe, appealed
to the New York Legislature for aid, and dreamed of establishing
something like collegiate training. More than three hundred students
entered her famous seminary, and for seventeen years she carried it on
with growing reputation. Her address to the President in 1819 is still a
strong statement of the importance to the republic of an enlightened and
disciplined womanhood.

Even more influential was the life and work of Mary Lyon, who in 1837
founded Mount Holyoke Seminary, and labored for the education of women
until her death, in 1849. Of strong religious nature, great courage and
resource, she went up and down New England securing funds and pupils.
Her rare gift of inspiring both men and women induced wide acceptance
of her ideals of character and intelligence. Seminaries patterned after
Mount Holyoke sprang up all over the land, and still remain as centres
of powerful influence, particularly in the Middle West and on the
Pacific Coast.

With this development, through the endowment of many excellent
seminaries, of the primary education of girls into something like
secondary or high-school opportunities, the period of quiescence comes
to an end. There follows a period of agitation when the full privilege
of college training side by side with men was demanded for women. This
agitation was closely connected on the one hand with the antislavery
movement and the general passion for moral reform at that time current;
and, on the other, with the interest in teaching and that study of its
methods which Horace Mann fostered. From 1830 to 1865 it was becoming
evident that women were destined to have a large share in the
instruction of children. For this work they sought to fit themselves,
and the reformers aided them. Oberlin College, which began as a
collegiate institute in 1833, was in 1850 chartered as a college. From
the beginning it admitted women, and in 1841 three women took its
diploma. Antioch College, under Horace Mann's leadership, opened in
1853, admitting women on equal terms with men. In 1855 Elmira College
was founded, the first institution chartered as a separate college for
women.

Even before the Civil War the commercial interests of the country had
become so much extended that trade was rising into a dignity comparable
to that of the learned professions. Men were more and more deserting
teaching for the business life, and their places, at first chiefly in
the lower grades, were being filled by women. During the five years of
the war this supersession of men by women teachers advanced rapidly. It
has since acquired such impetus that at present more than two thirds of
the training of the young of both sexes below the college grade has
fallen out of the hands of men. In the mean time, too, though in smaller
numbers, women have invaded the other professions and have even entered
into trade. These demonstrations of a previously unsuspected capacity
have been both the cause and the effect of enlarged opportunities for
mental equipment. The last thirty or forty years have seen the opening
of that new era in women's education which I have ventured to call the
period of accomplishment.

From the middle of the century the movement to open the state
universities to women, to found colleges for men and women on equal
terms, and to establish independent colleges for women spread rapidly.
From their first organization the state universities of Utah (1850),
Iowa (1856), Washington (1862), Kansas (1866), Minnesota (1868),
Nebraska (1871) admitted women. Indiana, founded in 1820, opened its
doors to women in 1868, and was followed in 1870 by Michigan, at that
time the largest and far the most influential of all the state
universities. From that time the movement became general. The example of
Michigan was followed until at the present time all the colleges and
universities of the West, excepting those under Catholic management, are
open to women. The only state university in the East, that of Maine,
admitted women in 1872. Virginia, Georgia, and Louisiana alone among all
the state universities of the country remain closed to women. This
sudden opening to women of practically all universities supported by
public funds is not more extraordinary than the immense endowments which
during the same period have been put into independent colleges for
women, or into colleges which admit men and women on equal terms. Of
these privately endowed colleges, Cornell, originally founded for men,
led the way in 1872 in opening its doors to women. The West and South
followed rapidly, the East more slowly. Of the 480 colleges which at the
end of the century are reported by the Bureau of Education, 336 admit
women; or, excluding the Catholic colleges, 80 per cent of all are open
to women. Of the sixty leading colleges in the United States there are
only ten in which women are not admitted to some department. These ten
are all on the Atlantic seaboard and are all old foundations.

This substantial accomplishment during the last forty years of the right
of women to a college education has not, however, resulted in fixing a
single type of college in which that education shall be obtained. On the
contrary, three clearly contrasted types now exist side by side. These
are the independent college, the coeducational college, and the
affiliated college.

To the independent college for women men are not admitted, though the
grade, the organization, and the general aim are supposed to be the same
as in the colleges exclusively for men. The first college of this type,
Elmira (1855), has been already mentioned. The four largest women's
colleges--Vassar, opened in 1861; Smith, in 1875; Wellesley, in 1875,
and Bryn Mawr, in 1885--take rank among the sixty leading colleges of
the country in wealth, equipment, teachers and students, and variety of
studies offered. Wells College, chartered as a college in 1870, the
Woman's College of Baltimore, opened in 1888, and Mt. Holyoke,
reorganized as a college in 1893, have also large endowments and
attendance. All the women's colleges are empowered to confer the same
degrees as are given in the men's colleges.

The development of coeducation, the prevailing type of education in the
United States for both men and women, has already been sufficiently
described. In coeducational colleges men and women have the same
instructors, recite in the same classes, and enjoy the same freedom in
choice of studies. To the faculties of these colleges women are
occasionally appointed, and, like their male colleagues, teach mixed
classes of men and women. Many coeducational colleges are without halls
of residence. Where these exist, special buildings are assigned to the
women students.

The affiliated colleges, while exclusively for women, are closely
connected with strong colleges for men, whose equipment and
opportunities they are expected in some degree to share. At present
there are five such: Radcliffe College, the originator of this type,
connected with Harvard University, and opened in 1879; Sophie Newcomb
Memorial College, at Tulane University, opened in 1886; the College for
Women of Western Reserve University, 1888; Barnard College, at Columbia
University, 1889; the Woman's College of Brown University, 1892. In all
these colleges the standards for entrance and graduation are the same as
those exacted from men in the universities with which they are
affiliated. To a considerable extent the instructors also are the same.

During the last quarter-century many professional schools have been
opened to women--schools of theology, law, medicine, dentistry,
pharmacy, technology, agriculture. The number of women entering these
professions is rapidly increasing. Since 1890 the increase of women
students in medicine is 64 per cent, in dentistry 205 per cent, in
pharmacy 190 per cent, in technology and agriculture 194 per cent.

While this great advance has been accomplished in America, women in
England and on the Continent, especially during the last thirty years,
have been demanding better education. Though much more slowly and in
fewer numbers than in this country, they have everywhere succeeded in
securing decided advantages. No country now refuses them a share in
liberal study, in the instruction of young children, and in the
profession of medicine. As might be expected, English-speaking women,
far more than any others, have won and used the opportunities of
university training. Since 1860 women have been studying at Cambridge,
England, and since 1879 at Oxford. At these ancient seats of learning
they have now every privilege except the formal degree. To all other
English and Scotch universities, and to the universities of the British
colonies, women are admitted, and from them they receive degrees.

In the most northern countries of Europe--in Iceland, Finland, Norway,
Sweden, Denmark--the high schools and universities are freely open to
women. In eastern Europe able women have made efforts to secure advanced
study, and these efforts have been most persistent in Russia and since
the Crimean war. When denied in their own land, Russian women have
flocked to the Swiss and French universities, and have even gone in
considerable numbers to Finland and to Italy. Now Russia is slowly
responding to its women's entreaties. During the last ten years the
universities of Rumania, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Greece have been open to
women; while in Constantinople the American College for Girls offers the
women of the East the systematic training of the New England type of
college. In western, central, and southern Europe all university doors
are open. In these countries, degrees and honors may everywhere be had
by women, except in Germany and Austria. Even here, by special
permission of the Minister of Education, or the professor in charge,
women may hear lectures. Each year, too, more women are granted degrees
by special vote and as exceptional cases.

In brief, it may be said that practically all European universities are
now open to women. No American woman of scholarship, properly qualified
for the work she undertakes, need fear refusal if she seeks the
instruction of the greatest European scholars in her chosen field. Each
year American women are taking with distinction the highest university
degrees of the Continent. To aid them, many fellowships and graduate
scholarships, ranging in value from $300 to $1000, are offered for
foreign study by our colleges for women and by private associations of
women who seek to promote scholarship. Large numbers of ambitious young
women who are preparing themselves for teaching or for the higher fields
of scientific research annually compete for this aid. Three years ago an
association was formed for maintaining an American woman's table in the
Zoological Station at Naples. By paying $500 a year they are thus able
to grant to selected students the most favorable conditions for
biological investigation. This association has also just offered a prize
of $1000, to be granted two years hence, for the best piece of original
scientific work done in the mean time by a woman. The American Schools
of Classical Studies in Athens and Rome admit women on the same terms as
men, and award their fellowships to men and women indifferently. One of
these fellowships, amounting to $1000 a year, has just been won by a
woman.

The experience, then, of the last thirty years shows a condition of
women's education undreamed of at the beginning of the century. It shows
that though still hampered here and there by timorous restrictions,
women are in substantial possession of much the same opportunities as
are available for men. It shows that they have both the capacity and the
desire for college training, that they can make profitable and approved
use of it when obtained, and that they are eager for that broader and
more original study after college work is over which is at once the
most novel and the most glorious feature of university education to-day.
Indeed, women have taken more than their due proportion of the prizes,
honors, and fellowships which have been accessible to them on the same
terms as to men. Their resort to institutions of higher learning has
increased far more than that of men. In 1872 the total number of college
students in each million of population was 590. Last year it had risen
to 1270, much more than doubling in twenty-seven years. During this time
the number of men had risen from 540 to 947, or had not quite doubled.
The women rose from 50 in 1872 to 323 in 1899, having increased their
former proportional number more than six times, and this advance has
also been maintained in graduate and professional schools.

The immensity of the change which the last century has wrought in
women's education may best be seen by setting side by side the
conditions at its beginning and at its close. In 1800 no colleges for
women existed, and only two endowed schools for girls--these belonging
to a small German sect. They had no high schools, and the best grammar
schools in cities were open to them only under restrictions. The
commoner grammar and district schools, and an occasional private school
dedicated to "accomplishments," were their only avenues to learning.
There was little hostility to their education, since it was generally
assumed by men and by themselves that intellectual matters did not
concern them. No profession was open to them, not even that of teaching,
and only seven possible trades and occupations.

In 1900 a third of all the college students in the United States are
women. Sixty per cent of the pupils in the secondary schools, both
public and private, are girls--_i.e._ more girls are preparing for
college than boys. Women having in general more leisure than men, there
is reason to expect that there will soon be more women than men in our
colleges and graduate schools. The time, too, has passed when girls went
to college to prepare themselves solely for teaching or for other
bread-winning occupations. In considerable numbers they now seek
intellectual resources and the enrichment of their private lives. Thus
far between 50 and 60 per cent of women college graduates have at some
time taught. In the country at large more than 70 per cent of the
teaching is done by women, in the North Atlantic portion over 80 per
cent. Even in the secondary schools, public and private, more women than
men are teaching, though in all other countries the advanced instruction
of boys is exclusively in the hands of men. Never before has a nation
intrusted all the school training of the vast majority of its future
population, men as well as women, to women alone.


FOOTNOTES:

  [15] Published in _The New York Evening Post_, 1900.




