III

PAPERS BY ALICE FREEMAN PALMER


While Mrs. Palmer always avoided writing, and thought--generous
prodigal!--that her work was best accomplished by spoken words, her
complying spirit could not always resist the appeals of magazine
editors. I could wish now that their requests had been even more urgent.
And I believe that those who read these pages will regret that one
possessed of such breadth of view, clearness, charm and cogency of style
should have left a literary record so meagre. All these papers are
printed precisely as she left them, without the change of a word. I have
not even ventured on correction in the printed report of one of her
addresses, that on going to college. Its looser structure well
illustrates her mode of moving an audience and bringing its mothers to
the course of conduct she approved.




XIII

THREE TYPES OF WOMEN'S COLLEGES[14]


American college education in the quarter-century since the Civil War
has undergone more numerous and more fundamental changes than befell it
in a hundred years before. These changes have not occurred unnoticed. A
multitude of journals and associations are busy every year discussing
the results of the experiments in teaching which go on with increasing
daring and fruitfulness in nearly all our colleges and schools. There
still exists a wide divergence of opinion among the directors of men's
colleges in regard to a variety of important questions: the conditions
and proper age for entrance; the length of the course of study; the
elective system, both of government and instruction; the requirements
for the bachelor's and master's degrees; the stress to be laid on
graduate work--these, and many sequents of these, touching the physical,
social, and religious life of the young men of the land, are undergoing
sharp discussion.

The advanced education of young women is exposed to all the
uncertainties which beset the education of men, but it has perplexities
of its own in addition. After fifty years of argument and twenty-five of
varied and costly experiment, it might be easy to suppose that we are
still in chaos, almost as far from knowing the best way to train a woman
as we were at the beginning. No educational convention meets without a
session devoted to the difficulties in "the higher education of women,"
so important has the subject become, and so hard is it to satisfy in any
one system the variety of its needs. Yet chaos may be thought more
chaotic than it really is. In the din of discussion it would not be
strange if the fair degree of concord already reached should sometimes
be missed. We are certainly still far from having found the one best
method of college training for girls. Some of us hope we may never find
it, believing that in diversity, no less than in unity, there is
strength. But already three tolerably clear, consistent, and accredited
types of education appear, which it will be the purpose of this paper to
explain. The nature of each, with its special strengths and weaknesses,
will be set forth in no spirit of partisanship, but in the belief that a
cool understanding of what is doing at present among fifty thousand
college girls may make us wiser and more patient in our future growth.
What, then, are the three types, and how have they arisen?

When to a few daring minds the conviction came that education was a
right of personality rather than of sex, and when there was added to
this growing sentiment the pressing demand for educated women as
teachers and as leaders in philanthropy, the simplest means of equipping
women with the needful preparation was found in the existing schools and
colleges. Scattered all over the country were colleges for men, young
for the most part and small, and greatly lacking anything like a proper
endowment. In nearly every state west of the Alleghanies, "universities"
had been founded by the voluntary tax of the whole population. Connected
with all the more powerful religious denominations were schools and
colleges which called upon their adherents for gifts and students. These
democratic institutions had the vigor of youth, and were ambitious and
struggling. "Why," asked the practical men of affairs who controlled
them, "should not our daughters go on with our sons from the public
schools to the university which we are sacrificing to equip and
maintain? Why should we duplicate the enormously expensive appliances of
education, when our existing colleges would be bettered by more
students? By far the large majority of our boys and girls study together
as children; they work together as men and women in all the important
concerns of life; why should they be separated in the lecture room for
only the four years between eighteen and twenty-two, when that
separation means the doubling of an equipment already too poor by
half?"

It is not strange that with this and much more practical reasoning of a
similar kind, coeducation was established in some colleges at their
beginning, in others after debate and by a radical change in policy.
When once the chivalrous desire was aroused to give girls as good an
education as their brothers, western men carried out the principle
unflinchingly. From the kindergarten to the preparation for the
doctorate of philosophy, educational opportunities are now practically
alike for men and women. The total number of colleges of arts and
sciences empowered by law to give degrees, reporting to Washington in
1888, was three hundred and eighty-nine. Of these two hundred and
thirty-seven, or nearly two thirds, were coeducational. Among them are
all the state universities, and nearly all the colleges under the
patronage of the Protestant sects.

Hitherto I have spoken as if coeducation were a western movement; and in
the West it certainly has had greater currency than elsewhere. But it
originated, at least so far as concerns superior secondary training, in
Massachusetts. Bradford Academy, chartered in 1804, is the oldest
incorporated institution in the country to which boys and girls were
from the first admitted; but it closed its department for boys in 1836,
three years after the foundation of coeducational Oberlin, and in the
very year when Mount Holyoke was opened by Mary Lyon, in the large hope
of doing for young women what Harvard had been founded to do for young
men just two hundred years before. Ipswich and Abbot Academies in
Massachusetts had already been chartered to educate girls alone. It has
been the dominant sentiment in the East that boys and girls should be
educated separately. The older, more generously endowed, more
conservative seats of learning, inheriting the complications of the
dormitory system, have remained closed to women. The requirements for
the two sexes are thought to be different. Girls are to be trained for
private, boys for public life. Let every opportunity be given, it is
said, for developing accomplished, yes, even learned women; but let the
process of acquiring knowledge take place under careful guardianship,
among the refinements of home life, with graceful women, their
instructors, as companions, and with suitable opportunities for social
life. Much stress is laid upon assisting girl students to attain
balanced characters, charming manners, and ambitions that are not
unwomanly. A powerful moral, often a deeply religious earnestness,
shaped the discussion, and finally laid the foundations of woman's
education in the East.

In the short period of the twenty years after the war the four women's
colleges which are the richest in endowments and students of any in the
world were founded and set in motion. These colleges--Vassar, opened in
1865, Wellesley and Smith in 1875, and Bryn Mawr in 1885--have received
in gifts of every kind about $6,000,000, and are educating nearly two
thousand students. For the whole country the Commissioner of Education
reports two hundred and seven institutions for the superior instruction
of women, with more than twenty-five thousand students. But these
resources proved inadequate. There came an increasing demand, especially
from teachers, for education of all sorts; more and more, too, for
training in subjects of advanced research. For this, only the best
equipped men's universities were thought sufficient, and women began to
resort to the great universities of England and Germany. In an attempt
to meet a demand of this sort the Harvard Annex began, twelve years ago,
to provide women with instruction by members of the Harvard Faculty.

Where, in a great centre of education, for many years books have
accumulated, and museums and laboratories have multiplied, where the
prestige and associations of a venerable past have grown up, and
cultivated surroundings assure a scholarly atmosphere; in short, in the
shadow of all that goes to make up the gracious influences of an old and
honorable university, it was to be expected that earnest women would
gather to seek a share in the enthusiasm for scholarship, and the
opportunities for acquiring it, which their brothers had enjoyed for two
hundred and fifty years.

These, then--coeducation, the woman's college, and the annex--are the
three great types of college in which the long agitation in behalf of
women's education has thus far issued. Of course they are but
types--that is, they do not always exist distinct and entire; they are
rather the central forms to which many varieties approximate. The
characteristic features of each I must now describe, and, as I promised
at the beginning, point out their inherent strengths and weaknesses; for
each, while having much to recommend it, still bears in itself the
defects of its qualities. To explain dangers as well as promises is the
business of the critic, as contrasted with that of the advocate. To this
business I now turn, and I may naturally have most in mind the
University of Michigan, my own Alma Mater, Wellesley College, with whose
government I have been connected for a dozen years, and the Harvard
Annex, whose neighbor I now am.

Coeducation involves, as its name implies, the education of a company of
young men and women as a single body. To the two sexes alike are
presented the same conditions of admission, of opportunities during the
course, of requirements for the degrees, of guardianship, of discipline,
of organization. The typical features are identical classrooms,
libraries, and laboratories, occupied at the same time, under the same
instructors; and the same honors for like work. Ordinarily all the
instructors are men, although in a few universities professorships are
held by women. Usually no dormitories or boarding-houses are provided
for either the young men or women, and no more surveillance is kept over
the one than over the other. This feature, however, is not essential. At
Cornell, Oberlin, and elsewhere, often out of local necessity, buildings
have been provided where the young women may--in some instances,
must--live together under the ordinary regulations of home life, with a
lady in charge. But in most of the higher coeducational institutions the
principle has from the first been assumed that students of both sexes
become sufficiently matured by eighteen years of home, school, and
social life--especially under the ample opportunities for learning the
uses of freedom which our social habits afford--safely to undertake a
college course, and advantageously to order their daily lives. Of course
all have a moral support in the advice and example of their teachers,
and they are held to good intellectual work by the perpetual demand of
the classroom, the laboratory, and the thesis.

The girl who goes to the University of Michigan to-day, just as when I
entered there in 1872, finds her own boarding-place in one of the quiet
homes of the pleasant little city whose interest centres in the two
thousand five hundred students scattered within its borders. She makes
the business arrangements for her winter's fuel and its storage; she
finds her washerwoman or her laundry; she arranges her own hours of
exercise, of study, and of sleep; she chooses her own society, clubs,
and church. The advice she gets comes from another girl student of
sophomoric dignity who chances to be in the same house, or possibly from
a still more advanced young woman whom she met on the journey, or sat
near in church on her first Sunday. Strong is the comradeship among
these ambitious girls, who nurse one another in illness, admonish one
another in health, and rival one another in study only less eagerly than
they all rival the boys. In my time in college the little group of
girls, suddenly introduced into the army of young men, felt that the
fate of our sex hung upon proving that "lady Greek" involved the
accents, and that women's minds were particularly absorptive of the
calculus and metaphysics. And still in those sections where, with
growing experience, the anxieties about coeducation have been allayed, a
healthy and hearty relationship and honest rivalry between young men and
women exists. It is a stimulating atmosphere, and develops in good stock
a strength and independent balance which tell in after-life.

In estimating the worth of such a system as this, we may say at once
that it does not meet every need of a woman's nature. No system can--no
system that has yet been devised. A woman is an object of attraction to
men, and also in herself so delicately organized as to be fitted
peculiarly for the graces and domesticities of life. The exercise of her
special function of motherhood demands sheltered circumstances and
refined moral perceptions. But then, over and above all this, she is a
human being--a person, that is, who has her own way in the world to
make, and who will come to success or failure, in her home or outside
it, according as her judgment is fortified, her observations and
experiences are enlarged, her courage is rendered strong and calm, her
moral estimates are trained to be accurate, broad, and swift. In a large
tract of her character--is it the largest tract?--her own needs and
those of the young man are identical. Both are rational persons, and the
greater part of the young man's education is addressed to his rational
personality rather than to the peculiarities of his sex. Why, the
defenders of coeducation ask, may not the same principles apply to
women? Why train a girl specifically to be a wife and mother, when no
great need is felt for training a boy to be a husband and father? In
education, as a public matter, the two sexes meet on common ground. The
differences must be attended to privately.

At any rate, whatever may be thought of the relative importance of the
two sides--the woman side and the human side--it will be generally
agreed that the training of a young woman is apt to be peculiarly weak
in agencies for bringing home to her the importance of direct and
rational action. The artificialities of society, the enfeebling
indulgence extended to pretty silliness, the gallantry of men glad ever
to accept the hard things and leave to her the easy--by these influences
any comfortably placed and pleasing girl is pretty sure to be surrounded
in her early teens. The coeducationists think it wholesome that in her
later teens and early twenties she should be subjected to an impartial
judgment, ready to estimate her without swerving, and to tell her as
freely when she is silly, ignorant, fussy, or indolent as her brother
himself is told. Coeducation, as a system, must minimize the different
needs of men and women; it appeals to them and provides for them alike,
and then allows the natural tastes and instincts of each scope for
individuality. The strengths of this system, accordingly, are to be
found in its tendency to promote independence of judgment, individuality
of tastes, common-sense and foresight in self-guidance, disinclination
to claim favor, interest in learning for its own sake; friendly,
natural, unromantic, non-sentimental relations with men. The early fear
that coeducation would result in classroom romances has proved
exaggerated. These young women do marry; so do others; so do young men.
Marriage is not in itself an evil, and many happy homes have been
founded in the belief that long and quiet acquaintance in intellectual
work, and intimate interests of the same deeper sort, form as solid a
basis for a successful marriage as ballroom intercourse or a summer at
Bar Harbor.

The weaknesses of this system are merely the converse of its strengths.
It does not usually provide for what is distinctively feminine. Refining
home influences and social oversight are largely lacking; and if they
are wanting in the home from which the student comes, it must not be
expected that she will show, on graduation, the graces of manner, the
niceties of speech and dress, and the shy delicacy which have been
encouraged in her more tenderly nurtured sister.

The woman's college is organized under a different and far more complex
conception. The chief business of the man's college, whether girls are
admitted to it or not, is to give instruction of the best available
quality in as many subjects as possible; to furnish every needed
appliance for the acquirement of knowledge and the encouragement of
special investigation. The woman's college aims to do all this, but it
aims also to make for its students a home within its own walls and to
develop other powers in them than the merely intellectual. At the
outset this may seem a simple matter, but it quickly proves as
complicated as life itself. When girls are gathered together by
hundreds, isolated from the ordinary conditions of established
communities, the college stands to them preeminently _in loco parentis_.
It must provide resident physicians and trained nurses, be ready in case
of illness and, to prevent illness, must direct exercise, sleep, hygiene
and sanitation, accepting the responsibility not only of the present
health of its students, but also in large degree of their physical power
in the future. It generally furnishes them means of social access to the
best men and women of their neighborhood; it draws to them leaders in
moral and social reforms, to give inspiration in high ideals and
generous self-sacrifice, and it undertakes religious instruction while
seeking still to respect the varied faiths of its students. In short,
the arrangements of the woman's college, as conceived by founders,
trustees, and faculty, have usually aimed with conscious directness at
building up character, inspiring to the service of others, cultivating
manners, developing taste, and strengthening health, as well as
providing the means of sound learning.

It may be said that a similar upbuilding of the personal life results
from the training of every college that is worthy of the name; and
fortunately it is impossible to enlarge knowledge without, to some
extent, enlarging life. But the question is one of directness or
indirectness of aim. The woman's college puts this aim in the foreground
side by side with the acquisition of knowledge. By setting its students
apart in homogeneous companies, it seeks to cultivate common ideals. Of
its teaching force, a large number are women who live with the students
in the college buildings, sit with them at table, join in their
festivities, and in numberless intimate ways share and guide the common
life. Every student, no matter how large the college, has friendly
access at any time to several members of the faculty, quite apart from
her relations with them in the classroom. In appointing these women to
the faculty no board of trustees would consider it sufficient that a
candidate was an accomplished specialist. She must be this, but she
should be also a lady of unobjectionable manners and influential
character; she should have amiability and a discreet temper, for she is
to be a guiding force in a complex community, continually in the
presence of her students, an officer of administration and government no
less than of instruction. Harvard and Johns Hopkins can ask their pupils
to attend the lectures of a great scholar, however brusque his bearing
or unbrushed his hair. They will not question their geniuses too
sharply, and will trust their students to look out for their own
proprieties of dress, manners, and speech. But neither Wellesley nor any
other woman's college could find a place in its faculty for a woman
Sophocles or Sylvester. Learning alone is not enough for women.

Not only in the appointment of its teaching body, but in all its
appliances the separate college aims at a rounded refinement, at
cultivating a sense of beauty, at imparting simple tastes and
generous sympathies. To effect this, pictures are hung on the walls,
statues and flowers decorate the rooms, concerts bring music to the
magnified home, and parties and receptions are paid for out of the
college purse. The influence of hundreds of mentally eager girls
upon the characters of one another, when they live for four years in
the closest daily companionship, is most interesting to see. I have
watched the ennobling process go on for many years among Wellesley
students, and I am confident that no more healthy, generous, democratic,
beauty-loving, serviceable society of people exists than the girls'
college community affords. That choicest product of modern civilization,
the American girl, is here in all her diverse colors. She comes from
more than a dozen religious denominations and from every political
party; from nearly every state and territory in the Union, and from
the foreign lands into which English and American missionaries,
merchants, or soldiers have penetrated. The farmer's daughter from
the western prairies is beside the child whose father owns half a dozen
mill towns of New England. The pride of a Southern senator's home
rooms with an anxious girl who must borrow all the money for her
college course because her father's life was given for the Union. Side
by side in the boats, on the tennis-grounds, at the table, arm in arm on
the long walks, debating in the societies, vigorous together in the
gymnasium and the library, girls of every grade gather the rich
experiences which will tincture their future toil, and make the world
perpetually seem an interesting and friendly place. They here learn to
"see great things large, and little things small."

This detailed explanation of the peculiarities of the girls' college
renders unnecessary any long discussion of its strengths and weaknesses.
According to the point of view of the critic these peculiarities
themselves will be counted means of invigoration or of enfeeblement.
Living so close to one another as girls here do, the sympathetic and
altruistic virtues acquire great prominence. Petty selfishness retreats
or becomes extinct. An earnest, high-minded spirit is easily cultivated,
and the break between college life and the life from which the student
comes is reduced to a minimum.

It is this very fact which is often alleged as the chief objection to
the girls' college. It is said that its students never escape from
themselves and their domestic standard, that they do not readily acquire
a scientific spirit, and become individual in taste and conduct. Is it
desirable that they should? That I shall not undertake to decide. I have
merely tried to explain the kinds of human work which the different
types of higher training-schools are best fitted to effect for women.
Whether the one or the other kind of work needs most to be done is a
question of social ethics which the future must answer. I have set forth
a type, perhaps in the endeavor after clearness exaggerating a little
its outlines, and contrasting it more sharply with its two neighbor
types than individual cases would justify. There are colleges for women
which closely approximate in aim and method the colleges for men. No
doubt those which move furthest in the directions I have indicated are
capable of modification. But I believe what I have said gives a
substantially true account of an actually existing type--a type powerful
in stirring the enthusiasm of those who are submitted to it, subtle in
its penetrating influences over them, and effective in winning the
confidence of a multitude of parents who would never send their
daughters to colleges of a different type.

The third type is the "annex," a recent and interesting experiment in
the education of girls, whose future it is yet difficult to predict.
Only a few cases exist, and as the Harvard Annex is the most
conspicuous, by reason of its dozen years of age and nearly two hundred
students, I shall describe it as the typical example. In the Harvard
Annex groups of young women undertake courses of study in classes whose
instruction is furnished entirely by members of the Harvard Faculty. No
college officer is obliged to give this instruction, and the Annex staff
of teachers is, therefore, liable to considerable variation from year to
year. Though the usual four classes appear in its curriculum, the large
majority of its students devote themselves to special subjects. A
wealthy girl turns from fashionable society to pursue a single course in
history or economics; a hard-worked teacher draws inspiration during a
few afternoons each week from a famous Greek or Latin professor; a woman
who has been long familiar with French literature explores with a
learned specialist some single period in the history of the language.
Because the opportunities for advanced and detached study are so
tempting, many ladies living in the neighborhood of the Annex enter one
or more of its courses. There are consequently among its students women
much older than the average of those who attend the colleges.

The business arrangements are taken charge of by a committee of ladies
and gentlemen, who provide classrooms, suggest boarding-places, secure
the instructors, solicit the interest of the public--in short, manage
all the details of an independent institution; for the noteworthy
feature of its relation to its powerful neighbor is this: that the two,
while actively friendly, have no official or organic tie whatever. In
the same city young men and young women of collegiate rank are studying
the same subjects under the same instructors; but there are two
colleges, not one. No detail in the management of Harvard College is
changed by the presence in Cambridge of the Harvard Annex. If the
corporation of Harvard should assume the financial responsibility,
supervise the government, and give the girl graduates degrees, making no
other changes whatever, the Annex would then become a school of the
university, about as distinct from Harvard College as the medical, law,
or divinity schools. The students of the medical school do not attend
the same lectures or frequent the same buildings as the college
undergraduates. The immediate governing boards of college and medical
school are separate. But here comparison fails, for the students of the
professional schools may elect courses in the college and make use of
all its resources. This the young women cannot do. They have only the
rights of all Cambridge ladies to attend the many public lectures and
readings of the university.

The Harvard Annex is, then, to-day a woman's college, with no degrees,
no dormitories, no women instructors, and with a staff of teachers made
up from volunteers of another college. The Fay House, where offices,
lecture and waiting rooms, library and laboratories are gathered, is in
the heart of Old Cambridge, but at a little distance from the college
buildings. This is the centre of the social and literary life of the
students. Here they gather their friends at afternoon teas; here the
various clubs which have sprung up, as numbers have increased, hold
their meetings and give their entertainments. The students lodge in all
parts of Cambridge and the neighboring towns, and are directly
responsible for their conduct only to themselves. The ladies of the
management are lavish in time and care to make the girls' lives happy
and wholesome; the secretary is always at hand to give advice; but the
personal life of the students is as separate and independent as in the
typical coeducational college.

It is impossible to estimate either favorably or adversely the
permanent worth of an undertaking still in its infancy. Manifestly,
the opportunities for the very highest training are here superb, if
they happen to exist at all. In this, however, is the incalculable
feature of the system. The Annex lives by favor, not by right, and it is
impossible to predict what the extent of favor may at any time be. A
girl hears that an admirable course of lectures has been given on a
topic in which she is greatly interested. She arranges to join the
Annex and enter the course, but learns in the summer vacation that
through pressure of other work the professor will be unable to teach in
the Annex the following year. The fact that favor rules, and not
rights, peculiarly hampers scientific and laboratory courses, and
for its literary work obliges the Annex largely to depend on its own
library. Yet when all these weaknesses are confessed--and by none are
they confessed more frankly than by the wise and devoted managers of the
Annex themselves--it should be said that hitherto they have not
practically hindered the formation of a spirit of scholarship,
eager, free and sane to an extraordinary degree. The Annex girl
succeeds in remaining a private and unobserved gentlewoman, while still,
in certain directions, pushing her studies to an advanced point seldom
reached elsewhere.

A plan in some respects superficially analogous to the American annex
has been in operation for many years at the English, and more recently
at some of the Scotch universities, where a hall or college for women
uses many of the resources of the university. But this plan is so
complicated with the peculiar organization of English university life
that it cannot usefully be discussed here. In the few colleges in this
country where, very recently, the annex experiment is being tried, its
methods vary markedly.

Barnard College in New York is an annex of Columbia only in a sense, for
not all her instruction is given by Columbia's teaching force, though
Columbia will confer degrees upon her graduates. The new Woman's College
at Cleveland sustains temporarily the same relations to Adelbert
College, though to a still greater extent she provides independent
instruction.

In both Barnard and Cleveland women are engaged in instruction and in
government. Indeed, the new annexes which have arisen in the last three
years seem to promise independent colleges for women in the immediate
neighborhood of, and in close relationship with, older and better
equipped universities for men, whose resources they can to some extent
use, whose standards they can apply, whose tests they can meet. When
they possess a fixed staff of teachers they are not, of course, liable
to the instabilities which at present beset the Harvard Annex. So far,
however, as these teachers belong to the annex, and are not drawn from
the neighboring university, the annex is assimilated to the type of the
ordinary woman's college, and loses its distinctive merits. If the
connection between it and the university should ever become so close
that it had the same right to the professors as the university itself,
it would become a question whether the barriers between the men's and
the women's lecture rooms could be economically maintained.

The preceding survey has shown how in coeducation a woman's study is
carried on inside a man's college, in the women's college outside it,
in the annex beside it. Each of these situations has its advantage. But
will the community be content to accept this; permanently to forego the
counter advantages, and even after it fully realizes the powers and
limitations of the different types, firmly to maintain them in their
distinctive vigor? Present indications render this improbable. Already
coeducational colleges incline to more careful leadership for their
girls. The separate colleges, with growing wealth, are learning to value
intrepidity, and are carrying their operations close up to the lands of
the Ph.D. The annex swings in its middle air, sometimes inclining to the
one side, sometimes to the other. And outside them all, the great body
of men's colleges continually find it harder to maintain their
isolation, and extend one privilege after another to the seeking sex.

The result of all these diversities is the most instructive body of
experiment that the world has seen for determining the best ways of
bringing woman to her powers. While the public mind is so uncertain, so
liable to panic, and so doubtful whether, after all, it is not better
for a girl to be a goose, the many methods of education assist one
another mightily in their united warfare against ignorance, selfish
privileges, and antiquated ideals. It is well that for a good while to
come woman's higher education should be all things to all mothers, if by
any means it may save girls. Those who are hardy enough may continue to
mingle their girls with men; while a parent who would be shocked that
her daughter should do anything so ambiguous as to enter a man's college
may be persuaded to send her to a girls'. Those who find it easier to
honor an old university than the eager life of a young college, may be
tempted into an annex. The important thing is that the adherents of
these differing types should not fall into jealousy, and belittle the
value of those who are performing a work which they themselves cannot do
so well. To understand one another kindly is the business of the
hour--to understand and to wait.


FOOTNOTES:

  [14] Published in _The Forum_ for September, 1891.




