X

NECESSARY LIMITATIONS OF THE ELECTIVE SYSTEM


The preceding paper has sufficiently discussed the impossible
limitations of the elective system, and has shown with some minuteness
the grounds of their impossibility. The methods there examined are the
only ones suggested by my critics. They all agree in this, that they
seek to narrow the scope of choice. They try to combine with it a
hostile factor, and they differ merely in their mode of combination. The
first puts a restraining check before election; the second puts one by
its side; the third makes the two inseparable by allowing nothing to be
chosen which is not first prescribed. The general purpose of all these
methods is mine also. Election must be limited. Unchartered choice is
licentious and self-destructive. I quarrel with them only because the
modes of effecting their purpose tend to produce results of a transient
and inappropriate sort. The aim of education, as I conceive it, is to
spiritualize the largest possible number of persons, that is, to teach
them how to do their own thinking and willing and to do it well. But
these methods effect something widely different. They either
aristocratize where they should democratize, or they belittle where they
should mature, or else they professionalize where they should humanize.
A common trouble besets them all: the limiting authority is placed in
external and arbitrary juxtaposition to the personal initiative which it
professes to support. It should grow out of this initiative and be its
interpreter and realization. By limitation of choice the proposers of
these schemes appear to mean making choice less. I mean fortifying it,
keeping it true to itself, making it more. Control that diminishes the
quantity of choice is one thing; control that raises the quality, quite
another. How important is this distinction and how frequently it is
forgotten! Words like "limitation," "control," "authority," "obedience,"
are words of majesty, but words also of doubtful import. They carry a
freight of wisdom or of folly, according to the end towards which they
steer. In order to sanction or discard limitations which induce
obedience, we must bear that end in mind. Let us stop a moment, and see
that we have it in mind now.

Old educational systems are often said to have erred by excess of
authority. I could not say so. The elective system, if it is to
possess the future, must become as authoritative as they. More
accurately we say that their authority was of a wrong sort. A father may
exercise an authority over his child no less directive than that of
the master over the slave; but the father is trying to accomplish
something which the master disregards; the father hopes to make the
will of another strong, the master to make it weak; the father
commands what the child himself would wish, had he sufficient
experience. The child's obedience accordingly enlightens, steadies,
invigorates his independent will. Invigoration is the purpose of the
command. The authority is akin--secretly akin--to the child's own
desires. No alien power intervenes, as when a slave obeys. Here a
foreign will thwarts the slave's proper motions. Over against his own
legitimate desires, the desire of a totally different being appears
and claims precedence. Obedience like this brings no ennoblement.
The oftener a child obeys, the less of a child is he; the oftener a
slave, the more completely he is a slave. Roughly to say, then, that
submission to authority is healthy for a college boy, argues a mental
confusion. There are two kinds of authority,--the authority of moral
guidance, and the authority of repressive control: parental authority,
respecting and vivifying the individual life and thus continually
tending to supersede itself; and masterly authority, whose command,
out of relation to the obeyer's wish, tends ever to bring the obedient
into bondage. Which shall college authority be? Authority is necessary,
ever-present authority. If the young man's choice is to become a
thing of worth, it must be encompassed with limitations. But as the
need of these limitations springs from the imperfections of choice,
so should their aim be to perfect choice, not to repress it. To impose
limitations which do not ultimately enlarge the youth they bind is to
make the means of education "oblige against its main end."

This moral authority is what the new education seeks. To a casual eye,
the colleges of to-day seem to be growing disorganized; a closer view
shows construction taking place, but taking place along the lines of the
vital distinction just pointed out. Men are striving to bring about a
germane and ethical authority in the room of the baser mechanical
authorities of the past. In this distinction, then, a clue is to be
found which, if followed up, will lead us away from impossible
limitations of the elective system, and conduct us at length to the
possible, nay, to the inevitable ones. As the elective principle is
essentially ethical, its limitations, if helpfully congruous, must be
ethical too. They must be simply the means of bringing home to the young
chooser the sacred conditions of choice; which conditions, if I rightly
understand them, may compactly be entitled those of intentionality,
information, and persistence. To secure these conditions, limitations
exist. In the very nature of choice such conditions are implied. Choice
is sound as they prevail, whimsical as they diminish. An education
which lays stress on the elective principle is bound to lay stress on
these conditions also. It cannot slip over into lazy ways of letting its
students drift, and still look for credit as an elective system. People
will distrust it. That is why they distrust Harvard to-day. The
objections brought against the elective system of Harvard are in reality
not levelled against the elective system at all. They are directed
against its bastard brother, _laissez-faire_. Objectors suspect that the
conditions of choice which I have named are not fulfilled. They are not
fulfilled, I confess, or rather I stoutly maintain. To come anywhere
near fulfilling them requires long time and study, and action unimpeded
by a misconceiving community. Both time and study Harvard has given, has
given largely. The records of scholarship and deportment which I
exhibited in my first paper show in how high a degree Harvard has
already been able to remove from choice the capricious, ignorant, and
unsteadfast characteristics which rightly bring it into disrepute. But
much remains to do, and in that doing we are hampered by the fact that a
portion of the public is still looking in wrong directions. It cannot
get over its hankering after the delusive modes of limitation which I
have discussed. It does not persistently see that at present the proper
work of education is the study of means by which self-direction may be
rendered safe. Leaders of education themselves see this but dimly, as
the papers of my critics naively show. Until choice was frankly accepted
as the fit basis for the direction of a person by a person, its
fortifying limitations could not be studied. Now they must be studied,
now that the old methods of autocratic control are breaking down. As a
moral will comes to be recognized as the best sort of steam power, the
modes of generating that power acquire new claims to attention.
Henceforth the training of the will must be undertaken by the elective
system as an integral part of its discipline.

I am not so presumptuous as to attempt to prophesy the precise forms
which methods of moral guidance will take. Moral guidance is a delicate
affair. Its spirit is more important than its procedure. Flexibility is
its strength. Methods final, rigid, and minute do not belong to it. Nor
can it afford to forget the one great truth of _laissez-faire_, that
wills which are to be kept fresh and vigorous will not bear much looking
after. Time, too, is an important factor in the shaping of moral
influences. Experiments now in progress at Harvard and elsewhere must
discriminate safe from unsafe limitations. Leaving then to the future
the task of showing how wide the scope of maturing discipline may
become, I will merely try to sketch the main lines along which
experiments are now proceeding, I will give a few illustrative examples
of what is being done and why, and I will state somewhat at large how,
in my judgment, more is yet to be accomplished. To make the matter
clear, a free exposition shall be given of the puzzling headings already
named; that is, I will first ramblingly discuss the limitations on
choice which may deepen the student's intentionality of aim; secondly,
those which increase his information in regard to means; and thirdly,
those which may strengthen his persistence in a course once chosen.

I. That intentionality should be cultivated, I need not spend many words
in explaining. Everybody acknowledges that without a certain degree of
it choice is impossible. Many persons assert also that boys come to
college with no clear intentions, not knowing what they want, waiting to
be told; for such, it is said, an elective system is manifestly absurd.
I admit the fact. It is true. The majority of the freshmen whom I have
known in the last seventeen years have been, at entrance, deficient in
serious aims. But from this fact I draw a conclusion quite opposite to
the one suggested. It is election, systematized election, which these
boys need; for when we say a young student has no definite aims, we
imply that he has never become sufficiently interested in any given
intellectual line to have acquired the wish to follow that line farther.
Such a state of things is lamentable, and certainly shows that
prescribed methods--the proper methods, in my judgment, for the school
years--have in his case proved inadequate. It is useless to continue
them into years confessedly less suited to their exercise. Perhaps it is
about equally useless to abandon the ill-formed boy to unguided choice.
Prescription says, "This person is unfit to choose, keep him so";
_laissez-faire_ says, "If he is unfit to choose, let him perish"; but a
watchful elective system must say, "Granting him to be unfit, if he is
not spoiled, I will fit him." And can we fit him? I know well enough
that indifferent teachers incline to shirk the task. They like to divide
pupils into the deceptive classes of good and bad, meaning by the former
those who intend to work, and by the latter those who intend not to. But
we must get rid of indifferent teachers. Teachers with enthusiasm in
them soon discover that the two classes of pupils I have named may as
well be dismissed from consideration. Where aims have become definite, a
teacher has little more to do. The boy who means to work will get
learning under the poorest teacher and the worst system; while the boy
who means not to work may be forced up to the Pierian spring, but will
hardly be made to drink. A vigorous teacher does not assume intention to
be ready-made. He counts it his continual office to help in making it.
On the middle two quarters of a class he spends his hardest efforts, on
students who are friendly to learning but not impassioned for it, on
those who like the results of study but like tennis also, and
popularity, and cigars, and slackness. The culture of these weak wills
is the problem of every college. Here are unintentional boys waiting to
be turned into intentional men. What limitations on intellectual and
moral vagrancy will help them forward?

The chief limitation, the one underlying all others, the one which no
clever contrivance can ever supersede, is vitalized teaching. Suitable
subjects, attractively taught, awake lethargic intention as nothing else
can. An elective system, as even its enemies confess, enormously
stimulates the zeal of teachers. It consequently brings to bear on
unawakened boys influences of a strangely quickening character. When I
hear a man trained under the old methods of prescription say, "At the
time I was in college I could not have chosen studies for myself, and I
do not believe my son can," I see, and am not surprised to see, that he
does not understand what forces the elective system sets astir. So
powerful an influence have these forces over both teachers and pupils,
that questions of hard and easy studies do not, as outsiders are apt to
suppose, seriously disturb the formation of sound intentions. The many
leaders in education whose opinions on election I quoted in my previous
paper agree that the new modes tend to sobriety and intentionality of
aim. When Professor Ladd speaks of "the unexpected wisdom and manliness
of the choices already made" in the first year of election at New Haven,
he well expresses the gratified surprise which every one experiences on
perceiving in the very constitution of the elective system a sort of
limitation on wayward choice. This limitation seems to me, as Professor
Ladd says he found it,[8] a tolerable preventive of choices directly
aimed at ease. In a community devoted to athletics, baseball is not
played because it is "soft," and football avoided on account of its
difficulty. A similar state of things must be brought about in studies.
In a certain low degree it has come about already. As election breeds
new life in teaching, the old slovenly habit of liking best what costs
least begins to disappear. Easy courses will exist and ought to exist.
Prescribed colleges, it is often forgotten, have more of them than
elective colleges. The important matter is, to see that they fall to the
right persons. Where everything is prescribed, students who do not wish
easy studies are still obliged to take them. Under election, soft
courses may often be pursued with advantage. A student whose other
courses largely depend for their profit on the amount of private
reading or of laboratory practice accomplished in connection with them
is wise in choosing one or more in which the bulk of the work is taken
by the teacher. I do not say that soft courses are always selected with
these wise aims in view. Many I know are not. We have our proper share
of hardened loafers--"tares in our sustaining corn"--who have an
unerring instinct as to where they can most safely settle. But large
numbers of the men in soft courses are there to good purpose; and I
maintain that the superficial study of a subject, acquainting one with
broad outlines, is not necessarily a worthless study. At Harvard to-day
I believe we have too few such superficial courses. As I look over the
Elective Pamphlet, and note the necessarily varying degrees of
difficulty in the studies announced there, I count but six which can,
with any justice, be entitled soft courses; and several of these must be
reckoned by anybody an inspiration to the students who pursue them.
There is a tendency in the elective system, as I have shown elsewhere,
to reduce the number of soft courses somewhat below the desirable
number.

I insist, therefore, that under a pretty loose elective system boys are
little disposed to intentionally vicious choices. My fears look in a
different direction. I do not expect depravity, but I want to head off
aimless trifling. I agree with the opponents of election in thinking
that there is danger, especially during the early years of college life,
that righteous intention may not be distinct and energetic. Boys drift.
Inadequate influences induce their decisions. The inclinations of the
clique in which a young man finds himself are, without much thought,
accepted as his own. Heedlessness is the young man's bane. It should not
be mistaken for vice; the two are different. A boy who will enter a
dormitory at twelve o'clock at night, and go to the third story
whistling and beating time on the banisters, certainly seems a brutish
person; but he is ordinarily a kind enough fellow, capable of a good
deal of self-sacrifice when brought face to face with need. He simply
does not think. So it is in study: there, too, he does not think. Now in
college a boy should learn perpetually to think; and an excellent way of
helping him to learn is to ask him often what he is thinking about. The
object of the questioning should not be to thwart the boy's aims, rather
to insure that they are in reality his own. Essentially his to the last
they should remain, even though intrinsically they may not be the best.
Young persons, much more than their elders, require to talk over plans
from time to time with an experienced critic, in order to learn by
degrees the difficult art of planning. By such talk intentionality is
fortified. There is much of this talk already; talk of younger students
with older, talk with wise persons at home, and more and more every
year with the teachers of the courses left and the courses entered. All
this is good. Haphazard modes breed an astonishing average of choices
that possess a meaning. The waste of a _laissez-faire_ system comes
nowhere near the waste of a prescribed. But what is good when compared
with a bad thing may be poor when compared with excellence itself. We
must go on. A college, like a man, should always be saying, "Never was I
so good as to-day, and never again will I be so bad." We must welcome
criticisms more than praises, and seek after our weak points as after
hid treasures. The elective system seems to me weak at present through
lacking organized means of bringing the student and his intentions face
to face. Intentions grow by being looked at. At the English universities
a young man on entering a college is put in charge of a special tutor,
without whose consent he can do little either in the way of study or of
personal management.[9] Dependence so extreme is perhaps better suited
to an infant school than to an American college; and even in England,
where respectful subservience on the part of the young has been
cultivated for generations, the system is losing ground. Since the
tutors were allowed to marry and to leave the college home, tutorial
influence has been changing. In most American colleges twenty-five years
ago there were officers known as class tutors, to whom, in case of need,
a student might turn. Petty permissions were received from these men,
instead of from a mechanical central office. So far as this plan set
personal supervision in the place of routine it was, in my eyes, good.
But the relation of a class tutor to his boys was usually one of more
awe than friendship. At the Johns Hopkins University there is a board of
advisers, to some member of which each student is assigned at entrance.
The adviser stands _in loco parentis_ to his charges. The value of such
adjustments depends on the nature of the parental tie. If the relation
is worked so as to stimulate the student's independence, it is good; if
so as to discharge him from responsibility, it unfits for the life that
follows. At Harvard special students not candidates for a degree have
recently been put in charge of a committee, to whom they are obliged to
report their previous history and their plans of study for each
succeeding year. The committee must know at all times what their charges
are doing. Something of this sort, I am convinced, will be demanded at
no distant day, as a means of steadying all students in elective
colleges. Large personal supervision need not mean diminution of
freedom. A young man may possess his freedom more solidly if he
recognizes an obligation to state and defend the reasons which induce
his choice. For myself, I should be willing to make the functions of
such advisory committees somewhat broad. As a college grows, the old
ways of bringing about acquaintance between officers and students become
impracticable. But the need of personal acquaintance, unhappily, does
not cease. New ways should be provided. A boy dropped into the middle of
a large college must not be lost to sight; he must be looked after. To
allow the teacher's work of instruction to become divorced from his
pastoral, his priestly, function is to cheapen and externalize
education. I would have every student in college supplied with somebody
who might serve as a discretionary friend; and I should not think it a
disadvantage that such an expectation of friendship would be as apt to
better the instructor as the student.

Before leaving this part of my subject, I may mention a subordinate, but
still valuable, means of limiting choice so as to increase its
intentionality. The studies open to choice in the early years should be
few and elementary. The significance of advanced courses cannot be
understood till elementary ones are mastered, and immature choice should
not be confused by many issues. At Harvard this mode of limitation is
largely employed. Although the elective list for 1886-87 shows 172
courses, a freshman has hardly more than one eighth of these to choose
from; in any given case this number will probably be reduced about one
half by insufficient preparation or conflict of hours. Seemingly about a
third of the list is offered to the average sophomore; but this amount
is again cut down nearly one half by the operation of similar causes.
The practice of hedging electives with qualifications is a growing one.
It may well grow more. It offers guidance precisely at the point where
it is most needed. It protects rational choice, and guards against many
of the dangers which the foes of election justly dread.

II. A second class of limitations of the elective system, possible and
friendly, springs from the need of furnishing the young elector ample
information about that which he is to choose. The best intentions
require judicious aim. If studies are taken in the dark, without right
anticipation of their subject-matter, or in ignorance of their relation
to other studies, small results follow. Here, I think it will be
generally agreed, prescribed systems are especially weak. Their pupils
have little knowledge beforehand of what a course is designed to
accomplish. Work is undertaken blindly, minds consenting as little as
wills. An elective system is impossible under such conditions. Its
student must know when he chooses, what he chooses. He must be able to
estimate whether the choice of Greek 5 will further his designs better
than the choice of Greek 8.

At Harvard, methods of furnishing information are pretty fully
developed. In May an elective pamphlet is issued, which announces
everything that is to be taught in the college during the following
year. Most departments, also, issue additional pamphlets, describing
with much detail the nature of their special courses, and the
considerations which should lead a student to one rather than
another. If the courses of a department are arranged properly, pursuing
one gives the most needful knowledge about the available next. This
knowledge is generally supplemented at the close of the year by
explanations on the part of the instructor about the courses that
follow. In the Elective Pamphlet a star, prefixed to courses of an
advanced and especially technical character, indicates that the
instructor must be privately consulted before these courses can be
chosen. Consultations with instructors about all courses are frequent.
That most effective means of distributing information, the talk of
students, goes on unceasingly. With time, perhaps, means may be devised
for informing a student more largely what he is choosing. The fullest
information is desirable. That which is at present most needed is, I
think, some rough indication of the relations of the several provinces
of study to one another. Information of this sort is peculiarly hard
to supply, because the knowledge on which it professes to rest cannot
be precise and unimpeachable. We deal here with intricate problems,
in regard to which experts are far from agreed, problems where the
different point of view provided in the nature of each individual
will rightly readjust whatever general conclusions are drawn. The old
type of college had an easy way of settling these troublesome matters
dogmatically, by voting, in open faculty-meeting, what should be
counted the normal sequence of studies, and what their mixture. But
as the votes of different colleges showed no uniformity, people have
gradually come to perceive that the subject is one where only large
outlines can distinctly be made out.[10] To these large outlines I
think it important to direct the attention of undergraduates. In most
German universities a course of _Encyclopaedie_ is offered, a course
which gives in brief a survey of the sciences, and attempts to fix
approximately the place of each in the total organization of knowledge.
I am not aware that such a course exists in any American college.
Indeed, there was hardly a place for it till dogmatic prescription
was shaken. But if something of the kind were now established in the
freshman year, our young men might be relieved of a certain intellectual
short-sightedness, and the choices of one year might better keep in
view those of the other three.

III. And now granting that a student has started with good intentions
and is well informed about the direction where profit lies, still
have we any assurance that he will push those intentions with a fair
degree of tenacity through the distractions which beset his daily path?
We need, indeed we must have, a third class of helpful limitations
which may secure the persistent adhesion of our student to his chosen
line of work. Probably this class of limitations is the most
important and complex of all. To yield a paying return, study must
be stuck to. A decision has little meaning unless the volition of
to-day brings in its train a volition to-morrow. Self-direction
implies such patient continuance in well-doing that only after
persistence has become somewhat habitual can choice be called mature. To
establish onward-leading habits, therefore, should be one of the
chief objects in devising limitations of election. Only we must not
mistake; we must look below the surface. Mechanical diligence often
covers mental sloth. It is not habits of passive docility that are
desirable, habits of timidity and uncriticising acceptance. Against
forming these pernicious and easily acquired habits, it may be necessary
even to erect barriers. The habit wanted is the habit of spontaneous
attack. Prescription deadened this vital habit; it mechanized. His
task removed, the student had little independent momentum. Election
invigorates the springs of action. Formerly I did not see this, and I
favored prescribed systems, thinking them systems of duty. That
absence of an aggressive intellectual life which prescribed studies
induce, I, like many others, mistook for faithfulness. Experience
has instructed me. I no longer have any question that for the
average man sound habits of steady endeavor grow best in fields of
choice. Emerson's words are words of soberness:--

  He that worketh high and wise
      Nor pauses in his plan,
  Will take the sun out of the skies
      Ere freedom out of man.

Furthermore, in attempting to stimulate persistence I believe we must
ultimately rely on the rational interest in study which we can arouse
and hold. Undoubtedly much can be done to save this interest from
disturbance and to hold vacillating attention fixed upon it; but it, and
it alone, is to be the driving force. Methods of college government must
be reckoned wise as they push into the foreground the intrinsic charm of
wisdom, mischievous as they hide it behind fidelity to technical demand.
In other matters we readily acknowledge interest as an efficient force.
We call it a force as broad as the worth of knowledge, and as deep as
the curiosity of man. "Put your heart into your work," we say, "if you
will make it excellent." A dozen proverbs tell that it is love that
makes the world go round. Every employment of life springs from an
underlying desire. The cricketer wants to win the game; the fisherman to
catch fish; the farmer to gather crops; the merchant to make money; the
physician to cure his patient; the student to become wise. Eliminate
desire, put in its place allegiance to the rules of a game, and what, in
any of these cases, would be the chance of persistent endeavor? It seems
almost a truism to say that limitations of personal effort designed to
strengthen persistency must be such as will heighten the wish and clear
its path to its object.

Obvious as is the truth here presented, it seems in some degree to have
escaped the attention of my critics. After showing that the grade of
scholarship at Harvard steadily rises, that our students become more
decorous and their methods of work less childish, I stated that, under
an extremely loose mode of regulating attendance five sixths of the
exercises were attended by all our men, worst and best, sick and well,
most reckless and most discreet. Few portions of my obnoxious paper have
occasioned a louder outcry. I am told of a neighboring college where the
benches show but three per cent of absentees. I wonder what the
percentage is in Charlestown State Prison. Nobody doubts that attendance
will be closer if compelled. But the interesting question still remains,
"Are students by such means learning habits of spontaneous regularity?"
This question can be answered only when the concealing restraint is
removed. It has been removed at Harvard,--in my judgment too largely
removed,--and the great body of our students is seen to desire learning
and to desire it all the time. Is it certain that the students of other
colleges, if left with little or no restraint, would show a better
record? The point of fidelity and regularity, it is said, is of supreme
importance. So it is. But fidelity and regularity in study, not in
attending recitations. If ever the Harvard system is perfected, so that
students here are as eager for knowledge as the best class of German
university men, I do not believe we shall see a lower rate of absence;
only then, each absence will be used, as it is not at present, for a
studious purpose. The modern teacher stimulates private reading, exacts
theses, directs work in libraries. Pupils engaged in these things are
not dependent on recitations as text-book schoolboys are. The grade of
higher education cannot rise much so long as the present extreme stress
is laid on appearance in the class-room.

In saying this I would not be understood to defend the method of dealing
with absences which has for some years been practised at Harvard. I
think the method bad. I have always thought it so, and have steadily
favored a different system. The behavior of our students under a
regulation so loose seems to me a striking testimony to the scholarly
spirit prevalent here. As such I mentioned it in my first paper, and as
such I would again call attention to it. But I am not satisfied with the
present good results. I want to impress on every student that absence
from the class-room can be justified by nothing short of illness or a
scholarly purpose. For a gainful purpose the merchant is occasionally
absent from his office; for a gainful purpose a scholar of mine may omit
a recitation. But Smith can be absent profitably when Brown would meet
with loss. I accordingly object to methods of limiting absence which
exact the same numerical regularity of all. College records may look
clean, yet students be learning little about duty. Limitation, in my
judgment, should be so adjusted as to strengthen the man's personal
adhesion to plans of daily study. Such limitations cannot be fixed by
statute and worked by a single clerk. Moral discipline is not a thing to
be supplied by wholesale. Professors must be individually charged with
the oversight of their men. I would have excuses for occasional absence
made to the instructor, and I should expect him to count it a part of
his work to see that the better purposes of his scholars did not grow
feeble. A professor who exercised such supervisory power slackly would
make his course the resort of the indolent; one who was over-stringent
would see himself deserted by indolent and earnest alike. My rule would
be that no student be allowed to present himself at an examination who
could not show his teacher's certificate that his attendance on daily
work was satisfactory. Traditions in this country and in Germany are so
different that I should have confidence in a method working well here
though it worked ill there. At any rate, whenever it fell into decay, it
could--a proviso necessary in all moral matters--be readjusted. A rule
something like this the Harvard Faculty has recently adopted by voting
that "any instructor, with the approval of the Dean, may at any time
exclude from his course any student who in his judgment has neglected
the work of the course." Probably the amount of absence which has
hitherto occurred at Harvard will under this vote diminish.

Suppose, then, by these limitations on a student's caprice we have
secured his persistence in outward endeavor, still one thing more is
needed. We have brought him bodily to a recitation room; but his mind
must be there too, his aroused and active mind. Limitations that will
secure this slippery part of the person are difficult to devise.
Nevertheless, they are worth studying. Their object is plain. They are
to lead a student to do something every day; to aid him to overcome
those tendencies to procrastination, self-confidence, and passive
absorption which are the regular and calculable dangers of youth. They
are to teach him how not to cram, to inspire him with respect for steady
effort, and to enable him each year to find such effort more habitual to
himself. These are hard tasks. The old education tried to meet them by
the use of daily recitations, a plan not without advantages. The new
education is preserving the valuable features of recitations by adopting
and developing the _Seminar_. But recitations pure and simple have
serious drawbacks. They presuppose a text-book, which, while it brings
definiteness, brings also narrowness of view. The learner masters a
book, not a subject. After-life possesses nothing analogous to the
text-book. A struggling man wins what he wants from many books, from his
own thought, from frequent consultations. Why should not a student be
disciplined in the ways he must afterwards employ? Moreover, recitations
have the disadvantage that no large number of men can take part on any
single day. The times of trial either become amenable to reckoning, or,
in order to prevent reckoning, a teacher must resort to schemes which do
not commend him to his class. Undoubtedly in recitation the reciter
gains, but the gains of the rest of the class are small. The listeners
would be more profited by instruction. An hour with an expert should
carry students forward; to occupy it in ascertaining where they now
stand is wasteful. For all these reasons there has been of late years a
strong reaction against recitations. Lectures have been introduced, and
the time formerly spent by a professor in hearing boys is now spent by
boys in hearing a professor. Plainly in this there is a gain, but a gain
which needs careful limitation if the student's persistence in work is
to be retained. A pure lecture system is a broad road to ignorance.
Students are entertained or bored, but at the end of a month they know
little more than at the beginning. Lectures always seem to me an
inheritance from the days when books were not. Learning--how often must
it be said!--is not acceptance; it is criticism, it is attack, it is
doing. An active element is everywhere involved in it. Personal sanction
is wanted for every step. One who will grow wise must perform processes
himself, not sit at ease and behold another's performance.

These simple truths are now tolerably understood at Harvard. There
remain in the college few courses of pure recitations or of pure
lectures. I wish all were forbidden by statute. In almost all courses,
in one way or another, frequent opportunity is given the student to show
what he is doing. In some, especially in elementary courses, lectures
run parallel with a text-book. In some, theses, that is, written
discussions, are exacted monthly, half-yearly, annually, in addition to
examinations. In some, examinations are frequent. In some, a daily
question, to be answered in writing on the spot, is offered to the whole
class. Often, especially in philosophical subjects, the hour is occupied
with debate between officer and students. More and more, physical
subjects are taught by the laboratory, linguistic and historical by the
library. In a living university a great variety of methods spring up,
according to the nature of the subject and the personality of the
teacher. Variety should exist. In constantly diversified ways each
student should be assured that he is expected to be doing something all
the time, and that somebody besides himself knows what he is doing. As
yet this assurance is not attained; we can only claim to be working
toward it. Every year we discover some fresh limitation which will make
persistence more natural, neglect more strange. I believe study at
Harvard is to-day more interested, energetic, and persistent than it has
ever been before. But that is no ground for satisfaction. A powerful
college must forever be dissatisfied. Each year it must address itself
anew to strengthening the tenacity of its students in their zeal for
knowledge.

By the side of these larger limitations in the interest of persistency,
it may be well to mention one or two examples of smaller ones which have
the same end in view. By some provision it must be made difficult to
withdraw from a study once chosen. Choice should be deliberate and then
be final. It probably will not be deliberate unless it is understood to
be final. A few weeks may be allowed for an inspection of a chosen
course, but at the close of the first month's teaching the Harvard
Faculty tie up their students and allow change only on petition and for
the most convincing cause. An elective college which did not make
changes of electives difficult would be an engine for discouraging
intentionality and persistence.

I incline to think, too, that a regulation forbidding elementary courses
in the later years would render our education more coherent. In this
matter elective colleges have an opportunity which prescribed ones
miss. In order to be fair to all the sciences, college faculties are
obliged to scatter fragments of them throughout the length and breadth
of prescribed curricula. Twenty-five years ago every Harvard man waited
till his senior year before beginning philosophy, acoustics, history,
and political economy. To-day the fourteen other New England colleges,
most of whom, like the Harvard of twenty-five years ago, offer a certain
number of elective studies, still show senior years largely occupied
with elementary studies. Five forbid philosophy before the senior year;
eight, political economy; two, history; six, geology. Out of the seven
colleges which offer some one of the eastern languages, all except
Harvard oblige the alphabet to be learned in the senior year. Of the six
which offer Italian or Spanish, Harvard alone permits a beginning to be
made before the junior year, while two take up these languages for the
first time in the senior year. In three New England colleges German
cannot be begun till the junior year. In a majority, a physical subject
is begun in the junior and another in the senior year. At Yale nobody
but a senior can study chemistry. Such postponement, and by consequence
such fragmentary work, may be necessary where early college years are
crowded with prescribed studies. But an elective system can employ its
later years to better advantage. It can bring to a mature understanding
the interests which freshmen and sophomores have already acquired.
Elementary studies are not maturing studies; they do not make the fibre
of a student firm. To studies of a solidifying sort the last years
should be devoted. I should like to forbid seniors to take any
elementary study whatever, and to forbid juniors all except philosophy,
political economy, history, fine arts, Sanskrit, Hebrew, and law. Under
such a rule we should graduate more men who would be first rate at
something; and a man who is first rate at something is generally pretty
good at anything.

Such, then, are a few examples of the ways in which choice may be
limited so as to become strong. They are but examples, intended merely
to draw attention to the three kinds of limitation still possible.
Humble ways they may seem, not particularly interesting to hear about;
business methods one might call them. But by means of these and such
as these the young scholar becomes clearer in intention, larger in
information, hardier in persistence. In urging such means I shall be
seen to be no thick and thin advocate of election. That I have never
been. Originally a doubter, I have come to regard the elective
system, that is, election under such limitations as I have described, as
the safest--indeed as the only possible--course which education can
now take, I advocate it heartily as a system which need not carry us
too fast or too far in any one direction, as a system so inherently
flexible that its own great virtues readily unite with those of an alien
type. Under its sheltering charge the worthier advantages of both
grouped and prescribed systems are attainable. I proclaim it,
therefore, not as a popular cry nor as an educational panacea, but as
a sober opportunity for moral and intellectual training. Limited as
it is at Harvard, I see that it works admirably with the studious,
stimulatingly with those of weaker will, not unendurably with the
depraved. These are great results. They cannot be set aside by calling
them the outcome of "individualism." In a certain sense they are. But
"individualism" is an uncertain term. In every one of us there is a
contemptible individuality, grounded in what is ephemeral and
capriciously personal. Systematic election, as I have shown, puts
limitations on this. But there is a noble individuality which should
be the object of our fostering care. Nothing that lends it strength
and fineness can be counted trivial. To form a true individuality
is, indeed, the ideal of the elective system. Let me briefly sketch my
conception of that ideal.

George Herbert, praising God for the physical world which He has made,
says that in it "all things have their will, yet none but thine." Such a
free harmony between thinking man and a Lord of his thought it is the
office of education to bring about. At the start it does not exist. The
child is aware of his own will, and he is aware of little else. He
imagines that one pleasing fancy may be willed as easily as another. As
he matures, he discovers that his will is effective when it accords with
the make of the world and ineffective when it does not. This discovery,
bringing as it does increased respect for the make of the world and even
for its Maker, degrades or ennobles according as the facts of the world
are now viewed as restrictive finalities or as an apparatus for larger
self-expression. Seeing the power of that which is not himself, a man
may become passively receptive, and say, "Then I am to have no will of
my own"; or he may become newly energetic, knowing that though he can
have no will of his separate own, yet all the power of God is his if he
will but understand. A man of the latter sort is spiritually educated.
Much still remains to be done in understanding special laws; and with
each fresh understanding, a fresh possibility of individual life is
disclosed. The worth, however, of the whole process lies in the man's
honoring his own will, but honoring it only as it grows strong through
accordance with the will of God.

Now into our colleges comes a mixed multitude made up of all the three
classes named: the childish, who imagine they can will anything; the
docile, so passive in the presence of an ordered world that they have
little individual will left; the spiritually-minded or original, who
with strong interests of their own seek to develop these through living
contact with truths which they have not made. Our educational modes must
meet them all, respecting their wills wherever wise, and teaching the
feeble to discriminate fanciful from righteous desires. For carrying
forward such a training the elective system seems to me to have peculiar
aptitudes. What I have called its limitations will be seen to be
spiritual assistances. To the further invention of such there is no end.
A watchful patience is the one great requisite, patience in directors,
instructed criticism on the part of the public, and a brave expression
of confidence when confidence is seen to have been earned.


FOOTNOTES:

   [8] Doubtless some have carried out the intention of making everything
       as soft as possible for themselves. But the choices, in fact, do
       not as yet show the existence of any such intention in any
       considerable number of cases; they show rather the very
       reverse.--Professor Ladd in _The New Englander_, January, 1885,
       p. 119.

   [9] As the minute personal care given to individual students in the
       English universities is often and deservedly praised, I may as
       well say that it costs something. Oxford spends each year about
       $2,000,000 on 2500 men; Harvard, $650,000 on 1700.

  [10] I may not have a better opportunity than this to clear up a petty
       difficulty which seems to agitate some of my critics. They say
       they want the degree of A.B. to mean something definite, while at
       present, under the elective system, it means one thing for John
       Doe, and something altogether different for his classmate,
       Richard Roe. That is true. Besides embodying the general
       signification that the bearer has been working four years in a
       way to satisfy college guardians, the stately letters do take on
       an individual variation of meaning for every man who wins them.
       They must do so as long as we are engaged in the formation of
       living persons. If the college were a factory, our case would be
       different. We might then offer a label which would keep its
       identity of meaning for all the articles turned out. Wherever
       education has been a living thing, the single degree has always
       contained this element of variety. The German degree is as
       diverse in meaning as ours. The degree of the English university
       is diverse, and more diverse for Honors men--the only ones who
       can properly be said to deserve it--than for inert Pass men.
       Degrees in this country have, from the first, had considerable
       diversity, college differing from college in requirement, and
       certainly student from student in attainment. That twenty-five
       years ago we were approaching too great uniformity in the
       signification of degrees, I suppose most educators now admit.
       That was a mechanical and stagnant period, and men have brought
       over from it to the more active days of the present ideals formed
       then. Precision of statement goes with figures, with etiquette,
       with military matters; but descriptions of the quality of persons
       must be stated in the round.




