IX

ERRONEOUS LIMITATIONS OF THE ELECTIVE SYSTEM


In a paper published in the Andover Review a year ago, I called
attention to the fact that a new principle is at work in American
education. That principle, briefly stated, is this: the student now
consciously shares in his own upbuilding. His studies are knitted
closely to his personal life. Under this influence a new species of
power is developed. Scholarship broadens and deepens, boyishness
diminishes, teacher and pupil meet less artificially. The college, as an
institution, wins fresh life. Public confidence awakens; pupils,
benefactions, flow in. Over what I wrote an eager controversy has
arisen, a controversy which must have proved instructive to those who
need instruction most. In the last resort questions of education are
decided by educators, as those of sanitation by sanitary engineers; but
in both cases the decision has reference to public needs, and people
require to be instructed in the working of appliances which are designed
for their comfort. There is danger that such instruction may not be
given. Professional men become absorbed in their art and content
themselves with reticence, leaving the public ignorant of the devices by
which its health is to be preserved. A great opportunity, therefore,
comes to the common householder when these professional men fall foul of
one another. In pressing arguments home they frequently take to ordinary
speech, and anybody who then lends an ear learns of the mysteries. The
present discussion, I am sure, has brought this informatory gain to
every parent who reads the Andover Review and has a studious boy. The
gain will have been greater because of the candor and courtesy with
which the attacking party has delivered its assault. The contest has
been earnest. Its issues have been rightly judged momentous. For good or
for ill, the choice youth of the land are to be shaped by whatever
educational policy finally wins. Yet, so far as I recall, no unkind word
has slipped from the pen of one of my stout opponents; no disparagement
of man or college has mixed with the energetic advocacy of principle;
the discussion has set in well toward things. I cannot call this
remarkable. Of course it is not easy to be fair and strong at once.
Sweetness and light are often parted. Yet we rightly expect the
scholar's life to civilize him who pursues it, and we anticipate from
books a refinement of the spirit and the manners as well as the
understanding. My opponents have been scholars, and have spoken as
scholars speak. It is a pleasure to linger in their kindly contentious
company. So I gladly accept the invitation of the editors of the Review
to sum up our discussion and to add some explanatory last words.

The papers which have appeared fall into two easily distinguishable
classes, the descriptive and the critical. To the former I devote but a
brief space, so much more direct is the bearing of the latter on the
main topic of debate--the question, namely, what course the higher
education can and what it cannot now take. Yet the descriptive papers
perform a service and deserve a welcome word. Suspecting that I was
showing off Harvard rather favorably, professors planted elsewhere have
attempted to make an equally favorable exhibit of their own colleges. In
my manifesto they have seen "a coveted opportunity to bring forward
corresponding statistics which have not been formed under the Harvard
method." Perhaps this was to mistake my aim a little. I did intend to
advance my college in public esteem; she deserves that of me in
everything I write. But primarily I thought of myself as the expounder
of an important policy, which happens to have been longer perceived and
more elaborately studied at Harvard than elsewhere. I hope I did not
imply that Harvard, having this excellence, has all others. She has many
weaknesses, which should not be shielded from discerning discussion. Nor
did I intend to commit the injustice to Harvard--an injustice as gross
as it is frequent--of treating her as a mere embodiment of the elective
system. Harvard is a complex and august institution, possessed of all
the attractions which can be lent by age, tradition, learning,
continually renewed resources, fortunate situation, widespread
clientage, enthusiastic loyalty, and forceful guidance. She is the
intellectual mother of us all, honored certainly by me, and I believe by
thousands of others, for a multiplicity of subtle influences which
stretch far outside her special modes of instruction. But for the last
half-century Harvard has been developing a new and important policy of
education. Coincident with this development she has attained enormous
popular esteem and internal power. The value and limits of this policy,
the sources of this esteem and power, I wish everybody, colleges and
populace, to scrutinize. To make these things understood is to help the
higher education everywhere.

In undertaking this _quasi_ philosophical task, I count it a piece of
good fortune to have provoked so many lucid accounts of what other
colleges are doing. The more of these the better. The public cannot be
too persistently reminded of the distinctive merits of this college and
of that. Let each be as zealous as possible; gains made by one are gains
for all. Depreciatory rivalry between colleges is as silly as it is
when religious sects quarrel in the midst of a perishing world. Probably
such rivalries have their rise in the dull supposition that a fixed
constituency of pupils exists somewhere, which if not turned toward one
college may be drawn to another. As the old political economists tell of
a "wages fund," fixed and constant in each community, so college
governors are apt to imagine a public pupil-hoard, not susceptible of
much increase or diminution, which may by inadvertence fall into other
hands than their own. In reality each college creates its constituency.
Its students come, in the main, from the inert mass of the uncollegiate
public. Only one in eight among Harvard students is a son of a Harvard
graduate; and probably the small colleges beget afresh an even larger
percentage of their students. On this account the small colleges have
been a power in the land. To disparage them shall never be my office. In
a larger degree than the great universities they spread the college idea
among people who would not otherwise possess it. The boy who lives
within fifty miles of one of them reflects whether he will or will not
have a college training. Were there no college in the neighborhood, he
might never consider the matter at all. It is natural enough for
undergraduates to decry every college except their own; but those who
love education generously, and who seek to spread it far and wide,
cannot afford the luxury of envy. One common danger besetting us all
should bind us together. In the allurements of commerce boys may forget
that college is calling. They do forget it. According to my computations
the number of persons in the New England colleges to-day is about the
same as the number in the insane asylums; but little more than the
number of idiots. Probably this number is not increasing in proportion
to population. Professor Newton, of Oberlin, finds that the increase of
students during the ten years between 1870 and 1880, in twenty of our
oldest leading colleges, was less than three and a half per cent, the
population of the United States increasing during the same period
twenty-three per cent. In view of facts like these, careful study of the
line along which college growth is still possible becomes a necessity.
It will benefit all colleges alike. No one engaged in it has a side to
maintain. We are all alike seekers. Whatever instructive experience any
college can contribute to the common study, and whatever pupils she may
thereby gain, will be matter for general rejoicing.

To such a study the second, or critical, class of papers furnishes
important stimulus; for these have not confined themselves to describing
institutions: they have gone on to discuss the value and limits of the
principle which actuates the new education everywhere. In many respects
their writers and I are in full accord. In moral aim we always are, and
generally too in our estimate of the present status. We all confess that
the conditions of college education have changed, that the field of
knowledge has enlarged, that a liberal training nowadays must fit men
for more than the four professions of preaching, teaching, medicine, and
law. We agree that the prescribed systems of the past are outgrown. We
do not want them. We doubt whether they were well suited to their own
time; we are sure they will never fit ours. Readjustments of curricula,
we all declare, must be undertaken if the higher education is to retain
its hold on our people. Further still, we agree in the direction of this
readjustment. My critics, no less than I, believe that a widely extended
scope must be given to individual choice. With the possible exception of
Professor Denison, about whose opinion I am uncertain, everybody who has
taken part in the controversy recognizes the elective principle as a
beneficial one and maintains that in some form or other it has come to
stay, People generally are not aware what a consensus of opinion on this
point late years have brought about. To rid ourselves once for all of
further controversy let us weigh well the words of my opponents.

Mr. Brearley begins his criticism addressed to the New York Harvard Club
thus: "We premise that every one accepts the elective principle. Some
system based on that principle must be established. No one wants the
old required systems back, or any new required system." Professor
Howison says: "An elective system, in its proper place, and under its
due conditions, is demonstrably sound." Professor Ladd does not express
himself very fully on this point in the Andover Review, but his opinions
may be learned from the New Englander for January, 1885. When, in 1884,
Yale College reformed its curriculum and introduced elective studies, it
became desirable to instruct the graduates about the reasons for a step
which had been long resisted. After a brief trial of the new system,
Professor Ladd published his impressions of it. I strongly commend his
candid paper to the attention of those who still believe the old methods
the safer. He asserts that "a perfect and final course of college study
is, if not an unattainable ideal, at present an impossible achievement."
The considerations which were "the definite and almost compulsory
reasons for instituting a comprehensive change" he groups under the
following heads: (1) the need of modern languages; (2) the crowding of
studies in the senior year; (3) the heterogeneous and planless character
of the total course; (4) the need of making allowance for the tastes,
the contemplated pursuits, and the aptitudes of the individual student.
Substantially, these are the evils of prescription which I pointed out;
only, in my view, they are evils not confined to a single year. Stating
his observation of the results of election, Professor Ladd says:
"Increased willingness in study, and even a new and marked enthusiasm on
the part of a considerable number of students, is another effect of the
new course already realized. The entire body of students in the upper
classes is more attentive, regular, interested, and even eager, than
ever before." "More intimate and effective relations are secured in many
cases between teachers and pupils."

These convictions in regard to the efficiency which the elective
principle lends to education are not confined to my critics and myself.
Let me cite testimony from representatives of other colleges. The last
Amherst Catalogue records (page 24) that "excellent results have
appeared from this [the elective] method. The special wants of the
student are thus met, his zest and progress in his work are increased,
and his association with his teachers becomes thus more close and
intimate." President Robinson says, in his annual report for 1885 to the
Corporation of Brown University: "There are advantages in a carefully
guarded system of optional studies not otherwise obtainable. The saving
of time in preparing for a special calling in life is something, and the
cumulative zeal in given lines of study, where a gratified and growing
taste is ever beckoning onward, is still more. But above all, some
provision for choice among ever-multiplying courses of study has become
a necessity." In addressing the American Institute of Instruction at Bar
Harbor, July 7, 1886, Professor A. S. Hardy, of Dartmouth, is reported
as saying: "Every educator now recognizes the fact that individual
characteristics are always sufficiently marked to demand his earliest
attention; and, furthermore, that there is a stage in the process of
education where the choice, the responsibility, and the freedom of the
individual should have a wide scope." President Adams, in his inaugural
address at Cornell in 1885, asserted that "there are varieties of gifts,
call them, if you will, fundamental differences, that make it impossible
to train successfully all of a group of boys to the same standard. These
differences are partly matters of sheer ability, and partly matters of
taste; for if a boy has so great an aversion to a given study that he
can never be brought to apply himself to it with some measure of
fondness, he is as sure not to succeed in it as he would be if he were
lacking the requisite mental capacity."

In determining, then, what the new education may wisely be, let this be
considered settled: it must contain a large element of election. That is
the opinion of these unbiased judges. They find personal choice
necessary for promoting a wider range of topics in the college, a
greater zeal on the part of the student, and more suitable relations
between teacher and pupil. With this judgment I, of course, heartily
agree, though I should make more prominent the moral reason of the
facts. I should insist that a right character and temper in the
receiving mind is always a prerequisite of worthy study.[6] But I
misrepresent these gentlemen if I allow their testimony to stop here.
They maintain that the elective principle as thus far carried out,
though valuable, is still meagre and one-sided. They do not think it
will be found self-sufficing and capable of guarding its own working.
They see that it has dangers peculiar to itself, and believe that to
escape them it will require to be restricted and furnished with
supplemental influences. I believe so too. Choice is important, but it
is also important that one should choose well. The individual is sacred,
but only so far as he is capable of recognizing the sacredness of laws
which he has had no part in making. Unrestricted arbitrary choice is
indistinguishable from chaos; and undoubtedly every method of training
which avoids mechanism and includes choice as a factor leaves a door
open in the direction of chaos. Infinite Wisdom left that door open when
man was created. To dangers from this source I am fully alive. I totally
dissent from those advocates of the elective system who would identify
it with a _laissez-faire_ policy. The cry that we must let nature take
care of itself is a familiar one in trade, in art, in medicine, in
social relations, in the religious life, in education; but in the long
run it always proves inadequate. Man is a personal spirit, a director, a
being fitted to compare and to organize forces, not to take them as they
rise, like a creature of nature. The future will certainly not tolerate
an education less organic than that of the past; but just as certainly
will it demand that the organic tie shall be a living one,--one whose
bond may assist those whom it restricts to become spontaneous, forcible,
and diverse. If I am offered only the alternative of absolutism or
_laissez-faire_, I choose _laissez-faire_. Out of chaotic nature
beautiful forms do continually come forth. But absolutism kills in the
cradle. It cannot tolerate a life that is imperfect, and so it stifles
what it should nourish.

Up to this point my critics and I have walked hand in hand. Henceforth
we part company. I shall not follow out all our little divergencies. My
object from the first has been to trace the line along which education
may now proceed. It must, it seems, be a line including election; but
election limited how? To disentangle an answer to this vexed question, I
pass by the many points in which my critics have shown that I am
foolish, and the few others in which I might show them so, and turn to
the fundamental issue between us, our judgment of what the supplemental
influences are which will render personal initiative safe. Personal
initiative is assured. The authoritative utterances I have just quoted
show that it can never again be expelled from American colleges. But
what checks are compatible with it? Accepting choice, what treatment
will render it continually wiser? Here differences of judgment begin to
appear, and here I had hoped to receive light from my critics. The
question is one where cooperative experience is essential. But those who
have written against me seem hardly to have realized its importance.
They generally confine themselves to showing how bad my plans are, and
merely hint at better ones which they themselves might offer. But what
are these plans? Wise ways of training boys are of more consequence than
Harvard misdeeds. We want to hear of a constructive policy which can
take a young man of nineteen and so train him in self-direction that
four years later he may venture out alone into a perplexing, and for the
most part hostile, world. The thing to be done is to teach boys how to
manage themselves. Admit that the Harvard discipline does not do this
perfectly at present; what will do it better? Here we are at an
educational crisis. We stand with this aim of self-guidance in our
hands. What are we going to do with it? It is as dangerous as a bomb.
But we cannot drop it. It is too late to objurgate. It is better to
think calmly what possible modes of treatment are still open. When
railroads were found dangerous, men did not take to stage-coaches again;
they only studied railroading the more.

Now in the mass of negative criticism which the last year has produced I
detect three positive suggestions, three ways in which it is thought
limitation may be usefully applied to supplement the inevitable personal
initiative. These modes of limitation, it is true, are not worked out
with any fulness of practical detail, as if their advocates were
convinced that the future was with them. Rather they are thrown out as
hints of what might be desirable if facts and the public would not
interfere. But as they seem to be the only conceivable modes of
restricting the elective principle by any species of outside checkage, I
propose to devote the remainder of this paper to an examination of their
feasibility. In a subsequent paper I shall indicate what sort of
corrective appears to me more likely to prove congruous and lasting.

I. The first suggestion is that the elective principle should be
limited from beneath. Universities and schools are to advance their
grade, so that finally the universities will secure three or four years
of purely elective study, while the schools, in addition to their
present labors, will take charge of the studies formerly prescribed by
the college. The schools, in short, are to become German gymnasia, and
the colleges to delay becoming universities until this regeneration
of the schools is accomplished.[7] A certain "sum of topics" is said
to be essential to the culture of the man and the citizen. In the
interest of church and state, young minds must be provided with
certain "fact forms," with a "common consciousness," a "common basis
of humanism." Important as personal election is, to allow it to take
place before this common basis is laid is "to strike a blow at the
historic substance of civilization." How extensive this common
consciousness is to be may be learned from Professor Howison's remark
that "languages, classical and modern; mathematics, in all its
general conceptions, thoroughly apprehended; physics, acquired in a
similar manner, and the other natural sciences, though with much less of
detail; history and politics; literature, especially of the mother
tongue, but, indispensably, the masterpieces in other languages,
particularly the classic; philosophy, in the thorough elements of
psychology, logic, metaphysics, and ethics, each historically
treated, and economics, in the history of elementary principles, must
all enter into any education that can claim to be liberal."

The practical objections to this monarchical scheme are many. I call
attention to three only.

In the first place, the argument on which it is based proves too much.
If we suppose a common consciousness to be a matter of such importance,
and that it cannot be secured except by sameness of studies, then that
state is criminally careless which allows ninety-nine hundredths of its
members to get an individual consciousness by the simple expedient of
never entering college. The theory seems to demand that every male--and
why not female?--between sixteen and twenty be indoctrinated in "the
essential subject-matters," without regard to what he or she may
personally need to know or do. This is the plan of religious teaching
adopted by the Roman Church, which enforces its "fact forms" of doctrine
on all alike; without securing, however, by this means, according to the
judgment of the outside world, any special freshness of religious life.
I do not believe the results would be better in the higher secular
culture, and I should be sorry to see Roman methods applied there; but
if they are to be applied, let them fall impartially on all members of
the community. To put into swaddling clothes the man who is wise enough
to seek an education, and to leave his duller brother to kick about as
he pleases, seems a little arbitrary.

But secondly, there is no more prospect of persuading our high schools
to accept the prescribed subjects of the colleges than there is of
persuading our government to transform itself into the German. Already
the high schools and the colleges are unhappily drawing apart. The only
hope of their nearer approach is in the remission by the colleges of
some of the more burdensome subjects at present exacted. Paid for by
common taxation, these schools are called on to equip the common man for
his daily struggle. That they will one day devote themselves to laying
the foundations of an ideally best education for men of leisure is
grotesquely improbable. Although Harvard draws rather more than
one-third of her students from states outside New England, the whole
number of students who have come to her from the high schools of these
states, during a period of the last ten years, is but sixty-six. Fitting
for college is becoming an alarmingly technical matter, and is falling
largely into the hands of private tutors and academies.

It may be said, however, thirdly, that it is just these academies which
might advantageously take the present freshmen and sophomore studies.
They would thus become the exclusive avenues to the university of the
future, leaving it free to do its own proper work with elective studies.
Considering the great expense which this lengthening of the curriculum
of the academy implies, it is plain that the number of schools capable
of fitting boys in this way would always be small. These few academies,
with their monopoly of learned training, would lose their present
character and be erected into little colleges,--colleges of a second
grade. That any such thing is likely to occur, I do not believe; but if
it were, would it aid the higher education and promote its wide
dispersion? Precisely the contrary. Instead of going to the university
from the academies, boys would content themselves with the tolerable
education already received. For the most part they would decline to go
farther. It is useless to say that this does not happen in Germany,
where the numbers resorting to the university are so large as to have
become the subject of complaint; for the German government, controlling
as it does all access to the professions, is able to force through the
gymnasia and through special courses at the university a body of young
men who would otherwise be seeking their fortunes elsewhere. Whether
such control would be desirable in this country, I will not consider.
Some questions are not feasible even for discussion. But it is to
English experience we must look to see what our case would be. The great
public schools of England--Eton, Rugby, Harrow, Winchester, Westminster,
Cheltenham--are of no higher order than under the proposed plan Andover
and Exeter would become. From these two academies nearly ninety-five
per cent of the senior classes now enter some college. But of the young
men graduating from the English schools named, so far as I can
ascertain, less than fifty per cent go to the university. With the
greater pressure toward commercial life in this country, the number
would certainly be less than in England. To build up colleges of a
second grade, and to permit none but those who have passed them to enter
colleges of the first, is to cut off the higher education from nearly
all those who do not belong to the privileged classes; it is to make the
"common consciousness" less common, and to turn it, even more
effectually than at present, into the consciousness of a clique. He who
must make a living for himself or for others cannot afford to reach his
profession late. The age of entering college is already too high. With
improved methods of teaching I hope it maybe somewhat reduced. At any
rate, every study now added to the high schools or academies is a fresh
barrier between education and the people.

II. If, then, by prescribing a large amount of study outside the
university the elective principle is not likely to be successfully
limited, is it not probable that within the college itself the two
counter principles of election and prescription, mutually limiting,
mutually supporting, will always be retained? This is the second
suggestion; to bring studies of choice and studies commanded into
juxtaposition. The backbone of the college is to be kept prescribed,
the fleshy parts to be made elective. By a special modification of the
plan, the later years are turned largely, perhaps wholly, toward
election, and a line is drawn at the junior, or even the sophomore year,
below which elective studies are forbidden to penetrate. Is not this the
plan that will finally be judged safest? It certainly is the safest for
a certain number of years. Before it can securely reach anything else,
every college must pass through this intermediate state. After half a
century of testing election Harvard still retains some prescribed
studies. The Harvard juniors chose for nineteen years before the
sophomores, and the sophomores seventeen years before the freshmen. In
introducing electives a sober pace is commendable. A university is
charged with the greatest of public trusts. The intelligence of the
community is, to a large extent, in its keeping. It is bound to keep
away from risky experiments, to disregard shifting popular fancies, and
to be as conservative as clearness of sight will permit. I do not plead,
therefore, that Harvard and Yale should abolish all prescription the
coming year. They certainly should not. In my opinion most colleges are
moving too fast in the elective direction already. I merely plead that
we must see where we are going. As public guides, we must forecast the
track of the future if we would avoid stumbling into paths which lead
nowhere. That is all I am attempting here. I want to ascertain whether
the dual system of limitation is a stable system, one in which we can
put our trust, or whether it is a temporary convenience, likely to slip
away a little year after year. What does history say? Let us examine the
facts of the past. The following table shows at the left the fifteen New
England colleges. In the next three parallel columns is printed the
percentage of elective studies which existed in these colleges in
1875-76; in the last three, the percentage which exists to-day. To
render the comparison more exact, I print the sophomore, junior, and
senior years separately, reserving the problem of the freshman year for
later discussion.

            |      1875-76     |     1885-86
            +------+-----+-----+------+-----+-----
            | Soph.| Jun.| Sen.| Soph.| Jun.| Sen.
  ----------+------+-----+-----+------+-----+-----
  Amherst   |  .04 | .20 | .08 |  .20 | .75 | .75
  Bates     |    0 |   0 |   0 |    0 |   0 |   0
  Boston    |    0 |   0 |   0 |  .35 | .66 | .82
  Bowdoin   |    0 |   0 |   0 |  .15 | .25 | .25
  Brown     |    0 | .04 | .04 |  .14 | .37 | .55
  Colby     |    0 |   0 |   0 |    0 | .08 | .16
  Dartmouth |    0 |   0 |   0 |    0 | .41 | .36
  Harvard   |  .50 | .78 |1.00 | 1.00 |1.00 |1.00
  Middlebury|    0 |   0 |   0 |    0 |   0 |   0
  Trinity   |    0 |   0 |   0 |    0 | .25 | .25
  Tufts     |    0 | .17 | .17 |    0 | .28 | .43
  Vermont   |    0 |   0 |   0 |    0 |   0 |   0
  Wesleyan  |    0 | .47 | .47 |  .16 | .47 | .64
  Williams  |    0 |   0 |   0 |    0 |   0 | .37
  Yale      |    0 |   0 |   0 |  .13 | .53 | .80

This table yields four conclusions: (1) A rapid and fateful revolution
is going on in the higher education of New England. We do not exaggerate
the change when we speak of an old education and a new. (2) The spread
of it is in tolerable proportion to the wealth of the college concerned.
The new modes are expensive. It is not disapproval which is holding the
colleges back; it is inability to meet the cost. I am sorry to point out
this fact. To my mind one of the gravest perplexities of the new
education is the query, What are the small colleges to do? They have a
usefulness altogether peculiar; yet from the life-giving modern methods
of training they are of necessity largely cut off. (3) The colleges
which long ago foresaw their coming necessities have been able to
proceed more cautiously than those which acknowledged them late. (4) The
movement is one of steady advance. There is no going back. It must be
remembered, too, that the stablest colleges have been proceeding with
these changes many more years than the period shown in the table. Are
we, then, prepared to dismiss prejudice from our minds and to recognize
what steadiness of advance means? In other matters when a general
tendency in a given direction is discovered, extending over a long
series of years, visible in individuals widely unlike, and presenting no
solitary case of backward turning, we are apt to conclude that there is
a force in the movement which will carry it still further onward. We
are not disposed to seize on some point in its path and to count that an
ultimate holding-ground. This, I say, would be a natural conclusion
unless we could detect in the movement tendencies at work in an opposite
direction. Are there any such tendencies here? I cannot find them.
Prescription invariably loses; election invariably gains.

But in order to make a rational prediction about the future we must know
more than the bare facts of the past; we need to know why these
particular facts have arisen. What are the reasons that whenever
elective and prescribed studies are mixed, an extrusive force regularly
appears in the elective? The reasons are not far to seek. Probably every
professor in New England understands them. The two systems are so
incongruous that each brings out the vices rather than the virtues of
its incompatible brother. Prescribed studies, side by side with
elective, appear a bondage; elective, side by side with prescribed, an
indulgence. So long as all studies are prescribed, one may be set above
another in the mind of the pupil on grounds of intrinsic worth; let
certain studies express the pupil's wishes, and almost certainly the
remainder, valuable as they may be in themselves, will express his
disesteem. It is useless to say this should not be so. It always is. The
zeal of work, the freshness of interest, which now appear in the chosen
studies, are deducted from those which are forced. On the latter as
little labor as possible is expended. They become perfunctory and
mechanical, and soon restive pupils and dissatisfied teachers call for
fresh extension of energizing choice. This is why the younger officers
in all the colleges are eager to give increased scope to the elective
studies. They cannot any longer get first-rate work done in the
prescribed. Alarmed by the dangers of the new principle, as they often
and justly are, they find that the presence of prescription, instead of
diminishing the dangers, adds another and a peculiarly enfeebling one to
those which existed before. So certain are these dangers, and so
inevitable the expanding power of the elective principle, that it is
questionable whether it would not be wise for a college to refuse to
have anything to do with elective studies so soon as it knows itself too
weak to allow them to spread.

For where will the spreading stop? It cannot stop till the causes of it
stop. The table just given shows no likelihood of its stopping at all,
and a little reflection will show that each enlargement increases the
reasons for another enlargement still. If prescribed studies are ever
exceptional, ineffective, and obnoxious, they certainly become more so
as they diminish in number. A college which retains one of them is in a
condition of unstable equilibrium. But is this true of the freshman
year? Will not a special class of considerations keep prescription
enduring and influential there, long after it has lost its usefulness in
the later years? A boy of nineteen comes from home about as untrained in
will as in intelligence. Will it not always be thought best to give him
a year in which to acquaint himself with his surroundings and to learn
what studies he may afterwards profitably select? Possibly it will. I
incline to think not. The case of the freshman year is undoubtedly
peculiar. Taking a large body of colleges, we have direct evidence that
during their last three years the elective principle steadily wins and
never loses. We have but a trifle of such evidence as regards the
freshman year. There the struggle of the two forces has barely begun. It
has begun at Harvard, and the usual result is already foreshadowed. The
prescribed studies are disparaged studies; they are not worked at the
best advantage. Still, I do not like to prophesy on evidence so narrow.
I will merely say I see no reason to suppose that colleges will meet
with permanent success in mingling incompatible kinds of study in their
freshman year. But I can only surmise. Let any college that inclines to
try the experiment do so.

It may be thought, however, a wiser course to keep the freshman year
untouched by choice. A solid year of prescription is thus secured as a
limitation on the election that is to follow. This plan is so often
advised, especially by persons unacquainted with the practical working
of colleges, that it requires a brief examination by itself.

Let us suppose the revolution which we have traced in the sophomore,
junior, and senior years to have reached its natural terminus; let us
suppose that in these years all studies have become elective, while the
freshman year remains completely prescribed; the college will then
fall into two parts, a preparatory department and a university
department. In these two departments the character of the instruction,
the methods of study, the consciousness of the students, will be
altogether dissimilar. The freshmen will not be taken by upper
classmen as companions; they will be looked down upon as children.
Hazing will find abundant excuse. An abrupt line will be drawn, on
whose farther side freedom will lie, on whose hither side, bondage.
The sophomore, a being who at best has his peculiarities, will find his
sense of self-sufficiency doubled. Whatever badly-bred boy parents
incline to send to college will seem to them safe enough for a year,
and they will suppose that during this period he will learn how to
behave. Of course he will learn nothing of the sort. Manly discipline
has not yet begun. At the end of the freshman year a boy will be
only so much less a boy as increase of age may make him. Through
being forced to study mathematics this year there comes no sustaining
influence fitted to fortify the judgment when one is called the next
year to choose between Greek and German. On the contrary, the change
from school methods to maturing methods is rendered as dangerous as
possible by allowing it to take place quite nakedly, by itself,
unsupported by other changes, and at the mere dictation of the
almanac. An emancipation so bare and sudden is not usual elsewhere.
For boys who do not go to college, departure from home is commonly
recognized as a fit occasion for putting on that dangerous garment, the
_toga virilis_. Entrance to the university constitutes a similar epoch,
when change of residence, new companions, altered conditions of
living, a realization that the old supports are gone, and the
presumption with which every one now meets the youth that he is to be
treated as a man among men, become helpful influences cooperating to
ease the hard and inevitable transition from parental control to
personal self-direction. A safer time for beginning individual
responsibility cannot be found. At any rate, whether my diagnosis of
reasons is correct or not, the fact is clear,--self-respecting colleges
do not tolerate preparatory departments. They do not work well. They
are an element of weakness in the institution which harbors them.
Even where at first they are judged necessary, so soon as the college
grows strong they are dropped. When we attempt to plan an education
for times to come, we must bear in mind established facts. Turn the
freshman year into a preparatory department, fill it with studies
antithetic in aim, method, and spirit to those of later years, and
something is established which no sober college ever permitted to remain
long within its borders. This is the teaching of the past without an
exception. To suppose the future will be different is but the blind
hope of a timid transitionalism.

III. The third suggestion for restricting election is the group system.
This deserves a more respectful treatment than the methods hitherto
discussed, for it is something more than a suggestion: it is a system, a
constructive plan of education, thought out in all its parts, and
directed toward an intended end. The definition which I have elsewhere
offered of the elective system, that it demands a fixed quantity and
quality of study with variable topic, would be applicable also to the
group system. Accordingly it belongs to the new education rather than to
the old. No less than the elective system it is opposed to the methods
of restriction thus far described. These latter methods attempt to limit
election by the ballast of an alien principle lodged beneath it or by
its side. They put a weight of prescription into the preparatory
schools, into the early college years, or into parallel lines of study
extending throughout the college course. The source of their practical
trouble lies here: the two principles, election and prescription, are
nowhere united; they remain sundered and at war, unserviceable for each
other's defects. The group system intertwines them. It permits choice in
everything, but at the same time prescribes everything. This it effects
by enlarging the unit of choice and prescribing its constituent factors.
A group or block of studies is offered for choice, not a single study.
All the studies of a group must be taken if any are, the "if" being the
only matter left for the student to settle. The group may include all
the studies open to a student at the university. One decision may
determine his entire course. Or, as in the somewhat analogous
arrangement of the English universities, one group may be selected at
the beginning and another in the middle of the university life. The
group itself is sometimes contrived so as to allow an individual
variation; different students read different books; a special phase of
philosophy, history, or science receives prominence. But the boundaries
of the group cannot be crossed. All the studies selected by the college
authorities to form a single group must be taken; no others can be.

In this method of limiting choice there is much that is attractive. I
feel that attraction strongly. Under the exceptional conditions which
exist at the Johns Hopkins University, a group system has done
excellent work. Like all the rest of the world, I honor that work and
admire its wise directors. But group systems seem to me to possess
features too objectionable to permit them to become the prevalent type
of the future, and I do not see how these features can be removed
without abandoning what is distinctive, and changing the whole plan
into the elective system, pure and simple. The objectionable features
connect themselves with the size of the unit of choice, with
difficulties in the construction of the groups, and with the attempt
to enforce specialization. But these are enigmatic phrases; let me
explain them.

Obviously, for the young, foresight is a hard matter. While disciplining
them in the intricate art of looking ahead, I should think it wise to
furnish frequently a means of repairing errors. Penalties for bad
choices should not be too severe. Now plainly the larger the unit of
choice, the graver the consequences of erroneous judgment. The group
system takes a large unit, a body of studies; the simple elective
system, a small unit, the single study. Errors of choice are
consequently less reparable under the group system than under pure
election. To meet this difficulty the college course at Baltimore has
been reduced from four years to three; but even so, a student who
selects a group for which he finds himself unfit cannot bring himself
into proper adjustment without the loss of a year. If he does not
discover his unfitness until the second year has begun, he loses two
years. Under the elective system, the largest possible penalty for a
single mistake is the loss of a single study, one quarter of a year's
work. This necessary difference in ease of reparability appears to me to
mark an inferiority in group systems, considered as methods of educating
choice. To the public it may seem otherwise. I am often astonished to
find people approving irreparable choices and condemning reparable ones.
That youths between nineteen and twenty-three should select studies for
themselves shocks many people who look kindly enough on marriages
contracted during those years. Boys still unbearded have a large share
in deciding whether they will go to college, to a scientific school, to
a store, to sea, or to a cattle-ranch. Their lives are staked on the
wisdom of the step taken. Yet the American mode of meeting these family
problems seems to our community, on the whole, safer than the English
way of regulating them by tradition and dictation. The choice with heavy
stakes of the boy who does not go to college is frequently set off
favorably against the choices with light stakes of the boy who goes.
Perhaps a similarly lenient judgment will in the long run be passed on
the great stakes involved in group systems. I doubt it. I think it will
ultimately be judged less dangerous and more maturing to grant a young
man, in his passage through a period of moral discipline, frequent
opportunities of repair.

Again, the practical difficulties of deciding what groups shall be
formed are enormous. What studies shall enter into each? How many groups
shall there be? If but one, we have the old-fashioned college with no
election. If two, we have the plan which Yale has just abandoned, a
fixed undergraduate department maintained in parallel vigor with a fixed
scientific school. But in conceding the claims of variety even to this
degree, we have treated the fundamental differences between man and man
as worthy, not reprehensible; and can we say that the proper differences
are only two? Must we not acknowledge a world at least as complex as
that they have in Baltimore, where there appear to be seven reputable
species of mankind: "Those who wish a good classical training; those who
look toward a course in medicine; those who prefer mathematical studies
with reference to engineering, astronomy, and teaching; those who wish
an education in scientific studies, not having chosen a specialty; those
who expect to pursue a course in theology; those who propose to study
law; those who wish a literary training not rigidly classical." Here a
classification of human wishes is attempted, but one suspects that there
are legitimate wishes which lie outside the scheme. It does not, for
example, at once appear why a prospective chemist should be debarred
from all regular study of mathematics. It seems hard that a youth of
literary tastes should be cut off from Greek at entrance unless he will
agree to take five exercises in it each week throughout his college
course. One does not feel quite easy in allowing nobody but a lawyer or
a devotee of modern languages to read a page of English or American
history. The Johns Hopkins programme is the most ingenious and the most
flexible contrivance for working a group system that I have ever seen.
For this reason I mention it as the most favorable type of all.
Considering its purposes, I do not believe it can be much improved. As
applied to its little band of students, 116, it certainly works few
hardships. Yet all the exclusions I have named, and many more besides,
appear in it. I instance these simply to show what barriers to knowledge
the best group system erects. Remove these, and others quite as great
are introduced. Try to avoid them by allowing the student of one group
to take certain studies in another, and the sole line which parts the
group system from the elective is abandoned. In practice, it usually is
abandoned. Confronted with the exigencies of operation, the so-called
group system turns into an elective system, with highly specialized
lines of study strongly recommended. With this more genial working I
have nothing now to do. My point is this: a system of hard and fast
groups presents difficulties of construction and maintenance too great
to recommend it to the average college of the future as the best mode of
limiting the elective principle.

Probably, however, this difficulty will chiefly be felt by persons
engaged in the actual work of educational organization. The outer public
will think it a more serious objection that grouped colleges are in
reality professional schools carried down to the limits of boyhood. So
far as they hold by their groups, they are nurseries of specialization.
That this is necessarily so may not at first be apparent. A little
consideration of the contrast in aim between group systems and
prescribed will make the matter plain. Prescribed systems have gained
their long hold on popular confidence by aiming at harmonious culture.
They argue, justly enough, that each separate sort of knowledge
furnishes something of its own to the making of a man. This particular
"something," they say, can be had from no other source. The sum of these
"somethings" constitutes a rounded whole. The man who has not
experienced each of them in some degree, however small, is imperfectly
planned. One who has been touched by all has laid the foundations of a
liberal education. Degree of acquaintance with this subject or with that
may subsequently enlarge. Scholarly interest may concentrate. But at the
first, the proper aim is balanced knowledge, harmonious development of
all essential powers, avoidance of one-sidedness.

On this aim the group system bestows but a secondary attention.
Regarding primarily studies, not men, it attempts to organize single
connected departments of knowledge. Accordingly it permits only those
studies to be pursued together which immediately cohere. It lays out
five, ten, any number of paths through the field of knowledge, and to
one of these paths the pilgrim is confined. Each group constitutes a
specialty,--a specialty intensified in character as, in order to escape
the difficulties of maintenance just pointed out, the number of groups
is allowed to increase. By insistence on specialization regard for
general culture is driven into a subordinate place. The advocates of
prescription maintain that there are not half a dozen ground-plans of
perfected humanity. They say there is but one. If we introduce variety
of design into a curriculum, we neglect that ideal man who resides alike
in all. We trust, on the contrary, in our power to hit some line of
study which may deservedly appeal to one human being while not so
appealing to another. We simply note the studies which are most
congruous with the special line selected, and by this congruity we shape
our group. In the new aim, congruity of studies, adaptation to a
professional purpose, takes precedence of harmonious development of
powers.

I have no doubt that specialization is destined to become more marked in
the American education of the future. It must become so if we are to
produce the strong departmental scholars who illuminate learning in
other countries; indeed, it must become so if we are to train competent
experts for the affairs of daily life. The popular distrust of
specializing is sure to grow less as our people become familiar with its
effects and see how often narrow and thorough study, undertaken in early
life, leads to ultimate breadth. It is a pretty dream that a man may
start broad and then concentrate, but nine out of every ten strong men
have taken the opposite course. They have begun in some one-sided way,
and have added other sides as occasion required. Almost in his teens
Shakespeare makes a specialty of the theatre, Napoleon of military
science, Beethoven of music, Hunter of medicine, Faraday of chemistry,
Hamilton of political science. The great body of painters, musicians,
poets, novelists, theologians, politicians, are early specialists. In
fact, self-made men are generally specialists. Something has aroused an
interest, and they have followed it out until they have surveyed a wide
horizon from a single point of view. In offering wider opportunities for
specialization, colleges have merely been assimilating their own modes
of training to those which prevail in the world at large.

It does not, therefore, seem to me objectionable that group systems set
a high value on specialization. That is what every man does, and every
clear-eyed college must do it too. What I object to is that group
systems, so far as they adhere to their aim, _enforce_ specialization.
Among every half-dozen students, probably one will be injured if he
cannot specialize largely; two or three more might wisely specialize in
lower degree; but to force the remaining two or three into curricula
shaped by professional bias is to do them serious damage. There are
sober boys of little intrepidity or positive taste, boys who properly
enough wish to know what others know. They will not make scholars. They
were not born to enlarge the boundaries of knowledge. They have another
function: they preserve and distribute such knowledge as already exists.
Many of them are persons of wealth. To furnish them glimpses of varied
learning is to save them from barbarism. Still another large class is
composed of boys who develop late. They are boys who will one day
acquire an interest of their own, if they are allowed to roam about
somewhat aimlessly in the domain of wisdom until they are twenty-one.
Both of these classes have their rights. The prescribed system was built
to support them; the elective shelters and improves them; but a group
system shuts them all out, if they will not on leaving school adopt
professional courses. Whenever I can hear of a group system which like
the old college has a place for the indistinct young man, and like the
new elective college matures him annually by suggesting that he take
part in shaping his own career, I will accept the group system. Then,
too, the public will probably accept it. Until then, rigid groups will
be thought by many to lay too great a strain on unseasoned powers of
choice, to present too many practical difficulties of construction, and
to show too doctrinaire a confidence that every youth will fit without
pinching into a specialized class.


FOOTNOTES:

   [6] These conditions of intellectual nourishment were long ago
       recognized in other, less formal, departments of mental training.
       In his essays on _Books and Reading_ President Porter wrote in
       1871: "The person who asks. What shall I read? or, With what
       shall I begin? may have read for years in a mechanical routine,
       and with a listless spirit; with scarcely an independent thought,
       with no plans of self-improvement, and few aspirations for
       self-culture. To all these classes the advice is full of meaning:
       'Read what will satisfy your wants and appease your desires, and
       you will comply with the first condition to reading with interest
       and profit.' Hunger and thirst are better than manifold
       appliances and directions, in respect to other than the bodily
       wants, towards a good appetite and a healthy digestion. If a man
       has any self-knowledge or any power of self-direction, he is
       surely competent to ask himself what is the subject or subjects
       in respect to which he stands most in need of knowledge or
       excitement from books. If he can answer this question, he has
       gone very far towards answering the question, 'What book or books
       can I read with satisfaction and profit?'" (Chap. iv, p. 39.)

   [7] In deference to certain writers I employ their favorite term
       "university" in contrast with the term "college," yet I must own
       I do not know what it means. An old signification is clear. A
       university is an assemblage of schools, as our government is
       an assemblage of states. In England, different corporations,
       giving substantially similar instruction, are brought together
       by a common body which confers the degrees. In this country, a
       group of professional schools--law, medicine, theology, and
       science--are associated through one governing body with the
       college proper, that is, with the candidates for the B.A. degree.
       In this useful sense, Tufts and Bowdoin are universities; Amherst
       and Brown, colleges. But Germany, which has thrown so many
       parts of the world into confusion, has introduced exaltation
       and mystery here. A university now appears to mean "a college
       as good as it can be," a stimulating conception, but not a
       finished or precise one. I would not disparage it. It is a term
       of aspiration, good to conjure with. When we want to elevate
       men's ideas, or to obtain their dollars, it is well to talk
       about creating a true university: just as it is wise to bid the
       forward-reaching boy to become "a true gentleman."




