CHAPTER VII.

NEW TESTAMENT FACTS CORROBORATED BY SECULAR WRITERS.

TERTULIAN'S WORKS--EXTRACT FROM TACITUS--VALUE OF COTEMPORARY
CORRESPONDENCE--PLINY'S LETTER--PROOF OF THE SAINTS' MORALITY--GOSPEL
DISTINCTIVE FROM ALL OTHER RELIGIONS--NO OTHER SYSTEM DEPENDS UPON
SIMILAR INFLUENCES.

In a former chapter was shown some of the internal evidences of the
validity of the New Testament. By continuing our investigations we find
other and valuable proofs of its authenticity. There was no printing in
those days; therefore the people to whom the gospels and epistles were
addressed, had the opportunity of knowing by the handwriting whether
these documents were genuine or not. For example, Paul in his second
epistle to the Thessalonians, says: "The salutation of Paul with my own
hand, which is the token in every epistle: so I write. The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen." These words show indeed
the heart of an apostle; but what a business man would most appreciate
is the fact how greatly these few lines add to the {104} security
against forgery. It is a hard thing to forge a signature, but give a
business man two lines of any man's writing besides that, and he is
perfectly secure against imposition. The churches to whom the epistles
were written and to whom the gospels were delivered consisted largely
of business men, merchants, traders, city chamberlains and officers of
Caesar's household. Does any one think that such men could not tell the
handwriting of the apostle who had lived among them for years or that
they cared less for the documents of the gospel, for which they risked
their lives, than we would care about the genuineness of a ten dollar
check? Tertulian, who lived from A. D. 145 to 222, was one of the most
learned men of that age. He was well versed in Roman law, in ancient
philosophy, history and poetry. He had been brought up a heathen,
and was not therefore likely to favor the teachings of the apostles
without due investigation. His writings are interesting, throwing
much light on the circumstances and social questions of that age. He
traveled extensively among the churches which the apostles had planted
and claims to have seen the original copies of Matthew and John and
the epistles written to the churches at Rome, Corinth, Thessalonica,
Ephesus and Philippi, and refers skeptics to the places where these
documents could be found. That these writings contained the same words
as are in our present New Testament is evident from the numerous
quotations in Tertulian's works.

{105} In the British and other museums may be found thousands of
manuscripts on every conceivable subject embracing every age for
the past sixteen hundred years and even some still earlier. Among
these manuscripts are over two thousand copies of the New Testament,
some of them dating back to apostolic times. These manuscripts have
been scrutinized by the most critical scholars; yet the result of
this examination is merely the suggestion of thirteen unimportant
alterations in the seven thousand nine hundred and fifty-nine verses
of the New Testament. This is a fact utterly unexampled in the history
of manuscripts. We are thus, by the special providence of God, as
undoubtedly in possession of genuine copies of the gospels and
epistles, some of which were written while the companions of the Savior
were still living and the divine authority and Priesthood were still
upon the earth, as we are of genuine copies of the Constitution of the
United States and of the Declaration of Independence.

There is no history so trustworthy as that prepared by cotemporary
writers, especially by those who have themselves been actively
engaged in the events which they relate. Such history never loses its
interest, nor does the lapse of ages, in the least degree, impair its
credibility. While the documents can be preserved, Xenophon's "Retreat
of the Ten Thousand," Wellington's dispatches, and Washington's letters
to Congress, will be as trustworthy as on the day they were written.
Of the great facts described in these {106} documents addressed to
their cotemporaries, able at a glance to detect a falsehood, we never
entertain the least suspicion. Many such historical allusions might be
quoted.

We have selected one from the well-known works of Tacitus, the
celebrated Roman historian, who lived between A. D. 60 and 120,
and wrote a history of Rome up to the reign of the emperor Trajan.
Concerning this extract from the history of Tacitus the infidel,
Gibbon, says, "The most skeptical criticism is obliged to respect
the truth of this important fact and the integrity of this important
passage of Tacitus." After relating the burning of the city of Rome
by order of Nero, and his attempt to transfer the odium of it to the
Christians, Tacitus says:

  "The author of that name was Christ, who in the reign of
  Tiberius, was put to death as a criminal, under the procurator
  Pontius Pilate. But this pestilent superstition, checked for
  a while, broke out afresh and spread not only over Judea,
  where the evil originated, but also in Rome, where all that is
  evil on the earth finds its way, and is practiced. At first,
  those only were apprehended who confessed themselves of
  that sect; afterwards, a vast multitude were discovered by
  them; all of whom were condemned, not so much for the
  crime of the burning of the city, as for their enmity to
  mankind. Their executions were so contrived as to expose them
  to derision and contempt. Some were covered over with the
  skins of wild beasts, that they might be torn to pieces by
  dogs; some were crucified; while others having been daubed
  over with combustible materials, were set up for lights in the
  night time and thus burned to death. For these spectacles
  Nero gave his own gardens, and, at the same time, exhibited
  there the diversions of the circus; sometimes standing in the
  crowd as a spectator, in the habit of a charioteer, and, at
  {107} other times driving a chariot himself; until at length these
  men, though really criminal and deserving of exemplary
  punishment, began to be commiserated as people who were destroyed,
  not out of regard to the public welfare, but only to gratify the
  cruelty of one man."

Now let the reader take up the New Testament and read the last six
chapters of Acts and the letters of Paul to Philemon, Titus and the
second to Timothy. These letters were written when the aged prisoner
was ready to be martyred, and the time of his departure was at hand.
Then let the reader form his opinion of the origin and nature of that
faith which enabled Paul to say, "None of these things move me, neither
count I my life dear unto me, that I may finish my course with joy, and
the testimony which I have received of the Lord Jesus."

There is still another kind of cotemporary history, which does not even
propose to relate history at all; but is for that very reason entirely
removed from the suspicion of making a false statement. By this is
meant cotemporary correspondence. The undersigned and incidental use
of a name, a date or a quotation often flashes conviction upon the
reader's mind in the most forcible manner. If we have the private
letters of celebrated men laid before us, we are enabled to look right
into them, and see their true characters. Thus Macaulay exhibits to the
world the proud, lying, stupid tyrant King, James, displayed in his own
letters. Thus the celebrated Voltaire records himself an adulterer,
and begs his friend {108} D'Alembert to lie for him, and his friend
replies that he has done so. Thus the correspondence of Thomas Paine
exhibits him drinking a quart of brandy daily at his friend's expense
and refusing to pay his bill for boarding. In the unguarded freedom of
confidential correspondence the veil is taken from the heart. We see
men as they are. The true man stands out in his native dignity and the
gilding is rubbed off the hypocrite. Give to the world their letters,
and no just person would hesitate to pronounce Hume a sensualist, or
Washington, "the noblest work of God," an honest man.

Now we are in possession of this same kind of indisputable evidence
concerning the great facts of the New Testament. From the abundant
notices of the faith, teachings and practices of the early saints,
which are to be found in the works of cotemporaneous writers,
historians and poets, philosophers and magistrates, Jewish, Christian
and heathen; it may be well to select one, to corroborate and compare
with the statements of the New Testament. Lest we should be accused of
partiality, let us take the celebrated letter of Pliny to Trajan. This
