letter is utterly undeniable and admitted by the most skeptical to be
beyond suspicion, Pliny, the younger, was born A. D. 61. He lived and
died a pagan. In A. D. 106, when a little more than forty-five years
of age, he was appointed by the emperor Trajan to be governor of the
Roman provinces of Pontus and Bithynia--a vast tract of Asia-Minor, in
which {109} were situated the cities and churches of Ephesus, Smyrna,
Pergamos, Thyatira, Sardis and Philadelphia. The Epistles of Peter "to
the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia Asia,
and Bithynia," brings us to the same mountainous region. Pliny, having
taken up his residence in Ephesus, wrote the following letter to the
Roman emperor:

  "Pliny to the Emperor Trajan wishes health and happiness.

  "It is my constant custom, sire, to refer myself to you in
  all matters concerning which I have any doubt. For who
  can better direct me when I hesitate, or instruct me when I am
  ignorant? T have never been present at any trials of Christians,
  so that I know not well what is the subject matter of
  punishment, or of inquiry, or what strictures ought to be used in
  either. Nor have I been a little perplexed to determine
  whether any difference ought to be made upon account of age,
  or whether the young and tender, and the full-grown and
  robust, ought to be treated all alike; whether repentance
  should entitle to pardon, or whether all who have once been
  Christians ought to be punished though they are now no
  longer so.

  "In the meantime I have taken this course with all who
  have been brought before me, and have been accused as
  Christians. I have put the question to them whether they
  were Christians. Upon their confessing to me that they were,
  I repeated the question a second and a third time, threatening
  also to punish them with death. Such as still persisted, I
  ordered away to be punished; for it was no doubt with me,
  whatever might be the nature of their opinion, that contumacy
  and inflexible obstinacy ought to be punished. There were
  others of the same infatuation, whom, because they are Roman
  citizens, I have noted down to be sent to the city (Rome).

  "In a short time, the crime spreading itself even while under
  persecutions, as is usual in such cases, divers sorts of people
  came in my way. And information was presented to me,
  {110} without mentioning the author, containing the names of many
  persons, who, upon examination denied that they were
  Christians, or had ever been so; who repeated after me an
  invocation to the gods, and with wine and frankincense made
  supplication to your image, which, for that purpose, I have
  caused to be brought and set before them, together with the
  statues of the deities. Moreover they reviled the name of
  Christ. None of which things, as is said, they who are really
  Christians can by any means be compelled to do. These,
  therefore, I thought proper to discharge.

  "Others were named by an informer, who at first confessed
  themselves Christians, and afterwards denied it. The rest
  said they had been Christians, but had left them; some three years
  ago, some longer, and one or more above twenty years. They
  all worshiped your image, and the statues of the gods; these
  also reviled Christ. They affirmed that the whole of their
  fault or error lay in this: that they were wont to meet together,
  on a stated day before it was light, and sing among themselves
  alternately, a hymn to Christ as a God and bind themselves
  by a sacrament, not to the commission of any wickedness, but
  not to be guilty of theft, or robbery, or adultery; never to
  falsify their word nor to deny a pledge committed to them
  when called upon to return it. When these things were
  performed, it was their custom to separate, and then to come
  together again to a meal which they ate in common, without
  any disorder; but this they had forborne since the publication
  of my edict, by which, according to your command, I
  prohibited assemblies. After receiving this account, I judged
  it the more necessary to examine two maid servants, who
  were called ministers, by torture. But I have discovered
  nothing besides a bad and excessive superstition.

  "Suspending, therefore, all judicial proceedings, I have
  recourse to you for advice; for it has appeared to me a matter
  highly deserving consideration especially upon account of the
  great number of persons who are in danger of suffering. For
  many of all ages and every rank, of both sexes likewise, are
  accused, and will be accused. Nor has the contagion of this
  superstition seized cities only, but the lesser towns also, and
  {111} the open country. Nevertheless, it seems that it may be
  restrained and arrested. It is certain that the temples which
  were almost forsaken, begin to be frequented. And the sacred
  solemnities, after a long intermission, are revived. Victims,
  likewise, are everywhere brought up, whereas, for some time,
  there were few purchasers. Whence, it is easy to imagine,
  what numbers of men might be reclaimed, if pardon were
  granted to those who shall repent."

To this the Emperor Trajan replied:

  "Trajan to Pliny wisheth health and happiness:

  "You have taken the right course, my Pliny, in your
  proceedings with those who have been brought before you as
  Christians; for it is impossible to establish any one rule that
  shall hold universally. They are not to be sought after. If
  any are brought before you, and are convicted, they ought to
  be punished. However, he that denies his being a Christian,
  and makes it evident in fact, that is, by supplication to our
  gods, though he be suspected to have been so formerly, let
  him be pardoned upon repentance. But in no case of any crime
  whatever, may a bill of information be received without being
  signed by him who presents it. For that would be a
  dangerous precedent, and unworthy of my government."

Now let us read the First General Epistle of Peter, the First General
Epistle of John, and the second and third chapters of Revelation and we
will be able to see the force of the various allusions, to the numbers,
doctrines, morals and persecutions of the Saints as mentioned in this
letter. The doctrines of the Christian faith then are not the gradual
growth of centuries, as the infidel would make us believe. On the
other hand the primitive churches possessed a perfection of doctrine
and organization unknown to the so-called Christian churches of the
present day. In the life time {112} of those who had seen the Savior
crucified, and in countries a thousand miles distant from Jerusalem, we
find the Saints scattered over Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and
Bithynia, as well as in the world's proud capital, the city of Rome.
In this letter also we have the testimony of apostates, eager to save
their lives by giving such information as they knew would be acceptable
to the persecuting governor, the testimony of the two servants under
torture, and the unwilling, yet express testimony; of their torturer,
that all his cruel ingenuity could discover nothing worse than what he
called "a bad and excessive superstition." Now, what was it that this
heathen governor called a "superstition?" Why simply that they bound
themselves by the most solemn religious services, not to be guilty of
theft, robbery or adultery; not to falsify their word nor deny a pledge
committed to them; and when a statue of the emperor was presented to
them they refused to make supplication to it. For this refusal, and
this alone, he ordered them away to death. And as these martyrs went
away to torture and to death, may they not have heard tingling in
their ears the words of Peter which had been written to them a few
years previous: "Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery
trial that is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto
you. But let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an
evil-doer, or as a busybody in other men's matters" (_I. Peter iv_,
12-15). Pliny says that there were apostates twenty years previous,
that is in the year 86. Now does not {113} that exactly coincide with
what John wrote to them in the year 90: "They went out from us but
they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would no doubt
have continued with us" (_I. John ii_. 19). So Pliny speaks of the
apostates, "They all worshiped your image and statues of the gods;
these also reviled Christ. None of which things, as is said, they who
are really Christians can by any means be compelled to do." What was it
that enabled the early Saints of all ranks and all ages, of both sexes
likewise, to joyfully meet death in its most horrid forms? It was the
power of truth--it was the power of God.

Now, the grand idea that strikes us in the testimony of the Saints,
both of primitive and modern times, is that it stands out utterly
different from all other religions. There is nothing in the world
like it, not even its counterfeits. The great central fact of
Christianity--that Christ died for our sins, and rose again from the
dead--stands absolutely alone in the history of religions. The priests
of Baal, Brahma or Jupiter never dreamed of such a thing. Confucius,
Buddha or Zoroaster never attained to such sublime ideas. Our modern
positivists and spiritualists perceiving the grandeur of this doctrine,
have vainly attempted to destroy this, the key-stone of the gospel arch.

There is no instance in the whole world's history of any other religion
ever producing the same effects; no other instance of men destitute
of wealth, arms, power and learning, converting multitudes of lying,
lustful, murdering idolators {114} into honest, peaceable Christians,
simply by prayer and preaching. When the skeptic tells us of the rapid
spread of impostures which enlist disciples by promising free license
to lust, robbery and murder, and retain them by the terror of scimetar
and rifle ball, he simply insults our common sense, by ignoring the
difference between the degrading practices of vice, and the ennobling
principles of virtue. The gospel stands alone in its doctrines,
singular in its operation, unequalled in its success.

* * * * *



