CHAPTER XV.

DIFFICULTIES IN ENSLAVING EXILES CONTINUED.

     Collins, Agent for the Slave-dealer, reaches Fort Pike--Prisoners
     gone--He repairs to New Orleans--reaches that City one day after
     the Exiles and Indians had left--He follows them up the
     River--Whole number of Prisoners on the two boats--They stop a few
     hours at Vicksburg--Collins overtakes them--Hands his Order to
     Reynolds--They consult together--Difficulty in separating Indians
     from Negroes--They all proceed together--Reynolds and Collins
     endeavor to persuade Indians to deliver over Negroes--They
     refuse--They reach Little Rock--Call on Governor Roane for military
     aid--His emphatic Answer--They proceed to Fort Gibson--Call on
     General Arbuckle to separate them--He refuses--Collins gives up all
     as lost--His Letter to Commissioner of Indian Affairs.


Collins, the agent of Watson, left the City of Washington on the tenth
of May with full powers to act for the Creek chiefs as well as for his
principal; fully provided, also, with orders from the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs, directing all officers of the United States, in whose
custody the Exiles might be, to deliver them to this agent of the
slave-dealer. Expecting to find his victims at Fort Pike, he repaired to
that place; but on his arrival found they had left for New Orleans some
days previously. He forthwith followed them, and reached that city on
the twenty-second of June, being one day after Reynolds and his
prisoners had left that city for Fort Gibson.

Thus it will be seen, that the efforts of General Gaines, and the active
vigilance of Major Clarke and Lieutenant Reynolds, had barely succeeded
in getting these people under way for their western homes, when the
authority for their reënslavement arrived.

Vexed and mortified at this disappointment, Collins took passage on the
first packet bound up the river, determined to secure the victims of
Watson's cupidity wherever he should find them.

While Collins was thus speeding his way up the river, Reynolds and his
charge, unconscious that the slave-hunter was on their track, stopped at
Vicksburg for a few hours to obtain supplies for their journey. While
passing up the river, Reynolds wrote a report to the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs, stating that on the boat which left New Orleans on the
nineteenth, six hundred and seventy-four prisoners had been placed for
emigration; that on the boat which left the twenty-first, on which he
had taken passage, there were four hundred and fifty-three--making in
all twelve hundred and twenty-one Indians and negroes, who were now
emigrating to the Western Country. While they were lying at Vicksburg,
Collins arrived, and, as he states, "succeeded in getting the order of
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs handed to Reynolds." This was
undoubtedly correct, for Reynolds wrote the Department the same day,
saying, "Since my letter this morning, enclosing an abstract of my
muster-roll, Mr. Collins, the attorney, recognized by you, has sent off
various papers, in relation to certain claims for negroes taken by the
Creek Volunteers, and _your order has been received_. I have therefore
made arrangements with Mr. Collins to accompany me to Little Rock on
board of my boat, that no time may be lost in the emigration on the
passage from here thither. Due care will be had in selecting such only
as come within your order, as also to apprise the chiefs and other
Indians with regard to the claim. The excitement evinced at New Orleans
on the part of the Indians, convinced me of the necessity of this
measure. I think that, between this and Little Rock, I will be enabled
to persuade them to consent without any resistance on their part."

As stated in this letter, Mr. Collins took passage at Vicksburg with
Lieutenant Reynolds, and agreed to go on with him and his prisoners,
until they could persuade the Indians to separate from their friends and
companions, their wives and children, or until they could obtain a
military force sufficient to compel the separation. Mr. Reynolds says
that the excitement on the part of the Indians at New Orleans, had
convinced him of the necessity of this measure; and the only doubt of
his perfect sincerity rests on the assertion, that he thought he could,
while on the voyage, induce the Indians to _consent to such separation_.

On the twenty-seventh, they left Vicksburg for Fort Gibson. While on
their passage, they had full opportunity to deliberate and consult
together as to the best mode of carrying out the plan of transforming
this small portion of mankind into property; but the universal laws of
Nature and of Nature's God appeared to conflict with this slave-dealing
theory. While on the passage up the river, Mr. Reynolds assembled the
Indian chiefs and warriors, and laid before them the facts concerning
the claim of Watson, and, as he says, "explained every thing calculated
to appease them." But the result we give in his own words, expressed in
a letter dated at Little Rock, Arkansas, June second, being one week
after they left Vicksburg, in which he says: "They (the Indians) at once
demurred: Micanopy taking the lead, saying, it was contrary to the
express words of General Jessup, and would listen to nothing calculated
to dispossess them of their negroes. Finding them thus determined, I
prevented any communication with them on the subject until reaching this
place, when they were again called together, and I repeated all that had
been mentioned to them before. I told them it was needless to object; my
orders were positive, and must be obeyed. All was of no use; they
became, if anything, more vexed than before, and left me much
exasperated. Mr. Collins witnessed my exertions to carry out your
instructions; indeed, sir, I have been excessively perplexed with these
Indians and negroes. I see no method in the absence of force by which
possession of the negroes can be had. The authorities here show a
decided inclination to protect the Indians, and there is no doubt every
attempt will fail on our part. I have in no instance acted with
duplicity. The statements made, have been as they actually exist.
Thirty-one of the number left at New Orleans are on the official list
handed me by Mr. Collins."

The whole party were detained several days at Little Rock in consequence
of the low stage of water. While waiting here, Collins appears to have
become impatient, and anxious to get possession of the negroes. Indeed,
from the closing remark of Mr. Reynolds's letter, last quoted, we are
led to suspect that little sympathy existed between Reynolds and this
agent of the slave-dealer; nor is it unlikely that an officer, bred up
in the cultivation of a high and chivalrous sense of honor, would feel
some repugnance at being constrained to associate with any man employed
in the business which brought Collins to the Western Country. Knowing,
however, that the Executive of the United States had become in fact a
party in this disreputable transaction, he endeavored to manifest at
least a respect for those officers of Government who had become
participants in it.

On the third of June, Lieutenant Reynolds addressed an official letter
to Samuel C. Roane, Governor of Arkansas, stating the circumstances in
which he was placed. He set forth the claim of the Creeks, and their
sale to Watson, together with the fact that Collins was then at Little
Rock, anxious to obtain possession of the negroes; that he (Reynolds)
could not deliver them to Collins without assistance, and on that
account demanded of his Excellency assistance of the civil authority to
aid him in carrying out the policy of the Federal Government.

Here again the workings of the human heart, and the laws of human
nature, cast insurmountable obstacles in the way of carrying out the
Executive designs. True, Arkansas was a slave State, and her Governor
was a slaveholder, characterized by that bold and generous nature which
usually distinguishes the pioneers of the West; but his letter breathes
such a spirit of independence, such a bold and unhesitating regard for
justice and propriety, that we prefer to let his Excellency speak for
himself. The letter is couched in the following language:


"EXECUTIVE OFFICE,

"_Little Rock_, June 4th, 1838.

     "SIR: Your note of this day has been duly received, in which you
     call on me as the Executive of the State of Arkansas to furnish you
     military force, sufficient to coerce obedience to your instructions
     to surrender a number of negroes, now with the Seminole Indians
     under your command; and stating that the Indians manifest a hostile
     determination not to permit the negroes in question to be
     surrendered to the agent or attorney of the Creek Indians. I have
     also examined the copies of the order from the War Department,
     directed to you on this subject, as well as the schedule of the
     negroes and letter of attorney, in the possession of Mr. N. F.
     Collins, the Creek agent or attorney, to receive the negroes in
     controversy. After due reflection on the subject, I have determined
     not to afford you any assistance to carry these instructions into
     effect, and respectfully request of you not to attempt to turn over
     those negroes to the claimants within the State of Arkansas, and
     more especially in the neighborhood of Little Rock. And _I require
     of you to proceed_ with your command of Indians and _negroes_ to
     their place of destination with the least practicable delay, that
     the citizens of Little Rock and its vicinity may be relieved from
     the annoyance of a hostile band of Indians and _savage negroes_.

     "Without prejudging the claim of the Creek Indians to the negroes,
     from the nature of things it is wholly impracticable for the
     claimants to make a proper designation of the negroes claimed.
     _There are no witnesses here that can identify the negroes_--not
     even the person setting up the claim. And had the Government
     intended to dispose of those negroes to the Creek Indians, it
     should have been done in Florida, and not bring Indians and negroes
     into Arkansas, the vicinity of their future residence, and then
     _irritate_ the Indians to madness, and turn them loose on our
     frontier, where we have no adequate protection--the massacre of our
     citizens would be the inevitable consequence.

     "I have just visited the chiefs of your command, and assured them
     that their negroes should not be taken from them, and they have
     pledged themselves that their people should go on to their country
     peaceably. Your immediate departure will insure peace and avert the
     outrages you had such good cause to expect.

     "You will transmit this note to the proper Department at Washington
     as a justification of the course you may pursue in accordance with
     it.

I am, respectfully,

Your obedient servant,

JNO. G. REYNOLDS, SAM. C. ROANE.

1st Lieut. U. S. M. C., and Disb'g Agent, Ind. Dep't."



This letter of Governor Roane certainly indicated to Mr. Collins a
strong repugnance to the policy adopted by the War Department, and must
have convinced him that his mission was, at least, unpopular among men
removed from the moral atmosphere in which the Executive appeared to
live. We are not informed of its effects upon Mr. Reynolds; but that
gentleman could not have been very greatly disappointed, as he had
clearly predicted the failure of all attempts to separate the Indians
and negroes.

A rise in the Arkansas River enabled them to resume their journey. They
reached Fort Gibson on the twelfth of June, and both Indians and negroes
were turned over to the care of Captain Stephenson, the agent appointed
to reside with the Western Seminoles. Here Mr. Reynolds and Mr. Collins
expected to make a final effort to separate the Indians and negroes, in
order that the latter might be transported back to that interminable
slavery which all knew awaited their return to Georgia. For this
purpose, Lieutenant Reynolds addressed Brigadier General Arbuckle, in
command at Fort Gibson; but, as the correspondence between these
officers brought the important mission of Mr. Collins in that Western
Country to a close, we will present these letters to the reader.

On the twelfth of June, the day of his arrival, Lieutenant Reynolds
addressed General Arbuckle the following note:

     "GENERAL: I herewith enclose orders, received from the Commissioner
     of Indian Affairs, for the surrender of a certain number of
     negroes, belonging to the Seminole Indians, to Mr. N. F. Collins,
     the attorney appointed by the Creek Delegation which recently
     visited Washington, which appointment has been ratified by the
     Department; and feeling myself bound to turn over all in my
     possession, in obedience to such orders, and the Seminole chiefs
     and Indians refusing _positively_ to give them up, I have to
     request the employment of such a force, General, as you may deem
     _adequate_ for carrying into effect my instructions.

I am, General, very respectfully,

Your obedient servant,

JNO. G. REYNOLDS,

_1st Lieut. U. S. M. C., and Disb'g Agent, Ind. Dept._

General M. ARBUCKLE,

Commanding, etc., Fort Gibson."



General Arbuckle was in command of the military forces of the United
States in that Western Country, and of course felt great responsibility
in regard to maintaining peaceful relations with the Indians of that
region. Having maturely reflected upon the communication of Mr.
Reynolds, he returned the following answer:


"HEAD QUARTERS WESTERN DEPARTMENT, THIRD DIVISION,}
_Fort Gibson_, June 13th, 1838.                       }

     "SIR: I have received your letter of the 12th instant, with the
     papers accompanying it, in which you request me to furnish such a
     force as I deem adequate, to enable you to turn over a number of
     negroes that were captured by the Creek warriors in Florida, to
     Nathaniel F. Collins, their attorney.

     "I have given your application much reflection, and have determined
     to decline a compliance therewith for the following reasons:

     "First. The difficulty and uncertainty of identifying the negroes
     actually captured by the Creek warriors, who are now with their
     former owners, and in company with a large number of other Indian
     negroes, and there being no individual of character present (as far
     as I am informed) who could with certainty designate them.
     Secondly. The Seminole chiefs positively declare that General
     Jessup promised that the negroes taken from them by the Creek
     warriors should be returned; and there is reason to believe that
     such a promise was made, other than the declaration of the chiefs.

     "In addition to the above, it is proper that I should state, that
     the Seminole chiefs, at the council I held with them yesterday,
     voluntarily pledged themselves to give up the negroes in question,
     provided the President of the United States should, after being
     informed of the facts in the case, so decide; yet they state that
     many of the negroes have died, and that several are claimed to have
     been captured that were brought in by their owners when they
     surrendered."

"I am, Sir, very respectfully,

Your obedient servant,

M. ARBUCKLE,

_Brevet Brigadier General, Commanding_.

J. G. REYNOLDS,

1st Lieut. U. S. M. C., and Disb'g Agent, Ind. Dept."



Collins now gave up all as lost. He appears to have realized, that
almost every officer of the army west of Florida, had conspired against
this policy of enslaving the Exiles, while he himself seemed to
entertain no doubt of the honor and rectitude of his own position; and
in order to do him justice, and render our narrative brief as
consistent, we here insert so much of his report to the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs, drawn up after his return to Alabama, as relates to his
mission up to the time of leaving Fort Gibson, on his return. It is as
follows:


"TUSKOGEE, ALABAMA, July 29, 1838"

     "SIR: Immediately after my arrival (about the first of this month),
     I was taken sick with the fever, from which I am just recovering,
     which will account for the delay in communicating the result of my
     mission to procure the Seminole negroes that were to have been
     turned over to me, as agent of the Creek Indians."

     "I left Washington on the 10th of May, and arrived in New Orleans
     on the 22d, the day after Lieutenant Reynolds had left there with
     the Indians and all the negroes, except thirty-two that were
     detained by the civil authority, at the instance of Love. I did not
     overtake Reynolds until he arrived at Vicksburg, when, after some
     exertion, I succeeded in having his order handed to him; and he
     came ashore, and suggested the probability of his being able to
     induce the Indians to consent to deliver the negroes willingly
     (between thirty-five and forty of which, by a comparison of our
     lists, we found he had in his possession), if I would go on board
     and proceed up the river with him. This I acceded to, as I was
     anxious to pursue such a course as would tend, ever so remotely, to
     conciliate the Indians, and harmonize with the views of the officer
     in charge. The experience of a day or two however proved that these
     calculations were erroneous, and I went on to Little Rock, to get a
     force to coerce their delivery. On our arrival there, Lieutenant R.
     called upon the acting Governor of Arkansas for assistance; _but
     from some cause or other_ he refused it, as will be seen by the
     correspondence forwarded you by Lieutenant R. I then proceeded with
     the party to Fort Gibson, calculating certainly on being able to
     obtain the necessary assistance at that place. Lieutenant R., on
     arriving within three miles of the fort, landed one of the boats,
     and proceeded with the other (having all the negroes and some
     Indians) directly to the fort, and made known to General Arbuckle
     the situation of the affair, and presented him with all the papers.
     He held a lengthy interview with the Seminole chiefs, in which the
     various talks and promises of General Jessup were detailed, the
     number and identity of the negroes denied, and the validity of the
     whole transaction questioned, etc.; and hence the conclusion, as he
     had received no order in relation to the negroes, he should not
     interfere; and directed Lieutenant R. to land them with the
     Indians. First, however, to conclude the farce, he exacted from
     each chief separately the promise, _if the President should decide
     that the negroes should be given up_, that they would deliver them
     to him. This of course they promised; any explanation or
     remonstrance urged by me was unavailing."




