letter itself; but we state the fact that he wrote the Secretary of War
by authority of that officer, who says in the letter quoted, "I have the
honor to acknowledge the receipt of _your letter of the 27th inst._,
inquiring," _etc._

[126] The Author was at that time a member of the House of
Representatives. He had then no conception of the real objects of this
war: indeed, it had long been the practice for members to say nothing on
the subject of slavery; and it was equally the practice for newspapers
to print nothing on that delicate subject, as it was called. Of course
the people knew very little concerning it.

[127] Captain Sprague, in his history of the Florida War, says, "The
truth, when made known to the Indians who remained in Florida,
constituted the strongest argument why they should not emigrate. Had
they (says that author) been kept in ignorance, better results might
have been anticipated; but what they gathered from the honest
confessions and silence of their brothers tended to make them venerate
with more fidelity and increased love the soil which they had defended
with heroic fortitude for five consecutive years."

[128] Captain Sprague, in his history, declares, that it was proven in
two instances that white men, disguised as Indians, actually committed
depredations and murdered white people.

[129] This first speech had been carefully prepared by the Author of
this work, and contained little more than a collation of facts from
public documents. It was made with the design of testing the application
of the gag rules more than for the purpose of exposing the character of
the war. Hon. John Q. Adams, Wm. Slade, and the Author, often consulted
with each other as to the best means for inducing the House to repeal
those obnoxious rules. The Author suggested the plan of alluding to
slavery while publicly discoursing matters with which it was
incidentally connected. Mr. Adams and Mr. Slade insisted that the Author
should try his plan. Aware that appropriations for this war would be
called for, he prepared this speech, showing the causes of the war; and
when the bill above referred to came before the House, he proceeded to
test his plan. He was frequently called to order, and great excitement
was produced; but he succeeded in delivering the speech. When he was
through, a southern member replied, declaring that the gag-rules may as
well be repealed as kept in force, if they permitted such discussions.
The position was evidently correct, and those disgraceful rules were
repealed by the next Congress.

[130] This statement is founded upon the authority of Captain Sprague.
It is however certain, that many of the claimants actually received
compensation from the public treasury for the loss of their slaves. The
power to pay for them was assumed by Executive officers, under the
appropriation act of March, 1841, without reference to Congress.

[131] Captain Sprague, in his history, enters into a somewhat lengthened
apology for this practice of General Worth, by saying, the negroes were
the most active and vindictive of the hostile forces; that, from the
peculiar situation of the country, ten negroes could keep it in a state
of constant alarm; that many of them had intermarried with the Seminoles
and become identified with them, had acquired their habits, and would
have been useless to their owners had they been delivered to them; that
the negro would have remained in service but a few days, when he would
have again taken to the swamps and hommocks, when he could elude
pursuit, and would have been more vindictive than before.

[132] Vide opinions of the Attorney Generals, from 1838 to 1851, page
1944, Senate Doc. 55. It is a singular fact that, in the whole of this
elaborate opinion, no allusion is made to the real condition of the
Exiles; nor would any person suspect, from reading it, that the Attorney
General had any knowledge of the claim which the Creeks preferred.
Although he quotes the clause in the articles of capitulation, which
expressly and emphatically declares that "Major General Jessup, in
behalf of the United States, agrees that the Seminoles _and their
allies, who come in and emigrate, shall be protected in their lives and
property_;" yet he appears never to have conceived the idea that such a
stipulation could impose any duties upon our Government in favor of
negroes; nor does he attempt to define the meaning of this most explicit
covenant.

[133] Under this law, which is general in all slave States, free colored
citizens of nearly every free State of the Union have been seized and
enslaved, and are now toiling in chains.

[134] Hon. R. W. Johnson, a Representative from Arkansas, spoke of this
wretch as having come from Louisiana; but from manuscript letters on
file in the War Department, the Author is led to think he came from
Florida, and had previously participated in kidnapping Exiles in that
Territory.

[135] The Author, being unable to obtain a publication of the documents
showing these facts, states them upon the best authority he possesses.
During the discussions upon what is called the Indian Appropriation Bill
for 1852, in the House of Representatives of the United States, the
following colloquial debate occurred, and is now cited as a part of the
evidence on which these facts are stated. It will be found in the
Congressional Globe of 1852, vol. 24, part 3d, pages 1804, 1805:

     "Mr. GIDDINGS. I rise for a different purpose than that of
     expressing my approbation of the amendment which has just been
     read. I ask the especial attention of gentlemen to some
     interrogatories which I desire to propound for the purpose of
     obtaining information; and that the information may go to the
     country, I will observe, that I desire to have the experience of
     the able Chairman of the committee on Indian Affairs (Mr. Johnson
     of Arkansas), to obtain this intelligence. According to reliable
     information which I received in the summer of 1850, these Creek
     Indians, to whom attention has been turned, with force and
     violence, seized from seventy to one hundred free persons of color
     in the Indian Territory, or at least those claiming to be free, and
     enslaved, sold and transported them to the State of Louisiana,
     where they are now in servitude as slaves. I will state that this
     was done in violation of the treaty entered into in 1845, and in
     subversion of our solemn faith, entered into with these negroes
     during the Seminole War, in 1837. The official information upon
     this subject is in the Indian Department, where it has been
     received; and from which that we have not been able to obtain any
     intelligence by resolution, although a resolution for that purpose
     has been in my desk since the first day of the session. The
     questions I desire to propound to those gentlemen are--First, Is it
     a fact that those persons of color were seized and sold into
     slavery; and, second, by what claim of right or pretended title did
     these Creek Indians enslave and sell those people?

     "Mr. JOHNSON. I have no official knowledge in the matter at all.
     Then as to the knowledge I have obtained incidentally, I do know
     that there has been a great contest in relation to a portion of
     these Creek Indian negroes; I do know that the matter has been
     looked into here in the Executive Departments; I do know that the
     matter has never been before the House at all, unless it has
     strangely escaped my notice; I know it has not been before my
     committee; I know the Attorney General of the United States has
     declared his opinion as to the title of these negroes: I think
     there were seventy of them, though it might have been more or less.
     So, then, I have no official information on the subject to which
     the gentleman alludes.

     "Some two or three years ago, I know of a contest going on about
     the title to these negroes, and that it was decided that they
     belonged to those Indians. They had established themselves in a
     free town, which they maintained with force and arms. There were
     heavy disturbances existing there in the Indian nation, amounting
     at times almost to civil war: I believe before it was done with, it
     was quite civil war. I know they were taken; but what was done with
     them, I do not know. They were taken, and carried out of the
     nation, with the design of holding them as property, when they
     could not hold them in the nation on account of the disturbance
     which they created. I know the decision of the Attorney General of
     the United States, as to the title to these negroes; and that is
     the whole statement in regard to the matter as far as I can give
     it."



[136] The Author has written many letters, and made frequent efforts, to
obtain a copy of the record of this writ, if any had been kept, and the
proceedings, together with the opinion of the Judge thereon, but has not
succeeded. The statement, therefore, rests on the verbal reports,
current at the time in the Indian Country, and communicated to the
Author by individuals who happened to be there at the time.

[137] The Author has been unable to obtain official data of the number
of Exiles who remained in the Indian Country.

[138] The Author has been compelled to rely on verbal reports received
from individuals for these facts. He also understood Mr. Johnston, the
Representative from Arkansas, in the debate referred to in a former
note, to say distinctly, that the Creeks pursued the Exiles, and that a
_battle was fought_, but he was unable to state particulars.

[139] Vide Official Report of Major Emory, in regard to the boundary
line between the United States and Mexico. He states the location of
Wild Cat and the Seminole Indians, but omits all reference to the
Exiles.

[140] This number has been increased by fresh arrivals from the Indian
Country, since 1850.

[141] Vide Manuscript Letters now on file in the Indian Bureau at
Washington.








End of Project Gutenberg's The Exiles of Florida, by Joshua R. Giddings



