CHAPTER XXI.

CLOSE OF THE WAR.

     Delegation from Emigrants return to Florida--Their efforts in favor
     of Peace--Pacific indications--Troops discharged--Indians and
     Negroes surrender--Foray of Captain Wade--Waxe Hadjo
     surrenders--Massacre at Mandarin--People of Georgia and Florida
     dissatisfied with General Worth--They insist on furnishing
     Troops--Gen. Worth refuses to employ Militia--General McDonald and
     Volunteers from Georgia take the field--Demand the withdrawal of
     the Regular Troops--They are withdrawn--Call for
     Provisions--General Worth refuses to furnish them--Militia
     disband--Tustenuggee Chapco surrenders--More Troops
     discharged--General Worth states the number of Enemy, and
     recommends cessation of Hostilities--Propositions rejected by
     Executive--Battle with Halec Tustenuggee--His character--His
     capture--He and his people sent West--President reconsiders General
     Worth's advice--Adopts the proposed policy--General Worth calls
     Council--Terms of Peace agreed upon--General Order--General Worth
     retires--War ended--Its object--Its cost--Number of lives
     sacrificed--Character of Indians and Exiles who remained in
     Florida.


[Sidenote: 1841.]

On the fourteenth of October, Alligator, with two other chiefs, and one
of the leading Exiles, named James, reached Fort Brooke, on their return
from the Western Country. They came at the request of General Worth to
exert their influence with Tiger-tail and others in favor of emigration.
The next day they left for the interior, and after an absence of seven
days returned with Tiger-tail. The General held several conversations
with him, and kindly expressed his sympathy for the Indians, explaining
his own situation and duty, and advising the Indians to emigrate as
their best policy. Tiger-tail, after remaining in camp four days,
returned for his band; and friendly Indians were dispatched by General
Worth to Sam Jones and other chiefs to induce them also to come in. Some
thirty Indians deserted Halec Tustenuggee (Nov. 10), and came to Fort
Brooke. The appearance of Indians and Exiles was so pacific that the
Commanding General discharged from further service in Florida five
companies of dragoons, who were ordered to the western frontier. The
Indians and Exiles who remained at Fort Brooke when Wild Cat and his
party left for the West, were active in their endeavors to induce their
other friends to emigrate. In these efforts they were at least partially
successful. Small parties from the bands of Tiger-tail and
Nethloke-Mathla arrived occasionally, and with the apparent consent of
those chiefs; but Tiger-tail himself appeared suspicious and wary. He
would not come in then, but promised to do so at some future day. The
influence of most of the Exiles now remaining in Florida was exerted in
favor of emigration. It is believed that nearly every family of pure
Exile blood had left; that the last of that class had departed with Wild
Cat, particularly all of the descendants of those pioneers who remained
unconnected with the Indians by marriage. There were yet remaining a few
who had more recently fled from their masters in Florida and Georgia.
They dared not trust themselves within the power of our troops, lest
they should be reconsigned to slavery. They exerted a strong influence
with the Indians against emigration. There were also, in almost every
band and small village of Indians, Exiles who had intermarried with
Indian families. They could not well separate from their family
connexions, and therefore refused to surrender for emigration, until
those relatives would go with them. By the twentieth of November,
fifty-two warriors and a hundred and ten women and children--making in
all one hundred and sixty-two people--were gathered from the bands of
Tiger-tail and Nethloke-Mathla; some thirty of whom were Exiles,
intermarried with the Indians and half-breeds.

Captain Wade made a foray into the Indian Country, and captured some
sixty-five Indians and Exiles of two different bands, by surprise, and
without bloodshed. They were mostly women and children, and were at
once sent forward to Tampa Bay for emigration.

About the close of November, "Waxe-Hadjo," a young chief from the
Cypress Swamp, with seventeen warriors and more than thirty women and
children--some ten or twelve of whom were half-breeds, descendants of
Exiles and Seminoles--surrendered, and were sent to Fort Brooke for
emigration.

While everything thus wore the appearance of peace, and all were
regarding the war as near its close, a small settlement of white people,
at a place called Mandarin, twenty-two miles from Jacksonville, was
assailed in open day, and five of the people murdered. This attack was
conducted by a small party of Indians, less than twenty in number, who
had come from the interior, and in a stealthy manner approached this
settlement, committed the murders, and retired before any troops could
be brought to the scene of slaughter.

Near the close of the year, the authorities of Georgia and Florida gave
evidence of their dissatisfaction of the manner in which General Worth
was conducting the war. The militia of neither Florida nor Georgia were
called on to participate in the war. No opportunities were afforded them
of seizing negroes and selling them into slavery; none but the regular
sutlers were permitted to encamp with or near the troops; in short, the
war, as then conducted, afforded them but little profit. General Worth
had encouraged the return of the people to their homes and plantations,
and very few of them now drew rations from the public stores for their
support. He had discharged citizens and their slaves from public
employment, and the war was carried on without permitting the people, or
politicians of Georgia or Florida, to interfere or dictate the manner of
its prosecution.

This proceeding of General Worth greatly excited the people and
Executive of Georgia, who insisted upon furnishing militia to carry on
the war. The Secretary of War referred the matter at once to General
Worth, and a most interesting and amusing correspondence followed
between the Executive of Georgia and the Commanding General. The latter
refusing to call for militia from that State, they were mustered without
his authority, and he was requested by Governor McDonald to withdraw the
United States forces from the Georgia frontiers.

As there was then no enemy near that State, and no danger to the
inhabitants, he removed the troops, and the Georgia militia were ordered
by the Governor to take their place. They did so with the confident
expectation that General Worth would furnish rations and hospital
supplies and arms from the United States stores. But he refused to do
this, and the gallant militia of that State immediately retired to their
homes in order to dine.

The correspondence on this subject continued until May, 1842, and shows
the skillful management of individuals to get up alarms in regard to the
supposed presence of hostile Indians, and thereby manifest the necessity
of posting troops in certain localities, where there had probably never
been an enemy. To give importance to these counterfeited alarms, letters
were written, and presentments were made by Grand Juries. The Delegate
from the Territory of Florida demanded of the Executive the employment
of militia for the protection of the frontier, and that such militia be
authorized to act independently of the Commanding General.

Hon. John C. Spencer, Secretary of War, replied, that the Department
could see no particular advantage to be derived from such a division of
the duties of the Commanding General; and, as he had no doubt General
Worth would do whatever was proper, he referred the whole matter to his
consideration.

Had General Jessup, in 1836 and '37, adopted the policy which guided
General Worth; had he sent his prisoners to the Western Country without
permitting the militia, or the people of Florida, to seize and enslave
those whom he had engaged to protect and defend, there is little doubt
that the war would have been closed during the time he was employed in
Florida.

During the last days of December, Tustenuggee Chopco, a sub-chief, and
about seventy followers, consisting of warriors, women and children, a
proportion of whom were Exiles and half-breeds, surrendered near the
Great Cypress Swamp, and were also sent to Fort Brooke for emigration.

[Sidenote: 1843.]

At the commencement of this year several more companies of troops were
discharged, the number of the enemy being so far diminished as to render
their presence useless.

On the fifth of February, some three hundred and fifty Indians and
Exiles were embarked at Tampa Bay for the Western Country. They in due
time reached Fort Gibson, and took up their residence with those who had
gone before them, and were still residing upon the lands of the
Cherokees.

On the fourteenth of February, General Worth addressed the Commanding
General of our army, at Washington City, a communication, giving a
detailed statement of the number of Indians yet remaining in
Florida--amounting in all to three hundred, according to the best
information he had been able to obtain. He also stated the impossibility
of capturing these individuals, scattered as they were over a vast
extent of country, and advising that they be dealt with, henceforth, in
a peaceful manner; and that at least five-sixths of the troops then
employed in Florida be withdrawn, and an equal proportion of the
expenses of the war be curtailed. He proposed sending a portion of those
friendly Indians who remained at Fort Brooke, among the hostiles, to
continue with them, and exert what influence they could in favor of
peace and of emigration; with the assurance, that no further hostilities
would be prosecuted by the United States while the Indians remained
peaceful.

The proposition, however, was rejected by the Executive; and General
Worth continued to carry forward the work which he had prosecuted thus
far with such signal success. He dismissed more troops from service in
Florida; discharged employees in the various departments under his
command, and made such retrenchments as he was able to effect, without
detracting from the efficiency of the public service.

On the sixteenth of April, the troops fell in with Hallec Tustenuggee,
who, with some seventy warriors of his own and other bands, was encamped
upon an island in the Great Wahoo Swamp, and after an irregular fight of
two hours, routed them. The loss was slight on both sides. Our troops
had one man killed, and four wounded; the allies three wounded, whom
they carried from the field. This was the last battle fought in the
Florida War. The Indians scattered in various directions, and in that
way evaded pursuit.

Halec Tustenuggee was a most skillful warrior: bold and daring in his
policy, yet capable of dissimulation and treachery. He had been the
object of pursuit for two years. His unceasing vigilance had enabled him
to bid defiance to civilized troops. He was now nearly destitute of
powder and provisions, and, as an alternative, professed a desire for
peace. He came into the American camp boldly, shook hands with General
Worth, and proclaimed his pacific purpose. His professions were treated
with great apparent respect. He wanted provisions for his band. They
were encamped within three miles of General Worth's head-quarters, and
were fed at public expense. And when the whole band had come within the
lines, for the purpose of attending a feast, they were secured as
prisoners, and immediately sent to Tampa Bay for emigration; and, on the
fourteenth of July, this entire band, consisting of one hundred and
twenty persons, embarked for Fort Gibson, by way of New Orleans. They
reached their destination in safety; and most of them took up their
residence with their brethren, the Seminoles; while others joined the
Creeks.

The Federal Executive, having more maturely considered the suggestions
of General Worth, at length concluded to accede to his propositions for
a pacification with the remaining hostiles in Florida. That officer,
having secured Halec Tustenuggee and his band, and sent them West, now
dispatched his messengers to those small bands of hostiles which
remained, inviting them to hold a council and enter into an arrangement,
based upon the condition, that the allies should remain in the southern
portion of the Peninsula of Florida, confined to certain limits, and
abstain from all acts of aggression upon their white neighbors.

Most of these small bands sent chiefs, or sub-chiefs, to attend the
council; and terms of peace were agreed to, and the following General
Order was issued:


"ORDER,} HEAD QUARTERS NINTH MILITARY DEPARTMENT,}
No. 28.} _Cedar Key, Florida_, August 14, 1843.  }

     "It is hereby announced, that hostilities with the Indians within
     this Territory have ceased. Measures are taken to pass the few
     remaining Indians within certain limits--those in the far south
     immediately; those west of the Suwanee in a few days, who,
     meantime, there is every reasonable assurance, will conduct
     inoffensively if unmolested in their haunts. The lands thus
     temporarily assigned, as their planting and hunting grounds, are
     within the following boundaries, to wit: From the mouth of
     Talockchopco, or Pease Creek, up the left bank of that stream to
     the fork of the southern branch, and, following that branch, to the
     head or northern edge of Lake Istokpoga; thence down the eastern
     margin of that lake to the stream which empties into the Kissimee
     River, following the left bank of the said stream and river to
     where the latter empties into Lake Okeechobee; thence down, due
     south, through said lake and everglades to Shark River, following
     the right bank of that river to the Gulf; thence along the Gulf
     shore (excluding all islands between Punta Rosa and the head of
     Charlotte's Harbor) to the place of beginning.

     "The foregoing arrangements are in accordance with the instructions
     of the President of the United States.

"By order of Col. WORTH:

S. COOPER, _A. A. General_."



Most of the troops were now withdrawn from Florida. General Worth
retired from the command, and the Florida War was supposed to have
ended. It had been commenced with a determination to reënslave the
Exiles. That object was, in part, attained. More than five hundred
persons were seized and enslaved, between the first of January, 1835,
and the fourteenth of August, 1843. Probably one half of them had been
born free; the others had themselves escaped from slavery. To effect
this object, forty millions of dollars were supposed to have been
expended. Eighty thousand dollars was paid from the public treasury for
the enslavement of each person, and the lives of at least three white
men were sacrificed to insure the enslavement of each black man. The
deterioration of our national morality was beyond estimate, and the
disgrace of our nation and government are matters incapable of
computation. The suffering of the Indians and Exiles amidst such
prolonged persecution, such loss of lives and property, we cannot
estimate. The friends and families who were separated, the number of
those who were made wretched for life, the broken hearts, we will not
attempt to enumerate. Nearly one half of the whole number were consigned
to the moral death of slavery, and many to that physical death which was
dreaded far less than slavery. After wandering in the wilderness thrice
forty years, they fell under the oppression, the persecution, the power
of a mighty nation, which boasts of its justice, its honor, and love of
liberty. We lament the sad fate of those who died in that struggle; but
with deeper anguish, and far keener mortification, we deplore the
unhappy lot of those who were doomed to drag out a miserable existence,
amidst chains and wretchedness, surrounded by that moral darkness which
broods over the enslaved portion of our fellow-beings in the Southern
States.

There are yet remaining in Florida a few descendants of the pioneer
Exiles. They are intermarried with the bands of "Billy Bowlegs," and of
"Sam Jones," sometimes called Aripeka; they are now mostly half-breeds,
and are rapidly becoming amalgamated with the Indian race.

Besides these, there are a number of Spanish Refugees, or colored people
who fled from Spanish masters and took up their residence with those
called "Spanish Indians." These did not engage in the war until 1840:
nor did they then engage in any of the battles with our army; they
contented themselves with plundering ships wrecked on their coast, and
the foray upon Indian Key. They refused to send delegates to the council
summoned by General Worth, to establish terms of pacification. They live
independent of the white people, subsisting mostly on fish and the
natural products of the soil, holding very little intercourse with
either white men or other Indians. Descendants of Exile parents, they
have the complexion and appearance of pure Spaniards; but they are
rapidly blending with the Indians, and forming a mixed race.

These different bands, remaining in Florida, and aggregating into a
distinct people, have on several occasions since 1843, given evidence of
implacable hostility to the whites. And at the time of writing this
narrative, they are engaged in open war; while the Government of the
United States is endeavoring to secure peace in the same manner and upon
the same terms on which General Worth obtained it, in 1843. Their future
history may, hereafter, occupy the pen of some other historian.




