CHAPTER XI.

MORAL GOVERNMENT.

II. ITS NATURE, CONDITIONS, METHOD, AND END.

     "The times of this ignorance God overlooked, but now commandeth all
     men every where to repent; because He hath appointed a day in the
     which He will judge the world in righteousness."--ST. PAUL.


The relations existing between God and man, especially the correlations
of paternity and filiation, constitute the ultimate foundations of Moral
Government. This is the conclusion of the preceding discussion. If God
is intimately near to man--if He is immanent in man, and man is immanent
in God--if God is "the Father of the human spirit," and man "the
offspring of God," then man must bear some resemblance to God--he must
have a spiritual and immortal nature, must be a free personality, must
be capable of knowing and loving God, and therefore must be under solemn
responsibility to God, and within the sphere of the eternal and
immutable laws of moral life; in a word, he must be the subject of
_moral_ government.

We proceed now to consider, more especially, the _nature_, the
_conditions_, the _methods_, and the _ends_ of moral government.

I. _The nature of moral government._--Government, in general, is
control--control with a view to the maintenance of order. This may be
effected by direct coaction or forceful compulsion; or by the reaction
of natural consequences; or by the pervasive influence of moral
motives. The first is constraint, the second is restraint, the third is
authoritative direction. We must, therefore, distinguish between
physical, natural, and moral government.

The _physical_ government of God is the absolute control which He
exercises over the material creation. He is the Fountain-head of all the
forces, and the Author of all the laws according to which passive,
unconscious matter is resistlessly impelled; and because his power and
wisdom are infinite, and his purposes are immutable, therefore material
nature is uniform, and there is an all-pervading order in the physical
world.

The _natural_ government of God is that constitution of nature, and of
man in so far as he is a part of nature, by which the sensations of
pleasure and pain result directly and necessarily from the actions of
man; and inasmuch as he is able by an induction from experience to
foresee these consequences, and to determine his own conduct in view of
them, they are not improperly called rewards and punishments. Thus it is
found by experience that disease and suffering result from acts of
intemperance and licentiousness, and men are restrained from the
commission of these acts by the fear of their foreseen results. This is
control by the reaction of natural consequences in that intermediate
sphere which we may designate the physico-moral order of the world.

The _moral_ government of God is that kind of control which a wise and
virtuous parent exercises over his family, or a just and equitable
magistrate over his subjects.[508] It is a government by laws or rules
addressed to the reason, by moral motives which appeal to the
conscience, and by moral sanctions which appeal to the emotions. It is
a constitution in which God has declared his will to man, and taught
him, prior to the experience of retributive consequences, what is right
and what is wrong; a constitution under which man is endowed with the
capacity of perceiving the inherent righteousness of the Divine law, of
feeling the imperative claims of duty, and of apprehending a future
retribution, and also a real causative power of self-determination and
choice. Finally, it is an economy in which ample scope is afforded for
the development of responsible character. It is a probation in which
there are tests and temptations, in which forbearance is exercised and
consequences are delayed, in which remedial agencies are plied and
opportunities are afforded for repentance and reformation, and in the
final consummation of which virtuous character shall receive its meet
reward, and sinful character its merited punishment. This is the ideal
order of moral life.

This twofold distinction between the _physical_ and the _spiritual_, and
between the _natural_ and the _moral_, runs through the entire domain of
existence and action, of being and becoming.

The terms _physical_ and _spiritual_ are employed as collective terms to
connote the essential, changeless, and permanent attributes of certain
entities or realities which are regarded as ultimate, viz., matter and
spirit. The attributes of matter are extension, divisibility, absolute
incompressibility, and inertia; the attributes of spirit are
sensitivity, reason, power, spontaneity, and memory. The term physical
is further employed to denote certain "affections of matter"--that is,
mechanical effects which are the result of the action of force upon
matter. It is true we often speak of "physical forces," as though force
were an essential attribute of matter. But this is one of the many
ambiguities of language. All that we mean by physical force is a force
which acts upon matter, and produces in the motions and collocations of
matter its appropriate effects.[509] Spirit-force is the only force in
the universe; all that our physical science deals with is "forms of
energy which have their origin in force." "Mind," says Dr. Carpenter,
"is the one and only source of power."[510]

The terms _natural_ and _moral_ are employed to denote opposite modes of
action and classes of effects. In the one case the mode of action is
fixed and uniform, and the effect is necessary; in the other case the
mode of action is free and volitional, and the effect is contingent and
variable. The first is the order of nature where force reigns, the
second is the order of moral life where freedom prevails. "Whatever is
comprised in the chain and mechanism of cause and effect, of course
necessitated, and having its necessity in some other thing antecedent or
concurrent, this is said to be _natural_, and the aggregate and system
of all such things is nature."[511] While, on the contrary, that which
lies within the agent's power, and to which he determines himself by an
act of free choice; and especially that which the agent knows he _ought_
to do, and in choosing which he is conscious of power to put forth, in
the same unchanged circumstances, a different volition instead, is
called _moral_.

Thus does morality commence with "the sacred distinction" between
_thing_ and _person_. "On this distinction all legislation, human and
Divine, proceeds." That which fundamentally distinguishes a person from
a mere thing of nature is _free causality_--that is, "the power or
immunity to put forth in the same circumstances either of several
volitions." A thing is unconscious, involuntary, and powerless, and
consequently limited to one sole possible eventuation. A thing has no
responsibility for its movements, which it has not willed, and of the
nature and consequences of which it is ignorant. A person alone is
responsible, because he is intelligent and free; that is, he can foresee
the consequences of his action, and freely determines himself to its
performance. A thing has no dignity; dignity attaches only to
personality. Personality is inalienable, sacred, and inviolable; it can
not be abrogated, surrendered, or transferred, and it demands to be
respected. In a word, it has both duties and rights, while things have
neither.[512]

Thus do we find that all dignity, all sacredness, all responsibility,
all morality belong to and are predicable only of the personal being,
because intelligence and freedom are the essential moments of
personality.

Furthermore, the sphere of the _moral_ is to be determined by another
important limitation. Not all the actions of men are personal and
responsible acts. Sensation is not a voluntary operation. When the
external object is brought into proper relation with the animated
organism, perception necessarily occurs. The intuitive apperceptions of
the reason are impersonal; when a change transpires, the reason
necessarily affirms the existence of a cause. Reflex nervous action is
involuntary. Many muscular movements are spontaneous, but not
volitional. A responsible action is an _intentional_ action--that is, an
act performed to realize an end which lies within the agent's
contemplation. Spontaneity or self-determination only thereby becomes
_will_. A moral act is consequently a premeditated, intentional,
voluntary act, and the merit or demerit of an agent is as his actual
intention.

The last and most important limitation of the moral sphere is to those
voluntary actions which have relation to personality, human and Divine.
"The peculiar distinction of moral actions, moral character, moral
principles, moral habits, as contrasted with the intellectual and other
parts of man's nature, lies in this, that they always imply a relation
between two persons."[513] Morality is the relation of person to person.

We sum up what has been said in the preceding paragraphs in these words:
The moral government of God is a _legislation_ which has respect to
personality, especially the relations of person to person; and it is an
_administration_ under which the subjects have power to resist and
violate its requirements, but which is provided with ample means to
vindicate its authority, and maintain the moral order of the universe.

II. _The subjective conditions of moral government._--It will be
apparent from what has been already said that the following conditions
are essential to moral government:

(1.) The subject of moral government must be _intelligent_. He must be
able to understand the Divine requirements, to perceive their inherent
rightness, and to feel the sense of obligation to comply therewith. He
must also be susceptible of certain pleasurable or painful _emotions_
which follow as the direct consequences of his actions, and secure an
adequate retribution. In a word, he must have a moral consciousness, or,
briefly, a _conscience_.

(2.) The subject of moral government must be a _free power_. He must be
the efficient cause of his own action, and he must be conscious of this
power of self-determination--that is, he must be conscious of power to
put forth, in the same unchanged circumstances, either of several
volitions. In short, he must have a _free will_.

These, then, are the essential conditions of moral agency--the
possession of a _conscience_, and the _power to obey or disobey_ the
requirements of moral law. Both these conditions of accountability exist
in man. By virtue of his constitution as a spiritual being made in the
image of God, he is capable of perceiving what is inherently right,
just, and good. His reason intuitively apprehends the good, and affirms
the imperative obligation to choose the good. His judgment pronounces
upon the relation of human conduct to the law of right, affirming man
has or has not done right. And his emotive nature yields him complacence
and joy as the reward of well-doing, or inflicts pain and remorse as the
punishment of wrong-doing. In the words of Chalmers, "he is endowed with
a conscience which performs within his bosom all the offices of a
lawgiver and a judge."

The possession of this faculty necessarily supposes the existence of
power in the agent to comply or not to comply with its behests. A moral
law is designed only for the government of a free being, and nothing is
moral or immoral which is not voluntary. If there is no
self-determination, there is no proper personality to which the law of
reason can attach. Remorse, on the one hand, satisfaction on the other,
are emotions which are inconceivable and impossible in a being who is
not consciously free.

_The nature and authority of conscience_ is a question which is
earnestly discussed. Among philosophers and theologians there are
diverse and conflicting opinions. It has been variously characterized as
a _witness_ of our past actions; as a _judgment_ passed upon our
actions; or as a _feeling_ arising in view of our actions. By one,
conscience is regarded as an _appetite_--a craving for the right, but
not a faculty intuitively perceiving the right. Another defines it "as a
_capacity_ and a _tendency_ to inquire into duty, but not as supplying a
law of duty."[514] While a third regards it as a state of the
_sensibility_--"a simple feeling, emotion, or vivid sentiment which
arises immediately in the mind in presence of certain actions, and to
which we give the name of moral approbation."[515]

These definitions of conscience may all be regarded as containing some
truth. They are all defective, however, in this one respect--_they fail
to recognize an internal law which constitutes a subjective standard of
right_, and an intuitive perception of moral distinctions and qualities
in human action.

As an essay toward a clearer apprehension of the nature of conscience,
we present the following propositions:

1. _Conscience is not a distinct faculty of the mind._ Conscience
(_conscientia_ = joint or double knowledge) is the knowledge of self in
relation to a known law of right and wrong. Conscience and consciousness
may therefore be regarded as, in some respects, identical. The terms in
their etymology and their general import are synonymous. There is,
however, a technical distinction to be made. Consciousness expresses
self-knowledge in general. Conscience expresses self-knowledge relative
to responsibility. Consciousness is the recognition by the thinking
subject of its own states and affections. Conscience is the knowledge of
an act or an affection as having some moral quality--as being right or
wrong.

2. _Conscience is, like consciousness, a complex phenomenon_, the
result of the simultaneous action of the primary powers of the mind. The
simplest fact of consciousness is a synthesis of sensation and reason in
a primitive psychological judgment. Sensation alone is not knowledge,
and it becomes consciousness only as it is illuminated and informed by
the reason. And so a mere state of the sensibility--a mere feeling of
approbation or disapprobation--does not constitute conscience until it
is informed by the reason. Conscience is the unity of feeling and reason
in a judgment which has respect to voluntary action.

3. _Conscience is the common field in which is revealed the result of
the operation of all our faculties in their especial relation to moral
law._ As consciousness is the common field in which the results of the
operation of all our faculties come to light, so conscience is that
department of the same field in which is revealed the action of the mind
in relation to the unchangeable principles of order and right which
dwell in the bosom of the Infinite. Conscience is pre-eminently the
Godward side of our mental being, which reflects the moral character of
God, and brings us into relationship with Him. It is that which carries
us _per saltum_ to the immediate recognition of a God, the Lawgiver and
the Judge who is over man, and which holds him in mysterious but
indissoluble bonds of obligation. Conscience is therefore,

(1.) The _reason_ intuitively apprehending universal moral ideas and
laws. It furnishes _the idea of the good_. It affirms that the good is
universally _obligatory_. It asserts that the good has _desert_,
worthiness, and dignity. And it demands for the good an appropriate
recognition and a just reward.

(2.) The _understanding_ apprehending the relations in which we stand to
God, to our fellow-beings, and to self as a moral personality endowed
with reason and freedom.

(3.) The _judgment_ comparing the acts of a voluntary agent existing in
certain relations with the immutable ideas and laws of the reason, and
affirming this is _right_ and worthy of praise and reward, or that is
_wrong_ and deserving of blame and punishment.

(4.) A particular state of the _sensibility_--the painful or pleasurable
emotions which spontaneously arise in presence of right or wrong in our
own actions or in the actions of our fellow-men.

Thus conscience is, as it were, the focal point at which are united and
blended the varied acts and states of the soul in its immediate relation
to the moral law. It is the synthesis of moral ideas, cognitions, and
feelings in a moral judgment.

The co-operation of these powers and susceptibilities of the soul in
their relation to the _good_ has a parallel and an illustration in their
operation in relation to the _beautiful_.

The ideas of order, proportion, harmony, fitness, and unity in variety
are unquestionably fundamental and necessary ideas of the _reason_. In
the Divine reason these ideas have always existed as the laws in
accordance with which He fashioned the material universe. And inasmuch
as the human reason is configured to the Divine, these ideas must also
exist in the human mind. Like statuary in the inner palaces of the soul,
they are the models by which we recognize and the standards according to
which we judge the forms of beauty in the external world. The
correspondence between these external forms and the inner ideals of the
reason is recognized by the _judgment_. And the delight we experience in
presence of the beautiful in nature and art is a particular direction
of the _sensibility_.

This is not, however, the chronological order in which the idea of the
beautiful is developed in the mind. The sense of beauty first reveals
itself in the spontaneous consciousness in presence of the order and
harmony and fitness which pervade the universe. We experience delight
without being able to specialize the precise causes of our pleasure. But
the reflective consciousness, which is pre-eminently analytic, brings
out into clear light the fundamental ideas of order, harmony, fitness,
and unity, which had a prior existence in the reason, and have now
recognized themselves as mirrored in the universe. The repeated
observation of the forms of beauty around us, and the comparison of
these with the standard ideas of the reason, will result in the
beau-ideal of a pure and correct taste--true αἰσθητικόν.

So in relation to the idea of the _good_. It does not stand forth to the
eye of consciousness, in the first instance, as an abstract conception.
The _moral sense_--the affection of the sensibility in presence of
voluntary and responsible action--is first revealed in the spontaneous
consciousness. When we behold an act of justice, of kindness, of
beneficence, we experience the fullest satisfaction. We admire and
esteem the actor. We feel that his conduct is praiseworthy, and that he
is deserving of honor and reward. These sentiments spring up
spontaneously and involuntarily in our bosoms long before we have
defined their reason and law. The reflective consciousness subsequently
elicits the rational ideas which underlie these emotions--the ideas of
the useful, the just, the beneficent, the noble, and the perfect, all
which are finally embraced in the idea of the _good_. And the repeated
comparison of the conduct of voluntary agents existing under certain
relations, with the fundamental ideas of the reason, these standards of
right erected in the soul, will result in an ideal of moral
excellence--a true ἐθικόν.

If this doctrine of conscience be the product of a true psychological
method, it will enable us to account for the apparent want of uniformity
in its suffrages in individual cases, and the varied phenomena presented
in different men.

Conscience, like consciousness, has its gradual development. Though
natural and necessary to every human soul whose powers are normally
developed, it is not exercised at the beginning of its existence, but
only after certain conditions of growth and stages of growth have been
attained. This development may be arrested or it may be perverted. The
absence of proper conditions, the lack of suitable discipline and
culture in any one of the faculties whose operation enters into the
concrete phenomena, will modify the general result. An excess of
_sensibility_ will give a morbid conscience; the lack of sensibility, a
slumbering conscience. A defective apprehension of the relations in
which we stand to God and to our fellow-men will prevent our seeing our
specific duties. Inattention to the character of our own motives, or
ignorance of the real intentions of other men, may mislead the
_judgment_ in discriminating between the quality of actions. There are
also natural differences in the soundness and accuracy of the judgments
of individual men. We meet those who with a limited acquaintance with
particular facts and abstract notions are nevertheless endowed with
sound practical judgment; while others, with a larger knowledge of facts
and general principles, are strangely defective in judgment. Finally,
unless men accustom themselves to reflection, to analysis, the ideas of
the just, the right, the good, do not come clearly into the light of
consciousness. Hence the different manifestations of conscience in
individual men.

We claim, however, that the moral ideas of the reason are in all men
_identical_; that they exist and operate, even though unconsciously, in
all minds, determining their moral judgments; and that _when the same
relations of personality are clearly before the mind the moral judgments
of men are uniform_.

In spite of all the topical moralities to which factitious circumstances
may have given birth, there is unquestionably _a universal and immutable
morality_. In every nation under heaven, veracity, justice, and
beneficence are separated by a clear, unmistakable line from falsehood,
injustice, and cruelty; nor can all the casuistry and sophistry in the
universe transpose or confound them. Custom, prescription, conventions
of human opinion, factitious circumstances, can never blur over and
obliterate these lines which separate right and wrong. Beneath all these
apparent differences, the conscience will make her voice heard in the
depth of the soul, in the common sentiments of mankind, and in the
statutes of universal jurisprudence. The great ideas of justice and
right were prominent and well defined among the nations of antiquity.
"Nemesis and Themis were not only their abstractions and deities--they
were embodied in their systems of jurisprudence. Law secured property
and sanctified life. Law guarded every relation and ordered every act.
Law was the theme of their philosophy and the burden of their song. We
are not unacquainted with the jealousies and disputes of their schools
of philosophy. They placed the good of man and the reason of morality in
the most incongruous things, but _they never differed concerning the
conduct which was right_. Epicurus and Zeno knew no divergence
here."[516] Indeed, they asserted the immutability of moral law for all
times and places--

    "The unwritten laws of God that know not change;
    They are not of to-day nor yesterday,
    But live for ever."[517]

"There is," says Cicero, "one true and original law, conformable to
nature and reason, diffused over all, invariable, eternal, which calls
to the fulfillment of duty and to abstinence from injustice, and which
calls with that irresistible voice which is felt in all its authority
wherever it is heard. This law can not be curtailed or abolished, nor
affected in its sanctions by any law of man. A whole senate, a whole
people, can not dispense with its paramount obligation. It requires no
commentator to render it distinctly intelligible, nor is it different at
Rome, at Athens, now and in ages before and after, but in all ages and
all nations it is and has been and will be one and everlasting--one as
that God, its author and promulgator, who is the common Sovereign of all
mankind, is Himself one. Man is truly man as he yields himself to this
Divine influence. He can not resist it but by flying, as it were, from
his own bosom, and laying aside the general feelings of humanity, by
which very act he must already have inflicted on himself the severest of
punishments, even though he were to avoid what is usually accounted
punishment."[518]

Among the most savage tribes, as among the most refined and polished
nations, are also to be found the same common principles of morality.
Theft, murder, adultery are offenses condemned and punished by every
nation under heaven. The high qualities of virtue are the things which
win esteem and command respect in every country, however rude. Were
proof demanded, we might bring it at once from the darkest corners of
the earth. The savage Fijian regards theft, adultery, abduction,
incendiarism, and treason as serious crimes.[519] And Dr. Livingstone
tells us that, "On questioning intelligent men among the Backwains as to
their former knowledge of good and evil, of God, and of a future state,
they have scouted the idea of any of them ever having been without a
tolerably clear conception on all these subjects. Respecting their sense
of right and wrong, they profess that nothing we indicate as sin ever
appeared to them as otherwise, except the statement that it was wrong to
have more wives than one."[520]

We conclude that the universal consciousness of our race, as revealed in
human history, languages, legislations, and sentiments, bears testimony
to the fact that the ideas of right, duty, accountability, and moral
desert are native to the human mind; and consequently the existence of
the first condition of moral government--namely, the possession by its
subject of a _conscience_--is an unquestionable fact.

The _second_ condition of moral government is the existence, in the
subject, _of free self-determining power_: the agent must be the real
cause and the sole cause of his own actions; he must have freedom both
_to_ and _from_ the act.

Under a reign of necessity there can be no moral government and no just
retribution. It is, at best, a mere physical or natural government; for
moral government must be of beings who are free and self-determined, and
not of mere machines. To blame a necessitated thing is irrational, to
punish it is a cruelty and an injustice. The necessitarian himself is
unable to conceal his conscious embarrassment in presence of these
difficulties, and to save his theory he becomes reckless in assertions.
He affirms that "the whole system of morality--its duties and
responsibilities; the whole scheme of moral government, with its rewards
and punishments--remains, on his theory, as entire and stable as
ever."[521] This affirmation runs athwart all the dictates of
common-sense, and collides with the universal conviction of humanity. He
is the only consistent necessitarian who rejects the Christian doctrine
of sin, denies all accountability and retribution, and reduces the
government of God to mere physical impulsion and the management of a
universal mechanism. The necessitarian dogma can not be made to quadrate
with our primitive convictions; it is out of harmony with all our
instinctive beliefs. The innate idea of right, the native sense of duty
and accountability, the consciousness of sin, our faith in the justice
of God, our religious hopes and fears, all impel us onward to find a
rational and valid basis for human responsibility and moral government
in the freedom of the will.

That man does possess an alternative power of self-determination and
choice is evident:

1. _From the direct testimony of consciousness._ We _know_ that any
doing of ours might have been reserved--we _feel_, by that same direct
consciousness which certifies our existence and our reason, that we have
the fullest power of choice. No subtlety, no abstraction of argument,
can convince us that we are otherwise than free. "Men are not conscious
of compulsion of any kind, not conscious of certain mental states,
called choices, which are either wholly or partially independent of
their free agency; but they are perfectly and distinctly conscious of
entire liberty, and of complete inward power to choose."[522]

That we have a direct consciousness of freedom is the doctrine of most
of the writers on moral science. Cousin is emphatic in the assertion of
this doctrine: "I am conscious of this sovereign power of the will. I
feel in myself, before its determination, the force that can determine
itself in such a manner or in such another. At the same time that I will
this or that I am equally conscious of the power to will the opposite; I
am conscious of being master of my resolution, of the ability to arrest
it, continue it, repress it."[523] The distinguished Professor of Moral
Philosophy in the University of Edinburgh, Dr. Calderwood, teaches the
same doctrine: "It is in our consciousness of self-control for the
determination of activity that we obtain our only knowledge of
causation. Every one knows himself as the cause of his own actions. In
the external world we continue ignorant of causes, and are able only to
trace uniform sequence, as Hume and Comte have insisted. But in
consciousness we distinguish between sequence and causality. We are
conscious of our own causal energy by knowing the origin of our activity
in self-determination."[524]

The direct consciousness of freedom is denied by Sir William Hamilton.
This denial is a necessary consequence of his doctrine of relativity. If
we are not conscious of self as a reality, but only of certain modes or
affections, then, of course, we can not be conscious of self as a free
power. But as Mansel has forcibly replied: "Does it not rather appear a
flat contradiction to maintain that I am not immediately conscious of
myself, but only of my sensations or volitions? Who, then, is the _I_
that is conscious; and how can _I_ be conscious of such states as
_mine_? In this case it would surely be more accurate to say, not that I
am conscious of my sensations, but that the sensation is conscious of
itself; but, thus worded, the glaring absurdity of the theory would
carry with it its own refutation.... Self-personality is revealed to us
with all the clearness of an original intuition."[525] With an
inconsistency which shows the fallacy of Sir William Hamilton's whole
theory of relativity, he admits that, "As clearly as I am conscious of
existing, so clearly am I conscious at every moment of my existence that
the conscious Ego is not itself a mere modification, nor a series of
modifications of any other subject, but that it is itself something
different from all its own modifications, and a _self-subsistent
entity_."[526]

If, then, we admit, as we must admit, the existence of an immediate
consciousness, not merely of the phenomena of mind, but of the personal
self as actively and passively related to them, we must also admit the
direct testimony of conscience to the fact of liberty. "I am conscious
not merely of the phenomenon of volition, _but of myself as producing
it, and as producing it by choice, with a power to choose the opposite
alternative_."

The necessitarians are all compelled to concede that the universal
conviction of our race is, and always has been, that man is free. They
have, however, asserted that this dictate of common-sense is not to be
accepted as philosophically true. Lord Kames admits the natural
conviction of freedom from necessity, though he declares it to be an
illusion:

    "Man fondly dreams that he is free to act;
    Naught is he but the powerless, worthless plaything
    Of the blind force that in his will itself
    Works out for him a dread necessity."

And Hommel, certainly one of the ablest and most decided of fatalists,
says, "I must believe that I have a feeling of liberty, at the very
moment I am writing against liberty, upon grounds which I regard as
incontestable. Zeno was a fatalist only in theory; he did not act in
conformity with his convictions."[527]

The possession of alternative power is a fact of consciousness as clear
and indubitable as the fact of personal existence. It is admitted by the
necessitarians that all men have "a natural conviction of freedom;" they
believe themselves to be free beings, and they act upon this belief in
all the relations of life. If this fact of consciousness is an illusion,
then our existence is also an illusion, for that same intuition which
certifies to me that I exist certifies also that I am free. If the
testimony of consciousness is invalidated, there is no criterion for
truth. If one of its deliverances is found to be false, how can we
vindicate the veracity of any? "Our faculties are bestowed upon us as
the instruments of deception; the root of our nature is a lie, and
universal skepticism is the only goal."

2. _The idea of moral obligation necessarily presupposes the freedom of
the will._ This is a principle so obvious that it needs no elucidation.
If man have duties, he must possess the power of fulfilling them. He
ought to be free if he ought to obey law, or human nature is in
contradiction with itself. The direct certainty of obligation implies
the corresponding certainty of freedom. Hence Kant's well-known canon,
"_I ought, therefore I can._" Though denying the direct consciousness of
freedom, Kant maintained with earnestness that the fact of liberty is
guaranteed by the existence of the moral law, whose categorical
imperative _thou shalt_ necessarily implies a corresponding _thou
canst_. To the same effect are the words of Sir William Hamilton: "The
fact that we are free is given to us in the consciousness of an
uncompromising law of duty.... Our consciousness of the moral law, which
without a moral liberty in man would be a mendacious imperative, gives a
decided preponderance to the doctrine of freedom over the doctrine of
fate."[528] Physical causation and moral obligation can not coexist side
by side. In proportion as we extend the domain of necessity we must
diminish that of duty.

3. _The sense of responsibility presupposes the freedom of the will._
This sense of responsibility is native to the human mind. Every man
feels himself to be accountable for his own conduct, not only at the bar
of his own conscience, but before the moral judgment-seat of his
fellow-men. Every where he recognizes the right of his fellow-men to
inquire into his character, to sit in judgment upon his conduct, and to
esteem and treat him accordingly. We necessarily impute blame when an
unjust action is performed by another; we feel conscious of guilt and
unworthiness when a wrong is done by ourselves. These are facts of
universal consciousness. But these sentiments are irrational and absurd
if man is a mere machine impelled by natural causes, and has no
self-determining power.[529] Whatever disasters may overtake us in the
course of nature, however we may suffer by the wild tornado or the
blighting mildew, how much soever of our property may be swallowed up by
the ocean tempest or the devouring flame, we impute no blame; and we
experience here emotions essentially different from those which we
experience when a wrong is intentionally inflicted upon us by our
fellow-men. "Suppose yourself to have been the victim of some act of
injustice and villainy by which you were reduced to penury, and your
family to want and indigence. By what philosophy can you eradicate the
sense of wrong or cease to impute blame to the man whose perfidy has
despoiled your life? You may forgive him, and follow him with your
prayers to the last hour of your life, but you will still pray for him
as a guilty man whose crime has been the burden of your life." Now what
is this radical and fundamental difference between the events of the
material universe and the actions of men? and what is the rational basis
for the different feelings we experience and the diverse judgments we
pass in regard to them?

There is only one answer to this question. The ultimate
ground-difference is found in the fact that one class of events is
_necessary_--there is no adequate power in the thing to be or do
otherwise; the other class of actions is _free_--they need not have been
performed, the actor had full power for a contrary choice. In the world
of nature _force_ reigns; in the world of moral life _liberty_ prevails.
The fundamental principle of difference is the _freedom of the will_.

This second condition of moral government--namely, the possession of
_free alternative power_ on the part of the subject to comply, or refuse
to comply, with the requirements of moral law--is thus established,
first, by the direct testimony of consciousness, from which there can be
no appeal, and, secondly, by necessary inference from collateral facts
of consciousness, which can not be invalidated by counter-proofs.

Unhappily, the restlessness of speculative minds, the necessities of
false theories in philosophy, or the unwarrantable assumptions of
dogmatic theologians, have led to the disregard of the affirmations of
universal consciousness. Men have asked, How can freedom be possible in
a dependent creature? How can it be consistent with our belief in the
principle of universal causation? How can it be harmonized with the fact
that man always acts under the influence of motives? How can it be
reconciled with the omnipotence and absolute prescience of God?

We shall now address ourselves to the consideration of the arguments
against the doctrine of the freedom of the will which are suggested by
these queries.


1. The first is the _Metaphysical or Causational Argument_. The rational
intuition that "every event must have a cause" is a universal and
necessary truth. It must therefore be rigorously applied to all mental
as well as to all physical phenomena. Every volition must have a cause,
and if caused it can not be _free_. This is the grand argument upon
which the necessitarian mainly relies, and it is urged with eloquence
and force by Edwards, Chalmers, and McCosh.

Now that "every event must have a cause" is an _à priori_ truth, which
is as readily accorded by the freedomist as it is vehemently insisted
upon by the necessitarian. No philosophic writers have more ably and
clearly enounced this law of causality than the freedomists Reid,
Stewart, and Cousin. They rely upon it as one of the main pillars of the
Theistic argument. And they apply it, in all its integrity, to mental as
well as to physical phenomena. They hesitate not to say that "_every
volition must have a cause_." That cause is the efficient creative power
which resides in a free, spiritual personality. And that power is not,
like a material or physical cause, shut up to one sole mode of
effectuation: it is an _alternative_ power, a pluri-efficient cause.
Where, then, is the discrepancy between the universal principle of
causality and the doctrine of alternative causation? Is the infinite
First Cause confined to one solely possible mode of effectuation? If so,
how will you account for the endlessly varied effects which appear in
the physical universe? God is the Eternal _One_; whence the plurality
and diversity of his creative acts if He be not an equipotent cause? And
yet, of all the events which have transpired in the universe, whether
natural or supernatural, we affirm "every event must have had a
cause."[530] The endless diversity of effects which originate in the
alternative causation of God is in perfect harmony with this universal
law of causality.

But on a closer examination it will be found that when the necessitarian
attempts to invalidate our consciousness of alternative power by the
application of the causational argument he adroitly shifts his ground.
He assumes another proposition, which is neither equivalent to the above
axiom, nor in itself axiomatic and self-evident, nor justifiably
assumed without proof. McCosh says "the doctrine of necessity is founded
on the intellectual intuitions of man's mind, which lead us, in mental
as in material phenomena, to anticipate the _same_ effects to follow the
_same_ causes"[531]--that is, every cause is inalternative or unipotent;
one effect, and only one can follow.

Now that a given phenomenon must have a cause is one assertion; that the
_same_ cause will again and forever produce the _same_ effect is
another. The first is an axiom, the second is an induction. That "every
event must have a cause" is a rational intuition. That "like causes will
produce always like effects" is a generalization from our limited
experience, and on a further analysis will be found to apply only to our
cognitions of the _material_ universe. It is grounded simply on what we
know empirically of the uniformity of nature. Now we have no _à priori_
intuitive conviction of the uniformity of nature. As the result of
maturer thought, McCosh admits this in his work on the "Intuitions of
the Mind:" "It is vain to speak of the belief in the uniformity of
nature as a self-evident, a necessary, or a universal truth" (page 276).
It is perfectly conceivable that the world might have been so
constituted that there should have been no regularity in the succession
of events. The causes of all the events in nature might have been
_supernatural_, and consisted in the immediate free volitions of the
Deity, or subordinate angelic agencies.[532] They might have been all
"miraculous," and yet the true law of causality would not have been
violated, or in any way invalidated. And so when man, in the exercise of
his free alternative power, produces a new succession of events in
physical nature, or moves disorder and ἀνομία into the moral sphere,
this is no way inconsistent with the axiom that "every event has a
cause."

"In our very definition of freedom of will we assume in the volitional
sphere the inapplicability of the maxim that 'like causes ever and
always produce like effects.' We assume that _either_ one of several
effects is legitimate from the _same_ cause. And while we admit that in
non-volitional causation the law that 'every event must have a cause'
means that every event must have its own peculiar cause, adequate for
itself alone, in volitional causation an event may have a cause adequate
either for it or for other event; and whichever event exists, the
_demands of the laws of causation are completely satisfied_."[533]

Driven from this boasted stronghold, the necessitarian resorts to his
favorite dialectic strategy. He demands the explanation of equipotent
causation, how one cause can be adequate to several effects. He asks,
_What causes the will to put forth one particular volition rather than
another?_

Now when we have shown that, as a fact of consciousness and experience,
a personal, _spiritual_ cause is adequate to several results, we are
entitled in reason and justice to protest against any attempt to push
the inquiry a step farther. We have attained an ultimate fact, and we
have no right to cast doubt upon its authority by raising perplexing
questions as to the _how_ or _why_ of that which _is_. This is precisely
the method by which the atheist Holyoake would invalidate the argument
for the existence of the infinite First Cause. He subjects the Deity to
this universal law of causality, and asks, What caused the Creator to
create? "The atheist holds that the universe is an endless series of
causes and effects _ad infinitum_, and therefore the idea of a _first_
cause is an absurdity and a contradiction." The "infinite series" of
Edwards and of Holyoake are constructed on the same principle. They both
ask _a_ cause for _the_ cause.

When, therefore, it is asked, What causes the will to effect one
volition rather than another? our answer is, _Nothing whatever!_

"Of its own effect, WILL, in its proper conditions, is not a partial,
but a full and adequate cause. Put your finger upon any effect
(volition) and ask, What caused this result exclusively of the others?
and the reply is, The will, or the agent in willing. Ask then what
caused the will in its conditions to cause the volition, and the reply
is, NOTHING. Nay, you are a bad philosopher in asking; for for its own
effect will or the willing agent is a complete cause: as complete a
cause as any cause whatever; _and every complete cause produces its
effect_ UNCAUSEDLY. The volition, like every other effect, is completely
accounted for when a complete cause is assigned. To ask what caused the
complete cause to produce the effect is to ask the cause of
causation."[534]

But such an "alternative" power, the necessitarian affirms, is
incomprehensible and inexplicable. To which we need only reply in the
language of Hamilton, "The scheme of freedom is not more
incomprehensible than the scheme of necessity."[535] "_Omnia exeunt in
mysterium_"--there is nothing the absolute ground of which is not a
mystery. In saying so much, however, we by no means grant the
affirmation of Hamilton that "we are unable to conceive an absolute
commencement [of being or motion]; we can not therefore conceive a free
volition."[536] This is not admitted by Mansel, the disciple and
annotator of Hamilton, as flowing even from his mental "law of the
conditioned." "It may be true, as a fact, that no material atom has been
added to the world since the first creation; but the assertion, however
true, is certainly not _necessary_. The Power which created once must be
conceived as able to create again, whether that ability is actually
exercised or not. The same conclusion is still more evident when we
proceed from the consideration of matter to that of mind. Of matter we
maintain that the creation of new portions is perfectly conceivable as a
result, if not as a process. Every man who comes into the world comes
into it as a distinct individual, having a personality and consciousness
of his own; and that personality is a distinct accession to the number
of persons previously existing.... I believe that every new person that
comes into the world is, as a person, a new existence."[537] So a
volition is a _new_ existence, an absolute origination, "a beginning of
motion" which has its source in the primordial power of the human spirit
as spirit. The _fact_ is undeniable, the _mode_ is inexplicable. But the
inconceivability of the mode in which the will creates a volition no
more renders the fact doubtful than the impossibility of conceiving how
a new and distinct self-conscious personality comes into existence
invalidates the fact that "I exist, and know myself as a distinctly
existing being."


2. _The Psychological Argument._--This may be briefly stated in the
following terms:

It is a fact of observation and experience that _motives_ do stand to
the will in the relation of _causes_ which necessitate volition. They
have an exact mathematical commensurability, and their prevalence is in
the precise ratio of their antecedent intrinsic _strength_. If motives
are wanting, there can be no choice; but when the same motives are
presented to the same mind, it obeys them with such remarkable
_uniformity_ that human actions may be reduced to statistical tables as
reliable and as accurate as tables of mortality.

We might here at once, and with justice, enter our caveat against the
attempt to invalidate a primitive datum of consciousness by alleged
deductions from the exterior phenomena of human life and history. A
primitive datum of consciousness is unquestionable and infallible. A
process of induction is liable to the interpolations of error. The
latter is therefore a lesser authority than the former, and a merely
derivative assurance can not be argued against an ultimate fact. We must
regard it as a philosophic canon that an experience cognition can not
conflict with an intuitive belief. The exterior phenomena of life and
history, properly interpreted, must harmonize with the interior facts
and laws of the human mind, for what is _history_ but the development,
under the conditions and relations of time, of the primitive powers,
ideas, and laws of humanity? If, then, consciousness attests the
presence in man's spiritual nature of a power, in the same
circumstances, to choose either of several ways, we may confidently
expect that the phenomena of the moral world will not belie that
testimony. Now it is a palpable fact that an unbroken law of continuity
and uniformity pervades the material universe. It is locked up in an
unchangeable status. There is no deviation and no progression. All
things remain as they were since the beginning. The fundamental fact
lying at the basis of this undeviating uniformity of nature is that
material causes are unipotent, and shut up to one solely possible mode
of effectuation.[538] And it is equally palpable that the phenomena of
the moral world, the sphere of human life and history, reveal
contingency, diversity, alteriety, and progression. Humanity has not
revolved in cycles, neither has it run in the inflexible grooves of an
anterior causation, nor remained in the dead-lock of an unchangeable
status. History is not an inflexible frame-work in which all events have
been shaped by necessity; it is a development of the inherent powers and
capabilities of humanity, and it teaches us that new trains of causes
have been originated, and new conditions have been superinduced by man.
The ground-fact which underlies all the diversity, contingency, and
progress which appear in the moral world is that volitional causes are
equipotent and efficient for any one of the several results.[539] In
moral development the progressive principle is just the freedom of the
will. The facts of the inner and outer world are therefore in harmony.

The theory of the necessitarian assumes that the will is a mere
passivity, a simple conductor of the impulse which motive power exerts,
a mere transition-point where ideal force is transformed into physical
force, and desires, inclinations, moral convictions, divine influences
become necessary acts. Motives thus prevail by their antecedent
intrinsic power just as physical forces prevail in mechanical and vital
dynamics. And, proceeding upon this assumption, he labors to construct a
science of Ethology in which he would anticipate human action by
statistics, and show how individual character _must_ be in accordance
with physical and mental causation. Whereas consciousness asserts that
the will "is not a bleak mechanical thing." It is a free alternative
power. It is a full, complete, adequate cause. It is _spirit_, not
matter.

Now it is freely granted that the mind acts in view of motives, acts in
accordance with motives, acts in a certain qualified sense under the
influence of motives; _but the freedomist emphatically denies that the
will is necessitated to action by motives_. Motives may be reason _for_
action, conditions under which will acts, but they are not causes _of_
action. They may solicit, invite, urge to action, but they can not
constrain, compel, and force action.[540]

Motives have no fixed correlation to the will. They address themselves
to the feelings, the judgment, the conscience, and not directly and
immediately to the will. They may awaken desire, fear, inclination,
preference, a sense of obligation; but these are all states of the
intellect and sensibility, and may coexist in the same mind with a state
of indetermination and non-differentiation in the will. That which is
desirable may appeal to the feelings, that which is eligible to the
judgment, that which is obligatory to the conscience, and these may
excite the mind in different degrees of intensity; but none of them have
power to move the will. We may be able intellectually to perceive that
some motives are intrinsically "higher" than others, that some have a
prevolition power to excite all minds more intensely than others; but
they do not prevail and secure action in any ratio with their supposed
_à priori_ strength. They can only become real motives for the will by
its voluntary placing its interest in them and making them objects of
its choice.[541] All the actual strength which a motive has is derived
from the action of the will. On this subject we offer the following
propositions:

(1.) _The so-called strength of a motive is the degree of probability
that the will will act in accordance with or on account of it._ "And it
is most important to remark that the _result_ is not always, nor in most
cases, necessarily as the _highest probability_. The will may choose for
the higher or for the lower. And as the will may choose for a lower
rather than a higher probability, so the will may choose on account of
what is called antecedently a _weaker_ over a _stronger_ motive. And
hereby is once for all established the difference between mechanical
force and motive influence--that whereas in the former, by necessity,
the greater effect results from the greater force, in the latter the
less is possible from the greater, the greater from the less."[542] That
result is not as the highest probability Dr. Whedon has shown most
conclusively from the doctrine of Contingencies or Probabilities. And on
this he grounds his doctrine of _contingent motive probability_. "This
contingent character of motive influence is correspondent with the
alternative character of that which is its sole possible object--will.
An alternative will and a contingent motive influence are correlatives.
They mutually explain and sustain each other. To admit either is to
admit both. And so a unipotent will and a necessary motive influence are
correlatives. He who is compelled to admit one is compelled to admit the
other. It will be a mere controversy about a word to say that an
influence which does not produce effect is no influence. That may
legitimately be called an influence, it is important to add, which is
conceived as _possessing an intrinsic probability for result, though the
higher probability be a contingency_ for which there exists power of
_failure_. If so, then the doctrine of contingent motive influence is
established, and the doctrine of volitional necessity is at an end. The
relation between physical force and effect is _necessity_. The relation
between motive and volition is _contingency_."[543]

(2.) _The so-called strength of a motive is the comparative prevalence
which the will assigns to it by its own action._ It is impossible to
erect any standard by which the intrinsic "strength" of motives can be
determined previous to volition. "A cold intellection is not
intrinsically commensurable with a deep emotion, nor a sentiment of
taste with a feeling of obligation, nor a physical appetite with a sense
of honor." Now by what standard can the comparative force of these
influences be determined? There is no more commensurability between them
than between "the brightness of day and the force of magnetic
attractions." Or if we could possibly determine, by some rational _à
priori_ method, that a feeling of obligation is intrinsically stronger
than a physical appetite, or that the love of life is stronger _per se_
than a sense of duty, we can not affirm that the one or the other shall
therefore uniformly and necessarily prevail. These influences derive all
their prevalency, and consequently their comparative strength of motive,
_from the will alone_. The will places its interest in the one or the
other. It decides the mental position. "It settles the question of
preferences between alternatives, dismisses the counter-motive from
view, and closes the debate."[544]

The "strength" of a motive, in its relation to the will, can only be
known by the test of _prevalency_. This is unwittingly conceded by the
necessitarian. He says "the strongest motive prevails because that is
the strongest which the will chooses." This really concedes the
position assumed by Dr. Whedon, that "the strength of a motive is the
comparative prevalence which the will, in its own action, assigns to it,
or the nearness to which the will comes to acting on account of it." Men
do not always choose that which is most _desirable_, nor that which is
most _eligible_, nor that which appears most _obligatory_. But from
whatever motive men may choose to act, however base and unworthy, the
necessitarian affirms it was intrinsically the strongest motive
_because_ it was chosen; which simply amounts to this--the strongest
motive is always chosen because the motive chosen is always the
strongest motive.

The attempts of the necessitarian to fix upon some standard by which to
estimate the antecedent strength of motives have all signally failed.
The most plausible is that of Edwards. He asserts that the volition is
always as the greatest _apparent_ good. But by what standard is that
good estimated, by which faculty is it recognized and pronounced _good_?
by the reason, the conscience, the judgment, or the appetites? Can that
be pronounced _good_ which is chosen in obedience to passion and lust?
Does the man who inflicts a premeditated injury upon his neighbor choose
the greatest apparent good? Does the murderer believe that in taking
away the life of his fellow-man "the volition is as the greatest
apparent good?" Certainly not. "Never," says Bushnell, "was there a case
of wrong, a sinful choice, in which the agent believed he was choosing
for the strongest, weightiest, or most valuable motives." The great mass
of sinful men are conscious of choosing sinful indulgence against their
"highest good."

(3.) _Motives are the conditions, but not the causes of volition._ "Of
volition the cause, the sole cause, is will. Motives are collateral
conditions ... for the volition to be; with which there is adequate
power for the volition not to be.... The motive is only the _occasion_,
and all its acts of excitement amount to no more than this, that they
stand as _probable conditions_ opening the way toward which the will
thereby acquires opportunity to act with full adequate power of not
acting."[545] The relation between motive and volition is not a
necessary but a contingent relation. The will is the controlling
conscious self in the exercise of direct causative power in producing
volition.

Some modern writers of the necessitarian school, McCosh for example,
admit the existence of "self-activity" in the will. But what can be the
meaning of "self-activity" if the will have not the power of either
resisting or yielding to motives presented, and in the same unchanged
circumstances of choosing a different alternative? To be moved
absolutely by motives is not _self_-movement. A power to move in only
one given direction is a mere nature-force; it can not be self-activity.
The distinguished writer above named also admits that "_causation in the
will is entirely different from causation in other actions_."[546] If he
mean that motives act upon the will in a manner "entirely different"
from that by which physical causes secure action or change in the
material world, what right has he to call it _causation_ at all? And if
he mean that volitional causation is "alternative," and not, like
physical causation, "unipotent," then the controversy is at an end.

(4.) _We have no such experience of "uniformities of volition" as shall
enable us to generalize a universal law of volitional causation._ The
facts of uniformity which present themselves in the continuous life of
some men who were absorbed in one great life-purpose, as also in the
conduct of aggregate masses of men, are not denied. We affirm that the
correct definition of a free will supposes that it may choose in a
generally uniform manner. Much of the uniformity in the life of an
individual may be accounted for by corporeal nature--disposition,
standard purpose, and habit. "Upon a basis of corporeal, psychological,
and mental nature are overlaid a primary stratum of dispositions
blending the natural and the volitional, and a secondary formation of
generic purposes wholly volitional, and formed by repetition into a
tertiary of habits; and thus we have, in his mingled constitution of
necessitation and freedom, an agent prepared for daily free responsible
action."[547]

Now it may be readily granted that character forms a basis of reliable
_probability_ as to how in given circumstances a man will act. We may be
able to judge, with some degree of accuracy, how a man will work in his
freedom; but we can never calculate with absolute certainty, because we
have numberless examples of men acting strangely "out of character," and
disappointing our most confident expectations.

"There is often the action, great or small, which reverses the record of
a life or a protracted course of action. He who well watches his
neighbor, however blind he may be to his own practical
self-contradictions, is sure to find, even in the life most uniform in
its great outline, plenty of minor inconsistencies. Or as Müller, in his
'Doctrine of Sin,' well says, that both our observation and our
subject's temptation may occur just at the moment of one of his great
volitional turning-points. From the apostasy of the first angels and the
fall of man, through the whole course of human history, we have
innumerable instances of revolutionary volitions, not only _out of the
previous character_, but shaping a _new_ character. The one disastrous
sin of Moses, the one great complicated crime of David, the apostasy of
Solomon, the wisest of men, are all proofs how, not only in contrasted
traits, but in revolutionary acts, a man may be

    'The wisest, brightest, meanest of mankind.'"[548]

Statistics are cited by Buckle, in his "History of Civilization in
England," showing that crimes, suicides, marriages, etc., occur with
remarkable uniformity, as the result of general conditions of human
society; and he thence infers that all the actions of men are governed
by a uniform law of causation. This uniformity may, however, be as
easily accounted for on the doctrine of freedom as on the doctrine of
necessity. In the calculations of contingencies, while results of
compared large aggregates in the same conditions may approach equality,
the _contingency of each individual case remains still a contingency_.
The actuary of an insurance company can assert with accuracy the average
duration of human life in different countries; but were he to attempt to
predict the duration of any one individual life he had insured, he would
certainly fail. The insured may falsify his predictions by a voluntary
act of suicide. So though large aggregations of free volitions,
surrounded by the same motives, may approach equality, the _freedom of
the individual will remains_.[549]

And as Mansel very justly remarks, "it is precisely because individual
actions are not reducible to any fixed law, or capable of representation
by any numerical calculation, that the statistical averages acquire
their value as substitutes. No one dreams of applying statistical
averages to calculate the period of the earth's rotation by showing that
four-and-twenty hours is the exact medium of time, comparing one month's
or one year's revolution with another's. It is only when individual
movements are irregular that it is necessary to aim at a proximate
regularity by calculating in mass."[550]


3. _The Theological Argument._--The main points of the theological
argument may be thus presented: Freedom in a created being is
incompatible with the absolute sovereignty and prescience of God. To
suppose a being capable of acting either of several ways is to suppose a
being out of the control of God. And a free agent can not possess power
to do otherwise than God foreknows he will do.

In regard to the first of these supposed incompatibilities, we need only
remark that if the Deity, in order to the existence of an equitable
moral government, and the consequent possibility of free responsible
action by the creature, shall please to subject his omnipotence to
conditional limitations, the necessitarian has no business to
object.[551] We need feel no solicitude about the Divine sovereignty.
God will take care of his own honor and defend his own high and holy
prerogatives. Such self-limiting laws prescribed by Divine wisdom and
love do not place man beyond Divine control. The necessitarian will not
deny that such self-limitation is essential to the very existence of the
kingdom of nature. God has established an order in nature, a uniformity
of antecedence and sequence, with which Omnipotence shall not interfere.
"Such a Divine law of non-usance of power is still more necessary in the
kingdom of living agents, and most of all in the realm of responsible
agents; it being observable that the more close the Divine
self-restraint, and the larger the amount of powers in the agent left
untouched, the more the creative system rises in dignity, and the higher
God appears as a sovereign. Even in the system of living _necessitated_
agents, as necessitarians must admit, God forbids Himself to disturb the
agent's uniform and perpetual acting according to strongest motive."

The second of these incompatibilities is really predicated upon our
ignorance, and not upon our knowledge. We can not understand _how_ the
Divine Intelligence foreknows all future events. To enable us to
understand the exact manner in which an Infinite Intelligence
contemplates succession in time, it would be necessary that we should be
infinite also. The _fact_ that God foreknows all future events is all
that is revealed to us; the _manner_ of it He has left in darkness, and
we can throw no light upon it by our verbal speculations.

Of one thing we may rest assured, that as perception precedes volition
in the finite intelligence, so knowledge must precede determination in
the Divine Mind. God can not will or act in absolute darkness. Divine
predestination must be conditioned on Divine foreknowledge.[552] His
foreknowledge does not depend upon his will, or on the adjustment of
motives to make us will thus and thus; but He foreknows every thing
first conditionally, in the world of possibility, before He creates, or
determines any thing to be, in the world of fact. Otherwise, all his
purposes would be grounded in ignorance, not in wisdom, and his
knowledge would consist in following after his will, to learn what it
had blindly determined.[553]

Another important principle clearly and vigorously maintained by Dr.
Whedon is "that the freeness of an act is not affected by the
consideration of its being foreknown." First, because the Divine
knowledge must always correspond to the reality. A free action must be
known as _free_. "If there be in the free agent, ascertainable by
psychology, or required by intuition, or supposably seen by the Divine
eye, the power of putting forth the volition with full power of
alteriety, then God knows that power."[554] Secondly, the occurrence of
an event or act may be _certain_ to Divine foreknowledge, and yet
perfectly _contingent_ in itself. Foreknowledge renders nothing
_necessary_; _it is the consequence, not the cause of events_.

If there be a necessity at all in the case, "the necessity lies not upon
the free act, but upon the foreknowledge. The foreknowledge must see to
its own accuracy. Pure knowledge, temporal or eternal, must conform
itself to the fact, not the fact to the knowledge."[555] The real
difficulty is, not how an act can be a free act and yet be foreknown
(for the act of knowledge can not change the object of knowledge), but
how God can possibly know with certainty a future contingency which may
or may not happen.

It is a clear and immediate revelation of consciousness that man has a
free power of self-determination. No revelation can contradict this
revelation. This fact of consciousness can not be invalidated by any
conceptions of the logical understanding in regard to the omnipotence or
prescience of God, for these by their very nature transcend all human
comprehension.

III. _The method of moral government._--We have seen that government, in
general, is control exercised with a view to the maintenance of order.
In the material world, order is secured by the direct compulsion of
omnipotent force. The things of nature are inertly passive under the
hand of God. They can offer no resistance to the Divine control, and
consequently, in the sphere of nature, there can be no real disorder.
But in the realm of self-determining powers there is the possibility of
collision, because there is the power to resist the will of God. And, as
a matter of fact, we know there is opposition, lawlessness, and sin. In
that sphere, where above all others the demand of the reason is for
order, there is the presence of _disorder_--that is, there is
disconformity to law and consequent suffering.

And now the question arises, By what _method_ is order to be maintained
in the sphere of freedom? How are beings that have the power to
determine for themselves what they will choose and do, to be brought to
act in harmony with the eternal laws of righteousness and love?

There are inconsiderate souls who dream that this may be achieved by
force. God, say they, is omnipotent; if He will the non-extension of
evil, He is able to destroy it; if He desire the maintenance of moral
order, He can compel it. Such reckless declaimers know not what they
say.

Had it so pleased God, He could have made beings in human form without
any sense of moral right and wrong, and without any power to commit sin;
but they would not have been _rational_ beings, would not have been
_free_ beings, would not have been _moral_ beings; neither could they,
in any high and proper sense, be _happy_ beings, because they could
experience no sense of rectitude, no approval of conscience, no delight
in moral excellence, no blessedness in duty and sacrifice. God, indeed,
has made many such creatures that can not sin. The bee, the ant, the
swine, the ape--these can not sin; but they are mere things, not free
powers; they have no sense of dignity and moral worth, no approving
conscience, no joy of sacrifice, and no immortal hopes. Lived there ever
a sane man who would change his lot with one of these, even though in
being a man he has the fearful power to sin, and in sinning, the fearful
susceptibility to suffer--yea, to suffer eternally? Is there any thing
on earth whose value does not fade away when compared with the priceless
value of being capable of duty, of virtue, of devotion, and of
sacrifice? In the eyes of God, the humblest of moral beings is worth
more than all the firmament of stars, and all the teeming myriads of
brutal forms of sense that dwell upon the earth. Because God preferred
to rule over free powers, and not mere things--free powers that could be
governed by truth and reason and love; because He loves moral character,
and cares for it more than all the things "that can be piled in the
infinitude of space, even though they were diamonds," therefore He
bestowed on man this high capacity of character--the capacity to know,
to choose, to love, to enjoy, and in a conscious communion with God to
be blessed forever.

But when God thus determines to create a rational and free being--to
make "man in his own image"--He determines to make a being who in acting
freely may act in opposition to the mind of God, and in violation of his
holy law. In creating a free self-determined being who shall be the
cause of his own action, God puts his own omnipotence under conditional
limitations, and renders it morally impossible for Him, by mere force,
to constrain the will of man. The notion of a free will, which is an
efficient cause, being governed by force, is a contradiction.
Omnipotence may, if it please, annihilate man, but it can not control
man in the sphere of his freedom. "Powers governed by the absolute force
or fiat of omnipotence would in that fact be uncreate and cease."[556]

The moral government of God must deal with man _as man_, must treat him
as intelligent and free, and must govern him solely by moral influences.
He must be controlled by the voice of reason and the sense of duty, by
persuasion and sympathy, by hope and fear; in short, by motives
addressed to the judgment, the conscience, and the heart. A
self-determined being can be brought into harmony with the Divine order
only by "the schooling of his consent." He can be perfected--that is,
fully established in harmony with the character and will of God--by the
discipline of the will. He must, therefore, be placed in such
circumstances as invite consent, and at the same time permit resistance.
He is to be trained, furnished, and perfected, and to this end he must
be carried through just such experiences, changes, and trials as will
best help the formation of a noble human character, and will best
prepare man for the plenitude and blessedness of that life for which the
present is a course of education and discipline.[557]

Furthermore, God's moral government of the world must deal with the
_actual man_--that is, with man as he exists in society with certain
hereditary taints that are not his fault, and under certain unfavorable
conditions in which he has been placed without his consent. With
reverence, we affirm that God Himself is under moral obligation to treat
man equitably, to take account of the weakness which he inherits, the
perverted education that has been given him, and the depraved
associations that surround him, and graduate his responsibility on the
scale of his available light. Finally, the moral government of God must
deal with _the man that will be_--with that fixed character which may be
formed by man in the exercise of his free power of self-determination,
amid the circumstances of his earthly probation. This character must
contain within itself the elements of a blessed or a wretched
futurition, and thus a retribution be secured by fixed nature, and
inflicted by an inflexible necessity.

That the moral government of God is a probationary economy, in which
ample scope is afforded for the development of character, and in which
we are in the act of being _proved_, is evident,

(1.) From the fact _that all our future interests are dependent upon our
present conduct_. God has endowed us with some degree of foresight, and
has thus made us provident beings. We have a native tendency to take
account of and forecast the future. By the aid of reason we can, in some
measure, foresee the tendencies of our actions; we can lay our plans for
the future, and anticipate events which are yet remote. We can also
bring to our aid the lessons of experience, and from this also we can
learn that our present action will have a powerful influence upon our
future condition. We know that the circumstances which surround us
to-day have been in a large degree created or moulded by ourselves, and
that many of our misadventures and our miseries may be easily traced
back to particular acts of imprudence and folly on our own part as the
cause. So that there is no truth we more certainly know than this, that
our future happiness of the next moment, and of every succeeding stage
of our living, is dependent upon our present conduct.

(2.) This is further evident from the fact _that the present scene is
filled with moral tests and temptations_. There is in the present life
an admixture of _good_ and _evil_. On the one hand there are numerous
solicitations to evil; on the other there are motives and inducements to
virtue, the plain intention of which is to prove us. In the words of
Bishop Butler, "We have here free scope and opportunity for that good or
evil conduct which God will reward or punish hereafter." This is
necessary to moral government, because moral government can not exist
without freedom of choice, and consequently the existence of those
circumstances in which that freedom can be exercised. That we have
freedom of choice we know; and our every-day experience of the
temptations to wrong-doing, and of the difficulties in the way of a
uniform adherence to virtue, teaches us that we are in a state of trial,
where our principles are being continually put to the test.

(3.) That our present life is a probation for a future life is evident
from the fact _that in the present life punishment is deferred,
consequences are delayed, to give play to the exercise of moral
motives_.

By "moral motives" we mean regard for what is right and just, _because
it is right and just_, respect for the voice of conscience, and
reverence for the will and requirements of God. If the consequences of
our moral conduct were to follow immediately on the heels of the act, if
reward or punishment were instantly to ensue, then moral motives could
have no exercise. If there were no delay--no interval between sin and
its punishment, moral government would cease, and a merely natural
government would remain, such as prevails over irrational creatures. Man
would then be influenced purely by motives of personal interest or
safety or enjoyment, and his obedience would not be the result of moral
motives, consequently neither virtuous nor vicious. God has, therefore,
put the consequences of much of our conduct into the future, that we may
have room for free deliberate choice, while just so much of consequence
is permitted to appear as will clearly indicate that we are under moral
government, and awaken the anticipation that _all_ our conduct will be
brought into judgment.

(4.) That our present life is a probation for a future life is more
fully proved by the fact _that as a moral economy the present life is
incomplete_. The present is a sphere too contracted for the equitable
administration of rewards and punishments, because some of the _last_
actions of men's lives, some of their _best_ actions or some of their
_basest_ actions, would come under neither. The blood of the martyrs who
died for the faith, or of the patriot who bled for his country, would
cry alike in vain for vengeance or reward. The man who first took away
his brother's life, and then his own, has evaded justice, and escaped
punishment. The hand of violence has robbed the virtuous man of his
present reward; and the suicide, by breaking in upon the sanctuary of
his own life, has defied and defeated the government of God, if there be
no future life.

In the present life retribution fails in uniformity. It is a proposition
which the reason of every man must approve--that the government of God
must be perfectly equitable, and that under it every man must receive
his just due. But men do not receive their requital in this life,
consequently we are bound to affirm that in the present life the Divine
administration is _incomplete_. We can not conceal from ourselves the
fact that events occur in the present life which we can not conceive as
benevolently or righteously consummated. These events lift the tyrant to
power, and trample down the patriot and the freeman. The orphan eats the
bitter bread of misery, while the man who has robbed him of the paternal
inheritance revels in luxury. The ungodly prosper in the world, "their
eyes stand out with fatness, they have more than heart could wish,"
while the righteous suffer affliction, and are in need. And if there is
no future life in which God will balance accounts with the universe, and
render to every man according to his works, then moral government is
incomplete, injustice has triumphed, wrong has prevailed. An imperfect
retribution and an unequal providence demand a future life for their
vindication--a future life both for the good and the bad, so that God
may reckon with all of them--and teach most convincingly that the
present life is a probation. The experiences, changes, conflicts, trials
of a probationary economy, are all intended to prove men, to test their
principles and make manifest their real character.

The government of God is a _moral discipline_ by which men are trained
in the practice and confirmed in the habits of virtue, and thus brought,
by the "schooling of their own consent," into harmony with the Divine
order.

It is a question which may be properly entertained, whether a free
self-determined being can be made perfect in moral character in any
other manner than by the discipline of the will. There certainly can be
no created moral desert. Responsible character must be the product of
free choice. A man can no more become virtuous without the discipline of
the will than he can become intelligent without the discipline of the
understanding. For wherein consists the virtue of a self-determined
being? Is it not in his free choice of what is right and good, his
resistance to temptation, his voluntary submission to the Divine will?
Is it not in his integrity, his patience, his fortitude, and his
resignation? But how can these virtues exist, how can they be exercised,
and how brought to maturity, except in the midst of difficulties and
hinderances? Where can patience and resignation and fortitude and
sympathy have a place, if there are no sufferings to be endured? How can
firmness and diligence and courage be developed, if there are no
difficulties and hinderances to the practice of virtue?

Therefore, in order that men may be trained and educated and perfected,
they are placed amid such scenes, experiences, and trials as shall draw
out the moral powers of the soul, shall strengthen and confirm the will
in goodness, and establish them in the law of their being, so that their
moral future is secure. "Life, thus ordered, is a magnificent scheme to
bring out the value of law, and teach the necessity of right as the only
conserving principle of order and happiness; teaching the more
powerfully, if so it must, by disorder and sorrow." Suffering is a
chastisement which is wholesome: it teaches the blessedness of purity
and the sinfulness of sin; and it may develop into "a godly sorrow"
which shall heal and purify the soul.

The moral government of God is an equitable administration, in which
responsibility is graduated on the scale of available light and
opportunity. "This is the condemnation that _light_ is come into the
world." Light is the symbol of knowledge, because it _reveals_ the right
and clearly manifests what duty is. Light is consequently the exact
measure of responsibility. Our knowledge of what we ought to do, or
ought not to do, determines the degree of our accountability. An
absolute and involuntary ignorance would be the most perfect plea of
innocence. The imputation of sin in such a case would be made void, but
thereby the completeness of human nature be destroyed. That which would
relegate man from the sphere of responsibility would also banish him
from the sphere of rationality.

St. Paul distinctly recognizes an alleviation of responsibility and
guilt in the "ignorance" of heathen life, and speaks of a Divine
"overlooking of the times of that ignorance"--a non-imputation of sins
committed in ignorance. But he does not by any means account the sinning
heathen as free from _all_ guilt. He shows that they were not in utter
ignorance, and that much of their ignorance was voluntary. He refers to
the original consciousness of God, and to the fact that this
consciousness is kept alive by the revelation of God in nature; and he
shows that the disorder of their religious and moral life resulted from
the voluntary suppression of this consciousness--"When they knew God,
they glorified Him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened." He also
appeals to the no less definite power of conscience in the heart of the
heathen, "which shows the works required by the law to be written on
their hearts, their consciences also bearing witness to this law, and
their thoughts approving or condemning each other," and their civil laws
"adjudging their crimes as worthy of death." So far as their ignorance
was involuntary it was an alleviation of guilt, though not an excuse for
all sin. Whatever light they had, be it little or much, it was the
standard and measure of their accountability.

The Founder of Christianity distinctly recognized this principle of
moral government. "If I had not come and spoken unto them, _they had not
had sin_, but now they have no cloak for their sin"--clearly teaching
that ignorance would be a negation of guilt, and knowledge an
aggravation of guilt. Not that we are to suppose that the Jews, without
the light which Christ supplied, were absolutely guiltless; their
ignorance was a mitigation of their guilt. Christ lays it down as a
universal principle that knowledge of the Divine law or ignorance of the
Divine law by the person who violates it is the ground of a distinction
in the different degrees of culpability. "That servant which _knew_ his
lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his
will, shall be beaten with _many_ stripes. But he that _knew not_, and
did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with _few_
stripes."[558] This is the uniform rule of the Divine government among
all nations.

Increase of light and knowledge necessarily enhances human
responsibility. "To whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much
required." More is expected of the man than of the child. More is
demanded at the hands of the man who has been blessed with the
advantages of a Christian civilization than from the untutored savage.
The man who has been favored with a liberal education is held to a more
rigid account than the man who has been cradled in ignorance and
schooled in vice. And when the kingdom of God comes nigh to men, human
responsibility must be enlarged in commensuration with its blessings.
There is a holier, richer trust, and consequently a deeper obligation.
There is a greater light and a greater condemnation.

"Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty
works which were done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would
have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, It
shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of judgment than
for you. And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be
brought down to hell: for if the mighty works which have been done in
thee had been done in Sodom, it would have remained until this day. But
I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in
the day of judgment than for thee."[559]

This aspect of the Divine government, which Dr. Whedon has felicitously
styled "the equation of probational advantages," relieves our sadness in
view of the moral condition of the world. "The Judge of all the earth
will do right" in the case of every human soul that has passed through
this probationary scene. His omniscient eye can take in at one view all
the influences and circumstances, favorable or unfavorable, which have
surrounded each individual, and fix the precise amount of
responsibility. He will "overlook" the "defect of doubt and taints of
blood," the faults of education and sins of ignorance, and He will make
a due allowance for the power of temptation, the trammels of evil
associations, and an enfeebled and perverted nature. "He is full of
compassion, and his tender mercies are over all his works." "He knows
our frame, and He remembers that we are dust." We may safely conjecture
that a negro hamlet in Central Africa, however inferior in its temporal
moral aspects, may, in its prospect for an eternal destiny, be superior
to many an American village. And in the dregs of our large cities there
are numbers who are excluded as effectually from the knowledge of the
truth as the heathen, and are scarcely developed to the level of
responsibility. These may be the least in the kingdom of heaven, but by
the law of moral equation they can not be excluded.[560] In every nation
under heaven, he that has feared God and wrought righteousness,
according to his knowledge and ability, will be "_accepted of God_."

The moral government of God secures an infallible and equitable
retribution by binding _character_ and _consequence_ in indissoluble
bonds, and evolving a reward or a punishment out of that permanent moral
state of the soul which has been induced by the free self-determination
of man.

"Character," says Novalis, "is a completely fashioned will (_vollkommen
gebildeter Wille_). It is that ultimate stress and determination of the
soul which results from the coherence and complexure of habits, and
habit is the result of repeated acts of voluntary choice. From the
persistence of habit a fixed disposition and cast of the inner man is
evolved which constitutes his _moral individuality_."

Even in this formative process we can discern the workings of the law of
retribution. One good deed handsels a second, and renders its
performance more easy and pleasurable. The man who obeys his conscience
feels that he can respect himself. He has a consciousness of growing
power; a sense of dignity and moral worth. The moral law is for him "a
law of liberty." On the other hand, one sinful deed involves a second,
and drags it after it. One lie demands another to maintain its
consistency. One act of injustice emboldens to the next. Self-respect is
broken down by license, and the path is prepared and cleared for further
iniquity. Thus, by the repetition of sinful deeds, restraints are
overborne, depraved habits are engendered, vice acquires a mastery over
the man, and he becomes a slave. There is a deep humiliation in this
sense of degradation and unworthiness. The sinner despises himself
because of his weakness, and blushes in secret places at the remembrance
of his own debasement.

The principal happiness or misery of man consists in the settled state
of his own heart, and not in the outward conditions of his daily life.
All human plaudits are as naught compared with the approval of one's own
conscience; and no penal inflictions can compare with the anguish of
remorse. The inward peace of the righteous soul, the disquietude and
misery of the sinful soul, are the blossom and the fruitage of the seed
which has been sown, and the stem and branches which have been nurtured
by the voluntary choices and acts of man. "He that soweth to his flesh
shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the spirit
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting." The connection between sin
and punishment is no arbitrary or accidental connection. It is just as
much a relation between cause and effect as the relation between sowing
and reaping in the physical world. "To cause the mind to punish itself,
to work a retribution out of ourselves, to secure it by fixed nature, to
inflict it by inflexible necessity, to convert the capacity of sin into
the instrument of suffering, is the prerogative of Divine rule."[561]

IV. _The end of moral government._--We have said that the end of
government, in general, is the maintenance of order. The end of moral
government is the maintenance of _moral order_ in the realm of free
self-determined powers. The moral order must consist in conformity to
the idea of the _absolute good_. The personality of God (the essential
momenta of which are reason and freedom, holiness and love) is _per se_,
in its totality, the absolute good. Infinite Personality is but another
name for Absolute Perfection.

The highest good for a created dependent personality is "to resemble
God" in all those attributes or perfections which constitute
personality. It is to be fully established in harmony with God's moral
character, unified with Him in will, glorified with Him in holiness, and
perfected with Him in the blessedness of love. The highest perfection of
personal being is moral order, and therefore human personality,
conceived in its purity and perfection, is the end of the Divine
government.[562]

This we have called "the ideal order of moral life," because it is not
yet realized in the world. We must believe, however, that the final
triumph of goodness is a part of the great world-plan. We must not only
believe, but know, that the great design of creation, the reason for
which the world exists at all, is that in it goodness may come to its
final realization. And this conviction is grounded on the fact that the
moral life of humanity has its source in the same Being who called the
world into existence, and who is conducting this present dispensation to
a glorious consummation, in which He shall "reconcile all things unto
Himself,... whether they be things in earth or things in heaven," and
"gather together in one all things in Christ," that "God may be all in
all."

Christianity bases all the obligations and sanctions of morality on the
great truths that God is near to man, that He sustains him every moment
in life, that He is the Father of the human spirit, and that He governs
man in order to perfect his nature and bring him into an everlasting
fellowship with Himself. Christianity knows nothing of "a science of
morals" which is not based upon the correlations between man and God,
nor of a morality which forgets God and disregards the most sacred and
fundamental of all duties, namely, the duties we owe to God. A morality
based solely upon the relations in which we stand to our fellow-men is
at best but secular and utilitarian. A morality which is grounded upon
the relation of volition to the state of the sensibility, and regards
"happiness as our being's end and aim," is egoistic and selfish. A
morality which rests upon our relation to God, the absolute good, and
which looks backward rather than forward for its motive, is unselfish
and Christian.




INDEX.


 A.

 Absolute creation, 62.

 Absolute, Infinite, and Perfect, relation of these terms, 41, 42.

 Action at a distance denied by Newton, 214;
   by Leibnitz, Faraday, Helmholtz, Thomson, Tait, Maxwell, 214.

 Agassiz on species, 164;
   on the preparation of the earth for man, 254.

 Attraction of gravitation not a primary force, 210-220;
   not an essential attribute of matter, 211-213.

 Attribute or related essence, 48-52.

 Augustine, St., on the days of creation, 150, 151;
   his conception of Divine conservation, 176, 177.


 B.

 Beale, Dr., on distinction between cell-life and soul-life, 163;
   on life, 192, 240.

 Being or essence, as reality, efficiency, and personality, 42-48.

 Bioplasm, or cell-life, 162, 163.

 Brooke, Prof., on conservation of energy, 205.

 Büchner, Dr., asserts the eternity of matter and force, 24.


 C.

 Calderwood, Prof., on consciousness of freedom, 382.

 Carpenter, Dr., on will as the type of all force, 39, 237;
   on distinction between molecular and somatic life, 163, 236;
   on the forces of nature as modes of the Divine action, 240.

 Catastrophes, common belief in, 100;
   sustained by science, 101, 102.

 Categories, universal, 41.

 Causative principle, the, must be real, efficient, and personal, 44.

 Chalmers's, Dr., incautious concession as to the eternity of matter,
  86.

 Character, the formation of perfect, noble--the highest end, 306,
   can only be attained under conditions of freedom, 308,
   and through the inspiration of a higher life, 309, 310.

 Christian civilization the age of philanthropy, 285-290.

 Cicero on a universal and immutable moral law, 379.

 Civilization, each epoch of, has had a different theatre, 275;
   stages of development in, 277-290.

 Clarke, Dr. Samuel, on immediate agency of God in conservation, 178.

 Cohn, Dr., on nature, 333.

 Coleridge on nature, 325;
   on the natural, 369.

 Comte on irregular variability in nature, 195, 329.

 Conditions of moral government, 371, 372.

 Conscience, its nature and authority, 372-377;
   its gradual development, 377.

 Consciousness, religions, 304, 305, 345;
   natural order of its development, 346-349.

 Conservation, Biblical doctrine of, 174, 175;
   conceptions of the mode of conservation, 176.

 Conservation by secondary causes or agencies, 181, 182;
   (1) hypothesis of natural law, 187-201;
   (2) hypothesis of active force inherent in matter, 202-222;
   (3) hypothesis of plastic nature, 222-235.

 Conservation of energy not an absolute law, 205, 206;
   limited by the law of dissipation of energy, 207;
   not fairly stated by Dr. Tyndall in his discussion on prayer, 331,
    332;
   no evidence that it holds in the realm of vital dynamics
    and psycho-dynamics, 332;
   is not absolute in the realm of physics, 332.

 Continuity of the ether, 217.

 Correlation between God and man, 344.

 Creation, Biblical account of, not designed to teach science, 136-138;
   poetic, symbolical, and unchronological, 138-151.

 Creation by law, 196.

 Creation _ex nihilo_, how understood by the Christian Fathers, 92;
   not discredited by the progress of science, 93.

 Creation, its history, 126-171;
   a gradual process, 152-155;
   cumulative, 156-166;
   consecutive, 166-171;
   harmonious, 169, 170;
   final purpose of creation, 130-133.

 Creation, the conception of, 56;
   the Biblical conception of, can not be determined
    on philological grounds, 56-58;
   how to be determined, 58-61;
   distinction between absolute and architectonic, 61;
   an origination _de novo_, 60, 61;
   a voluntary act of God, 63-68;
   not determined by any inherent necessity, 64;
   not conditioned _ab extra_, 66.

 Cudworth on a plastic nature, 222-225.


 D.

 Days of the creative week, 145-151.

 Defects in nature, supposed, not removed by hypothesis
  of unconscious intelligence, 232, 233;
   this supposition based upon our ignorance of nature
    as a whole, 233-235.

 Descartes, his conception of God, 29.

 Dissipation of mechanical energy, 120, 121, 207-209.

 Dualism, Oriental, 23.

 Duration not identical with time, 77;
   nor with eternity, 77;
   a quality of dependent existence, 81;
   a fact of consciousness, 82.


 E.

 Earth, secular cooling of the, 105-108;
   indications of surface transformations of the, 108, 109.

 Earth, the, a school-house for man, 258.

 End of moral government, 417-419.

 Energy, conservation, transformation, and dissipation of, 118, 119;
   defined, 194;
   distinction between force and energy, 203;
   laws of conservation and transformation limited by
    the law of dissipation, 207-209;
   cases of transformation, 237;
   all the forms of energy are transformations of one
    Omnipresent force, 237.

 Eternity an attribute of God, 77, 83, 84.

 Ether, hypothesis of the, 113;
   a resisting medium, 114, 115;
   absolute continuity of the, 217, 218.

 Experience can not attain to a universal truth, 190.

 Extension a quality of matter, 81;
   not a predicate of space, 79;
   a percept of sense, 81.


 F.

 Faraday on the possible and the impossible, 195;
   on action at a distance, 214.

 Final purpose of creation revealed in Scriptures, 130-133;
   not discoverable by science, 234, 245.

 Force defined, 203, 236;
   the ultimate of all ultimates, according to Spencer, 25;
   theory that matter is a phenomenon of force, 123;
   the power of God, 123;
   distinct from energy, 203;
   not inherent in matter, 219, 236;
   tendency of modern scientists to hypostatize, 227;
   spirit-force the only force, 236, 237, 341;
   a metaphysical idea, 340;
   the expression of will, 341.

 Forces, primary, of nature, 209;
   a perpetual stream of power from the Infinite Spirit, 221, 222.

 Foreknowledge of God and human freedom, 402-405.

 Formation implies origination, 97.

 Free self-determining power of the will, 380, 387;
   arguments against--(1) Metaphysical or causational, 387, 392;
   (2) Psychological, 392-402;
   (3) Theological, 402-405;
   conceded by Dr. Tyndall, 335.

 Freedom of God, absolute, 63.


 G.

 Galton on the efficacy of prayer, 313.

 Geographical conditions, their influence on the character
  of nations, 258-264.

 Geology points back to a beginning, 104-110.

 Geological changes indicate a preparation for man, 254-257.

 God, omnipotence of, and human freedom, 355-359.

 God the author and giver of life, 240.

 God, the existence of, the fundamental postulate of all
  philosophy and all religion, 291, 292.

 God, the fatherhood of, 359-365.

 God the first principle and unconditioned cause of all existence, 27;
   the content of our conception of, 27;
   the idea of, a phenomenon of the universal intelligence
    of our race, 28;
   idea and concept of, 350;
   harmony of the Biblical and philosophic conception of, 46, 47;
   distinction between the nature and essence of, 62, 63;
   not necessarily but freely just and good, 63;
   immanence of, in nature, 174, 175, 240, 241.

 Government of God, distinction between physical, natural,
  and moral, 367, 368.

 Gravitation--attraction not a universal and necessary attribute
  of matter, 191, 211-213;
   must have a cause, 214;
   transmitted by the ether, 215;
   instantaneous, 215;
   cause of, not material, 216;
   a derivative force, 221.

 Grecian civilization the youth of humanity, 280-282.

 Grove on causation, 39;
   on force, 340.


 H.

 Hamilton, Sir William, confounds space and extension, 72;
   also space and immensity, 73;
   confuses the concepts time, duration, and eternity, 76;
   on the inconceivability of an absolute commencement, 93.

 Harmony between the philosophic conception of force and the
  religious conception of God, 338-343.

 Hebrew civilization the childhood of humanity, 278-280.

 Hedge, Dr., on the immanence of God in nature, 186.

 Hegel on Thought as the supreme reality, 25.

 Helmholtz denies direct action at a distance, 214.

 Herschel, Sir John, his conception of matter, 95, 125, 237;
   on force, 39, 341;
   on universal gravitation, 191;
   on law, 198;
   on conservation of energy, 205, 206.

 History a revelation of Divine providence, 246;
   the goal of, is the perfection of humanity, 248;
   the especial field of Divine providence, 253.

 Human race commenced its history in the Temperate Zone, 264-268;
   distribution of the, not governed by the same law as the distribution
    of plants and animals, 272;
   distribution of, indicates a Providential guidance, 273.

 Human freedom and Divine omnipotence, 355-359;
   and Divine prescience, 402-405.

 Humanity, perfection of, in what does it consist? 248, 249.


 I.

 Immanence of God in nature, 174, 175, 240, 241;
   the doctrine of, not pantheistic, 241, 242.

 Immanent attributes of God, 50;
   an eternal and necessary in being, 52.

 Immensity an attribute of God, 75, 81, 83, 84.

 Inertia of matter, 220, 235.

 Infinite series a contradiction _in adjecto_, 90.

 Interception of force by matter, 220.


 L.

 Laplace on the stability of the solar system, 113.

 Laurent on Providence, 247.

 Law, creation by, 196;
   meaning of the term, 197-200.

 Laycock, Dr., on the law of design, 129;
   on life, 192;
   on science, 195.

 Life, distinction between molecular and individual, 163;
   molecular, the result of the immediate presence and agency of God,
    239;
   the cause, not the consequence of organization, 240.

 Love the highest, determining principle of the Divine
  efficiency, 130, 131.


 M.

 Mahan, Dr. A., his fatal concession to Hume, 88;
   on an infinite series, 88;
   rejects the _à priori_ argument for the being of God, 88-91.

 Mansel on the conceivability of a commencement of existence, 94.

 Martineau asserts the coeval and coeternal existence of something
  objective to God, 67;
   if true, would invalidate every proof of the existence of God, 67,
    68;
   on the separate spheres of religion and science, 296.

 Matter a created entity, 95, 125.

 Matter, eternity of, affirmed by Martineau, 67;
   a fatal admission, which imperils the Theistic argument, 85-92.

 Matter, theory that, is a phenomenon or a function
  of force, 123, 124, 228, 236;
   a real entity, 235.

 Maxwell, Prof., on the nature of matter, 124;
   regards matter as a created entity, 125, 126;
   rejects the doctrine of action at a distance, 214;
   on the origin of motion, 219.

 McCosh concedes that space and time are not independent of God, 68;
   on proportions of infinite space, 74;
   on causation in the will, 399.

 Mechanical theory of the origin of things, 299, 300.

 Method of the Divine government, 405-407;
   a probationary economy, 408-411;
   a moral discipline, 411, 412;
   an equitable administration, in which responsibility is graduated
    on the scale of available light and opportunity, 412-416;
   secures an infallible and equitable retribution
 by connecting character and consequence, 416, 417.

 Mill, J. S., on Teleology, 128;
   on uniformity of nature, 189.

 Mind, stages of development of, in the individual, 276, 277.

 Mind the primal source of all being, 38;
   the first cause of motion, 236;
   the one and only source of power, 237.

 Mivart on unconscious intelligence, 226.

 Montesquieu, his definition of law, 198.

 Moral attributes or perfections of God, 51;
   an everlasting voluntary becoming, 52, 63.

 Moral government, its grounds, 351-365;
   its nature, 366-371;
   its subjective conditions, 371, 404;
   its end, 417-419.

 Moral ideas of the reason identical in all men, 378-380.

 Motion, origin of, 219.

 Motives, moral, do not act causally on the will, 393-396;
   the so-called _strength_ of motives discussed, 397-402.

 Müller on Divine love as the highest determining principle
  of the Divine efficiency, 131.

 Murphy, J. J., on unconscious intelligence, 225;
   on matter and force, 227-229;
   his doctrine involves Pantheism, 229, 230.


 N.

 Natural and moral distinguished, 369-371.

 Nature, meaning of the term, 193, 325;
   course of, 326;
   constitution of, 326, 329;
   controlled and modified by man, 335, 336;
   therefore also controlled by God, 337.

 Nebular hypothesis implies a beginning, 110, 111.

 Necessitarians, theory of, 394, 395.

 Newman, John Henry, his conception of God, 31.

 Newton, Sir Isaac, his conception of God, 29;
   teaches that God constitutes space and duration, 68;
   denies action at a distance, 214;
   denies that gravity is inherent in and essential to matter, 211, 213.

 Niebuhr on Divine providence, 246.

 Nitzsch teaches that God is the cause of space and time, 69.

 Norton, Prof., on Atomic Forces, 209;
   his doctrine that atomic repulsion is the primary force, 220;
   teaches that the Infinite Spirit is the primal source
    of all force, 221, 222.


 O.

 Omnipotence of God and human freedom, 355-359.

 Order of nature, facts concerning the, which are
  supposed to conflict with the efficacy of prayer, 310.

 Order of the universe had a beginning, 98.

 Oriental civilization the infancy of humanity, 275.

 Origin of things, mechanical theory of the, 299, 300;
   vito-dynamical theory of, 299.

 Origination and formation, 97.

 Owen, Prof. R., on the preparation of the earth for man, 255, 256.


 P.

 Pantheism, the doctrine of unconscious intelligence ends in, 229, 230.

 Perfect personality of God, 51.

 Permanence of substance, force, and law, 15.

 Permanence of the universe, no _à priori_ ground for
  belief in the, 100, 188, 189.

 Phenomena of the universe in ceaseless change, 14.

 Physical and spiritual distinguished, 368.

 Physical geography indicates a preparation of the earth for man, 257.

 Plastic nature, theory of a, 183, 222-235.

 Plato taught that a perfect mind is the primal source
  of all existence, 38.

 Porter, Dr., regards space as an entity, 69.

 Prayer--have our prayers any influence with the Supreme Power? 292;
   importance of this question, 292, 293;
   natural to man, 302-304;
   an essential element of life, 304-310;
   necessary to the formation of noble character, 306-308;
   attacks on the efficacy of, from the stand-point
    of experience, 313-321;
   from the theoretic stand-point, 321-338.

 Prayer-gauge, the, not presented in terms of experience, and therefore
  not capable of experimental application, 317, 318.

 Problem, the central, specifically stated, 21, 22.

 Procter on Divine supervision and control, 176.

 Providence, statement of the Christian doctrine of, 245, 246;
   the course of human history a revelation of, 246, 247;
   defined, 252;
   in the physical universe, 254;
   nature and history the two great factors of Divine providence, 258.


 R.

 Reality of the external world, 14.

 Relation between God and man--(1) contiguity, 351-353;
   (2) immanency, 353-359;
   (3) paternity and filiation, 359-365.

 Religion, the sphere of, 294-297;
   inadequate definition of, by Spencer, 298;
   true conception of, 295.

 Religious consciousness, the content of, 304, 305;
   order of development of, 346-349.

 Religious feeling, the facts of, as incontestible as the
  facts of Physics, 296;
   statement of the facts of, 302-310.

 Repulsion the primary force, 220.

 Richter on the providence of God in history, 247.

 Roman civilization the manhood of the race, 282-285.


 S.

 Schleiermacher on the cause of space and time, 69.

 Science and Religion, the apparent antagonism between them, 297, 298.

 Science, modern, its metaphysical tendency, 103;
   the sphere of science, 294-297.

 Self, the fundamental reality of, 13.

 Solar heat, dissipation of, 116, 117;
   must be finally exhausted, 118.

 Space--what is space? 69-78;
   is absolute vacuity, 69, 70;
   is an entity, 69;
   is a relation, 71-75;
   confusion of thought in regard to, 71;
   confounded with extension, 72
     --by Hamilton, 72, 73
     --by McCosh, 73
     --by Cousin, 74;
   confounded with immensity, 74;
   the relation of coexistence among extended bodies, 82.

 Special providence and the efficacy of prayer, the present
  issue between science and religion, 291.

 Species, the essential element of, a spiritual entity, 164.

 Spencer asserts that force is the ultimate of all ultimates, 25;
   his definition of law, 198;
   admits that will-force symbolizes the cause of all change, 40, 341.

 Spinoza, his assertion that all determination is negation, 43.

 Spirit-force the only force in the universe, 236.

 Stewart, Dugald, on the impossibility of annihilating space, 70;
   answer thereto, 71.

 Sufficient reason, the law of, 31.

 Symbolical Hymn of Creation, 140-142.


 T.

 Tait, Prof., rejects direct action at a distance, 214.

 Teleological idea the highest law of the universe, 128-130;
   not invalidated by the doctrine of evolution, 171.

 Temperate Zone, the human race commenced its history in the, 264-268;
   purely zoological data would lend us to fix that starting-point in
    the Torrid Zone, 268-272;
   a providence here revealed, 273, 274.

 Temporal character of the universe, 98;
   the order of the universe had a beginning, 98;
   this has been the common belief of all ages, 99;
   all philosophers have recognized a beginning, 101;
   modern science sustains this belief, 102, 103;
   Geology points back to a beginning, 104-110;
   astronomical paletiology confirms the law of finite duration,
    110-118;
   Physics especially sustains the belief, 118-121.

 Thomas Aquinas, his notion of conservation, 177.

 Thomson, Sir William, on secular cooling of the earth, 107, 108;
   on dissipation of energy, 119, 120;
   on the argument from design, 129;
   rejects direct action at a distance, 214;
   on life, 240.

 Tidal friction dissipates mechanical energy, 115.

 Time or Succession, what is it? 78;
   confounded by most philosophers with duration, 75,
     and with eternity, 75;
   consequences of this confusion, 76;
   answer of McCosh, 78;
   of Dr. Porter, 80;
   time the measure of finite duration, 83.

 Transformation of energy, 208;
   illustrations of, 237.

 Transitive or relative attributes of God, 50.

 Tyndall on impossibilities in nature, 196;
   on the certainty of the facts of religious experience, 296;
   admits that the great problem of the age is to find a legitimate
    satisfaction for the religious emotions, 300;
   prescribes the conditions under which it must be solved, 301;
   admits that religion can not be dislodged from the heart of man, 304;
   believes in the existence of God, 312;
   his attack on the efficacy of prayer from the stand-point
    of science, 321-338;
   does not deny that God may create energy, 332;
   admits the interference of personal volition in nature, 332-334;
   grants that the conception of a universal Father who controls the
    phenomena of nature is not unscientific, 337;
   distinguishes between the force which animates nature and the God
    who answers prayer, 338-340.


 U.

 Unconditioned Will the principle of all reality, efficiency,
  and perfection, 34, 41-48.

 Unconscious intelligence, doctrine of, 225;
   impossibility of forming any conception of, 226, 227;
   no difficulties relieved by this hypothesis, 232-235.

 Uniformity of Nature, meaning of the term, 193-196, 325-330.

 Uniformity of the course of nature not an intuitive
  belief, 99, 188-190, 321, 326;
   an assumption, 322;
   what ground is there for this assumption? 322-324.

 Unity, demand of the reason for, 23.

 Unity of the Cosmos, 15.

 Universal beliefs, authority of, 100, 101.

 Universal Father controlling nature a scientific conception, 336, 337.

 Universe an effect, 21;
   had a commencement in time, and will therefore have an end, 98-121;
   not a conservative but a dissipative system, 118-121;
   dependent on the Divine conservation every moment, 174-177.


 V.

 Vito-dynamical theory of the origin of things, 299.

 Volition, reality of personal, 334.


 W.

 Wallace on unconscious intelligence, 226;
   regards all force as will-force, 39.

 Wesley on Divine conservation of the world, 179.

 Whedon, Dr., on causation in the will, 390-391;
   on the so-called strength of motives, 396, 397, 399, 400;
   on Divine foreknowledge, 404;
   on equation of probational advantages, 415.

 Whewell, Prof., on law and cause, 200;
   on the origin of force, 341.

 Will the fountain-head of all force, 38;
   so recognised by scientists, 39, 40;
   this doctrine the balancing-point of a moral theism, 37.

 Will, the freedom of the, 380-387;
   direct testimony of consciousness, 381-384;
   presupposed by the idea of moral obligation, 384, 385;
   and by the sense of obligation, 385, 386.

 Will the real essence of the soul, 35, 36;
   is more than mere power of energy, 35;
   the synthesis of reason and power, 197.

 Will, the unconditioned, 34;
   the absolute first principle, 25;
   the Divine will the source of all the forms of force in the
   universe, 237.

 Winchell, Dr., on surface transformations of the earth, 109;
   on molar aggregation, 162;
   on species, 164;
   on the harmony between the Mosaic and geological records, 155.

THE END.




FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: "The Old Faith and the New," vol. i. p. 107.]

[Footnote 2: Ibid. vol. i. p. 3.]

[Footnote 3: Ibid. vol. i. p. 158.]

[Footnote 4: "The Old Faith and the New," vol. ii. p. 35.]

[Footnote 5: Ibid. vol. ii. p. 19.]

[Footnote 6: "The Old Faith and the New," vol. ii. p. 213.]

[Footnote 7: Ueberweg's "History of Philosophy," vol. ii. p. 41.]

[Footnote 8: Ueberweg's "Logic," p. 91.]

[Footnote 9: This is mournfully conceded by Geo. Henry Lewes (an avowed
Comtean): "No army of argument, no accumulation of contempt, no
historical exhibition of the fruitlessness of its effort, has sufficed
to extirpate the tendency toward metaphysical speculation. Although its
doctrines have become a scoff (except among the valiant few), its method
still survives, still prompts to renewed research, and still misleads
some men of science. In vain History points to the failure of twenty
centuries; the metaphysician admits the fact, but appeals to History in
proof of the persistent passion which no failure can dismay; and hence
draws confidence in ultimate success. A cause which is vigorous after
centuries of defeat is a cause baffled but not hopeless, beaten but not
subdued. The ranks of its army may be thinned, its banners torn and
mud-stained; but the indomitable energy breaks out anew, and the fight
is continued."--"Problems of Life and Mind," p. 7.]

[Footnote 10: "Every religion may be defined as an _à priori_ theory of
the universe. The surrounding facts being given, some form of agency is
alleged which, in the opinion of these alleging it, accounts for these
facts.... Nay, even that which is commonly regarded as the negation of
all religion--even positive Atheism, comes within the definition; for
it, too, in asserting the self-existence of Space, Matter, and Motion,
which it regards as adequate causes of every appearance, propounds an _à
priori_ theory from which it holds the facts to be deducible."--Spencer,
"First Principles," p. 43.]

[Footnote 11: "Philosophy begins in wonder: he was not a bad genealogist
who said that Isis, the messenger of Heaven, is the child of Thaumas
(Wonder); for Wonder is the feeling of a philosopher."--Plato,
"Theætetus," § 155.]

[Footnote 12: Plato, "Timæus," § 9.]

[Footnote 13: Büchner, "Matter and Force," pp. 1-27.]

[Footnote 14: Spencer, "First Principles," pp. 235, 236.]

[Footnote 15: Hegel, "Philosophy of Religion," vol. i. p. 201.]

[Footnote 16: "Spiritual Philosophy of Coleridge," by Green, vol. i. pp.
1, 2.]

[Footnote 17: Isaiah xliii. 13; Exod. iii. 14: "I am that I am."]

[Footnote 18: "We can see the sun, we can greet it in the morning and
mourn for it in the evening, without necessarily naming it, that is to
say, comprehending it under some general notion. It is the same with the
perception of the Divine. It may have been perceived, men may have
welcomed it or yearned after it, long before they knew how to name
it."--Max Müller, "Science of Language," 2d Series, p. 454.]

[Footnote 19: "Meditations," vol. i. p. 313.]

[Footnote 20: "Works," vol. i. p. 218; vol. v. p. 18; Hamilton's
"Philosophy," p. 176; Murphy's "Scientific Basis of Faith," p. 130.]

[Footnote 21: Morell, "Philosophy of Religion," p. 3.]

[Footnote 22: Müller, "Christian Doctrine of Sin," vol. i. p. 28.]

[Footnote 23: Green, "Spiritual Philosophy," vol. i. p. 2.]

[Footnote 24: Morell, "Psychology," p. 61.]

[Footnote 25: Cousin, "Elements of Psychology," p. 452.]

[Footnote 26: Martineau's "Essays," p. 188, 2d Series.]

[Footnote 27: "Timæus," ch. ix.]

[Footnote 28: "Philebus," § 50.]

[Footnote 29: "Sophist," § 72.]

[Footnote 30: "Timæus," ch. ix. x.]

[Footnote 31: "Correlation and Conservation of Forces," p. 199.]

[Footnote 32: "Outlines of Astronomy," pp. 233-4; also "Familiar
Lectures on Scientific Subjects," pp. 462, 475.]

[Footnote 33: "Human Physiology," p. 542; also art. "On Mutual Relation
of Vital and Physical Forces," _Philosophical Transactions_, p. 730.]

[Footnote 34: "Natural Selection," p. 368. See Mivart, "Genesis of
Species," p. 298; Laycock, "Mind and Brain," vol. i. pp. 225, 304;
Murphy, "Scientific Basis of Faith," p. 51.]

[Footnote 35: "Reign of Law," pp. 123, 129; Cooke, "Religion and
Chemistry," p. 340.]

[Footnote 36: "First Principles," p. 235. See also Challis, "Principles
of Mathematics and Physics," p. 681.]

[Footnote 37: Comte, "L'Ensemble du Positivisme," p. 46.]

[Footnote 38: M'Vicar, "Sketch of Philosophy," p. 8.]

[Footnote 39: These terms are frequently and somewhat loosely employed
as synonymous; but in reality each has its own peculiar shade of
meaning. Here we employ the term _Absolute_ to denote the underived,
independent, incomposite, and immutable. _Infinite_ is employed to
denote the absence of all limitation--that which can not be bounded,
measured, quantified. _Perfect_ is employed to denote that which is
complete, finished, self-sufficient--that which has no defect and no
want. _The unconditioned_ is a genus, of which the Infinite, Absolute,
and Perfect are species--not conditioned by quantity, kind, or degree.
For the Infinite there are no limits; for the Absolute no parts, no
equals, and no change; for the Perfect no wants. See Calderwood,
"Philosophy of the Infinite," p. 179; _North American Review_, Oct.
1864, pp. 407, 417.]

[Footnote 40: Saisset, "Modern Pantheism," vol. ii. p. 70.]

[Footnote 41: "The idea of God is the unity of three factors--the
logical (intelligence), the ethical (love), and the physical
(might)."--Dr. Martensen, "Die Christliche Ethik," § 19.]

[Footnote 42: Dr. Whedon, _Meth. Qu. Review_, Jan. 9, 1871, p. 164.]

[Footnote 43: As related to the purpose of Redemption. God the Father is
the moving or actuating cause of Redemption, God the Son is the
revealing and actualizing cause, and God the Spirit is the active and
efficient cause. Father = Love; Logos = Revealer; Spirit = Life.]

[Footnote 44: The Justice, Truth, and Faithfulness of God are not
properly regarded as attributes of the Divine nature, but as modes of
Divine conduct or action, determined by the Holiness and Goodness of
God. So Grace, Mercy, Compassion are but modifications of Divine Love
viewed in relation to sinful, guilty, and suffering creatures, and their
consideration belongs not to the doctrine of Creation, but of
Redemption.]

[Footnote 45: Whedon, "On the Freedom of the Will," p. 316.]

[Footnote 46: For an exhaustive discussion of this subject, see Müller,
"Christian Doctrine of Sin," vol. ii. pp. 199-215.]

[Footnote 47: We make no pretensions to critical acquaintance with the
Hebrew, but will hazard this suggestion, עָשָׂה (aysah) is the most
general term; its fundamental meaning is _to do, to perform, to work_,
and may embrace both origination and formation. בָּרָא (bara) and יִצֶר
(yetsar) are more specific, the former denoting the origination of a
new essence or substance, the latter formation or fashioning out of
pre-existing materials. Thus we read in Gen. ii. 7: "And the Lord God
formed [יִצֶר] man [_i. e._, the body of man] out of the dust of the
earth." Here we have pre-existing matter. But in Gen. i. 27 we read,
"And God created [בָּרָא] man [_i. e._, the soul of man] in his own
image." Here we have no pre-existing material, for matter can not bear
the image of God. (See Acts xvii. 29.) _Bara_ must therefore here mean
origination. Even in Gen. i. 21, where _bara_ is employed in regard to
the production of _living creatures_, we have the origination of
something new: for _vitality_, _sensitivity_, _perception_ are not
properties of matter, neither can they be educed from any organization
of matter.]

[Footnote 48: We can not help regarding this mode of reasoning as
superficial and misleading. Gen. i. 27, "So God created [בָּרָא]
man in _his own image_," refers to the spiritual nature of man which
alone can bear the "image of God," and must mean _origination_. Gen. ii.
7, "And the Lord God formed [עָשָׂה] man out of the dust of the
earth," refers solely to the body of man. This distinction can scarcely
be accidental.]

[Footnote 49: James i. 17.]

[Footnote 50: Rom. xi. 36.]

[Footnote 51: Lange's "Commentary," Introduction.]

[Footnote 52: We can not overlook the connection between Gen. i. 1 and
John i. 1, and close our eyes to the light which the later announcement
throws upon the former. It is most probable that by ἐν ἀρχῇ John means
ἐν αἰῶνι, in eternity--that is, before all time-succession began. Ἀρχή
here can have no relation to time. And why may we not accept the
Platonic notion of "a creation in eternity," which itself constituted a
beginning of time? Prior to finite succession and change, there can be
no time.]

[Footnote 53: "God being limited neither _in_ nor _by_ any other
existence, is infinite in a positive sense, inasmuch as _his will alone_
imposes all limitation."--Ulrici, "Gott und die Natur," 1862, p. 535.]

[Footnote 54: _Natura_--that which is produced or born, that which is
always _becoming_. _Essentia_--the fundamental, permanent _being_. See
note 1 (Next footnote.)]

[Footnote 55: "We Arminians hold that God is freely good from eternity
to eternity, just as man is good freely and alternatively for one hour.
Infinite knowledge does not insure infinite goodness. Infinite knowledge
(which is a very different thing from infinite _wisdom_) is not an
anterior cause of infinite goodness; but both Infinite Wisdom and
Infinite Holiness _consist in_ and result from God's volitions
eternally, and absolutely, perfectly coinciding with, not the Wrong, but
the Right. God's infinite knowledge = omniscience, is an eternal, fixed,
necessary _be_-ing; God's wisdom and holiness are an eternal volitional
BECOMING; an eternally free, alternative _putting forth_ of choices for
the Right. God's omniscience is self-existent; God's wisdom and holiness
are self-made, or eternally and continuously _being made_. God is
necessarily omnipotent and all-knowing through eternity, but God is
_truly_ wise and holy through all eternity, but no more _necessarily_
than a man through a single hour. God is holy therefore, not
automatically, but freely; not merely with infinite excellence, but with
infinite meritoriousness."--Whedon, "Freedom of the Will," p. 316.]

[Footnote 56: Lange, "Commentary" on Gen. i., p. 180.]

[Footnote 57: Poynting, quoted by Martineau in "Nature and God," p.
153.]

[Footnote 58: See also Heb. i.]

[Footnote 59: See Müller's "Christian Doctrine of Sin," vol. ii. p.
146.]

[Footnote 60: Saisset, "Modern Pantheism," vol. ii. p. 119.]

[Footnote 61: "History of Modern Philosophy," vol. i. p. 94.]

[Footnote 62: "Essays," 1st Series, pp. 158, 161.]

[Footnote 63: "First Principles," p. 37.]

[Footnote 64: Müller, "Christian Doctrine of Sin," vol. ii. p. 215.]

[Footnote 65: "Essays," 1st Series, p. 161.]

[Footnote 66: "Essays," 1st Series, p. 203.]

[Footnote 67: "Deus durat semper et adest ubique, et existendo semper et
ubique durationem et spatium, æternitatem et infinitatem
_constituit_."--_Principia_, _Schol. Gen._]

[Footnote 68: "Modern Pantheism," vol. i. p. 180.]

[Footnote 69: "Intuitions," p. 213.]

[Footnote 70: "System of Christian Doctrine," by Nitzsch, pp. 156-7.]

[Footnote 71: "The Human Intellect," p. 565.]

[Footnote 72: July, 1864.]

[Footnote 73: Stewart's Dissertation in "Encyclopædia Britannica," vol.
i. p. 142.]

[Footnote 74: Even physical science rejects the notion of "pure space,"
and it may be reasonably doubted whether "absolute vacuity" has any
place in the universe of God. As a question of science, the existence of
the "vacuum" is doubtful. "It may be safely asserted that hitherto all
attempts at producing a perfect vacuum have failed."--Grove,
"Correlation of Physical Forces," p. 134. The general tendency of
science is toward a denial of its existence (p. 137). As a question of
metaphysics, the human reason can only find satisfaction in believing in
a spiritual Being, a living Will which "inhabiteth eternity and
immensity," and "filleth all in all" with living and life-giving
fullness, so that "in Him we live and move and have being."--McCosh,
"Intuitions of the Mind," p. 225.]

[Footnote 75: "By empty space I mean _distance_, I mean _direction_:
that steeple is a mile off, and not _here_ where I sit, and it lies
southeast and not north."--Herschel, "Familiar Lectures on Scientific
Subjects," p. 455.]

[Footnote 76: Taylor, "Physical Theory of Another Life," p. 26.]

[Footnote 77: "The idea of space--the idea of extension--is the logical
condition of the admission of the idea of the body."--"History of
Philosophy," vol. ii. p. 217.]

[Footnote 78: "Extension is only another name for space."--"Lectures on
Metaphysics," vol. ii. p. 113.]

[Footnote 79: "Space and extension are convertible terms."--"First
Principles," p. 48.]

[Footnote 80: See "Intuitions," p. 223, where the terms are employed as
synonymous.]

[Footnote 81: "L'immensité ou l'unité de l'espace."--Cousin, "Histoire
de la Philosophie du xviii^me Siècle," p. 121. "Infinity of
extension."--McCosh, "Intuitions," p. 223. "Infinite immensity of
space."--Hamilton, "Discussions," p. 36.]

[Footnote 82: "Lectures," vol. ii. pp. 114, 167.]

[Footnote 83: "Intuitions," p. 202.]

[Footnote 84: "Lectures," vol. ii. p. 169.]

[Footnote 85: "Lectures," vol. ii. p. 170]

[Footnote 86: "Discussions," etc., p. 36.]

[Footnote 87: "Philosophy," p. 357.]

[Footnote 88: "Intuitions," p. 208.]

[Footnote 89: "History of Philosophy," vol. i. p. 77.]

[Footnote 90: "History of Philosophy," vol. ii. p. 224.]

[Footnote 91: "When the succession of ideas ceases, our perception of
duration ceases with it."--Locke, "Essays" (bk. ii. ch. xiv. § 4).]

[Footnote 92: Time and duration are confounded by McCosh ("Intuitions,"
p. 223), by Mahan ("Intellectual Philosophy," p. 22), and by Cousin
("History of Philosophy," vol. ii. p. 229).]

[Footnote 93: "Absolute time is eternity" (Cousin, "History of
Philosophy," vol. i. p. 77). "L'éternité ou l'unité de temps" ("Histoire
de la Philosophie du xviii^{me} Siècle," p. 121). "Eternity is the
synonym of pure time" (_North American Review_, April, 1864, p. 115).]

[Footnote 94: "Mind is nothing but the series of our feelings as they
actually occur, with the addition of infinite possibilities of feeling"
("Examination of Hamilton's Philosophy," vol. i. p. 253).]

[Footnote 95: "Intuitions," p. 206.]

[Footnote 96: "Intuitions," p. 206.]

[Footnote 97: "Intuitions," p. 252.]

[Footnote 98: Hamilton's "Lectures," vol. ii. p. 527.]

[Footnote 99: McCosh, "Intuitions," p. 205; Saisset, "Mod. Pantheism,"
vol. i. p. 193.]

[Footnote 100: Hamilton's "Logic," p. 55.]

[Footnote 101: "Intuitions," p. 211. See also Porter's "Human
Intellect," p. 567.]

[Footnote 102: "Intuitions," p. 211.]

[Footnote 103: Strange as it may sound, Dr. McCosh says, at p. 202, that
"we have an immediate knowledge of space in the concrete by the senses,"
and here he asserts that "space is not a substance," and therefore can
not be perceived.]

[Footnote 104: "Opuscula," p. 752.]

[Footnote 105: "Discussions," p. 36.]

[Footnote 106: "Philosophy of the Infinite," pp. 319, 331.]

[Footnote 107: "Modern Pantheism," vol. i. p. 192.]

[Footnote 108: "Philosophy of the Infinite," p. 300.]

[Footnote 109: "Philosophy of the Infinite," p. 331.]

[Footnote 110: Müller, "Christian Doctrine of Sin," vol. i. p. 243.]

[Footnote 111: "Familiar Lectures," p. 455.]

[Footnote 112: Martineau's "Essays," 1st Series, p. 158.]

[Footnote 113: Martineau's "Essays," 1st Series, p. 161.]

[Footnote 114: "Institutes of Theology," vol. i. pp. 76, 79.]

[Footnote 115: "Natural Theology," p. 23.

The practice so common among writers of Natural Theology of fixing upon
one line of proof of the being of God as the only valid method, and then
disparaging and endeavoring to show the invalidity of all others, is
highly reprehensible. The strongest arguments employed by the Atheists
have been culled from the writings of these eccentric theologians. In
the celebrated public discussion between Mr. Holyoake, the leader of the
Secularists in England, and Mr. Brindley, "On the existence of God," the
most telling arguments of Mr. Holyoake were drawn from the standard
works on Natural Theology. How much more rational and commendable is the
course of the philosopher: "There are different proofs of the existence
of God. The consoling result of my studies is that these different
proofs are more or less strict in form, but they have all a depth of
truth which needs only to be disengaged and put in a clear light in
order to give incontestable authority. Every thing leads to God. There
is no bad way of arriving at Him, but we go to Him by different
paths."--Cousin, "History of Philosophy," vol. ii. p. 418.

The argument for the being of a God in its completeness is at once
Ontological and Cosmological, Etiological and Teleological. It is in the
concurrence and synthesis of these separate but harmonious lines of
proof that we have an unanswerable demonstration. For ourselves, we are
convinced, with Neitzsch, that the Ontological proof is first and last;
they who seek to invalidate this cut the ground from under all the
rest.]

[Footnote 116: Herschel's "Outlines of Astronomy," p. 511.]

[Footnote 117: _North American Review_, October, 1864, p. 428.]

[Footnote 118: "By finite we generally mean that which is within reach,
or may be brought within reach of our senses.... The powers, therefore,
of our senses and mind place the limit to the finite, but those
magnitudes which severally transcend these limits, by reason of their
being too great or too small, we call _infinite_ and
_infinitesimal_."--Price, "Infinitesimal Calculus," vol. i. pp. 12, 13.]

[Footnote 119: Martineau, "Essays," 1st Series, p. 161.]

[Footnote 120: Hamilton, "Metaphysics," vol. ii. p. 539.]

[Footnote 121: Argyll, "Reign of Law," p. 117.]

[Footnote 122: "Essays," 1st Series, p. 206.]

[Footnote 123: "Lectures," vol. ii. p. 406.]

[Footnote 124: "Prolegomena," p. 267-269.]

[Footnote 125: See Locke's "Human Understanding," bk. iv. ch. x., where
a similar line of argument is pursued.]

[Footnote 126: Schellen, "Spectrum Analysis," p. 45.]

[Footnote 127: Sir John Herschel, "Natural Philosophy," § 28.]

[Footnote 128: "On Molecules," Lecture at the British Association at
Bradford, in _Nature_, vol. viii. p. 441.]

[Footnote 129: "God is not merely spirit, but He has upon Himself a
realistic _nature_. God did not create the world out of an absolute
nothing. The something out of which God created it are his eternal
_potentialities_--not merely logical (merely conceived by God), but at
the same time also _physical_ (essentially in God existing)
potentialities. In these δυνάμεις God possesses both the something out
of which He makes the world, and also the forces, instruments, and means
by which He produces it. In this sense it is literally true: _All things
are of God_ (Rom. xi. 33). This admission of a supramaterial physis in
God--this spiritual realism--furnishes not only an escape from the
errors of a lifeless materialism and of an abstract spiritualism, but is
the synthesis of the partial truth that is in both."--_Bibliotheca
Sacra_, January, 1873, p. 191.]

[Footnote 130: Lange's Commentary, "Preliminary Essay," p. 126.]

[Footnote 131: See Whewell's "History of Scientific Ideas," vol. ii. p.
287.]

[Footnote 132: Ch. XXXIV.]

[Footnote 133: Whewell's "History of Inductive Sciences," vol. ii. p.
593.]

[Footnote 134: Spencer, "First Principles," p. 4.]

[Footnote 135: Spencer, "First Principles," p. 43.]

[Footnote 136: "Fragments of Science," p. 12.]

[Footnote 137: Inaugural Address before the British Association of
Science, in _Nature_, vol. iv. p. 269.]

[Footnote 138: "Positive Philosophy," vol. i. p. 206.]

[Footnote 139: "Philosophy of Aristotle," p. 66.]

[Footnote 140: Prof. P. G. Tait, M.A., opening Address at the Edinburgh
Meeting of the British Association of Science, in _Nature_, vol. iv. p.
271. See also Prof. Maxwell's Address at the Liverpool Meeting, in
_Nature_, vol. ii. p. 422.]

[Footnote 141: Miller's "Testimony of the Rocks," p. 221.]

[Footnote 142: Sir William Thomson supposes that temperature to have
been at least 7000° Fahr. See Thomson and Tait's "Natural Philosophy,"
vol. i. p. 716.]

[Footnote 143: "Fragments of Science," p. 158.]

[Footnote 144: Thomson and Tait, "Natural Philosophy," vol. i. p. 714.
Winchell, "Sketches of Creation," p. 407.]

[Footnote 145: Mayer, "Celestial Dynamics: Correlation and Conservation
of Forces," p. 315. The palæobotanist Heer has described many species of
tropical plants from Greenland, Alaska, and Spitzbergen.]

[Footnote 146: Thomson and Tait, "Natural Philosophy," vol. i. p. 714.
Observations on over forty artesian wells in Central Alabama show an
average increase of temperature of 1° for every 47 feet of descent.--Dr.
Winchell, in "Proceedings of American Association," part ii. p. 102.]

[Footnote 147: Thomson and Tait, "Natural Philosophy," vol. i. p. 714.]

[Footnote 148: Pouillet estimates that the heat which reaches the
surface of the earth from its interior at 200 cubic miles per diem. A
cubic mile is the quantity of heat necessary to raise a cubic mile of
water 1° Centigrade in temperature.]

[Footnote 149: Thomson and Tait, "Natural Philosophy," vol. i. p. 716.]

[Footnote 150: Thomson and Tait, "Natural Philosophy," vol. i. p. 721.]

[Footnote 151: See Winchell's "Sketches of Creation," chap. xxxvi.]

[Footnote 152: Proctor, "Other Worlds than Ours," p. 193. "More likely
these have been totally absorbed by the lunar rocks."--Dr. Winchell.]

[Footnote 153: "Correlation and Conservation of forces," p. 245.]

[Footnote 154: _North American Review_, Oct., 1861, pp. 372-3.]

[Footnote 155: Mitchell's "Planetary and Stellar Worlds," p. 143.]

[Footnote 156: Tyndall, "Fragments of Science," p. 135.]

[Footnote 157: Quoted by Mayer, "Celestial Dynamics: Correlation and
Conservation of Forces," p. 271.]

[Footnote 158: "Outlines of Astronomy," p. 308.]

[Footnote 159: Thomson and Tait, "Natural Philosophy," vol. i. p. 191.]

[Footnote 160: Thomson and Tait, "Natural Philosophy," vol. i. p. 191.
Balfour Stewart, "Treatise on Heat," p. 372.]

[Footnote 161: Thomson and Tait, "Natural Philosophy," vol. i. p. 194;
also Helmholtz, in "Correlation and Conservation of Forces," p. 242.]

[Footnote 162: Winchell, "Sketches of Creation," p. 422. If the whole
solar radiation were employed in dissolving a layer of ice inclosing the
sun, it would dissolve a stratum ten miles and a half thick in one day.]

[Footnote 163: Helmholtz, "Correlation and Conservation of Forces," p.
245.]

[Footnote 164: _Energy_ is now defined as "_the power of doing work_,"
that is, the power, in _virtue of its position_ (as a head of water, a
raised mass, a coiled spring) or in _virtue of its motion_ (as a falling
mass, a current of wind, a projectile), to do work. The first is called
_Potential_, the second _Kinetic_ Energy. Besides these instances of
_Visible_ Energy, there is also _Invisible_ Molecular Energy, divided
into, (_a_) the Energy of electricity in motion; (_b_) the Energy of
radiant heat and light; (_c_) the kinetic Energy of absorbed heat; (_d_)
molecular potential Energy; (_e_) potential Energy caused by electrical
separation; (_f_) potential Energy caused by chemical separation. Of
these different _kinds_ of Energy, the most available for work is
Mechanical Energy, or Energy of visible motions and positions; the least
available is universal heat, or radiant Energy.]

[Footnote 165: See article "Energy," in _North British Review_, May,
1864, and Balfour Stewart's "Treatise on Heat," p. 370.]

[Footnote 166: Stewart's "Elements of Physics," p. 357.]

[Footnote 167: "Die Naturkräfte in ihrer Wechselbeziehung," p. 89.]

[Footnote 168: "Correlation of Physical Forces," p. 187.]

[Footnote 169: _American Journal of Science_, July, 1864.]

[Footnote 170: Argyll, "Reign of Law," p. 121.]

[Footnote 171: Sir Isaac Newton entertained a similar opinion. "We may
be able," he said, "to form some rude conception of the _creation of
matter_, if we suppose that God by his power had prevented the entrance
of any thing into a certain portion of pure space which is of its nature
penetrable,... from henceforward this portion of space will be endowed
with _impenetrability_, one of the essential qualities of matter; and as
pure space is absolutely uniform, we have only to suppose that God
communicated the same impenetrability to another portion of space, and
we should obtain in a certain sort the notion of _mobility_, another
quality which is essential to matter."--M. Coste, Note in the 4th
Edition of his "French Translation of Locke's Essay." (M. Coste reports
the above from Newton's lips.)]

[Footnote 172: Prof. Maxwell, in _Nature_, vol. ii. p. 219.]

[Footnote 173: M. Claude Bernard, _Revue des Deux Mondes_, 1867.]

[Footnote 174: "Dissertation on the Study of Natural Philosophy," § 28.]

[Footnote 175: Prof. Clerk Maxwell, F.R.S., "Lecture delivered before
the British Association at Bradford," in _Nature_, vol. viii. p. 441.]

[Footnote 176: Müller, "Christian Doctrine of Sin," vol. i. p. 28.]

[Footnote 177: "Logic," vol. ii. p. 527, 4th edition.]

[Footnote 178: "Mind and Brain," vol. i. pp. 107-8.]

[Footnote 179: "Mind and Brain," vol. i. p. 261.]

[Footnote 180: _Nature_, vol. iv. p. 270.]

[Footnote 181: See Murphy, "Habit and Intelligence," vol. i. p. 121.]

[Footnote 182: Müller, "Christian Doctrine of Sin," vol. ii. p. 146.]

[Footnote 183: That man is the final end of the material creation is a
principle recognized by scientific men. "The aim of the Creator in
forming the earth, in allowing it to undergo the successive changes
which geology has pointed out, and in creating successively all the
different types of animals, was to introduce man upon the earth. Man is
the end toward which all the animal creation has tended from the
appearance of the Palæozoic fishes."--Agassiz and Gould, "Principles of
Zoology," p. 238. See Dr. Winchell's "Sketches of Creation," pp. 373,
374; Owen's "Anatomy of the Vertebrates," vol. iii. pp. 796, 808.]

[Footnote 184: Argyll, "Reign of Law," p. 213.]

[Footnote 185: See Müller's "Christian Doctrine of Sin," vol. i. p.
237.]

[Footnote 186: Argyll, "Reign of Law," p. 219.]

[Footnote 187: G. Warrington, "The Week of Creation," p. 27.]

[Footnote 188: Rorison, "Creative Week," in Replies to "Essays and
Reviews."]

[Footnote 189: Dr. Whedon, in _Methodist Quarterly Review_, July, 1862,
p. 528.]

[Footnote 190: See "Creative Week," by Rorison, in Replies to "Essays
and Reviews."]

[Footnote 191: "The waters of verse 2 is quite another thing than the
water proper of the third creative day: it is the fluid (or gaseous)
form of the earth itself in its first condition."--Lange.]

[Footnote 192: "We must beware of thinking of a mass of elementary
water.... Here is meant the gaseous fluid as it forms a unity with the
air."--Lange, p. 168.]

[Footnote 193: נֶפֶשׁ הַיָּה = soul of life.--Lange.]

[Footnote 194: Whedon.]

[Footnote 195: Hence αἰών, time, or the all of time, is used
to express the all of the finite, the universe. See Heb. i. 2, xi. 3,
where αἰῶνες is equivalent to universe.]

[Footnote 196: See Special Introduction by Prof. T. Lewis, in Lange's
"Commentary."]

[Footnote 197: Lange's "Commentary" on Genesis, Introduction, p. 131.]

[Footnote 198: "In a conversation held some years ago by the author (Sir
J. Herschel) with his lamented friend, Dr. Hawtrey, Head-Master and late
Provost of Eton College, on the subject of Etymology, I happened to
remark that the syllable _Ur_ or _Or_ must have some very remote origin,
having found its way into many languages, conveying the idea of
something absolute, solemn, definite, fundamental, or of unknown
antiquity, as in the German _Ur-alt_ (primeval), _Ur-satz_ (a
fundamental proposition), _Ur-theil_ (a solemn judgment)--in the Latin
_Oriri_ (to arise), _Origo_ (the origin), _Aurora_ (the dawn)--in the
Greek Ὄρος (a boundary, the extreme limit of our vision, whence
our horizon), Ὄρκος (an oath or solemn obligation, etc.). 'You
are right,' was his reply, 'it is the oldest word of all words: the
first word ever recorded to have been pronounced. It is the Hebrew for
_Light_'" (אוֹר, AOR).--"Familiar Lectures on Scientific
Subjects," p. 219.]

[Footnote 199: See "Week of Creation," by Geo. Warrington, p. 13.]

[Footnote 200: The critical reader will discover a slight difference of
opinion between Dr. Winchell and myself in regard to how much of chapter
i. is to be regarded as the "Exordium" of the Hymn of Creation. Dr.
Winchell includes verses 1 and 2; I incline, however, to the opinion
that it is embraced in verse 1. The reasons which weigh with me are the
following: 1. The chaos or the darkness of verse 2 is clearly recognized
as "the _evening_" of the first day, "And God called the light Day, and
the darkness He called Night; and there was evening and morning: one
day." I do not see how on a fair interpretation of the sacred poem we
can escape the conclusion that the _first_ day embraces "the evening and
morning"--that is, the primal darkness of verse 2, and the creation of
dawning light. This conception furthermore harmonizes with the Hebrew
usage, which always regarded the preceding night as part of the one
natural day. The Hebrew Sabbath commenced at six o'clock on Friday
evening. Thus we read in Leviticus xxiii. 32, "From even to even shall
ye celebrate your Sabbath." Hence also the evening--morning = day
(νυχθή-μερον)--of Daniel viii. 14. 2. The division I have made is the
one which has been followed by the best Hebrew scholars, whose opinion
is entitled to the highest deference in this connection. The independent
character of the opening sentence of Genesis was affirmed by such
judicious and learned men as Calvin, Bishop Patrick, and Dr. D.
Jennings. The early fathers of the Church, as St. Gregory of Nazianzen,
St. Justin Martyr, Origen, St. Augustine, and others, held that there
was a considerable interval between the creation related in the first
verse, and that of which an account is given in the third and following
verses. See "The Pre-Adamite Earth," by Dr. Harris, p. 281.]

[Footnote 201: Breman Lectures, M. Fuchs "On Miracles," p. 105.]

[Footnote 202: See _ante_, p. 61.]

[Footnote 203: Lange, _in loco_.]

[Footnote 204: Faraday.]

[Footnote 205: "Three direct acts of the Deity may be recognized, viz.,
the creation of matter, of life, and of mind."--Prof. Hinrich, _American
Journal of Science and Arts_, vol. xxxix. p. 57.]

[Footnote 206: See M. Claude Bernard, _Revue des Deux Mondes_, December
15, 1867; Prof. Norton, _American Journal of Science_, July, 1864;
Cooke, "Religion and Chemistry," p. 330.]

[Footnote 207: _North British Review_, March, 1868, p. 127. This is the
doctrine of the first physicists of the age, of Sir William Thomson (see
_Nature_, vol. i. p. 551; vol. ii. p. 421; and especially vol. iv. pp.
265-6), of Prof. Maxwell (see _Nature_, vol. ii. p. 421), of Prof. Tait
(see _Nature_, vol. iv. p. 271), also of Clausius and Rankine. See also
Prof. Hinrich, "On Planetology," in _American Journal of Science_, vol.
xxxix. p. 283; and Prof. Norton, "On Molecular and Cosmical Physics,"
_American Journal of Science_, vol. xlix. pp. 24, 33.]

[Footnote 208: Cooke's "Religion and Chemistry," p. 129.]

[Footnote 209: _North British Review_, March, 1868, p. 127; also Prof.
Tait, in _Nature_, vol. iv. p. 271.]

[Footnote 210: See Beale, "Protoplasm," pp. 69-71, 88, 108; Carpenter,
"Human Physiology," pp. 46, 865-6.]

[Footnote 211: Beale, "Protoplasm," pp. 67-8.]

[Footnote 212: See Agassiz's "Methods of Study in Natural History," p.
287; also Grindon, "Life, its Nature," etc., pp. 189-190.]

[Footnote 213: Cuvier, "Animal Kingdom," p. 32.]

[Footnote 214: _Methodist Quarterly Review_, January, 1867, p. 143.]

[Footnote 215: Herschel, "Familiar Lectures on Science," p. 218;
"Outlines of Astronomy," § 599; _North British Review_, 1868, p. 127.]

[Footnote 216: Dr. Winchell, "Sketches of Creation," pp. 66, 67.]

[Footnote 217: Dr. Winchell, "Sketches of Creation," p. 374.]

[Footnote 218: Dana, "Geology," pp. 745, 746.]

[Footnote 219: The theory of "Divine superintendence and control" falls
very little, if any thing, short of the ever-present and pervading
energy which we advocate. At least, the arguments which would establish
such a relation of the Deity to the material universe as amounts to
"superintendence and control," would go far to establish the doctrine of
a real presence and agency of God pervading and upholding all nature.
Superintendence and control imply some agency, some efficiency, and some
_intervention_ of righteousness or mercy to secure other ends than those
secured by the established course of nature, for whoever _overrules_
steps on a field beyond his ordinary _rule_. The physical laws are,
therefore, simply God's uniform mode of governing the world. This is the
conclusion which is reached by Proctor ("Other Worlds than Ours"). In
his chapter on "Supervision and Control" (ch. xiii.), he says: "Thus we
are led to the conclusion that all things happen according to set
physical laws; and without, by any means, adopting the view that the
Almighty exercises no special control over his universe, we see strong
reason to believe that the laws which He has assigned to it are
sufficient for the control of all things. Indeed, as far as all things
take place in accordance with laws which the Almighty must assuredly
have Himself ordained, we may say that _every event which has happened
or will happen throughout infinite time is the direct work and indicates
the direct purpose and will of Almighty God_" (pp. 329, 332); and
further, "_He who made the laws may annul or suspend them at his
pleasure_" (p. 333).]

[Footnote 220: St. Augustine's "De Civitate Dei," xii. 25, 26; Neander's
"Church History," vol. ii. p. 605; Nitzsch, "System of Christian
Doctrine," p. 193; Müller's "Christian Doctrine of Sin," vol. i. p. 248;
Harris's " Pre-Adamite Earth," p. 103; Young's "Creator and Creation,"
pp. 57, 58; Chalmers's "Astronomical Discourses," Dis. iii. pp. 91, 98.]

[Footnote 221: "De Civitate Dei," xii. 25; xiii. 26.]

[Footnote 222: Contra Gentiles, ii. 38.]

[Footnote 223: "Summa Universalis," pt. i. q. 105, art. 5.]

[Footnote 224: "Evidences of Natural and Revealed Religion," Prop. xiv.
Dugald Stewart, after quoting the above, adds, "My opinion on this
subject coincides with that of Dr. Clarke" ("Philosophy of the Active
and Moral Powers of Man," vol. ii. p. 29).]

[Footnote 225: "Sermons," vol. ii. pp. 178, 179.]

[Footnote 226: Thomson's "Seasons."]

[Footnote 227: Holyoake, "Discussion with Townley," p. 68.]

[Footnote 228: Croonian Lecture, "On Matter and Force," p. 94. Is it not
significant that Dr. Jones must write his "First Cause" without the
initial capitals?]

[Footnote 229: Powell, "Essays and Reviews," p. 139.]

[Footnote 230: Powell, "Christianity and Judaism," p. 11.]

[Footnote 231: Dr. Harris, "Pre-Adamite Earth," p. 104.]

[Footnote 232: Amos i. 2.]

[Footnote 233: Hedge, "Reason and Religion," p. 74.]

[Footnote 234: "Essays and Reviews," p. 102.]

[Footnote 235: McCosh, "Intuitions," p. 276.]

[Footnote 236: "Logic," vol. ii. pp. 117, 118.]

[Footnote 237: Hamilton's "Lectures on Metaphysics," vol. i. p. 102.]

[Footnote 238: Whewell, "Novum Organon Renovatum," p. 7.]

[Footnote 239: "Familiar Lectures on Science," pp. 218, 284, 140.]

[Footnote 240: "Physiological Anatomy," by Todd, Bowman, and Beale, p.
19; Nicholson's "Biology," p. 14.]

[Footnote 241: Jevons, "Principles of Science," vol. ii. pp. 433, 434.]

[Footnote 242: Argyll, "Reign of Law," p. 100.]

[Footnote 243: Laycock, "Mind and Brain," vol. i. p. 225.]

[Footnote 244: Beale, "Protoplasm," pp. 39, 42, 109.]

[Footnote 245: Beale, "Protoplasm," pp. 104, 117; Laycock, "Mind and
Brain," vol. i. pp. 222, 224; Liebig, "Organic Chemistry," p. 69.]

[Footnote 246: Spencer, "First Principles," p. 128.]

[Footnote 247: By _Energy_ we understand "the power of doing work," or
overcoming resistance, which in nature is something perfectly
intelligible and measurable, equivalent in all cases to the product of
the mass into the square of the velocity. By _Force_ we understand "that
which originates motion." All the forms of Energy have therefore their
origin in Force, and Force has its origin in the Will of the Deity.]

[Footnote 248: Quoted from "Positive Philosophy," by Dr. McCosh, "Divine
Government," p. 167.]

[Footnote 249: Science has been defined as the "knowledge of these
_deviations_ from the great laws of nature formularized in contingent or
derivative laws."--Laycock, "Mind and Brain," vol. i. p. 221.]

[Footnote 250: "Fragments of Science," p. 162.]

[Footnote 251: Spencer, "First Principles," p. 128.]

[Footnote 252: Montesquieu, "Spirit of Laws," bk. i. ch. i.]

[Footnote 253: Herschel, "Natural Philosophy," § 27.]

[Footnote 254: "Astronomy and Physics," p. 224.]

[Footnote 255: Thomson and Tait, "Natural Philosophy," vol. i. p. 164;
Mayer, "Correlation and Conservation of Forces," p. 335.]

[Footnote 256: Stewart's "Physics," p. 103.]

[Footnote 257: Stewart's "Physics," pp. 114, 353.]

[Footnote 258: Stewart's "Physics," p. 356.]

[Footnote 259: Murphy, "Habit and Intelligence," vol. i. p. 22.]

[Footnote 260: Professor Charles Brooke, in _Nature_, vol. vi. p. 125.]

[Footnote 261: "Familiar Lectures on Scientific Subjects," pp. 469-472.]

[Footnote 262: "Natural Philosophy," vol. i. pp. 190, 191.]

[Footnote 263: Ibid. p. 194.]

[Footnote 264: _North British Review_, vol. xl. pp. 182, 183.]

[Footnote 265: Helmholtz, "Correlation and Conservation of Forces," p.
245.]

[Footnote 266: This is the hypothesis of Helmholtz, Mayer, and Thomson.]

[Footnote 267: Tyndall, "Fragments of Science," p. 31; Murphy, "Habit
and Intelligence," vol. i. p. 23.]

[Footnote 268: Murphy, "Habit and Intelligence," vol. i. p. 43.]

[Footnote 269: Professor Norton, "On Molecular Physics;" _American
Journal of Science and Arts_, vol. iii, 3d Series, pp. 329-331.]

[Footnote 270: Tyndall, "Fragments of Science," p. 76.]

[Footnote 271: "Principia," Def. viii. p. 8.]

[Footnote 272: "Does every grain of salt and pepper in a million
salt-cellars and pepper-casters individually and separately pull and
actually move the sun and fixed stars?"--De Morgan.]

[Footnote 273: _North British Review_, vol. xlviii. March, 1868, p.
125.]

[Footnote 274: Third Letter to Bentley.]

[Footnote 275: _Nature_, vol. iii. p. 51; vol. ii. p. 422.]

[Footnote 276: _Nature_, vol. i. p. 551.]

[Footnote 277: Delivered at the Royal Institution, and reported in
_Nature_, vol. vii. Nos. 174, 175.]

[Footnote 278: _North British Review_, vol. xlviii. March, 1868;
"Correlation and Conservation of Forces," p. 368; _Amer. Jour. of
Science and Arts_, vol. xlix. p. 24.]

[Footnote 279: _North British Review_, vol. xlviii. p. 127; _Nature_,
vol. vii. p. 343.]

[Footnote 280: "Familiar Lectures on Science," p. 90.]

[Footnote 281: Picton, "Mystery of Matter," p. 49.]

[Footnote 282: Herschel, "Familiar Lectures on Science," p. 467.]

[Footnote 283: Sir William Thomson, "Papers on Electrostatics and
Magnetism," p. 419.]

[Footnote 284: _North British Review_, vol. xlviii. p. 127.]

[Footnote 285: We do not by any means assert that two substances can not
occupy the same point in space at the same moment in time. We accept the
Hegelian maxim that "two substances may occupy the same point in space
at the same time _provided their qualities are essentially different_."
If the qualities of the ether are essentially different from gross
matter, then to call ether "matter" is to confound and mislead the mind.
May not ether be a "tertium quid" between matter and mind?]

[Footnote 286: Prof. Clerk Maxwell, in _Nature_, vol. ii. p. 421.]

[Footnote 287: Sir William Thomson, in _Nature_, vol. iv. p. 266.]

[Footnote 288: Sir W. Thomson, in _Nature_, vol. i. p. 551.]

[Footnote 289: _Nature_, vol. ii. p. 421.]

[Footnote 290: _Philosophical Magazine_, 1868.]

[Footnote 291: Thomson and Tait, "Natural Philosophy," vol. i. p. 164.]

[Footnote 292: _Nature_, vol. viii. p. 280; also Challis, "Principles of
Mathematics and Physics," pp. 685-687.]

[Footnote 293: _American Journal of Science and Arts_, vol. xlix. pp.
32, 33.]

[Footnote 294: How gravitation may result from the interception of the
Cosmic Force of Repulsion is explained by Prof. Norton at pp. 26-28, and
still more fully in vol. iii. 3d Series, May, 1872, pp. 332, 336.]

[Footnote 295: _American Journal of Science and Arts_, vol. xlix. p.
34.]

[Footnote 296: _American Journal of Science and Arts_, vol. xlix. p.
33.]

[Footnote 297: See vol. i. pp. 217-284.]

[Footnote 298: "Intellectual System of the Universe," vol. i. p. 224.]

[Footnote 299: Ibid. p. 271.]

[Footnote 300: Ibid. p. 244.]

[Footnote 301: Ibid. p. 271.]

[Footnote 302: "Intellectual System of the Universe," vol. i. pp.
223-4.]

[Footnote 303: Todd, Bowman, and Beale, "Physiological Anatomy and
Physiology of Man," p. 25.]

[Footnote 304: "Habit and Intelligence," vol. ii. p. 5.]

[Footnote 305: Ibid. p. 8.]

[Footnote 306: Ibid. p. 5.]

[Footnote 307: Ibid. pp. 6, 7.]

[Footnote 308: "On Natural Selection," p. 360.]

[Footnote 309: "Genesis of Species," p. 294.]

[Footnote 310: "Habit and Intelligence," vol. ii. p. 5.]

[Footnote 311: "Habit and Intelligence," vol. ii. p. 160.]

[Footnote 312: "Scientific Basis of Faith," p. 43.]

[Footnote 313: "Scientific Basis of Faith," p. 14.]

[Footnote 314: "Habit and Intelligence," vol. ii. pp. 4, 7.]

[Footnote 315: Ibid. p. 8.]

[Footnote 316: Ibid. vol. i. p. 89.]

[Footnote 317: "Scientific Basis of Faith," pp. 351, 352.]

[Footnote 318: "Scientific Basis of Faith," pp. 46, 47.]

[Footnote 319: Ibid. pp. 51, 52.]

[Footnote 320: "Habit and Intelligence," vol. ii. p. 7. "Pantheism
asserts the absolute UNITY and permanence of SUBSTANCE with its two
attributes of _matter_ and _force_(= extension and thought), and their
innumerable modifications which go to form all the phenomena of the
universe."--Dr. Cohn. Under this definition, Mr. Murphy must be ranked a
Pantheist. He knows but of ONE SUBSTANCE underlying all phenomena.]

[Footnote 321: "Scientific Basis of Faith," p. 29.]

[Footnote 322: Ibid. p. 14.]

[Footnote 323: Ibid. p. 36.]

[Footnote 324: Ibid. p. 35.]

[Footnote 325: Ibid. p. 47.]

[Footnote 326: "Intellectual System of the Universe," vol. i. p. 223.]

[Footnote 327: "Scientific Basis of Faith," p. 52.]

[Footnote 328: "Intellectual System," vol. i. p. 224.]

[Footnote 329: "On Natural Selection," p. 372.]

[Footnote 330: Tyndall, "Fragments of Science," p. 104.]

[Footnote 331: "Unity of Worlds," p. 230.]

[Footnote 332: Tyndall.]

[Footnote 333: By the statical properties of matter we understand
extension, limit, position, impenetrability, and _inertia_. We have no
idea that there is a _vis inertiæ_ in matter. Vis inertiæ is a
_forceless force_, which is an absurdity. Inertness in matter is not a
force, but the opposite of a force--a passivity which requires a force
in order to change.]

[Footnote 334: Faraday, "Correlation and Conservation of Forces," p.
368.]

[Footnote 335: Clerk Maxwell, in _Nature_, vol. ii. p. 421; Herschel,
"Familiar Lectures on Science," p. 467.]

[Footnote 336: Professor Norton, in the _American Journal of Science and
Arts_, July, 1864, p. 64; Herschel, "Familiar Lectures on Science," p.
467; Dr. Carpenter, "Human Physiology," p. 542.]

[Footnote 337: _Revue des Deux Mondes_, 1867.]

[Footnote 338: Anaxagoras.]

[Footnote 339: Dr. Carpenter, in _Nature_, vol. vi. p. 312.]

[Footnote 340: Herschel, "Familiar Lectures on Science," p. 467.]

[Footnote 341: For other illustrations, see Cooke's "Religion of
Chemistry," pp. 326-8; Grove, "Correlation and Conservation of Forces,"
pp. 116, 117.]

[Footnote 342: Dr. Cohn, of the University of Breslau, in _Nature_, vol.
vii. p. 137.]

[Footnote 343: Carpenter, "Human Physiology," p. 542; Herschel,
"Outlines of Astronomy," pp. 233, 234; Wallace, "On Natural Selection,"
p. 368; Murphy, "Scientific Basis of Faith," p. 51; Laycock, "Mind and
Brain," vol. i. pp. 225, 258-9, 304.]

[Footnote 344: "First Principles," p. 235.]

[Footnote 345: Letter to the author.]

[Footnote 346: The distinction made by Dr. Carpenter between _molecular_
(bioplasmic) and _somatic_ (individual) life is important: molecular
life is a cosmic force, somatic life is an individualized force; the
former is the direct action of Deity, the second is the indwelling of a
created but yet dependent spiritual entity in a vitalized organism.]

[Footnote 347: "On the Mutual Relation of the Vital and Physical
Forces," _Philosophical Transactions_, 1850, p. 730. See also Laycock,
"Mind and Brain," vol. i. p. 304; Wallace, in _Nature_, vol. vi. p.
285.]

[Footnote 348: Huxley, "Introduction to the Classification of Animals."]

[Footnote 349: _Nature_, vol. iv. p. 269.]

[Footnote 350: "God in Nature," in _Old and New_, 1872, p. 163.]

[Footnote 351: _Methodist Quarterly Review_, July, 1871, p. 499.]

[Footnote 352: "All atomic forces are incessant forces that are made up
of impulses which are renewed every instant."--Professor Norton, in the
_American Journal of Science and Arts_, vol. iii. 3d Series, p. 331.]

[Footnote 353: Sir W. Thomson, in _Nature_, vol. iv. p. 266.]

[Footnote 354: Grove, "Correlation and Conservation of Forces," pp. 15,
18, 199. See also the words of Dr. Mayer in the same volume, p. 341.]

[Footnote 355: Mr. Wallace, the author of the theory of natural
selection, denies its applicability to man. Man is "a being apart," a
"being superior to nature." "He has not only escaped 'natural selection'
himself, but he is actually able to take away some of that power from
nature which, before his appearance, she universally exercised" ("On
Natural Selection," pp. 325, 326). See also Lubbock's "Prehistoric
Times," last chapter.]

[Footnote 356: "Lectures on the History of Rome," vol. ii. p. 59.]

[Footnote 357: Laurent, "Études sur l'Histoire de l'Humanité," vol. v.
p. 14.]

[Footnote 358: Cousin, "History of Philosophy," vol. i. p. 160.]

[Footnote 359: "Nichomachean Ethics," bk. i. ch. ii.]

[Footnote 360: Ibid. bk. i. ch. x.]

[Footnote 361: Ibid. bk. x. ch. viii.]

[Footnote 362: Nitzsch, "System of Christian Doctrine," p. 172.]

[Footnote 363: Müller, "Christian Doctrine of Sin," vol. ii. p. 146.]

[Footnote 364: Acts xvii. 25-28.]

[Footnote 365: Laurent, "Études sur l'Histoire de l'Humanité," vol. v.
p. 12. Not all the Stoics seem to have understood this "necessity" in so
rigorous a sense. Cleanthes would exempt the evil actions of men from
necessity: "Nothing takes place without Thee, O Deity, except that which
bad men do through their own want of reason; but even that which is evil
is overruled by Thee for good, and is made to harmonize with the plan of
the world."--_Hymn to Zeus._]

[Footnote 366: Laurent, "Études sur l'Histoire de l'Humanité," vol. v.
p. 12.]

[Footnote 367: The statement of the text will remain unaffected by any
theory as to the derivation of the material organism of the primitive
man. If the hypothesis be true that "man is the descendant of some
pre-existent generic type, the which, if it were now living, we would
probably call an ape," this can only be affirmed of the body of man, and
the statement is still correct that "God formed man of the dust of the
earth." The body of the ape and the body of man are formed of the same
materials. But, as Prof. Cope, a thorough-going Evolutionist, remarks,
this material nature can not bear or be "the image of God," for "God is
a spirit," and "a spirit hath not flesh and bones" (Luke xxiv. 39). The
image of God must inhere in that spiritual nature which was inbreathed
by God, and consists in reason, conscience, and moral liberty. (See
Cope, "On the Hypothesis of Evolution," pp. 33, 34.) This theory as to
the descent of man's material organism from some pre-existent generic
type does not by any means involve the conclusion of Sir J. Lubbock that
"the primitive condition of mankind was one of _utter barbarism_." We
may grant that the primitive condition of man was one of childhood
ignorance and inexperience, a state in which his intellectual and moral
nature was undeveloped; but this is not "Savagism." Barbarism is the
lapse and deterioration of man. Even if it could be shown that primeval
man was destitute of the industrious arts, "it would not afford the
slightest presumption that he was also ignorant of duty or ignorant of
God" ("Primeval Man," by the Duke of Argyll, p. 132). "Whenever we can
trace back a religion to its first beginnings, we find it free from many
blemishes that affect it in its later stages" (Max Müller, "Chips from a
German Workshop," vol. i., preface). The most ancient form of religion
was the Monotheistic (Grimm, "Deutsche Mythologie," p. xliv. 3d ed.).
See also "Les Origines Indo-Européennes," vol. ii. p. 720, by M. Adolphe
Pictet.]

[Footnote 368: Agassiz and Gould's "Zoology," p. 238.]

[Footnote 369: "On Limbs," p. 88.]

[Footnote 370: "On the Skeleton and Teeth," p. 228.]

[Footnote 371: "Anatomy of the Vertebrates," vol. iii. p. 796.]

[Footnote 372: "The Harmonies of Nature," by Dr. C. Hartwig, pp. 46,
47.]

[Footnote 373: "Typical Forms and Special Ends," R. McCosh and Dr.
Dickie, p. 352.]

[Footnote 374: "History of Philosophy," vol. i. p. 169.]

[Footnote 375: "Geographical Studies," p. 34.]

[Footnote 376: Ritter, "Geographical Studies," p. 314; Guyot, "Earth and
Man," p. 34.]

[Footnote 377: Ritter, "Geographical Studies," p. 34; Guyot, "Earth and
Man," p. 35.]

[Footnote 378: See Guyot, "Earth and Man", pp. 268-270.]

[Footnote 379: Cousin, "History of Philosophy," vol. i. pp. 169-170.]

[Footnote 380: "Adam and the Adamites."]

[Footnote 381: Article "Ararat," in Smith's Dictionary.]

[Footnote 382: It is called in Ptolemy _Naxuana_, and by Moses
Chorenensis, the Armenian historian, _Idsheuan_, but at the place itself
_Nachidsheuan_, which signifies "the first place of descent." See
Whiston's note on p. 87, vol. i. of Josephus.]

[Footnote 383: "Antiquities," bk. i. chap. iii. § 5.]

[Footnote 384: Ibid. bk. i. chap. iii. § 6. Scaliger was the first to
draw the attention of scholars to the writings of Berosus. In his work
"De Emendatione Temporum" he has collected his fragments, and vindicated
their authenticity. Berosus is always quoted with respect by English
divines, and Niebuhr has sustained his claims to be regarded as a
reliable authority. In more than one place he speaks of Armenia as the
resting-place of the ark. See Rawlinson's "Historical Evidences," p. 63,
and note liii.]

[Footnote 385: "Antiquities," bk. i. chap, iii. § 6.]

[Footnote 386: "For instance, in the very second verse, the great
discovery of Schlegel, which the word Indo-European embodies--the
affinity of the principal nations of Europe with the Arian or
Indo-Persic stock--is sufficiently indicated by the conjunction of the
Madai or Medes (whose native name is Mada) with Gomer of the Cymry, and
Javan of the Ionians. Again, one of the most recent and unexpected
results of modern linguistic inquiry is the proof which it has furnished
of an ethnic connection between the Ethiopians or Cushites, who adjoined
on Egypt, and the primitive inhabitants of Babylonia; a connection which
was positively denied by an eminent ethnologist only a few years ago,
but which has now been sufficiently established from the cuneiform
monuments. In the tenth chapter of Genesis (vers. 8-10) we find this
truth thus briefly stated: 'And Cush begat Nimrod,' the 'beginning of
whose kingdom was Babel' (ver. 11). So we have had it recently made
evident from the same monuments that 'out of that land went forth
Asshur, and builded Nineveh'--or that the Semitic Assyrians proceeded
from Babylonia and founded Nineveh long after the Cushite foundation of
Babylon. Again, the Hamitic descent of the early inhabitants of Canaan,
which had often been called in question, has recently come to be looked
upon as almost certain, apart from the evidence of Scripture; and the
double mention of Sheba, both among the sons of Ham, and also among
those of Shem (vers. 7 and 28), has been illustrated by the discovery
that there are two races of Arabs--one (the Joktanian) Semitic, the
other (the Himyaric) Cushite or Ethiopic."--Rawlinson's "Historical
Evidences," pp. 71, 72.]

[Footnote 387: _Asiatic Society's Journal_, vol. xv.]

[Footnote 388: Rawlinson's "Herodotus," vol. i. p. 523.]

[Footnote 389: "Cosmos," vol. i. p. 348.]

[Footnote 390: Article "Botany," _Encyclopædia Britannica_, vol. v.;
also "Geographical Botany;" and Guyot, "Earth and Man," p. 251.]

[Footnote 391: Guyot, "Earth and Man," p. 255.]

[Footnote 392: Guyot, "Earth and Man," pp. 264, 265; Wallace, "On
Natural Selection," pp. 324-6; Martineau, "Essays," 1st Series, p. 126.]

[Footnote 393: Guyot, "Earth and Man," p. 304.]

[Footnote 394: See Article "Philosophy," in Smith's "Dictionary of the
Bible." See also Shairp, "Culture and Religion," pp. 40-46.]

[Footnote 395: "Palestine was from the beginning an isolated land, as
Israel was an isolated people, and therefore for thousands of years both
have been unintelligible to the world at large. No great highway led
through Palestine from people to people; all passed _by_ it, and not
_over_ it; all its coast was without favorable harbors. No one of the
pagan states of antiquity could come into close geographical,
mercantile, political, and religious relations with a people existing
under the sway of Jehovah."--Ritter, "Geographical Studies," p. 43.]

[Footnote 396: Article "Philosophy," in Smith's "Dictionary of the
Bible."]

[Footnote 397: Ritter, "Geographical Studies," pp. 342, 343.]

[Footnote 398: Guyot, "Earth and Man," p. 307.]

[Footnote 399: "The conjugal tie was held sacred, and polygamy
prohibited."--De Pressensé, "Religions before Christ," p. 160.]

[Footnote 400: Merivale, "Conversion of the Roman Empire," p. 92.]

[Footnote 401: "God," said Plato, "is supremely good" ("Republic," book
ii. ch. 18); and "virtue is likeness or assimilation to God"
("Theætetus," § 384).]

[Footnote 402: Milman, "Latin Christianity," vol. i. p. 357.]

[Footnote 403: Guyot, "Earth and Man," p. 322.]

[Footnote 404: Wallace, "On Natural Selection," p. 326.]

[Footnote 405: "First Principles," p. 38.]

[Footnote 406: Ibid. p. 496.]

[Footnote 407: Buchanan, "Modern Atheism," p. 285.]

[Footnote 408: "Scientific Basis of Faith," p. 6.]

[Footnote 409: "First Principles," p. 43.]

[Footnote 410: Without referring to the writings of theologians, we may
take any definition of religion which incidentally occurs in general
literature. For example, Froude defines religion as "the attitude of
reverence in which noble-minded men instinctively place themselves
toward the Unknown Power which made man and his dwelling-place. It is
the natural accompaniment of their lives, the sanctification of their
actions and their acquirements. It is what gives to man in the midst of
the rest of Creation his special elevation and dignity" ("History of
England," vol. xii. p. 560).]

[Footnote 411: "Essays," 1st Series, p. 178.]

[Footnote 412: Preface to the seventh edition of the Address before the
British Association of Science at Belfast.]

[Footnote 413: Preface to the seventh edition of the Address before the
British Association of Science at Belfast.]

[Footnote 414: Dr. Tyndall subsequently defends his course by saying,
"The kingdom of science cometh not by observation and experiment alone,
but is completed by fixing the roots of observation and experiment in _a
region inaccessible to both_, and in dealing with which we are forced to
fall back upon the picturing power of the
mind"--"_Einbildungskraft_"--the force of imagination (Preface to
seventh edition). Are we then to believe that the imagination is the
source of scientific principles, that it has any "power of intuition, or
can in any way create its own objects?" Why does he not fall back on his
"_Anschauungsgabe_," or faculty of rational intuition, and admit that he
is in the region of the metaphysical? See "Fragments of Science," p.
130.]

[Footnote 415: "Πρὸς Κολώτην," xxxi.]

[Footnote 416: This is admitted even by those who regard prayer for
physical change, as, for example, the averting of disease or the fall of
rain, to be "irrational and unconsciously irreverent." "I repeat that no
theory of the universe, no philosophy of human nature, and no conclusion
of science can ever lay an arrest upon the instincts of the universal
heart in the presence of calamity, and with the prospect of its
increase. Let men philosophize as they will, and let science march where
it will (conquering realm after realm, and reducing all under the rigor
of law), the human spirit will always 'cry unto God' in times of crisis,
and will find immeasurable solace in 'committing its causes' unto Him;
for the instinct to pray for relief in times of anxiety or of peril is
one which can never be exorcised from the heart of man. But it does not
follow that it will always (or that it ought ever) to imagine that by so
doing it can deflect the order of nature or induce God to alter his
prearrangements. The relief obtained is in the act of _submission_ and
of filial trust, not in the notion of being able to persuade an
infinitely powerful and sympathetic Listener" ("Prayer: 'The Two
Spheres:' They _are_ Two," by the Rev. William Knight, _Contemporary
Review_, December, 1873, p. 35). Of course we have no reason to expect
that Dr. Tyndall should yield his judgment to the authority of
Scripture, but we may legitimately expect the Rev. William Knight, of
the Free Church of Scotland, to defer in some measure to James v.
13-18.]

[Footnote 417: Preface to the seventh edition of Dr. Tyndall's
"Address."]

[Footnote 418: "Scientific Basis of Faith," p. 39.]

[Footnote 419: "When ten men are so in earnest on one side that they
will sooner be killed than give way, and twenty are earnest enough on
the other to cast their votes for it but will not risk their skins, the
ten will give the law to the twenty in virtue of the robuster faith, and
of the strength that goes along with it."--Froude, "History of England,"
vol. xii. p. 562.]

[Footnote 420: "Fragments of Science," p. 350.]

[Footnote 421: "Only in the domain of Freedom can there exist the
moral."--Martensen, "Christian Ethics," p. 1.]

[Footnote 422: "Fragments of Science," p. 39.]

[Footnote 423: "Questions such as these derive their present interest in
great part from their _audacity_."--Tyndall.]

[Footnote 424: See "Fragments of Science," pp. 38 and 64-65.]

[Footnote 425: _Contemporary Review_, December, 1873, p. 30.]

[Footnote 426: Tyndall, "Fragments of Science," p. 160.]

[Footnote 427: Preface to the Address before the British Association of
Science at Belfast.]

[Footnote 428: Preface to the seventh edition.]

[Footnote 429: _Contemporary Review._]

[Footnote 430: Mansel, "Prolegomena Logica," p. 280.]

[Footnote 431: "History of Civilization."]

[Footnote 432: Comte, "Positive Philosophy," vol. i. p. 45.]

[Footnote 433: "No record of _coincidences_ can prove a causal
connection, or even suggest it--unless the instances are exceptionally
numerous, and unless other causes leading to the result are excluded by
the rigid methods of verification."--"Prayer: 'The Two Spheres:' They
_are_ Two,"_Contemporary Review_, Dec., 1873, p. 39.]

[Footnote 434: See pp. 386-7.]

[Footnote 435: Dr. Tuke, "Influence of the Mind on the Body in Health
and Disease," p. 351.]

[Footnote 436: "Fragments of Science," pp. 36-39.]

[Footnote 437: "Fragments of Science," p. 40: "The _assumed_ permanence
of natural laws."]

[Footnote 438: Ibid., p. 60.]

[Footnote 439: "Fragments of Science," p. 64.]

[Footnote 440: Jevons, "Principles of Science," vol. ii. p. 434.]

[Footnote 441: "Fragments of Science," p. 64.]

[Footnote 442: Ibid. p. 38.]

[Footnote 443: "On the Relation of God to the World," pp. 187-201.]

[Footnote 444: See Coleridge, "Works," vol. i. pp. 152, 263; Hamilton,
"Metaphysics," vol. i. p. 40.]

[Footnote 445: Fleming, "Vocabulary of Philosophy," _in loco_.]

[Footnote 446: See Jevons, "Principles of Science," vol. ii. p. 440;
Spencer, "First Principles," p. 128.]

[Footnote 447: Carpenter, "Mental Physiology," p. 692; see Lewes,
"Problems of Life and Mind," vol. i. p. 336.]

[Footnote 448: Essential properties "are those which admit neither of
intension nor remission of degrees."--Newton, _Regula Tertia
Philosophandi_, "Principia," lib. iii]

[Footnote 449: Maxwell, "Theory of Heat," p. 310; and also in _Nature_,
vol. ii. p. 421.]

[Footnote 450: By "causes" is here meant nothing more than all the
antecedent conditions. The statement makes no real distinction between
"causes" and "conditions." "We can not predicate of any physical agency
that it is abstractedly the cause of another." "_Causation is the will
of God._"--Grove, "Correlation and Conservation of Forces," pp. 15,
199.]

[Footnote 451: See Murphy, "Habit and Intelligence," vol. ii. p. 157;
"Scientific Basis of Faith," pp. 75, 76; J. S. Mill, "Logic," vol. ii.
ch. xxii. § 1.]

[Footnote 452: "Logic," bk. iii. ch. xvi. See also McCosh, "Intuitions,"
pp. 275-7.]

[Footnote 453: "Scientific Basis of Faith," p. 79.]

[Footnote 454: "Principles of Science," vol. ii. p. 465.]

[Footnote 455: Murphy, "Scientific Basis of Faith," pp. 80 and 49-51;
Jevons, "Principles of Science," vol. ii. p. 438.]

[Footnote 456: Grove, "Correlation and Conservation of Forces," p. 193.]

[Footnote 457: "First Principles," chs. xiii. and xiv.]

[Footnote 458: Wallace, "On Natural Selection," p. 266.]

[Footnote 459: "Positive Philosophy," vol. i. p. 153-156.]

[Footnote 460: "Fragments of Science," p. 64.]

[Footnote 461: Jevons, "Principles of Science," vol. ii. p. 434.]

[Footnote 462: Grove, "Correlation and Conservation of Forces," p. 24.]

[Footnote 463: "There is one wonderful condition of matter, perhaps its
only true indication, namely, inertia."--Faraday, "Correlation and
Conservation of Forces," p. 368; Maxwell, "Theory of Heat," p. 86.]

[Footnote 464: Stewart, "Physics," p. 357.]

[Footnote 465: Ibid. p. 355.]

[Footnote 466: "Correlation and Conservation of Forces," p. 195.]

[Footnote 467: "Fragments of Science," p. 39.]

[Footnote 468: "Fragments of Science," p. 420.]

[Footnote 469: _Nature_, vol. viii. p. 280.]

[Footnote 470: _Nature_, vol. vi. p. 125.]

[Footnote 471: "Familiar Lectures on Science," p. 469.]

[Footnote 472: "Principles of Science," vol. ii. p. 83.]

[Footnote 473: Maxwell, "Theory of Heat," p. 92.]

[Footnote 474: Challis's "Mathematical Principles of Physics," p. 107;
Herschel, "Familiar Lectures on Science," p. 467.]

[Footnote 475: "It is pretty much the same to the greater number even of
the instructed hearers whether a man of science say 'I know' or 'I
suppose;' they only ask after the result and the authority by which it
is supported, not the grounds of the _doubts_. It is thus not to be
wondered at if earnest investigators _do not willingly shock the
confidence of their readers in what the former may think true and
demonstrable by the enumeration of ideas of the correctness of which
they do not feel themselves quite secure_."--Helmholtz, "On John
Tyndall," in _Nature_, vol. x. p. 301.]

[Footnote 476: Jevons, "Principles of Science," vol. ii, p. 466.]

[Footnote 477: "Fragments of Science," p. 40.]

[Footnote 478: Ibid. p. 40.]

[Footnote 479: Marsh, "Man and Nature," chs. i. and iii.; Lyell,
"Principles of Geology," pp. 713-717.]

[Footnote 480: Wallace, "On Natural Selection," pp. 324-326; Lyell,
"Principles of Geology," pp. 681-688, 579-590.]

[Footnote 481: "Fragments of Science," p. 421.]

[Footnote 482: _Contemporary Review_, July, 1872.]

[Footnote 483: Grove, "Correlation and Conservation of Forces," p. 20.]

[Footnote 484: Ibid.]

[Footnote 485: Spencer, "First Principles," pp. 235, 252.]

[Footnote 486: Challis, "Mathematical Principles of Physics," p. 681.]

[Footnote 487: Herschel, "Familiar Lectures on Science," p. 461.]

[Footnote 488: Carpenter, "Mental Physiology," p. 703.]

[Footnote 489: Whewell, "Astronomy and Physics," p. 224.]

[Footnote 490: 1 Cor. xii. 6.]

[Footnote 491: "ἄραγε ψηλαφήσειαν αὐτόν" = truly feel or
touch Him.]

[Footnote 492: See Ritter, "History of Philosophy," vol. i. p. 200.]

[Footnote 493: "Memorabilia," bk. i. ch. iv.]

[Footnote 494: "Timæus," ch. viii.; also "Second Alcibiades," which is a
discourse on prayer.]

[Footnote 495: "Laws," bk. v. ch. i.; bk. x. ch. xii.; "Theæstetes," §
83.]

[Footnote 496: "Apology," § 19.]

[Footnote 497: "Philebus," § 84.]

[Footnote 498: 1 Cor. viii. 6.]

[Footnote 499: Eph. iv. 6.]

[Footnote 500: 1 Cor. xii. 6.]

[Footnote 501: "Without God there is no great man. It is He who inspires
us with great ideas and exalted designs. When you see a man superior to
his passions, happy in adversity, calm amid surrounding storms, can you
forbear to confess that these qualities are too exalted to have their
origin in the little individual whom they ornament? A god inhabits every
virtuous man, and without God there is no virtue."--Seneca, "Epistles,"
41, 73.]

[Footnote 502: See "Creator and the Creation," by Dr. Young, pp. 57,
58.]

[Footnote 503: See Müller, "Christian Doctrine of Sin," vol. i. pp. 248,
249.]

[Footnote 504: Some theologians affirm that this "image of God" was
utterly and totally lost in the fall. Such an unqualified statement does
not, however, seem warranted by Scripture. After the fall, the sanctity
of human life is still grounded upon the fact that man is "made in the
_image_ of God" (Gen. ix. 6), and Paul affirms of man, as man, that he
is "the _image_ and glory of God" (1 Cor. xi. 7).]

[Footnote 505: "History of Philosophy," vol. i. p. 115.]

[Footnote 506: See Psa. viii. 6; 1 Cor. xi. 7; Col. iii. 10; Eph. iv.
24.]

[Footnote 507: See Dr. Young's "Christ of History," pp. 136-138.]

[Footnote 508: Butler's "Analogy," pt. i. ch. iii.]

[Footnote 509: "Reign of Law," by the Duke of Argyll, p. 121.]

[Footnote 510: _Nature_, vol. vi. p. 312.]

[Footnote 511: Coleridge's Works, vol. i. p. 152.]

[Footnote 512: Cousin, "True, Beautiful, and Good," pp. 287-289.]

[Footnote 513: Sewell's "Christian Morals," p. 339.]

[Footnote 514: R. W. Hamilton.]

[Footnote 515: Dr. Thomas Brown.]

[Footnote 516: R. W. Hamilton.]

[Footnote 517: Sophocles, "Antigone," v. 450-460.]

[Footnote 518: Quoted by Dr. Brown from "Lucani Pharsalia," bk. ix.]

[Footnote 519: "Fiji and the Fijians," by Williams and Calvert, p. 22.]

[Footnote 520: "Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa," p.
153.]

[Footnote 521: Chalmers's "Institutes of Theology," vol. ii. p. 294.]

[Footnote 522: "The Creator and the Creation," by John Young. LL.D., pp.
101-2. See also "Man Primeval," by Dr. Harris, p. 109; Hamilton's
"Revealed Doctrine of Rewards and Punishments," p. 67.]

[Footnote 523: "True, Beautiful, and Good," p. 286.]

[Footnote 524: "Hand-book of Moral Philosophy," p. 184. See also
Cairns's "Treatise on Moral Freedom," p. 222; and Hazard on "Causation
and Freedom in Willing," p. 7; Dr. Alexander, "Outlines of Moral
Science," p. 125: Sir John Herschel's "Familiar Lectures on Science," p.
461; Carpenter's "Human Physiology," p. 543; Wallace, "On Natural
Selection," p. 367; Beale's "Protoplasm," p. 121.]

[Footnote 525: "Prolegomena Logica," p. 122.]

[Footnote 526: "Lectures on Metaphysics," vol. i. p. 373; also Porter's
"Human Intellect," p. 95.]

[Footnote 527: Quoted by Hamilton in "Notes on Reid," p. 616.]

[Footnote 528: "Discussions," p. 587.]

[Footnote 529: "The feeling of responsibility is unmeaning unless it
presupposes the reality of freedom."--Murphy, "Scientific Basis of
Faith," p. 85.]

[Footnote 530: "The miraculous interpositions recorded in the Scriptures
are not inconsistent with this fundamental axiom, for they are effects
of the will of God as the _cause_."--McCosh, "Divine Government," p.
113.]

[Footnote 531: "Divine Government," p. 541.]

[Footnote 532: See McCosh's "Divine Government," p. 113, and Mill's
"Logic," p. 114, vol. ii., English edition.]

[Footnote 533: Whedon, "Freedom of the Will," p. 87.]

[Footnote 534: Whedon, "Freedom of the Will," p. 92. "Every intelligent
effort is an exercise of _originating creative power_ which makes the
future different from what it would have been but for the exercise of
this power."--Hazard, "On Causation," p. 87.]

[Footnote 535: "Philosophy," p. 511.]

[Footnote 536: "Philosophy," p. 508.]

[Footnote 537: "Prolegomena Logica," App., note C.]

[Footnote 538: Whedon, "Freedom of the Will," p. 32.]

[Footnote 539: Ibid., p. 56.]

[Footnote 540: See Calderwood's "Hand-book of Moral Philosophy," pp.
196, 197.]

[Footnote 541: Müller's "Christian Doctrine of Sin," vol. ii. p. 56.]

[Footnote 542: Whedon, "Freedom of the Will," p. 130.]

[Footnote 543: Whedon, "Freedom of the Will," p. 135.]

[Footnote 544: Ibid., p. 193.]

[Footnote 545: Whedon, "Freedom of the Will," p. 158.]

[Footnote 546: "Intuition," etc., p. 472.]

[Footnote 547: Whedon, "Freedom of the Will," p. 171.]

[Footnote 548: Whedon, "Freedom of the Will," p. 173.]

[Footnote 549: "So long as there are fluctuations at all, even though
they be of infinitesimal magnitude as compared with the total,
statistical regularity does not exclude all room for freedom."--Murphy,
"Scientific Basis of Faith," p. 84.]

[Footnote 550: "Prolegomena Logica," p. 280.]

[Footnote 551: On self-limitation of the Divine will, see Müller,
"Christian Doctrine of Sin," vol. ii. pp. 208-212.]

[Footnote 552: This is unquestionably the doctrine of Scripture, "Whom
He _foreknew_, them also He did predestinate."]

[Footnote 553: Bushnell, "Nature and the Supernatural," p. 50.]

[Footnote 554: Whedon, "Freedom of the Will," p. 273; Müller, "Christian
Doctrine of Sin," vol. ii. pp. 236-247.]

[Footnote 555: Whedon, "Freedom of the Will," p. 283.]

[Footnote 556: Bushnell, "Nature and the Supernatural," p. 83.]

[Footnote 557: Ibid., p. 99.]

[Footnote 558: Luke xii. 47, 48.]

[Footnote 559: Matt. xi. 21-24.]

[Footnote 560: Whedon, "Freedom of the Will," pp. 355-357.]

[Footnote 561: Hamilton, "Revealed Doctrine of Rewards and Punishments,"
p. 88.]

[Footnote 562: "The formation of noble human characters is the highest
work that man, or, so far as we know, that God can be engaged
in."--Murphy, "Scientific Basis of Faith," p. 39.]


VALUABLE AND INTERESTING WORKS

FOR

PUBLIC & PRIVATE LIBRARIES,

PUBLISHED BY HARPER & BROTHERS, NEW YORK.


     _For a full List of Books suitable for Libraries published by_
     HARPER & BROTHERS, _see_ HARPER'S CATALOGUE, _which may be had
     gratuitously on application to the publishers personally, or by
     letter enclosing Nine Cents in Postage stamps_.

     HARPER & BROTHERS _will send their publications by mail, postage
     prepaid, on receipt of the price_.

     MACAULAY'S ENGLAND. The History of England from the Accession of
     James II. By THOMAS BABINGTON MACAULAY. New Edition, from new
     Electrotype Plates. 8vo, Cloth, with Paper Labels, Uncut Edges and
     Gilt Tops, 5 vols. in a Box, $10 00 per set. Sold only in Sets.
     Cheap Edition, 5 vols. in a Box, 12mo, Cloth, $2 50; Sheep, $3 75.

     MACAULAY'S LIFE AND LETTERS. The Life and Letters of Lord Macaulay.
     By his Nephew, G. OTTO TREVELYAN, M.P. With Portrait on Steel.
     Complete in 2 vols., 8vo, Cloth, Uncut Edges and Gilt Tops, $5 00;
     Sheep, $6 00; Half Calf, $9 50. Popular Edition, two vols. in one,
     12mo, Cloth, $1 75.

     HUME'S ENGLAND. The History of England, from the Invasion of Julius
     Cæsar to the Abdication of James II., 1688. By DAVID HUME. New and
     Elegant Library Edition, from new Electrotype Plates. 6 vols. in a
     Box, 8vo, Cloth, with Paper Labels, Uncut Edges and Gilt Tops, $12
     00. Sold only in Sets. Popular Edition, 6 vols. in a Box, 12mo,
     Cloth, $3 00; Sheep, $4 50.

     GIBBON'S ROME. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman
     Empire. By EDWARD GIBBON. With Notes by Dean MILMAN, M. GUIZOT, and
     Dr. WILLIAM SMITH. New Edition, from new Electrotype Plates. 6
     vols., 8vo, Cloth, with Paper Labels, Uncut Edges and Gilt Tops,
     $12 00. Sold only in Sets. Popular Edition, 6 vols. in a Box, 12mo,
     Cloth, $3 00; Sheep, $4 50.

     HILDRETH'S UNITED STATES. History of the United States. FIRST
     SERIES: From the Discovery of the Continent to the Organization of
     the Government under the Federal Constitution. SECOND SERIES: From
     the Adoption of the Federal Constitution to the End of the
     Sixteenth Congress. By RICHARD HILDRETH. Popular Edition, 6 vols.
     in a Box, 8vo, Cloth, with Paper Labels, Uncut Edges and Gilt Tops,
     $12 00. Sold only in Sets.

     MOTLEY'S DUTCH REPUBLIC. The Rise of the Dutch Republic. A History.
     By JOHN LOTHROP MOTLEY, LL.D., D.C.L. With a Portrait of William of
     Orange. Cheap Edition, 3 vols. in a Box, 8vo, Cloth, with Paper
     Labels, Uncut Edges and Gilt Tops, $6 00. Sold only in Sets.
     Original Library Edition, 3 vols., 8vo, Cloth, $10 50; Sheep, $12
     00; Half Calf, $17 25.

     MOTLEY'S UNITED NETHERLANDS. History of the United Netherlands:
     from the Death of William the Silent to the Twelve Years'
     Truce--1584-1609. With a full View of the English-Dutch Struggle
     against Spain and of the Origin and Destruction of the Spanish
     Armada. By JOHN LOTHROP MOTLEY, LL.D., D.C.L. Portraits. Cheap
     Edition, 4 vols. in a Box, 8vo, Cloth, with Paper Labels, Uncut
     Edges and Gilt Tops, $8 00. Sold only in Sets. Original Library
     Edition, 4 vols., 8vo, Cloth, $14 00; Sheep, $16 00; Half Calf, $23
     00.

     MOTLEY'S LIFE AND DEATH OF JOHN OF BARNEVELD. The Life and Death of
     John of Barneveld, Advocate of Holland: with a View of the Primary
     Causes and Movements of "The Thirty Years' War." By JOHN LOTHROP
     MOTLEY, LL.D., D.C.L. Illustrated. Cheap Edition, 2 vols. in a Box,
     8vo, Cloth, with Paper Labels, Uncut Edges and Gilt Tops, $4 00.
     Sold only in Sets. Original Library Edition, 2 vols., 8vo, Cloth,
     $7 00; Sheep, $8 00; Half Calf, $11 50.

     GEDDES'S HISTORY OF JOHN DE WITT. History of the Administration of
     John De Witt, Grand Pensionary of Holland. By JAMES GEDDES. Vol.
     I.--1623-1654. With a Portrait. 8vo, Cloth, $2 50.

     SKETCHES AND STUDIES IN SOUTHERN EUROPE. By JOHN ADDINGTON SYMONDS.
     In Two Volumes. Post 8vo, Cloth, $4 00.

     SYMONDS'S GREEK POETS. Studies of the Greek Poets. By JOHN
     ADDINGTON SYMONDS. 2 vols., Square 16mo, Cloth, $3 50.

     BENJAMIN'S CONTEMPORARY ART. Contemporary Art in Europe. By S. G.
     W. BENJAMIN. Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $3 50.

     BENJAMIN'S ART IN AMERICA. Art in America. By S. G. W. BENJAMIN.
     Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $4 00.

     HUDSON'S HISTORY OF JOURNALISM. Journalism in the United States,
     from 1690 to 1872. By FREDERIC HUDSON. 8vo, Cloth, $5 00; Half
     Calf, $7 25.

     KINGLAKE'S CRIMEAN WAR. The Invasion of the Crimea: its Origin, and
     an Account of its Progress down to the Death of Lord Raglan. By
     ALEXANDER WILLIAM KINGLAKE. With Maps and Plans. Three Volumes now
     ready. 12mo, Cloth, $2 00 per vol.

     JEFFERSON'S LIFE. The Domestic Life of Thomas Jefferson: Compiled
     from Family Letters and Reminiscences, by his Great-granddaughter,
     SARAH N. RANDOLPH. Illustrated. Crown 8vo, Cloth, $2 50.

     LAMB'S COMPLETE WORKS. The Works of Charles Lamb. Comprising his
     Letters, Poems, Essays of Elia, Essays upon Shakspeare, Hogarth,
     etc., and a Sketch of his Life, with the Final Memorials, by T.
     NOON TALFOURD. With Portrait. 2 vols., 12mo, Cloth, $3 00.

     LAWRENCE'S HISTORICAL STUDIES. Historical Studies. By EUGENE
     LAWRENCE. Containing the following Essays: The Bishops of
     Rome.--Leo and Luther.--Loyola and the Jesuits.--Ecumenical
     Councils.--The Vaudois.--The Huguenots.--The Church of
     Jerusalem.--Dominic and the Inquisition.--The Conquest of
     Ireland.--The Greek Church. 8vo, Cloth, Uncut Edges and Gilt Tops,
     $3 00.

     LOSSING'S FIELD-BOOK OF THE REVOLUTION. Pictorial Field-Book of the
     Revolution: or, Illustrations by Pen and Pencil of the History,
     Biography, Scenery, Relics, and Traditions of the War for
     Independence. By BENSON J. LOSSING. 2 vols., 8vo, Cloth, $14 00;
     Sheep or Roan, $15 00; Half Calf, $18 00.

     LOSSING'S FIELD-BOOK OF THE WAR OF 1812. Pictorial Field-Book of
     the War of 1812; or, Illustrations by Pen and Pencil of the
     History, Biography, Scenery, Relics, and Traditions of the last War
     for American Independence. By BENSON J. LOSSING. With several
     hundred Engravings on Wood by Lossing and Barritt, chiefly from
     Original Sketches by the Author. 1088 pages, 8vo, Cloth, $7 00;
     Sheep, $8 50; Roan, $9 00; Half Calf, $10 00.

     FORSTER'S LIFE OF DEAN SWIFT. The Early Life of Jonathan Swift
     (1667-1711). By JOHN FORSTER. With Portrait. 8vo, Cloth, Uncut
     Edges and Gilt Tops, $2 50.

     GREEN'S ENGLISH PEOPLE. History of the English People. By JOHN
     RICHARD GREEN, M.A. 3 volumes ready. 8vo, Cloth, $2 50 per volume.

     SHORT'S NORTH AMERICANS OF ANTIQUITY. The North Americans of
     Antiquity. Their Origin, Migrations, and Type of Civilization
     Considered. By JOHN T. SHORT. Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $3 00.

     SQUIER'S PERU. Peru: Incidents of Travel and Exploration in the
     Land of the Incas. By E. GEORGE SQUIER, M.A., F.S.A., late U.S.
     Commissioner to Peru. With Illustrations, 8vo, Cloth, $5 00.

     MYERS'S LOST EMPIRES. Remains of Lost Empires: Sketches of the
     Ruins of Palmyra, Nineveh, Babylon, and Persepolis. By P. V. N.
     MYERS. Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $3 50.

     MAURY'S PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY OF THE SEA. The Physical Geography of
     the Sea, and its Meteorology. By M. F. MAURY, LL.D. 8vo, Cloth, $4
     00.

     SCHWEINFURTH'S HEART OF AFRICA. The Heart of Africa. Three Years'
     Travels and Adventures in the Unexplored Regions of the Centre of
     Africa--from 1868 to 1871. By Dr. GEORQ SCHWEINFURTH. Translated by
     ELLEN E. FREWER. With an Introduction by WINWOOD READE. Illustrated
     by about 130 Wood-cuts from Drawings made by the Author, and with
     two Maps. 2 vols., 8vo, Cloth, $8 00.

     M'CLINTOCK & STRONG'S CYCLOPÆDIA. Cyclopædia of Biblical,
     Theological, and Ecclesiastical Literature. Prepared by the Rev.
     JOHN M'CLINTOCK, D.D., and JAMES STRONG, S.T.D. _9 vols. now
     ready._ Royal 8vo. Price per vol., Cloth, $5 00; Sheep, $6 00; Half
     Morocco, $8 00. (_Sold by Subscription._)

     MOHAMMED AND MOHAMMEDANISM: Lectures Delivered at the Royal
     Institution of Great Britain in February and March, 1874. By R.
     BOSWORTH SMITH, M.A., Assistant Master in Harrow School; late
     Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford. With an Appendix containing
     Emanuel Deutsch's Article on "Islam." 12mo, Cloth, $1 50.

     MOSHEIM'S CHURCH HISTORY. Ecclesiastical History, Ancient and
     Modern; in which the Rise, Progress, and Variation of Church Power
     are considered in their connection with the State of Learning and
     Philosophy, and the Political History of Europe during that Period.
     Translated, with Notes, etc., by A. MACLAINE, D.D. Continued to
     1826 by C. COOTE, LL.D. 2 vols., 8vo, Cloth, $4 00; Sheep, $5 00.

     HARPER'S NEW CLASSICAL LIBRARY. Literal Translations. The following
     volumes are now ready. 12mo, Cloth, $1 50 each.
     CÆSAR.--VIRGIL.--SALLUST.--HORACE.--CICERO'S ORATIONS.--CICERO'S
     OFFICES, etc.--CICERO ON ORATORY AND ORATORS.--TACITUS (2
     vols.).--TERENCE.--SOPHOCLES.--JUVENAL.--XENOPHON.--HOMER'S
     ILIAD.--HOMER'S ODYSSEY.--HERODOTUS.--DEMOSTHENES (2
     vols.).--THUCYDIDES.--ÆSCHYLUS.--EURIPIDES (2 vols.).--LIVY (2
     vols.).--PLATO [Select Dialogues].

     VINCENT'S LAND OF THE WHITE ELEPHANT. The Land of the White
     Elephant: Sights and Scenes in Southeastern Asia. A Personal
     Narrative of Travel and Adventure in Farther India, embracing the
     Countries of Burma, Siam, Cambodia, and Cochin-China (1871-2). By
     FRANK VINCENT, Jr. Illustrated with Maps, Plans, and Wood-cuts.
     Crown 8vo, Cloth, $3 50.

     LIVINGSTONE'S SOUTH AFRICA. Missionary Travels and Researches in
     South Africa: including a Sketch of Sixteen Years' Residence in the
     Interior of Africa, and a Journey from the Cape of Good Hope to
     Loanda on the West Coast; thence across the Continent, down the
     River Zambesi, to the Eastern Ocean. By DAVID LIVINGSTONE, LL.D.,
     D.C.L. With Portrait, Maps, and Illustrations. 8vo, Cloth, $4 50;
     Sheep, $5 00; Half Calf, $6 75.

     LIVINGSTONE'S ZAMBESI. Narrative of an Expedition to the Zambesi
     and its Tributaries, and of the Discovery of the Lakes Shirwa and
     Nyassa, 1858-1864. By DAVID and CHARLES LIVINGSTONE. Map and
     Illustrations. 8vo, Cloth, $5 00; Sheep, $5 50; Half Calf, $7 25.

     LIVINGSTONE'S LAST JOURNALS. The Last Journals of David Livingstone
     in Central Africa, from 1865 to his Death. Continued by a Narrative
     of his Last Moments and Sufferings, obtained from his Faithful
     Servants Chuma and Susi. By HORACE WALLER, F.R.G.S., Rector of
     Twywell, Northampton. With Portrait, Maps, and Illustrations. 8vo,
     Cloth, $5 00; Sheep, $5 50; Half Calf, $7 25. Cheap Popular
     Edition, 8vo, Cloth, with Map and Illustrations, $2 50.

     GROTE'S HISTORY OF GREECE. 12 vols., 12mo, Cloth, $18 00; Sheep,
     $22 80; Half Calf, $39 00.

     RECLUS'S EARTH. The Earth: a Descriptive History of the Phenomena
     of the Life of the Globe. By ÉLISÉE RECLUS. With 234 Maps and
     Illustrations, and 23 Page Maps printed in Colors. 8vo, Cloth, $5
     00.

     RECLUS'S OCEAN. The Ocean, Atmosphere, and Life. Being the Second
     Series of a Descriptive History of the Life of the Globe. By ÉLISÉE
     RECLUS. Profusely Illustrated with 250 Maps or Figures, and 27 Maps
     printed in Colors. 8vo, Cloth, $6 00.

     NORDHOFF'S COMMUNISTIC SOCIETIES OF THE UNITED STATES. The
     Communistic Societies of the United States, from Personal Visit and
     Observation; including Detailed Accounts of the Economists,
     Zoarites, Shakers, the Amana, Oneida, Bethel, Aurora, Icarian, and
     other existing Societies. With Particulars of their Religious
     Creeds and Practices, their Social Theories and Life, Numbers,
     Industries, and Present Condition. By CHARLES NORDHOFF.
     Illustrations. 8vo, Cloth, $4 00.

     NORDHOFF'S CALIFORNIA. California: for Health, Pleasure, and
     Residence. A Book for Travellers and Settlers. Illustrated. 8vo,
     Cloth, $2 50.

     NORDHOFF'S NORTHERN CALIFORNIA AND THE SANDWICH ISLANDS. Northern
     California, Oregon, and the Sandwich Islands, By CHARLES NORDHOFF.
     Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $2 50.

     SHAKSPEARE. The Dramatic Works of William Shakspeare. With
     Corrections and Notes. Engravings. 6 vols., 12mo, Cloth, $9 00. 2
     vols., 8vo, Cloth, $4 00; Sheep, $5 00. In one vol., 8vo, Sheep, $4
     00.

     BAKER'S ISMAILÏA. Ismailïa: a Narrative of the Expedition to
     Central Africa for the Suppression of the Slave-trade, organized by
     Ismail, Khedive of Egypt. By Sir SAMUEL WHITE BAKER, PASHA, F.R.S.,
     F.R.G.S. With Maps, Portraits, and Illustrations. 8vo, Cloth, $5
     00; Half Calf, $7 25.

     GRIFFIS'S JAPAN. The Mikado's Empire: Book I. History of Japan,
     from 660 B.C. to 1872 A.D. Book II. Personal Experiences,
     Observations, and Studies in Japan, 1870-1874. By WILLIAM ELLIOT
     GRIFFIS, A.M., late of the Imperial University of Tokio,
     Japan. Copiously Illustrated. 8vo, Cloth, $4 00; Half Calf, $6 25.

     SMILES'S HISTORY OF THE HUGUENOTS. The Huguenots: their
     Settlements, Churches, and Industries in England and Ireland. By
     SAMUEL SMILES. With an Appendix relating to the Huguenots in
     America. Crown 8vo, Cloth, $2 00.

     SMILES'S HUGUENOTS AFTER THE REVOCATION. The Huguenots in France
     after the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes; with a Visit to the
     Country of the Vaudois. By SAMUEL SMILES. Crown 8vo, Cloth, $2 00.

     SMILES'S LIFE OF THE STEPHENSONS. The Life of George Stephenson,
     and of his Son, Robert Stephenson; Comprising, also, a History of
     the Invention and Introduction of the Railway Locomotive. By SAMUEL
     SMILES. With Steel Portraits and numerous Illustrations. 8vo,
     Cloth, $3 00.

     RAWLINSON'S MANUAL OF ANCIENT HISTORY. A Manual of Ancient History,
     from the Earliest Times to the Fall of the Western Empire.
     Comprising the History of Chaldæa, Assyria, Media, Babylonia,
     Lydia, Phœnicia, Syria, Judæa, Egypt, Carthage, Persia, Greece,
     Macedonia, Parthia, and Rome. By GEORGE RAWLINSON, M.A., Camden
     Professor of Ancient History in the University of Oxford. 12mo,
     Cloth, $1 25.

     ALISON'S HISTORY OF EUROPE. FIRST SERIES: From the Commencement of
     the French Revolution, in 1789, to the Restoration of the Bourbons
     in 1815. [In addition to the Notes on Chapter LXXVI., which correct
     the errors of the original work concerning the United States, a
     copious Analytical Index has been appended to this American
     Edition.] SECOND SERIES: From the Fall of Napoleon, in 1815, to the
     Accession of Louis Napoleon, in 1852. 8 vols., 8vo, Cloth, $16 00;
     Sheep, $20 00; Half Calf, $34 00.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Theistic Conception of the World, by 
B. F. (Benjamin Franklin) Cocker

