CHAPTER XV. LYME OF THE KING

On the next day, which was Friday, the country folk continued to come
in, and by evening Monmouth's forces amounted to a thousand foot and
a hundred and fifty horse. The men were armed as fast as they were
enrolled, and scarce a field or quiet avenue in the district but
resounded to the tramp of feet, the rattle of weapons, and the sharp
orders of the officers who, by drilling, were converting this raw
material into soldiers. On the Saturday the rally of the Duke's standard
was such that Monmouth threw off at last the gloomy forebodings that had
burdened his soul since that meeting on Thursday night. Wade, Holmes,
Foulkes, and Fox were able to set about forming the first four
regiments--the Duke's, and the Green, the White, and the Yellow.
Monmouth's spirits continued to rise, for he had been joined by now
by Legge and Hooper--the two upon whom Battiscomb had counted--and by
Colonel Joshua Churchill, of whom Battiscomb had been less certain.
Captain Matthews brought news that Lord Wiltshire and the gentlemen
of Hampshire might be expected if they could force their way through
Albemarle's militia, which was already closing round Lyme.

Long before evening willing fellows were being turned away in hundreds
for lack of weapons. In spite of Monmouth's big talk on landing, and of
the rumour that had gone out, that he could arm thirty thousand men, his
stock of arms was exhausted by a mere fifteen hundred. Trenchard,
who now held a Major's rank in the horse attached to the Duke's own
regiment, was loud in his scorn of this state of things; Mr. Wilding was
sad, and his depression again spread to the Duke after a few words had
passed between them towards evening. Fletcher was for heroic measures.
He looked only ahead now, like the good soldier that he was; and,
already, he began to suggest a bold dash for Exeter, for weapons,
horses, and possibly the militia as well, for they had ample evidence
that the men composing it might easily be induced to desert to the
Duke's side.

The suggestion was one that instantly received Mr. Wilding's heartiest
approval. It seemed to fill him suddenly with hope, and he spoke of
it, indeed, as an inspiration which, if acted upon, might yet save the
situation. The Duke was undecided as ever; he was too much troubled
weighing the chances for and against, and he would decide upon nothing
until he had consulted Grey and the others. He would summon a council
that night, he promised, and the matter should be considered.

But that council was never to be called, for Andrew Fletcher's
association with the rebellion was drawing rapidly to its close, and
there was that to happen in the next few hours which should counteract
all the encouragement with which the Duke had been fortified that day.
Towards evening little Heywood Dare, the Taunton goldsmith, who had
landed at Seatown and gone out with the news of the Duke's arrival, rode
into Lyme with forty horse, mounted, himself, upon a beautiful charger
which was destined to be the undoing of him.

News came, too, that the Dorset militia were at Bridport, eight miles
away, whereupon Wilding and Fletcher postponed all further suggestion of
the dash for Exeter, proposing that in the mean time a night attack upon
Bridport might result well. For once Lord Grey was in agreement with
them, and so the matter was decided. Fletcher went down to arm and
mount, and all the world knows the story of the foolish, ill-fated
quarrel which robbed Monmouth of two of his most valued adherents.
By ill-luck the Scot's eyes lighted upon the fine horse that Dare had
brought from Ford Abbey. It occurred to him that nothing could be more
fitting than that the best man should sit upon the best horse, and he
forthwith led the beast from the stables and was about to mount when
Dare came forth to catch him in the very act. The goldsmith was a rude,
peppery fellow, who did not mince his words.

“What a plague are you doing with that horse?” he cried.

Fletcher paused, one foot in the stirrup, and looked the fellow up and
down. “I am mounting it,” said he, and proceeded to do as he said.

But Dare caught him by the tails of his coat and brought him back to
earth.

“You are making a mistake, Mr. Fletcher,” he cried angrily. “That horse
is mine.”

Fletcher, whose temper was by no means of the most peaceful, kept
himself with difficulty in hand at the indignity Dare offered him.

“Yours?” quoth he.

“Aye, mine. I brought it from Ford Abbey myself.”

“For the Duke's service,” Fletcher reminded him.

“For my own, sir; for my own I would have you know.” And brushing
the Scot aside, he caught the bridle, and sought to wrench it from
Fletcher's hand.

But Fletcher maintained his hold. “Softly, Mr. Dare,” said he. “Ye're
a trifle o'er true to your name, as you once told his late Majesty
yourself.”

“Take your hands from my horse,” Dare shouted, very angry.

Several loiterers in the yard gathered round to watch the scene, culling
diversion from it and speculating upon the conclusion it might have. One
rash young fellow offered audibly to lay ten to one that Paymaster Dare
would have the best of the argument.

Dare overheard, and was spurred on.

“I will, by God!” he answered. “Come, Mr. Fletcher!” And he shook the
bridle again.

There was a dull flush showing through the tan of Fletcher's skin.
“Mr. Dare,” said he, “this horse is no more yours than mine. It is the
Duke's, and I, as one o' the leaders, claim it in the Duke's service.”

“Aye, sir,” cried an onlooker, encouraging Fletcher, and did the
mischief. It so goaded Dare to have his antagonist in this trifling
matter supported that he utterly lost his head.

“I have said the horse is mine, and I repeat it. Let go the bridle--let
it go!” Still, Fletcher, striving hard to keep his calm, clung to the
reins. “Let it go, you damned, thieving Scot!” screamed Dare in a fury,
and struck Fletcher with his whip.

It was unfortunate for them both that he should have had that switch in
his hand at such a time, but more unfortunate still was it that Fletcher
should have had a pistol in his belt. The Scot dropped the bridle at
last; dropped it to pluck forth the weapon.

“Hi! I did not...” began Dare, who had stood appalled by what he had
done in the second or two that had passed since he had delivered the
blow. The rest of his sentence was drowned in the report of Fletcher's
pistol, and Dare dropped dead on the rough cobbles of the yard.

Ferguson has left it on record--and, presumably, he had Fletcher's
word for it--that it was no part of the Scot's intent to do Mr. Dare
a mischief. He had but drawn the pistol to intimidate him into better
manners, but in his haste he accidentally pulled the trigger.

However that may be, there was Dare as dead as the stones on which he
lay, and Fletcher with a smoking pistol in his hand.

After that all was confusion. Fletcher was seized by those who had
witnessed the deed; there was none thought it an accident; indeed,
they were all ready enough to say that Fletcher had received excessive
provocation. He was haled to the presence of the Duke with whom
were Grey and Wilding at the time; and old Dare's son--an ensign in
Goodenough's company--came clamouring for vengeance backed by such
goodly numbers that the distraught Duke was forced to show at least the
outward seeming of it.

Wilding, who knew the value of this Scottish soldier of fortune who had
seen so much service, strenuously urged his enlargement. It was not a
time to let the fortunes of a cause suffer through such an act as this,
deplorable though it might be. The evidence showed that Fletcher had
been provoked; he had been struck, a thing that might well justify the
anger in the heat of which he had done this thing. Grey was stolid and
silent, saying nothing either for or against the man who had divided
with him under the Duke the honours of the supreme command.

Monmouth, white and horror-stricken, sat and listened first to
Wilding, then to Dare, and lastly to Fletcher himself. But it was young
Dare--Dare and his followers, who prevailed. They were too numerous and
turbulent, and they must at all costs be conciliated, or there was no
telling to what extremes they might not go. And so there was an end to
the share of Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun in this undertaking--the end of
the only man who was of any capacity to pilot it through the troubled
waters that lay before it. Monmouth placed him under arrest and sent him
aboard the frigate again, ordering her captain to sail at once. That was
the utmost Monmouth could do to save him.

Wilding continued to plead with the Duke after Fletcher's removal, and
to such good purpose that at last Monmouth determined that Fletcher
should rejoin them later, when the affair should have blown over, and
he sent word accordingly to the Scot. Even in this there were
manifestations of antagonism between Mr. Wilding and Lord Grey, and it
almost seemed enough that Wilding should suggest a course for Lord Grey
instantly to oppose it.

The effects of Fletcher's removal were not long in following. On the
morrow came the Bridport affair, and Grey's shameful conduct when, had
he stood his ground, victory must have been assured the Duke's forces
instead of just that honourable retreat by which Colonel Wade so
gallantly saved the situation. Mr. Wilding did not mince his words in
putting it that Grey had run away.

In his room at the George Inn, Monmouth, deeply distressed, asked
Wilding and Colonel Matthews what action he should take in the
matter--how deal with Grey.

“There is no other general in Europe would ask that, Your Grace,”
 answered Matthews gravely, and Mr. Wilding added without an instant's
hesitation that His Grace's course was plain.

“It would be an unwise thing to expose the troops to the chance of more
such happenings.”

Monmouth dismissed them and sent for Grey, and he seemed resolved to
deal with him as he deserved. Yet an hour later, when Wilding, Matthews,
Wade, and the others were ordered to attend the Duke in council, there
was his lordship seemingly on as good terms as ever with His Grace.

They were assembled to discuss the next step which it might be advisable
to take, for the militia was closing in around them, and to remain
longer in Lyme would be to be caught there as in a trap. It was Grey
who advanced the first suggestion, his assurance no whit abated by
the shameful thing that had befallen, by the cowardice which he had
betrayed.

“That we must quit Lyme we are all agreed,” said he. “I would propose
that Your Grace march north to Gloucester, where our Cheshire friends
will assemble to meet us.”

Colonel Matthews reminded the Duke of Andrew Fletcher's proposal that
they should make a raid upon Exeter with a view to seizing arms, of
which they stood so sorely in need.

This Mr. Wilding was quick to support. “Not only that, Your Grace,” he
said, “but I am confident that with very little inducement the greater
portion of the militia will desert to us as soon as we appear.

“What assurance can you give of that?” asked Grey, his heavy lip
protruded.

“I take it,” said Mr. Wilding, “that in such matters no man can give
an assurance of anything. I speak with knowledge of the country and the
folk from which the militia is enlisted. I offer it as my opinion that
the militia is favourably disposed to Your Grace. I can do no more.

“If Mr. Wilding says so, Your Grace,” put in Matthews, “I have no doubt
he has sound reasons upon which to base his opinion.

“No doubt,” said Monmouth. “Indeed, I had already thought of the step
that you suggest, Colonel Matthews, and what Mr. Wilding says causes me
to look upon it still more favourably.”

Grey frowned. “Consider, Your Grace,” he said earnestly, “that you are
in no case to fight at present.”

“What fighting do you suggest there would be?” asked the Duke.

“There is Albemarle between us and Exeter.”

“But with the militia,” Wilding reminded him; “and if the militia
deserts him for Your Grace, in what case will Albemarle find himself?”

“And if the militia does not desert? If you should be proven wrong, sir?
What then? What then?” asked Grey.

“Aye--true--what then, Mr. Wilding?” quoth the Duke, already wavering.

Wilding considered a moment, all eyes upon him. “Even then,” said he
presently, “I do maintain that in this dash for Exeter lies Your Grace's
greatest chance of success. We can deliver battle if need be. Already we
are three thousand strong...”

Grey interrupted him rudely. “Nay,” he insisted. “You must not presume
upon that. We are not yet fit to fight. It is His Grace's business at
present to drill and discipline his troops and induce more friends to
join him.”

“Already we are turning men away because we have no weapons to put into
their hands,” Wilding reminded them, and a murmur of approval ran round,
which but served to anger Grey the more, to render more obstinate his
opposition.

“But all that come in are not unprovided,” was his lordship's retort.
“There are the Hampshire gentry and their friends. They will come armed,
and so will others if we have patience.

“Aye,” said Wilding, “and if you have patience enough there will be
troops the Parliament will send against us. They, too, will be armed, I
can assure your lordship.”

“In God's name let us keep from wrangling,” the Duke besought them. “It
is difficult enough to determine for the best. If the dash to Exeter
were successful...”

“It cannot be,” Grey interrupted again.

The liberties he took with Monmouth and which Monmouth permitted him
might well be a source of wonder to all who heard them. Monmouth paused
now in his interrupted speech and looked about him a trifle wearily.

“It seems idle to insist,” said Mr. Wilding; “such is the temper of Your
Grace's counsellors, that we get no further than contradictions.” Grey's
bold eyes were upon Wilding as he spoke. “I would remind Your Grace,
and I am sure that many present will agree with me, that in a desperate
enterprise a sudden unexpected movement will often strike terror.”

“That is true,” said Monmouth, but apparently without enthusiasm, and
having approved what was urged on one side, he looked at Grey, as if
waiting to hear what might be said on the other. His indecision was
pitiful--tragical, indeed, in the leader of so bold an enterprise.

“We should do better, I think,” said Grey, “to deal with the facts as we
know them.”

“It is what I am endeavouring to do, Your Grace,” protested Wilding,
a note of despair in his voice. “Perhaps some other gentleman will put
forward better counsel than mine.”

“Aye! In Heaven's name let us hope so,” snorted Grey; and Monmouth,
catching the sudden flash of Mr. Wilding's eye, set a hand upon his
lordship's arm as if to urge him to be gentler. But he continued, “When
men talk of striking terror by sudden movements they build on air.”

“I had hardly thought to hear that from your lordship,” said Mr.
Wilding, and he permitted himself that tight-lipped smile that gave his
face so wicked a look.

“And why not?” asked Grey, stupidly unsuspicious.

“Because I had thought you might have concluded otherwise from your own
experience at Bridport this morning.”

Grey got angrily to his feet, rage and shame flushing his face, and it
needed Ferguson and the Duke to restore him to some semblance of calm.
Indeed, it may well be that it was to complete this that His Grace
decided there and then that they should follow Grey's advice and go by
way of Taunton, Bridgwater, and Bristol to Gloucester. He was, like all
weak men, of conspicuous mental short-sightedness. The matter of the
moment was ever of greater importance to him than any result that might
attend it in the future.

He insisted that Wilding and Grey should shake hands before the breaking
up of that most astounding council, and as he had done last night, he
now again imposed upon them his commands that they must not allow this
matter to go further.

Mr. Wilding paved the way for peace by making an apology within
limitations.

“If, in my zeal to serve Your Grace to the best of my ability, I have
said that which Lord Grey thinks fit to resent, I would bid him consider
my motive rather than my actual words.”

But when all had gone save Ferguson, the chaplain approached the
preoccupied and distressed Duke with counsel that Mr. Wilding should be
sent away from the army.

“Else there'll be trouble 'twixt him and Grey,” the plotting parson
foretold. “We'll be having a repetition of the unfortunate Fletcher and
Dare affair, and I think that has cost Your Grace enough already.”

“Do you suggest that I dismiss Wilding?” cried the Duke. “You know his
influence, and the bad impression his removal would leave.”

Ferguson stroked his long lean jaw. “No, no,” said he; “all I suggest is
that you find Mr. Wilding work to do elsewhere.”

“Elsewhere?” the Duke questioned. “Where else?”

“I have thought of that, too. Send him to London to see Danvers and to
stir up your friends there. And,” he added, lowering his voice, “give
him discretion to see Sunderland if he thinks well.”

The proposition pleased Monmouth, and it seemed to please Mr. Wilding
no less when, having sent for him, the Duke communicated it to him in
Ferguson's presence.

Upon this mission Mr. Wilding set out that very night, leaving Nick
Trenchard in despair at being separated from him at a time when there
seemed to be every chance that such a separation might be eternal.

Monmouth and Ferguson may have conceived they did a wise thing in
removing a man who was instinctively spoiling for a little sword-play
with my Lord Grey. It is odds that had he remained, the brewing storm
between the pair would have come to a head. Had it done so, it is more
than likely, from what we know of Mr. Wilding's accomplishments, that
he had given Lord Grey his quietus. And had that happened, it is to
be inferred from history that it is possible the Duke of Monmouth's
rebellion might have had a less disastrous issue.






