CHAPTER III. DIANA SCHEMES

Notwithstanding the brave face Ruth Westmacott had kept during his
presence, when he departed Sir Rowland left behind him a distress
amounting almost to anguish in her mind. Yet though she might suffer,
there was no weakness in Ruth's nature. She knew how to endure. Diana,
bearing Richard not a tenth of the affection his sister consecrated to
him, was alarmed for him. Besides, her own interests urged the averting
of this encounter. And so she held in accents almost tearful that
something must be done to save him.

This, too, appeared to be Richard's own view, when presently--within a
few minutes of Blake's departure--he came to join them. They watched
his approach in silence, and both noted--though with different eyes and
different feelings--the pallor of his fair face, the dark lines under
his colourless eyes. His condition was abject, and his manners, never
of the best--for there was much of the spoiled child about Richard--were
clearly suffering from it.

He stood before his sister and his cousin, moving his eyes shiftily from
one to the other, rubbing his hands nervously together.

“Your precious friend Sir Rowland has been here,” said he, and it was
not clear from his manner which of them he addressed. “Not a doubt but
he will have brought you the news.” He seemed to sneer.

Ruth advanced towards him, her face grave, her sweet eyes full of
pitying concern. She placed a hand upon his sleeve. “My poor Richard...”
 she began, but he shook off her kindly touch, laughing angrily--a mere
cackle of irritability.

“Odso!” he interrupted her. “It is a thought late for this mock
kindliness!”

Diana, in the background, arched her brows, then with a shrug turned
aside and seated herself on the stone seat by which they had been
standing. Ruth shrank back as if her brother had struck her.

“Richard!” she cried, and searched his livid face with her eyes.
“Richard!”

He read a question in the interjection, and he answered it. “Had you
known any real care, any true concern for me, you had not given cause
for this affair,” he chid her peevishly.

“What are you saying?” she cried, and it occurred to her at last that
Richard was afraid. He was a coward! She felt as she would faint.

“I am saying,” said he, hunching his shoulders, and shivering as he
spoke, yet, his glance unable to meet hers, “that it is your fault that
I am like to get my throat cut before sunset.”

“My fault?” she murmured. The slope of lawn seemed to wave and swim
about her. “My fault?”

“The fault of your wanton ways,” he accused her harshly. “You have so
played fast and loose with this fellow Wilding that he makes free of
your name in my very presence, and puts upon me the need to get myself
killed by him to save the family honour.”

He would have said more in this strain, but something in her glance gave
him pause. There fell a silence. From the distance came the melodious
pealing of church bells. High overhead a lark was pouring out its song;
in the lane at the orchard end rang the beat of trotting hoofs. It
was Diana who spoke presently. Just indignation stirred her, and, when
stirred, she knew no pity, set no limits to her speech.

“I think, indeed,” said she, her voice crisp and merciless, “that the
family honour will best be saved if Mr. Wilding kills you. It is in
danger while you live. You are a coward, Richard.”

“Diana!” he thundered--he could be mighty brave with women--whilst Ruth
clutched her arm to restrain her.

But she continued, undeterred: “You are a coward--a pitiful coward,” she
told him. “Consult your mirror. It will tell you what a palsied thing
you are. That you should dare so speak to Ruth...”

“Don't!” Ruth begged her, turning.

“Aye,” growled Richard, “she had best be silent.”

Diana rose, to battle, her cheeks crimson. “It asks a braver man than
you to compel my obedience,” she told him. “La!” she fumed, “I'll swear
that had Mr. Wilding overheard what you have said to your sister, you
would have little to fear from his sword. A cane would be the weapon
he'd use on you.”

Richard's pale eyes flamed malevolently; a violent rage possessed him
and flooded out his fear, for nothing can so goad a man as an offensive
truth. Ruth approached him again; again she took him by the arm, seeking
to soothe his over-troubled spirit; but again he shook her off. And then
to save the situation came a servant from the house. So lost in anger
was all Richard's sense of decency that the mere supervention of the
man would not have been enough to have silenced him could he have found
adequate words in which to answer Mistress Horton. But even as he racked
his mind, the footman's voice broke the silence, and the words the
fellow uttered did what his presence alone might not have sufficed to
do.

“Mr. Vallancey is asking for you, sir,” he announced.

Richard started. Vallancey! He had come at last, and his coming was
connected with the impending duel. The thought was paralyzing to young
Westmacott. The flush of anger faded from his face; its leaden hue
returned and he shivered as with cold. At last he mastered himself
sufficiently to ask:

“Where is he, Jasper?”

“In the library, sir,” replied the servant. “Shall I bring him hither?”

“Yes--no,” he answered. “I will come to him.” He turned his back upon
the ladies, paused a moment, still irresolute. Then, as by an effort,
he followed the servant across the lawn and vanished through the ivied
porch.

As he went Diana flew to her cousin. Her shallow nature was touched with
transient pity. “My poor Ruth...” she murmured soothingly, and set her
arm about the other's waist. There was a gleam of tears in the eyes Ruth
turned upon her. Together they came to the granite seat and sank to it
side by side, fronting the placid river. There Ruth, her elbows on her
knees, cradled her chin in her hands, and with a sigh of misery stared
straight before her.

“It was untrue!” she said at last. “What Richard said of me was untrue.”

“Why, yes,” Diana snapped, contemptuous. “The only truth is that Richard
is afraid.”

Ruth shivered. “Ah, no,” she pleaded--she knew how true was the
impeachment. “Don't say it, Diana.”

“It matters little that I say it,” snorted Diana impatiently. “It is a
truth proclaimed by the first glance at him.”

“He is in poor health, perhaps,” said Ruth, seeking miserably to excuse
him.

“Aye,” said Diana. “He's suffering from an ague--the result of a lack
of courage. That he should so have spoken to you! Give me patience,
Heaven!”

Ruth crimsoned again at the memory of his words; a wave of indignation
swept through her gentle soul, but was gone at once, leaving an
ineffable sadness in its room. What was to be done? She turned to Diana
for counsel. But Diana was still whipping up her scorn.

“If he goes out to meet Mr. Wilding, he'll shame himself and every man
and woman that bears the name of Westmacott,” said she, and struck a new
fear with that into the heart of Ruth.

“He must not go!” she answered passionately. “He must not meet him!”

Diana flashed her a sidelong glance. “And if he doesn't, will things be
mended?” she inquired. “Will it save his honour to have Mr. Wilding come
and cane him?”

“He'd not do that?” said Ruth.

“Not if you asked him--no,” was Diana's sharp retort, and she caught her
breath on the last word of it, for just then the Devil dropped the seed
of a suggestion into the fertile soil of her lovesick soul.

“Diana!” Ruth exclaimed in reproof, turning to confront her cousin. But
Diana's mind started upon its scheming journey was now travelling fast.
Out of that devil's seed there sprang with amazing rapidity a tree-like
growth, throwing out branches, putting forth leaves, bearing already--in
her fancy--bloom and fruit.

“Why not?” quoth she after a breathing space, and her voice was gentle,
her tone innocent beyond compare. “Why should you not ask him?” Ruth
frowned, perplexed and thoughtful, and now Diana turned to her with
the lively eye of one into whose mind has leapt a sudden inspiration.
“Ruth!” she exclaimed. “Why, indeed, should you not ask him to forgo
this duel?”

“How, how could I?” faltered Ruth.

“He'd not deny you; you know he'd not.”

“I do not know it,” answered Ruth. “But if I did, how could I ask it?”

“Were I Richard's sister, and had I his life and honour at heart as you
have, I'd not ask how. If Richard goes to that encounter he loses both,
remember--unless between this and then he undergoes some change. Were I
in your place, I'd straight to Wilding.”

“To him?” mused Ruth, sitting up. “How could I go to him?”

“Go to him, yes,” Diana insisted. “Go to him at once--while there is yet
time.”

Ruth rose and moved away a step or two towards the water, deep in
thought. Diana watched her furtively and slyly, the rapid rise and fall
of her maiden breast betraying the agitation that filled her as she
waited--like a gamester--for the turn of the card that would show her
whether she had won or lost. For she saw clearly how Ruth might be so
compromised that there was something more than a chance that Diana would
no longer have cause to account her cousin a barrier between herself and
Blake.

“I could not go alone,” said Ruth, and her tone was that of one still
battling with a notion that is repugnant.

“Why, if that is all,” said Diana, “then I'll go with you.”

“I can't! I can't! Consider the humiliation.”

“Consider Richard rather,” the fair temptress made answer eagerly. “Be
sure that Mr. Wilding will save you all humiliation. He'll not deny you.
At a word from you, I know what answer he will make. He will refuse to
push the matter forward--acknowledge himself in the wrong, do whatever
you may ask him. He can do it. None will question his courage. It has
been proved too often.” She rose and came to Ruth. She set her arm
about her waist again, and poured shrewd persuasion over her cousin's
indecision. “To-night you'll thank me for this thought,” she assured
her. “Why do you pause? Are you so selfish as to think more of the
little humiliation that may await you than of Richard's life and
honour?”

“No, no,” Ruth protested feebly.

“What, then? Is Richard to go out and slay his honour by a show of fear
before he is slain, himself, by the man he has insulted?”

“I'll go,” said Ruth. Now that the resolve was taken, she was brisk,
impatient. “Come, Diana. Let Jerry saddle for us. We'll ride to Zoyland
Chase at once.”

They went without a word to Richard who was still closeted with
Vallancey, and riding forth they crossed the river and took the road
that, skirting Sedgemoor, runs south to Weston Zoyland. They rode with
little said until they came to the point where the road branches on the
left, throwing out an arm across the moor towards Chedzoy, a mile or so
short of Zoyland Chase. Here Diana reined in with a sharp gasp of pain.
Ruth checked, and cried to know what ailed her.

“It is the sun, I think,” muttered Diana, her hand to her brow. “I am
sick and giddy.” And she slipped a thought heavily to the ground. In an
instant Ruth had dismounted and was beside her. Diana was pale, which
lent colour to her complaint, for Ruth was not to know that the pallor
sprang from her agitation in wondering whether the ruse she attempted
would succeed or not.

A short stone's-throw from where they had halted stood a cottage back
from the road in a little plot of ground, the property of a kindly old
woman known to both. There Diana expressed the wish to rest awhile, and
thither they took their way, Ruth leading both horses and supporting her
faltering cousin. The dame was all solicitude. Diana was led into her
parlour, and what could be done was done. Her corsage was loosened,
water drawn from the well and brought her to drink and bathe her brow.

She sat back languidly, her head lolling sideways against one of the
wings of the great chair, and languidly assured them she would be better
soon if she were but allowed to rest awhile. Ruth drew up a stool to
sit beside her, for all that her soul fretted at this delay. What if in
consequence she should reach Zoyland Chase too late--to find that Mr.
Wilding had gone forth already? But even as she was about to sit, it
seemed that the same thought had of a sudden come to Diana. The girl
leaned forward, thrusting--as if by an effort--some of her faintness
from her.

“Do not wait for me, Ruth,” she begged.

“I must, child.”

“You must not;” the other insisted. “Think what it may mean--Richard's
life, perhaps. No, no, Ruth, dear. Go on; go on to Zoyland. I'll follow
you in a few minutes.”

“I'll wait for you,” said Ruth with firmness.

At that Diana rose, and in rising staggered. “Then we'll push on at
once,” she gasped, as if speech itself were an excruciating effort.

“But you are in no case to stand!” said Ruth. “Sit, Diana, sit.”

“Either you go on alone or I go with you, but go at once you must. At
any moment Mr. Wilding may go forth, and your chance is lost. I'll not
have Richard's blood upon my head.”

Ruth wrung her hands in her dismay, confronted by a parlous choice.
Consent to Diana's accompanying her in this condition she could not;
ride on alone to Mr. Wilding's house was hardly to be thought of, and
yet if she delayed she was endangering Richard's life. By the very
strength of her nature she was caught in the mesh of Diana's scheme.
She saw that her hesitation was unworthy. This was no ordinary cause, no
ordinary occasion. It was a time for heroic measures. She must ride on,
nor could she consent to take Diana.

And so in the end she went, having seen her cousin settled again in the
high chair, and took with her Diana's feeble assurances that she would
follow her in a few moments, as soon as her faintness passed.






