CHAPTER II. THE EPISTLES OF IGNATIUS--THE EPISTLE OF POLYCARP

Although, in reality, appertaining to a very much later period, we shall
here refer to the so-called "Epistles of Ignatius," and examine any
testimony which they afford regarding the date and authenticity of our
Gospels. There are in all fifteen epistles bearing the name of Ignatius.
Three of these, addressed to the Virgin Mary and the Apostle John 2,
exist only in a Latin version, and these, together with five others
directed to Mary of Cassobolita, to the Tarsians, to the Antiochans,
to Hero of Antioch, and to the Philippians, of which there are versions
both in Greek and Latin, are universally admitted to be spurious, and
may, so far as their contents are concerned, be at once dismissed from
all consideration.(1) They are not mentioned by Eusebius, nor does any
early writer refer to them. Of the remaining seven epistles, addressed
to the Ephesians, Magnesians, Trallians, Romans, Philadelphians,
Smyrnaeans, and to Polycarp, there are two distinct versions extant,
one long version, of which there are both Greek and Latin texts, and
another much shorter, and presenting considerable variations, of which
there are also both Greek and Latin texts. After a couple of centuries
of discussion, critics

{256}

almost without exception have finally agreed that the longer version
is nothing more than an interpolated version of the shorter and more
ancient form of the Epistles. The question regarding the authenticity
of the Ignatian Epistles, however, was re-opened and complicated by
the publication, in 1845, by Dr. Cureton, of a Syriac version of three
epistles only--to Polycarp, to the Ephesians, and to the Romans--in a
still shorter form, discovered amongst a large number of MSS. purchased
by Dr. Tattam from the monks of the Desert of Nitria. These three Syriac
epistles have been subjected to the severest scrutiny, and many of the
ablest critics have pronounced them to be the only authentic Epistles
of Ignatius, whilst others, who do not admit that even these are genuine
letters emanating from Ignatius, still prefer them to the version of
seven Greek epistles, and consider them the most ancient form of the
letters which we possess.(1) As early as the sixteenth century, however,
the strongest doubts were expressed regarding the authenticity of any of
the epistles ascribed to Ignatius. The Magdeburg

{257}

Centuriators first attacked them, and Calvin declared them to be
spurious,(1) an opinion fully shared by Dallaeus, and others; Chemnitz
regarded them with suspicion; and similar doubts, more or lass definite,
were expressed throughout the seventeenth century,(2) and onward to
comparatively recent times,(3) although the means of forming a judgment
were not then so complete as now. That the epistles were interpolated
there was no doubt. Fuller examination and more comprehensive knowledge
of the subject have confirmed earlier doubts, and a large mass of
critics either recognize that the authenticity of none of these epistles
can be established, or that they

{258}

can only be considered later and spurious compositions.(1)

Omitting for the present the so-called Epistle of Polycarp to the
Philippians, the earliest reference to any of these epistles, or to
Ignatius himself, is made by Irenaeus, who quotes a passage which is
found in the Epistle to the Romans (ch. iv.), without, however, any
mention of name,' introduced by the following words: "As a certain
man of ours said, being condemned to the wild beasts on account of his
testimony to God: 'I am the wheat of God, and by the teeth of beasts I
am ground, that I may be found pure

{259}

bread."(1) Origen likewise quotes two brief sentences which he refers to
Ignatius. The first is merely: "But my love is crucified,"(2) which is
likewise found in the Epistle to the Romans (ch. vii.); and the other
quoted as "out of one of the Epistles" of the martyr Ignatius: "From the
Prince of this world was concealed the virginity of Mary,"(3) which is
found in the Epistle to the Ephesians (ch. xix). Eusebius mentions seven
epistles,(4) and quotes one passage from the Epistle to the Romans (ch.
v.), and a few words from an apocryphal Gospel contained in the Epistle
to the Smyrnaeans (ch. iii.), the source of which he says that he does
not know, and he cites from Irenaeus the brief quotation given above, and
refers to the mention of the epistles in the letter of Polycarp which we
reserve. Elsewhere,(5) he further quotes a short sentence found in the
Epistle to the Ephesians (ch. xix.), part of which had previously been
cited by Origen. It will be observed that all these quotations, with the
exception of that from Irenaeus, are taken from the three Epistles which
exist in the Syriac translation, and they are found in that version; and
the first occasion on which any passage attributed to Ignatius is quoted
which is not in the Syriac version of the three Epistles occurs in
the second half of the fourth century, when Athanasius, in his Epistle
regarding the Synods of Ariminum and Selucia,(6) quotes a few words from
the Epistle to the Ephesians (ch. vii.); but although foreign to the
Syriac text, it is to be noted that the words are

{260}

at least from a form of one of the three epistles which exist in that
version.(1) It is a fact, therefore, that up to the second half of
the fourth century no quotation ascribed to Ignatius, except one by
Eusebius, exists, which is not found in the three short Syriac letters.

As we have already remarked, the Syriac version of the three epistles
is very much shorter than the shorter Greek version, the Epistle to the
Ephesians, for instance, being only about one-third of the length of the
Greek text. Those who still maintain the superior authenticity of the
Greek shorter version argue that the Syriac is an epitome of the Greek.
This does not, however, seem tenable when the matter is carefully
examined. Although so much is absent from the Syriac version, not only
is there no interruption of the sense and no obscurity or undue curtness
in the style, but the epistles read more consecutively, without faults
of construction or grammar, and passages which in the Greek text were
confused and almost unintelligible have become quite clear in the
Syriac. The interpolations of the text, in fact, had been so clumsily
made, that they had obscured the meaning, and their mere omission,
without any other alteration of grammatical construction, has restored
the epistles to clear and simple order.(2) It is, moreover, a remarkable
fact that the passages which, long before the discovery of the Syriac
epistles, were pointed out as chiefly determining that the epistles were
spurious, are not found in the Syriac version at all.3 Archbishop Usher,
who only admitted the authenticity of six epistles, showed that much
interpolation of these letters took place in the

{261}

sixth century,(1) but this very fact increases the probability of much
earlier interpolation also, at which the various existing versions
most clearly point. The interpolations can be explained upon the most
palpable dogmatic grounds, but not so the omissions upon the hypothesis
that the Syriac version is an abridgment made upon any distinct dogmatic
principle, for that which is allowed to remain renders the omissions
ineffectual for dogmatic reasons. There is no ground of interest upon
which the portions omitted and retained by the Syriac version can be
intelligently explained.(2) Finally, here, we may mention that the MSS.
of the three Syriac epistles are more ancient by some centuries than
those of any of the Greek versions of the Seven epistles.(3) The
strongest internal, as well as other evidence, into which space forbids
our going in detail, has led the majority of critics to recognize the
Syriac version as the most ancient form of the letters of Ignatius
extant, and this is admitted by many of those who nevertheless deny the
authenticity of any of the epistles.(4)

Seven epistles have been selected out of fifteen extant, all equally
purporting to be by Ignatius, simply because only that number was
mentioned by Eusebius, from whom for the first time, in the fourth
century,--except the general reference in the so-called Epistle of
Poly-carp, to which we shall presently refer,--we hear of them. Now
neither the silence of Eusebius regarding the eight epistles, nor his
mention of the seven, can have much weight in deciding the question of
their authenticity. The only point which is settled by the reference

{262}

of Eusebius is that, at the date at which he wrote, seven epistles were
known to him which were ascribed to Ignatius. He evidently knew little
or nothing regarding the man or the Epistles, beyond what he had learnt
from themselves,(1) and he mentions the martyr-journey to Rome as a mere
report: "It is said that he was conducted from Syria to Rome to be cast
to wild beasts on account of his testimony to Christ."(2) It would be
unreasonable to argue that no other epistles existed simply because
Eusebius did not mention them; and on the other hand it would be still
more unreasonable to affirm that the seven epistles are authentic merely
because Eusebius, in the fourth century,--that is to say, some two
centuries after they are supposed to have been written,--had met with
them. Does any one believe the letter of Jesus to Abgarus Prince of
Edessa to be genuine, because Eusebius inserts it in his history(3) as
an authentic document out of the public records of the city of Edessa \
There is, in fact, no evidence that the brief quotations of Irenaeus
and Origen are taken from either of the extant Greek versions of the
epistles; for, as we have mentioned, they exist in the Syriac epistles,
and there is nothing to show the original state of the letters from
which they were derived. Nothing is more certain than the fact that, if
any writer wished to circulate letters in the name of Ignatius, he
would insert such passages as were said to have been quoted from genuine
epistles of Ignatius, and supposing those quotations to be real, all
that could be said on finding such passages would be that at least so
much might be genuine.(4) It is a total

{263}

mistake to suppose that the seven epistles mentioned by Eusebius have
been transmitted to us in any special way. These epistles are mixed
up in the Medicean and corresponding ancient Latin MSS. with the
other eight epistles, universally pronounced to be spurious, without
distinction of any kind, and all have equal honour.(1) The recognition
of the number seven may, therefore, be ascribed simply to the reference
to them by Eusebius, and his silence regarding the rest.

What, then, is the position of the so-called Ignatian Epistles? Towards
the end of the second century, Irenaeus makes a very short quotation from
a source unnamed, which Eusebius, in the fourth century, finds in an
epistle attributed to Ignatius. Origen, in the third century, quotes a
very few words which he ascribes to Ignatius, although without definite
reference to any particular epistle; and, in the fourth century
Eusebius mentions seven epistles ascribed to Ignatius. There is no other
evidence. There are, however, fifteen epistles extant, all of which are
attributed to Ignatius, of all of which, with the exception of three
which are only known in a Latin version, we possess both Greek and Latin
versions. Of seven of these epistles--and they are those mentioned by
Eusebius--we have two Greek versions, one of which is very much shorter
than the other; and finally we now possess a Syriac version of three
epistles only(2) in a form still shorter than the shorter Greek version,
in which are found all the quotations of the Fathers, without exception,
up to the fourth century. Eight of the fifteen

     2  It is worthy of remark that at the end of the Syriac
     version the subscription is: "Here end the three Epistles of
     Ignatius, Bishop and Martyr;" cf. Cureton, The Ancient
     Syriac Version, &c, p. 25.

{264}

epistles are universally rejected as spurious. The longer Greek version
of the remaining seven epistles is almost unanimously condemned as
grossly interpolated; and the great majority of critics recognize that
the shorter Greek version is also much interpolated; whilst the Syriac
version, which so far as MSS. are concerned is by far the most ancient
text of any of the letters which we posses, reduces their number to
three, and their contents to a very small compass indeed. It is not
surprising that the vast majority of critics have expressed doubt more
or less strong regarding the authenticity of all of these epistles, and
that so large a number have repudiated them altogether. One thing is
quite evident,--that amidst such a mass of falsification, interpolation,
and fraud, the Ignatian Epistles cannot in any form be considered
evidence on any important point.(1)

We have not, however, finished. All of these epistles, including the
three of the Syriac recension, profess to have been written by Ignatius
during his journey from Antioch to Rome, in the custody of Roman
soldiers, in order to be exposed to wild beasts, the form of martyrdom
to which he had been condemned. The writer describes the circumstances
of his journey as follows: "From Syria even unto Rome I fight with wild
beasts, by sea and by land, by night and day; being bound amongst ten
leopards, which are the band of soldiers: who even receiving benefits
become worse."(2) Now if this account be in the least degree true, how
is it possible to suppose that the martyr could have found means to
write

{265}

so many long epistles, entering minutely into dogmatic teaching,
and expressing the most deliberate and advanced views regarding
ecclesiastical government? Indeed it may be asked why Ignatius should
have considered it necessary in such a journey, even if the possibility
be for a moment conceded, to address such epistles to communities and
individuals to whom, by the showing of the letters themselves, he had
just had opportunities of addressing his counsels in person.(1) The
epistles themselves bear none of the marks of composition under such
circumstances, and it is impossible to suppose that soldiers such as
the quotation above describes would allow a prisoner, condemned to wild
beasts for professing Christianity, deliberately to write long epistles
at every stage of his journey, promulgating the very doctrines for which
he was condemned. And not only this, but on his way to martyrdom, he
has, according to the epistles,(2) perfect freedom to see his friends.
He receives the bishops, deacons, and members of various Christian
communities, who come with greetings to him, and devoted followers
accompany him on his journey. All this without hindrance from the "ten
leopards," of whose cruelty he complains, and without persecution or
harm to those who so openly declare themselves his friends and fellow
believers. The whole story is absolutely incredible.(3) This conclusion,
irresistible in itself, is, however, confirmed by facte arrived at from
a totally different point of view.

{266}

It has been demonstrated that, most probably, Ignatius was not sent to
Rome at all, but suffered martyrdom in Antioch itself(l) on the 20th
December, a.d. 115,(2) when he was condemned to be cast to wild beasts
in the amphitheatre, in consequence of the fanatical excitement produced
by the earthquake which took place on the 13th of that month.(3) There
are no less than three martyrologies of Ignatius,(4) giving an
account of the martyr's journey from Antioch to Rome, but they are all
recognised to be mere idle legends, of whose existence we do not hear
till a very late period.(5) In fact the whole of the Ignatian literature
is a mass of falsification and fraud.

We might well spare our readers the trouble of examining further the
contents of the epistles of pseudo-Ignatius, for it is manifest that
they cannot afford testimony

{267}

of any value on the subject of our inquiry. We shall, however, briefly
point out all the passages contained in the seven Greek Epistles which
have any bearing upon our synoptic Gospels, in order that their exact
position may be more fully appreciated. Teschendorf(1) refers to a
passage in the Epistle to the Romans, c. vi., as a verbal quotation of
Matthew xvi. 26, but he neither gives the context nor states the facts
of the case. The passage reads as follows: "The pleasures of the world
shall profit me nothing, nor the kingdoms of this time; it is better for
me to die for Jesus Christ, than to reign over the ends of the earth.
For what is a man profited if he gain the whole world, but lose his
soul."(2) Now this quotation not only is not found in the Syriac version
of the Epistle, but it is also omitted from the ancient Latin version,
and is absent from the passage in the work of Timotheus of Alexandria
against the Council of Chalcedon, and from other authorities. It
is evidently a later addition, and is recognized as such by most
critics.(3) It was probably a gloss, which subsequently was inserted in
the text. Of these facts, however, Tischendorf does not say a word.(4)

The next passage to which he refers is in the Epistle to the Smyrnaeans,
c. i., where the writer says of Jesus: "He was baptized by John in order
that all righteousness

{268}

might be fulfilled by Him,"(1)--which Teschendorf considers a
reminiscence of Matthew iii. 15, "For thus it becometh us to fulfil all
righteousness."(2) The phrase, besides being no quotation, has again all
the appearance of being an addition; and when in Ch. iii. of the same
Epistle we find a palpable quotation from an apocryphal Gospel, which
Jerome states to be the "Gospel according to the Hebrews," to which
we shall presently refer, a Gospel which we know to have contained the
baptism of Jesus by John, it is not possible, even if the Epistle were
genuine, which it is not, to base any such conclusion upon these words.
There is not only the alternative of tradition, but the use of the same
apocryphal Gospel, elsewhere quoted in the Epistle, as the source of
the reminiscence. Tischendorf does not point out any more supposed
references to our synoptic Gospels, but we proceed to notice all the
other passages which have been indicated by others. In the Epistle to
Polycarp, c. ii., the following sentence occurs: "Be thou wise as a
serpent in everything, and harmless as the dove." This is, of course,
compared with Matth. x. 16, "Be ye, therefore, wise as serpents and
innocent as doves." The Greek of both reads as follows: [--Greek--]

In the Syriac version, the passage reads: "Be thou wise as the serpent
in everything, and harmless as to those things which are requisite as
the dove."(4) It is unnecessary

{269}

to add that no source is indicated for the reminiscence. Ewald assigns
this part of our first Gospel originally to the Spruchsammlung,(1) and
even apart from the variations presented in the Epistle there is nothing
to warrant exclusive selection of our first Gospel as the source of the
saying. The remaining passages we subjoin in parallel columns.

None of these passages are quotations, and they generally present such
marked linguistic variations from the parallel

{270}

passages in our first Gospel, that there is not the slightest ground
for specially referring them to it. The last words cited are introduced
without any appropriate context. In no case are the expressions
indicated as quotations from, or references to, any particular source.
They may either be traditional, or reminiscences of some of the numerous
Gospels current in the early Church, such as the Gospel according to the
Hebrews. That the writer made use of one of these cannot be doubted. In
the Epistle to the Smyrnaeans, c. iii., there occurs a quotation from an
apocryphal Gospel to which we have already, in passing, referred: "For I
know that also after his resurrection he was in the flesh, and I believe
he is so now. And when he came to those who were with Peter, he said to
them: Lay hold, handle me, and see that I am not an incorporeal spirit,
[--Greek--]. And immediately they touched him and believed, being convinced
by his flesh and spirit." Eusebius, who quotes this passage, says that
he does not know whence it is taken.(2) Origen, however, quotes it from
a work well known in the early Church, called "The Doctrine of Peter,"
[--Greek--];(3) and Jerome found it in the "Gospel according to the
Hebrews," in use among the Nazarenes,(4) which he translated, as we
shall hereafter sec. It was, no doubt, in both of those works. The
narrative, Luke xxiv. 39 f., being neglected, and an apocryphal Gospel
used here, the inevitable inference is clear and very suggestive. As it
is certain that this quotation was taken from a source

{271}

different from our Gospels, there is reason to suppose that the other
passages which we have cited are reminiscences of the same work. The
passage on the three mysteries in the Epistle to the Ephesians, c. xix.,
is evidently another quotation from an uncanonical source.(1)

We must, however, again point out that, with the single exception of
the short passage in the Epistle to Polycarp, c. ii., which is not a
quotation, differs from the reading in Matthew, and may well be from
any other source, none of these supposed reminiscences of our synoptic
Gospels are found in the Syriac version of the three epistles. The
evidential value of the seven Greek epistles is clearly stated by
an English historian and divine: "My conclusion is, that I should be
unwilling to claim historical authority for any passage not contained in
Dr. Cureton's Syriac reprint."(3) We must, however, go much further,
and assert that none of the Epistles have any value as evidence for
an earlier period than the end of the second or beginning of the third
century, if indeed they possess any value at all. The whole of the
literature ascribed to Ignatius is, in fact, such a tissue of fraud and
imposture, and the successive versions exhibit such undeniable marks
of the grossest interpolation, that even if any small original element
exist referrible to Ignatius, it is impossible to define it, or to
distinguish with the slightest degree of accuracy between what is
authentic and what is spurious. The Epistles do not, however, in any
case afford evidence even of the existence of our synoptic Gospels.

{272}

2.

We have hitherto deferred all consideration of the so-called Epistle of
Polycarp to the Philippians, from the fact that, instead of proving
the existence of the Epistles of Ignatius, with which it is intimately
associated, it is itself discredited in proportion as they are shown to
be in authentic. We have just seen that the martyr-journey of Ignatius
to Rome is, for cogent reasons, declared to be wholly fabulous, and the
epistles purporting to be written during that journey must be held to
be spurious. The Epistle of Polycarp, however, not only refers to the
martyr-journey (c. ix.), but to the Ignatian Epistles which are
inauthentic (c. xiii.), and the manifest inference is that it also is
spurious.

Polycarp, who is said by Irenaeus(1) to have been in his youth a disciple
of the Apostle John, became Bishop of Smyrna, and suffered martyrdom at
a very advanced age.(2) On the authority of Eusebius and Jerome, it
has hitherto been generally believed that his death took place in a.d.
166-167. In the account of his martyrdom, which we possess in the shape
of a letter from the Church of Smyrna, purporting to have been written
by eye-witnesses, which must be pronounced spurious, Polycarp is said to
have died under the Proconsul Statius Quadratus.(3) If this statement
be correct, the date hitherto received can no longer be maintained,
for recent investigations have determined that Statius Quadratus was
proconsul in a.d. 154-5 or 155-6.(4) Some critics,

{273}

who affirm the authenticity of the Epistle attributed to Polycarp, date
the Epistle before a.d. 120,(1) but the preponderance of opinion assigns
it to a much later period.(2) Doubts of its authenticity, and of the
integrity of the text, were very early expressed,(3) and the close
scrutiny to which later and more competent criticism has subjected it,
has led very many to the conclusion that the Epistle is either largely
interpolated,(4) or altogether spurious.(5) The principal argument in
favour

{274}

of its authenticity is the fact that the Epistle is mentioned by
Irenaeus,(1) who in his extreme youth was acquainted with Polycarp.(2)
We have no very precise information regarding the age of Irenaeus, but
Jerome states that he flourished under Commodus (180-192), and we may,
as a favourable conjecture, suppose that he was then about 35-37. In
that case his birth must be dated about a.d. 145. There is reason to
believe that he fell a victim to persecution under Septimius Severus,
and it is only doubtful whether he suffered during the first outbreak
in a.d. 202, or later. According to this calculation, the martyrdom of
Polycarp, in a.d. 155-156, took place when he was ten or eleven years
of age. Even if a further concession be made in regard to his age, it is
evident that the intercourse of Irenaeus with the Bishop of Smyrna
must have been confined to his very earliest years,(3) a fact which is
confirmed by the almost total absence of any record in his writings of
the communications of Polycarp. This certainly does not entitle Irenaeus
to speak more authoritatively of an epistle ascribed to Polycarp, than
any one else of his day.(4)

In the Epistle itself, there are several anachronisms. In ch. ix. the
blessed Ignatius" is referred to as already dead, and he is held up with
Zosimus and Rufus, and also with Paul and the rest of the Apostles, as
examples of patience: men who have not run in vain, but are with the
Lord; but in ch. xiii. he is spoken of as living, and information is
requested regarding him,

{275}

"and those who are with him."(1) Yet, although thus spoken of as alive,
the writer already knows of his Epistles, and refers, in the plural, to
those written by him "to us, and all the rest which we have by us."(2)
The reference here, it will be observed, is not only to the Epistles to
the Smyrnaeans, and to Polycarp himself, but to other spurious epistles
which are not included in the Syriac version. Dallseus(3) pointed out
long ago, that ch. xiii. abruptly interrupts the conclusion of the
Epistle, and most critics, including those who assert the authenticity
of the rest of the Epistle, reject it at least, although many of these
likewise repudiate ch. ix. as interpolated.(4) Others, however, consider
that the latter chapter is quite consistent with the later date, which,
according to internal evidence, must be assigned to the Epistle. The
writer vehemently denounces,(5) as already widely spread, the Gnostic
heresy and other forms of false doctrine which did not exist until
the time of Marcion, to whom and to whose followers he refers in
unmistakable terms. An expression is used in ch. vii. in speaking of
these heretics, which Polycarp is reported by Irenseus to have actually
applied to Marcion in person, during his visit to Home. He is said to
have called Marcion the "first-born of Satan," [--Greek--](6) and the same
term

{276}

is employed in this epistle with regard to every one who holds such
false doctrines. The development of these heresies, therefore, implies
a date for the composition of the Epistle, at earliest, after the
middle of the second century, a date which is further confirmed by other
circumstances.(1) The writer of such a letter must have held a position
in the Church, to which Polycarp could only have attained in the
latter part of his life, when he was deputed to Rome for the Paschal
discussion, and the Epistle depicts the developed ecclesiastical
organization of a later time.(2) The earlier date which has now been
adopted for the martyrdom of Polycarp, by limiting the period during
which it is possible that he himself could have written any portion
of it, only renders the inauthenticity of the Epistle more apparent.
Hilgenfeld has pointed out, as another indication of the same date, the
injunction "Pray for the kings" (Orate pro regibus), which, in 1 Peter
ii. 17, is "Honour the king" [--Greek--], which, he argues, accords with
the period after Antoninus Pius had elevated Marcus Aurelius

{277}

to joint sovereignty (a.d. 147), or better still, with that in which
Marcus Aurelius appointed Lucius Verus his colleague, a.d. 161, for
to rulers outside of the Roman empire there can be no reference. If
authentic, however, the Epistle must have been written, at latest,
shortly after the martyrdom of Ignatius in a.d. 115, but, as we have
seen, there are strong internal characteristics excluding such a
supposition. The reference to the martyr-journey of Ignatius and to
the epistles falsely ascribed to him, is alone sufficient to betray the
spurious nature of the composition, and to class the Epistle with the
rest of the pseudo-Ignatian literature.

We shall now examine all the passages in this epistle which are pointed
out as indicating any acquaintance with our synoptic Gospels.(1) The
first occurs in ch. ii., and we subjoin it in contrast with the nearest
parallel passages of the Gospels, but although we break it up into
paragraphs, it will, of course, be understood that the quotation is
continuous in the Epistle.

[---Greek---]

{278}

It will be remembered that an almost similar direct quotation of words
of Jesus occurs in the so-called Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians,
c. xiii., which we have already examined.(1) There, the passage is
introduced by the same words, and in the midst of brief phrases which
have parallels in our Gospel there occurs in both Epistles the same
expression, "Be pitiful that ye may be pitied," which is not found in
any of our Gospels. In order to find any parallels for the quotation,
upon the hypothesis of a combination of texts, we have to add together
portions of the following verses in the following order: Matthew vii. 1,
vi. 14 (although, with complete linguistic variations, the sense of
Luke vi. 37 is much closer), v. 7, vii. 2, v. 3, v. 10. Such fragmentary
compilation is in itself scarcely conceivable in an epistle of this
kind, but when in the midst we find a passage foreign to our Gospels,
but which occurs in another work in connection with so similar a
quotation, it is reasonable to conclude that the whole is derived from
tradition or from a Gospel different from ours.(2) In no case can such

{279}

a passage be considered material evidence of the existence of any one of
our Gospels.

Another expression which is pointed out occurs in ch. vii., "beseeching
in our prayers the all-searching God not to lead us into temptation, as
the Lord said: The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak."(1)
This is compared with the phrase in "the Lord's Prayer" (Matthew vi.
13), or the passage (xxvi. 41): "Watch and pray that ye enter not into
temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak."(2) The
second Gospel, however, equally has the phrase (xiv. 38), and shows how
unreasonable it is to limit these historical sayings to a single Gospel.
The next passage is of a similar nature (c. vi.): "If, therefore,
we pray the Lord that he may forgive us, we ought also ourselves
to forgive."(3) The thought but not the language of this passage
corresponds with Matthew vi. 12--14, but equally so with Luke xi. 4. Now
we must repeat that all such sayings of Jesus were the common property
of the early Christians--were no doubt orally current amongst them, and
still more certainly were recorded by many of the numerous Gospels then
in circulation, as they are by several of our own. In no case is there
any written source indicated from which these passages are derived; they
are simply quoted as words of Jesus, and being all connected either with
the "Sermon on the Mount" or the "Lord's Prayer," the two portions of
the teaching of Jesus which were most

{280}

popular, widely known, and characteristic, there can be no doubt that
they were familiar throughout the whole of the early Church, and must
have formed a part of most or all of the many collections of the words
of the Master. To limit them to our actual Gospels, which alone
survive, would be quite unwarrantable, and no reference to them, without
specification of the source, can be received as evidence even of the
existence of our Synoptics. We may here briefly illustrate the point
from the Synoptics themselves. Assuming the parable of the Sower to be
a genuine example of the teaching of Jesus, as there is every reason
to believe, it may with certainty be asserted that it must have been
included in many of the records circulating among early Christians, to
which reference is made in the prologue to the third Gospel. It would
not be permissible to affirm that no part of that parable could
be referred to by an early writer without that reference being an
indication of acquaintance with our synoptic Gospels. The parable is
reported in closely similar words in each of those three Gospels,(1) and
it may have been, and probably was, recorded similarly in a dozen more.
Confining ourselves, however, for a moment to the three Synoptics: what
could a general allusion to the parable of the Sower prove regarding
their existence and use, no mention of a particular source being made?
Would it prove that all the three were extant, and that the writer knew
them all, for each of them containing the parable would possess an equal
claim to the reference? Could it with any reason be affirmed that he
was acquainted with Matthew and not with Mark? or with Mark and not with
Matthew and Luke? or with the third Gospel and

{281}

not with either of the other two? The case is the very same if we extend
the illustration, and along with the Synoptics include the numerous
other records of the early Church. The anonymous quotation of historical
expressions of Jesus cannot prove the existence of one special document
among many to which we may choose to trace it. This is more especially
to be insisted on from the fact, that hitherto we have not met with
any mention of any one of our Gospels, and have no right even to assume
their existence from any evidence which has been furnished.




