CHAPTER XI

JOSEPH IN MAYFAIR


There was a dead silence in the great library. The morning sunshine
poured into it, touching and refining the rich decorations with a glory
which was greater than they. But no one spoke a word. It was a dramatic
moment.

Then Mary spoke, and there was a rose-pink flush upon her cheeks.

"Oh, auntie," she said, "I am so very sorry! But I asked Sir Thomas
Ducaine to come here and see me this morning. I meant to have told you.
But when you and uncle sent for me here I forgot all about it."

"What does it matter if you did forget, dear?" she said to Mary. "Sir
Thomas, how do you do? So glad to see you!"

"How do, Ducaine?" said Sir Augustus. "Sorry I can't get up; but this
confounded gout still hangs round me. Can't quite get rid of it."

Mary saw, with a strange throb at her heart, that Ducaine's face had
changed in some subtle way. She had not seen him for a fortnight or
more, and she noticed the difference immediately, though she could
hardly have defined it. But what was Joseph doing here? How came the
Teacher to be with the man who loved her? Even as she asked herself the
question she knew the answer. What did _details_ matter, after all? The
Holy Ghost was leading and guiding....

"I want you to know my friend Joseph, Lady Kirwan," Sir Thomas said.
"Allow me to introduce him to you. Joseph--Lady Kirwan."

"How do you do, Mr. Joseph?" she answered. "This is quite an unexpected
pleasure. Of course, we have all been hearing so much about you in the
papers lately; and, of course, you were with my poor dear nephew when he
died."

She gave him her hand with great graciousness, marvelling at the tall,
erect figure, the serene power and beauty of the face, the wonderful
magnetic eyes.

Joseph bowed.

"Thank you very much, Lady Kirwan," he said in the deep, musical voice
which could rise to such heights of passion and pleading, or remain as
now, so perfectly modulated and strong. "I did not know Lluellyn for
very long, but we were like brothers for a time, and he allowed me to
see deep into his heart. I have never known a better man. I shall never
meet with anyone so good again, or so specially gifted and favored by
God."

Lady Kirwan was unable to repress a slight start of surprise. The man
before her spoke and moved like an easy and polished gentleman. There
was no possible doubt about it. And she had expected something so very
different.

"Present me to your friend, Ducaine," Sir Augustus said from his
arm-chair; and the Teacher shook hands with the great banker, and then
at his invitation sat down beside him.

"Well, sir," the baronet said, "you have been making a pretty big stir
in London, it seems. The most talked-of person in England at this
moment, I suppose."

Joseph smiled.

"Oh, that was inevitable!" he said. "I am sorry in a way, because I
intensely dislike publicity that is merely curiosity. But I expect our
backs are broad enough to bear it. And if only I can get people to
listen, that is the great thing, after all."

"But about last night," Sir Augustus said. "Aren't you afraid of being
arrested for making a disturbance? I've no doubt the play went a little
too far, even for the Frivolity. But such very drastic methods, you
know--well really, sir, if this sort of thing is allowed to continue--I
mean no unkindness, believe me--society would be quite upset."

"I hope to upset it, Sir Augustus," Joseph answered with an absolute
simplicity that robbed his words of either ostentation or offence. "No;
they will take no action against me for what I did--of that I am quite
certain."

"I by no means share your certainty," Sir Augustus answered. "Though I
am sure, for your sake, and for the sake of my niece, who, I gather,
somewhat foolishly accompanied you, I hope you're right. But I am a man
of the world, you know, while you--if you will pardon me for saying
so--hardly seem to be that."

"I was at the theatre last night," Sir Thomas Ducaine broke in, "and I'm
quite certain they will do nothing, Sir Augustus. They wouldn't dare. I
saw everything that went on. You may take it from me that it will be all
right."

"Well, you ought to know, my dear fellow," the banker said, obviously
relieved at the words of the younger man. "And I do hope,
Mr.--er--Joseph, that you don't mean to visit any more theatres, except
in a purely private capacity."

"I don't think we are likely to visit any more theatres," Ducaine said
quietly.

Everyone looked up quickly at the word "we". There was a mute
interrogation upon every face.

Then there was a silence. Sir Augustus Kirwan was thinking rapidly and
arriving at a decision. He had made his vast fortune, had gained his
reputation and influence, by just this power of rapid, decisive thought,
mingled with a shrewd intuition which all his life had served him well.

He saw at once that this man Joseph was no ordinary person. He had
pictured him as some noisy, eloquent, and sincere Welsh peasant. He
found him a gentleman in manner, and possessed of a personality so
remarkable, a latent force so unmistakable, that in any assembly,
wherever he went, he would be like a sword among kindling wood.

The newspapers of that morning had exaggerated nothing at all.

And then the man was obviously closely intimate with Sir Thomas Ducaine.
Sir Augustus made up his mind.

"I am going to do a thing very much out of the ordinary," he said. "But
this is not an ordinary occasion, however much some of us here would
like it to be so. I am going to speak out, and I am going to ask some
questions. I think you will admit that I have a right to ask them. My
nephew by marriage, Lluellyn Lys, is dead. Lady Kirwan and I stand _in
loco parentis_ to our dear niece here, Mary Lys. She is, of course, of
age, and legally her own mistress. But there are moral obligations which
are stronger than legal ones. Very well, then. Mary, my dear girl, I
want you to tell me why you asked Sir Thomas Ducaine to come here this
morning. And did you ask Mr. Joseph here to accompany him?"

"I asked Sir Thomas to come, uncle," she said, "because I wanted to
persuade him to meet Joseph. I wanted him to hear the truth as I have
heard it. I wanted him to believe in Christ, and follow Him with us. I
did not ask Joseph to come here. I did not know that he had ever met Sir
Thomas."

Then Ducaine broke in.

"I think, Sir Augustus," he said, "that here I must make an explanation.
Mary and I are old friends. We have known each other for a long time."

He paused, with an evident difficulty in continuing, nor did he see the
swift glance which passed between Lady Kirwan and her husband--a glance
full of surprise, meaning, and satisfaction, which said as plainly as
possible, "this quite alters the position of affairs!"

Ducaine continued:--

"I hate speaking about it," he said, "but you have a right to know. I
love her better than anything else in the world, and over and over
again I have asked her to be my wife. She has always refused me. I have
understood that such a great joy might be possible for me if I could
believe as Mary believes. But I couldn't do so. I could not believe in
Christ, and of course I could not pretend to accept Christianity in its
full sense unless I was really convinced. It was no use trying to trick
myself into a state of mind which my conscience would tell me was
insincere. There the matter has rested until last night. Last night I
was at the theatre, and saw Mary with Joseph. Afterwards, when I came
out, I tried to find them everywhere, but they had vanished. I was in a
terrible state of mind when I met, by chance, a friend of Joseph's--a
Mr. Hampson--who came home to supper with me. Late that same evening I
met, by a coincidence"--Joseph shook his head with a smile, but Ducaine
did not notice him--"by a coincidence, I met Joseph. We have talked all
night long, and I have come to this conclusion."

He paused, and, in the sunlight, Mary could see that little beads of
perspiration stood out upon his brow. There was a dead silence in the
room now, every ear was strained--one heart, at least, was beating
rapidly.

"Yes?" Sir Augustus said.

"That I am going to throw in my lot with Joseph and his campaign," Sir
Thomas replied. "My money, and such influence as I have, will be at his
disposal. Now, I do this without any thought of what I hope to gain by
it--the priceless treasure I hope to gain." He looked at Mary for the
first time since he had begun to speak. "I am not yet convinced of the
truth of Christianity. I do not, even after this momentous decision
which I have taken, believe in Christ. But I want to believe, for the
truth's own sake. One way or another the next few months will settle the
question for me, and so I am going with Joseph."

Sir Augustus had listened to the young man with tightly shut lips.
Nothing in his face showed what he thought.

Suddenly he turned to Joseph.

"Well, sir," he said, not without a kindly irony in his voice, "you may
be quite sure that London will listen to you now. With Sir Thomas
Ducaine's money and influence behind you, the path is smooth."

"It is God's will--blessed be His name!" Joseph answered quietly.

His voice was so humble and sincere, so full of gratitude and fervor,
that even in the mind of the hard-headed man of the world no further
doubt could possibly remain.

"Be that as it may," Sir Augustus said, after a pause. "I suppose you
have some sort of a definite programme, sir?"

The grave answer rang like a bell in the room:--

"To succor, help, and comfort all that are in danger, necessity, and
tribulation. To strengthen such as do stand; to comfort and help the
weak-hearted; to raise up them that fall; to rebuke those that do evil
in the sight of the Lord, and finally to beat down Satan under our
feet."

Once more there was a silence.

"And you, Mary?" Sir Augustus asked suddenly.

"I mean to give my humble aid to this great work," Mary answered slowly.
"Oh, don't oppose me, uncle--don't forbid me! It would make me so
unhappy to do anything that you did not wish. But Jesus calls me--He
calls all of us--His voice is ever in my ears."

"I propose," Sir Augustus said, at length, "that you all go into another
room and leave me here with my wife. I should like to discuss this with
her for a few minutes."

When the two elder people were alone, their conference was brief and to
the point.

"Of course, we shall withdraw all opposition," said Sir Augustus the
worldly. "The thing has quite changed its aspect. This Joseph fellow is,
of course, as mad as a hatter. But he is obviously a gentleman, and, at
the same time, quite sincere--another Lluellyn, in fact, though with a
good deal more in him. Ducaine's accession to the movement makes all the
difference. Joseph will become a fashionable fad, and all sorts of
people will join him in search of a new sensation. I'm quite looking
forward to it. London will be more amusing than it has been for years.
Then it will all die a natural death, this Joseph will disappear, and
Mary will marry Tom Ducaine, the biggest catch in London."

"It does seem as if Providence was in it, after all," said Lady Kirwan
piously.

"No doubt, no doubt!" the banker answered jovially. "Just make the girl
promise to make this house her home--she shall have perfect freedom to
go and come as she pleases, of course--and everything will come right."

They had settled it to their mutual satisfaction, and were about to send
for Mary, when the butler entered the library and announced that the
Reverend Mr. Persse had called and asked for her ladyship.

Lady Kirwan was about to say that she was engaged, and could not see the
clergyman, when Sir Augustus interposed. "I think I should see Mr.
Persse, dear," he said. And then, when the man had gone: "We'll
introduce him to this Joseph. It will be most amusing, and I want a
little amusement, after being tied by the leg like this for nearly a
fortnight. And besides, that humbug Persse will go and tell everyone in
Mayfair, and it will give the whole thing a _cachet_ and a send-off!
Don't say anything--leave it all to me."

Sir Augustus did not like The Hon. Mr. Persse, the fashionable clergyman
of Mayfair, and it was with a somewhat sardonic smile that he welcomed
him a moment afterwards.

The vicar of St. Elwyn's was a tall, clean-shaven priest, who would have
been pompous had he not been so suave. His face was a smooth
cream-color, his eyes ingratiating and perhaps a little furtive, while
the mouth was mobile and clever. He occupied a somewhat peculiar
position among the London clergy. He was an advanced Ritualist,
inclining to many ceremonies that were purely Roman and Continental.
But he had very little of the ascetic about him, and was as far removed
from the patient, self-denying Anglican clergy of the slum districts in
the East End, as four pounds of butter is from four o'clock. St. Elwyn's
was one of the "smartest" congregations in London. The costly splendor
of its ceremony, the perfection with which everything was done,
attracted pleasure-loving people, who would go anywhere for a thrill
that would act as the blow of a whip to jaded and enervated lives.

Mr. Persse "catered"--the word exactly describes his methods--for
precisely that class of people whom he was so successful in attracting.

"How do you do, Lady Kirwan?" he said, in a pleasant and gentlemanly
voice. "Ah, Sir Augustus, I hope you are better. It is a trying time of
the year. I have called this morning on a somewhat singular errand. I
was told, I must not say by whom, that he actually saw your niece, Miss
Lys, in the theatre last night--you have read the papers this
morning--yes?--in company with this extraordinary mountebank of whom
every one is talking. Of course I denied it indignantly. I have met Miss
Lys at your house, and I knew such a thing to be impossible. But my
informant is, I am sorry to say, a little prone to gossip and
tittle-tattle, and I thought, in justice to you that if I were armed
with an authoritative denial, I should be able to nip all such foolish
gossip in the bud, before it has time to spread. You know how people
talk, dear Lady Kirwan."

Lady Kirwan certainly knew--and so did Mr. Persse. He was the hero of
many afternoon tea-tables, and an active disseminator of gossip.

"My dear Mr. Persse," Sir Augustus said somewhat emphatically, "allow me
to tell you that you have been _quite_ mistaken in your view of the new
movement. The man whom the papers call Joseph is not at all what you
think. Sir Thomas Ducaine, for example, is hand and glove with him. I
must really correct your ideas on the point. If irregular, perhaps, the
mission will be most influential."

"Oh, ah! I had no idea," said Mr. Persse, with remarkable mental
agility. "Dear me, is that so, Sir Augustus? Anything that makes for
good, of course, must be welcomed by all of us. I myself--"

"I will introduce you to Joseph," Sir Augustus interrupted, with intense
internal enjoyment. "He happens to be in the house at this moment."

That afternoon all the evening papers contained an announcement that
Joseph, the new evangelist, would preach at St. Elwyn's, Mayfair, after
evening service on the morrow--which was Sunday.

What had happened was this:

Joseph had been duly introduced to Father Persse. The latter, in whom
the instincts of the theatrical _entrepreneur_ were very largely
developed, saw his chance at once. Mayfair would have a sensation such
as it had never enjoyed before.

Joseph had promised to preach without any more words than a simple
assent. That there would probably be trouble with the bishop Mr. Persse
knew very well. But he was already out of favor in Episcopal quarters,
and could hope for nothing in that direction. At the worst, an apology
and a promise not to repeat the offence of asking a layman, who was
unlicensed by the bishop, to preach in St. Elwyn's, would make
everything right. He had made the actual request to Joseph privately,
asking leave to have a few moments' conversation alone with him.

After obtaining the promise he went back to the library, where Mary and
Sir Thomas Ducaine had returned, and announced his success.

But when they went to look for the Teacher he had disappeared. No one
knew where he had gone, and neither Mary nor any of the others saw him
again that day.

The West End of London waited with considerable excitement for what
Sunday would bring forth.




