CHAPTER XXIV

SUPREME MOMENTS


The dawn came.

The sun rose over the still, grey sea, and the first rays which flashed
out over the brim of the world shone in through the open window of the
little bedroom.

It was a simple cottage room. The walls were whitewashed, the
appointments were primitive, and the fresh light of morning fell upon
the little truckle-bed in which a young man lay sleeping.

One arm rested behind his head, another was flung carelessly over the
counterpane. The sun touched a strong, clean-shaven face, a face
clear-cut as a cameo, with resolution in every line, and with a curious
happiness lying upon it, even as the sunlight touched it.

Thomas Ducaine was sleeping in the little cottage room of the Welsh
village, where he had come for the great day of his life.

As the sun touched the young and noble face, the head moved a little,
and the firm mouth parted in a happy smile. As they will in dreams,
towards the end of both sleep and dreaming, the events of the last day
or two were summing themselves up in the sub-conscious brain, just
before consciousness itself was about to return, and the eyes open upon
the happy day.

Over the sea the sun rose, the sea-birds winged above the smooth water
with shrill, joyous voices, the little ozone-laden breeze eddied upon
the fore-shore, and found its way into the room of the sleeping man.

Then, as day began to move and stir, and all the happy world of Wales
prepared to greet it, Sir Thomas Ducaine opened his eyes and awoke.

For a moment or two he lay looking round him with eyes which still held
part of the deep mystery of sleep, and then at last everything came back
to him. He sat up in the bed, the color mounted to his cheeks, and as he
turned his face towards the window and saw the brilliant but still
sleeping glory of the early-rising sun and quiet sea, he buried his face
in his hands and prayed.

For this was the morning of his life, the morning of all mornings; there
would never be another morning like this.

A week ago Joseph had come to him in the night. Pale, wan, and wearied,
yet still with the inextinguishable fires of the Spirit shining through
his eyes, informing all his movements and words, Joseph had come to him
with a solemn message.

The Master had told him that, despite all that had happened, although to
the world of society and convention he and Mary were still in the depths
of mourning, it was necessary that they should put all these material
and social considerations on one side, and that their love should be
sealed and signed by the blessing of the Church--that the time of the
singing of the birds had come, that wedlock awaited them.

And so, without further questioning, Thomas and Mary obeyed the voice of
the man who had had so stupendous an influence upon their lives, and
gave the direction of their actions into his keeping. Both of them were
certain that what their beloved Teacher ordained for them was just and
right. Nay, more than that, they knew that the words of Joseph, which
ordered their doings, were more than the words of a mere man; that, as
always, the Holy Spirit informed them.

The sun poured into the humble room, filling it with amber light and the
fresh breeze of the dawn.

Thomas Ducaine leapt from his bed, and went to the low window. Leaning
his arms upon the sill, he breathed in the gracious, welcoming air, and
looked out over the ocean to the far horizon, with eyes that were dim
with happy gratitude and gracious tears.

Yes, this, indeed, was the day of days. The morning of all mornings had
come!

Leaning out of the window, he saw the curve of little whitewashed houses
which fringed the bay. The fishers' boats rocked at anchor beyond the
granite mole, and far at the end of the village his eyes fell upon
another whitewashed cottage. As he saw it once more, he placed his hands
before his face and sent up a deep and fervent petition to the Almighty
that he might indeed be worthy of the precious and saintly maiden whom
he knew was sleeping there in her sweet innocence.

This was the morning of mornings!

When the sun had risen higher in the heavens, he would walk to the
little granite-walled, slate-roofed church. Mary would meet him there,
and Joseph and the brethren who had accompanied the Teacher from London
back to their old beloved home. And there, without pomp or ceremony,
noise of publicity, or the rout and stir of a great company, he would
place his hand in the hand of the girl he loved, and the old village
priest would make them one for ever in this world and the next, and
afterwards give them the Body and Blood of Our Lord.

Behind the cottages the great mountains towered up into the sky. One
purple peak, still covered at the summit by a white curtain of cloud,
was the mountain where Lluellyn Lys, the brother of Mary, lay in sleep.

Thomas could see the mountain from the cottage, and as his eyes traveled
up the green and purple sides to the mysterious cap which hid the top,
he remembered all that he had heard about it, and looked upward with an
added interest and awe.

For this was the mountain upon which Joseph had first met the mysterious
recluse of the hills who had changed him from what he had been to what
he was. This was the modern Sinai, where the Master had communed with
God. Here he had gathered together his disciples, had preached to them
with the voice which the Holy Spirit had given him, and blessed them,
and led them to the conquest of London, to the Cross.

Yes, it was there, on those seemingly inaccessible heights, that the
great drama of Joseph's life had begun, and it was there that the drama
of his life--the life of Thomas Ducaine--was to receive its seal and
setting.

After the marriage and the simple feast, which was to be held in the
village, they were all to climb the heights, and there, up in the
clouds, Joseph was to bless them and give them, so it was said,
whispered, and understood, a special message.

The bridegroom left the window, knelt down at his bedside, and prayed.
This complex, young, modern gentleman--a product of every influence
which makes for subtlety and decadence of brain and body--knelt down and
said his prayers with the simplicity of a child. Despite his vast
wealth, his upbringing as a young prince of modern England, Thomas
Ducaine had lived a life far more pure and unspotted than almost any of
his contemporaries. It was that fact, so patent in his face and manner,
which had first attracted Hampson to him, when the two had met in the
Frivolity Theatre--how long ago that seemed now!

So the young man with great possessions said the Lord's Prayer in the
fresh morning light, and then prayed most earnestly that he might be
worthy of the gift that God had given him--the love of the sweetest,
purest, and loveliest lady in the land.

He prayed that God would be pleased to bless their union at the supreme
moment which was now so imminent, and for ever afterwards. His whole
heart and soul went up to the throne of the Most High in supplication
for himself and the girl who was to be his wife. That they might live
together in godly and righteous wedlock; that they might spend their
lives, and the wealth which had been given them, for the good of others
and for the welfare of the world; that at the last they might be
gathered up in the company of the elect, might tread the shining
pavements of Heaven, and see the face of God--these were the prayers of
the young man as, like a knight of old, he kept the vigil before the
Sacrament which was to come.

He went down to the little sleeping cove and bathed in the fresh, clear
water of the sea. The right arm rose and fell forcefully, conquering an
element, as rejoicing in his strength, rejoicing in the glory of the
morning, rejoicing in the sense that God was with him, and that His
blessing was upon his doings, he swam out into the sea, laughing aloud
with holy rapture at what was, what was to come, and what would be.

Then, once more, he re-entered the little cottage, and found the old
Welsh woman who was his hostess preparing the simple breakfast meal. She
put the griddle cakes, fresh eggs and milk before him, but he stood,
looking down upon the board, and, turning to her, refused to eat.

"No," he said, "I will go fasting to my wedding. I will eat no earthly
food until I take the Body and Blood of Jesus from the priest's hand.
It will be afterwards that the feast comes."

"Oh, my dear," she answered, in her broken English--"my dear, that's
right of ye, though indeed and indeed I should wish you would take
something. But you are right--my dear, go to your love fasting, and you
will never fast more."

Another door, opening into the little raftered kitchen, was pushed
aside, and Hampson entered.

His face was white and pinched. All night long the little man had been
wrestling with the last remnants of the old Adam which remained within
him. From the moment when the gracious lady who was about to become the
bride of his dear friend had saved him from death, the journalist had
loved Mary with a dog-like fidelity and adoration. He knew, as he had
known at that moment when he had been with her upon the roof of
England's great cathedral, and seen the white cross hanging over London,
that she could never, under any possible circumstances, have been his.

He had known this and realized it always, but upon this last night of
her maidenhood, when she was about to finally and irrevocably join her
life to another's, there had been mad hours of revolt, of natural, human
revolt, in his brain.

Now it was all over. He had passed through the Valley of the Shadow, and
the morning was come.

For Mr. Hampson also the morning of all mornings was come, the morning
when he had finally and utterly laid down his own desires at the foot of
the Cross, had bowed to the will of the Almighty, and found himself
filled with sacred joy in the joy of the two people he loved better than
any one else in the world, save only his dear Master, Joseph.

In his hand the little man held a book bound in crimson leather. It was
the Revised Version of the New Testament, the latest product of the
University Press, and a very beautiful specimen of typography and
binding.

He came up to his friend and shook him warmly by the hand. Then he gave
him the book.

"Thomas," he said, "there is nothing that I can give you that you have
not got. And, of course, it would be silly of me to give you anything of
material value, because all those things you have had from your youth
up. But here is my little offering. It is only the New Testament. I have
written something upon the fly-leaf, and if you will use it constantly
instead of any other copy that you may have, it will be a great joy to
me. Indeed, my dear fellow," he continued with a smile, "I can give you
nothing more valuable than this."

There was a moment of tense emotion, which was broken, and fortunately
broken, by the voice of the old Welsh woman.

"Now then, my dear," she said, "you are not going to be married this
morning, so you will take your breakfast--indeed, you must an' all. The
bells will be ringing soon, but not for you, and so you must keep your
body warm with food."

Hampson sat down to the simple meal.

Thomas Ducaine, carrying the crimson volume in his hand, went out into
the sunlight, which was now becoming brilliant and strong. He walked
down the silent village street, his feet stirring up the white dust as
he went, for it had been long since rain had fallen in the Welsh
village, and strolled to the end of the mole which stretched out into
the blue sea. Standing there, he breathed in the marvellous invigorating
air of the morning, and his whole young, fresh body responded to the
appeal which nature made.

This was the morning of mornings!

In a few short hours--how short, how blissfully short!--Mary would come
to him.... There were no words in which to clothe his thoughts or in
which to voice his thankfulness and joy. He surveyed his past life
rapidly and swiftly. It passed before him in a panoramic vista, full of
color, but blurred and unimportant until the wonderful night when, as he
stood at the door of his house in Piccadilly with Hampson, the tall
figure of the Teacher had suddenly appeared out of the night, and had
entered into his house with blessing and salvation.

From that time onwards, the vista of happenings was more detailed, more
definitely clear. He realized that he owed, not only his present
material felicity--the fact that all his hopes and desires were to be
consummated in the little village church before the sun had reached his
midday height--but also all the new spiritual awakening, the certainty
of another life, the hope of eternal blessedness, to one cause, to one
personality.

It was at this moment to Joseph that his thoughts went, to that strange
force and power--more force and power, indeed, than that of mere human
man--which, or who, had changed his life from a dull and hopeless
routine--how he realized that now!--to this beatitude of morning light,
of love to the world, and thankfulness to God.

Joseph was somewhere in the neighborhood, that he knew. Where exactly
the Teacher was he could not say. Mary was staying at the little cottage
which he could see as he sent his eyes roving round the semicircle of
white houses which fringed the bay, with her aunt, Lady Susan Wells.
Hampson was to be "best man." Bridesmaids there were none. It was to be
the simplest of all ceremonies.

This prince of modern London was to be married to one of the greatest
heiresses in England, and a member of one of the oldest families in the
United Kingdom, as Colin might marry Audrey--happily, quietly, and far
from the view of the world.

Whether Joseph himself would be present at the ceremony even Ducaine
himself was not quite certain. That after the wedding-feast--the simple
wedding-feast--they were all to meet Joseph upon the mountain-top, he
was well aware. It had been arranged, and he thrilled with anticipation
of some further and more wonderful revelation of the designs of the
Almighty than had ever been vouchsafed to him before. But at the
church--he hoped the Teacher would be present in the little village
church when he and Mary were made one.

He turned to walk back to the cottage, when down the granite pier he saw
that a little flaxen-haired girl was walking. In all the sleeping
semicircle of the village Thomas and the little girl seemed alone to be
awake.

The blue wood-smoke was rising from the chimneys of the cottages, but as
yet no one was stirring in the outside air.

The little girl came tripping and laughing along the granite isthmus
between the waters, and in her hand she held a folded piece of paper.

With the confiding innocence of childhood, she came straight up to the
tall young man, and stretching out her tiny arm, looked into his face.

"You are Thomas, aren't you?" she said.

"Yes," he answered, "I am Thomas."

"Then this is for you, Thomas," she replied. "This letter an' all. Dadda
was up in the mountain this morning, and William Rees, whateffer, met
dadda, and gave him this letter, which Mr. Joseph had given him. The
Teacher is staying up in the little house in the mountain-top where
Lluellyn Lys used to live, and he gave this to William Rees, and William
Rees gave it to dadda, and dadda told me to find you and give it to you,
Thomas."

Ducaine opened the letter. These were the words

"I shall not be with you in body when you and Mary are made one. But I
shall be with you in the spirit, my dear friend. When you have made your
communion and kept the feast come up with the Brethren to the
mountain-top. There I will bless you. And now, farewell!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Therefore, if any man can show any just cause why they may not lawfully
be joined together, let him now speak, or else hereafter for ever hold
his peace."

       *       *       *       *       *

"... I pronounce that they be man and wife together, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.... God the Father,
God the Son, God the Holy Ghost, bless, preserve, and keep you; the Lord
mercifully look upon you, and so fill you with all spiritual benediction
and grace, that ye may so live together in this life, that in the world
to come ye may have life everlasting."

       *       *       *       *       *

Arm in arm they went out from the little church, joined together, man
and wife, for ever and a day--the goodly young man and the girl with the
face of an angel.

The fiddlers who were waiting set up a merry tune, as, surrounded by
their humble friends, they walked to the tithe-barn in which the
marriage feast was to be.

As they all stood waiting till the signal to fall-to should be given,
Thomas Ducaine took his wife's hand in his, bowed over it, and kissed it
in gracious chivalry.

Then he drew her to him and kissed her on the lips.

The music broke out once more as all the company sat down. It was a
short and merry feast, yet not untainted with the Celtic sadness which
all the Welsh folk feel at happy moments.

One and all, from bride and bridegroom down to the humblest worker
there, knew that there were more stirring and awful things to come; that
a trumpet was sounding on the mountain summit; that they were to climb
as if into the presence of the Almighty.

Old David Owen, Joseph's trusted lieutenant, lifted on high a great
goblet of the pure mountain water, in which he pledged the newly married
pair.

"I pledge you," he said, "Mary and Thomas, brother and sister in the
Lord, followers of our dear Teacher--I pledge you and call upon all that
are present here to join me in the toast. May your life together be one
long song of happiness! May you, with all the opportunities that God has
given you, always remain true to the trust reposed in you, and follow
the banner of Jesus, and once more plunge into the battle for the
winning over of Babylon to the Lord!"

Then the old man paused, and, setting down his glass, placed his hands
upon the table, and leaning forward, spoke very earnestly and quietly,
rather to the assembled company than to the married pair.

"The Master," he said, "is not with us now; but we are going to meet
him, and I doubt not we are all to receive another signal proof of the
Lord's favor. To some of us it has been a grief that Joseph was not in
the church when the marriage was made of the two we love. But Joseph's
ways are not our ways, and he is led as we are not led. But I would say
this to you, dear brethren and sisters. I see around me those who a long
time ago--it seems a very long time ago--accompanied the Master from
these hills to the great Modern Babylon of our time. There is no one
here who does not remember the saint of the mountain, Lluellyn Lys.
There is no one here who has not known the circumstances under which our
dear Teacher first came down to these parts. I mind well that I was one
of those who carried him up to the mountain, ill and crippled as he was.
And it was through that strange fellowship of Joseph and Lluellyn that
the things have come to pass. We all assembled on the mountain-top,
where we are going soon, to bury Lluellyn, and we all heard our Master
as he took on the mantle of Elijah and called us to rally round the
standard of Jesus with him as leader. And now we are all going once more
to that sacred spot on the top of Pendrydos, and God grant that we may
hear inspiring and edifying things there. I have just pledged Thomas and
Mary as our brother and our sister in the fight we are waging, and have
still to wage, against the sins of the great city so far away from here.
I pledge them in the name of you all, and as our brother and our sister.
But it would ill become me not to say a word upon another part of the
question. We must remember that Thomas, our brother, is also Sir Thomas
Ducaine, a man of great fortune and of high lineage. We must also
remember that Mary, our sister, was Miss Mary Lys, the sister of
Lluellyn Lys, and the descendant of the old kings of Wales who ruled
these parts. Just as they are leaders of our band in Christ, so also are
they leaders in the great things of this world, and we owe them a double
loyalty."

He stopped for a moment, and the old face worked as he thought deeply.
Then with a wild, free Celtic gesture, he threw out one hand.

"I can say no more," he said; "but you all know what they are, and who
they are. God bless them for our natural leaders and our friends in the
Lord! And now, what think you, shall we not climb the mountain?"

It is a steep road from the little village through the pine plantations,
until one comes out upon the mountain-side itself. At that point a green
gorge stretches up between two spurs of the hill above, a green gorge
covered with soft, pneumatic turf cropped like a lawn by the innumerable
sheep which range over those high pastures. And then on and up, through
the pleasant, slanting valley, until the heather-covered plateau is
reached.

There one surveys a vast expanse of wild and lonely moor, all purple,
green, and brown. At huge distances great peaks rise up--the peaks of
the Snowdon range--and on clear moments the white and glistening cap of
the emperor mountain of Wales shines in its distant majesty.

So they went out into the sunshine, and wound their way through the
lower slopes of the pines quietly and gravely, without many words, but
with the quickening sense of hope and anticipation strong in each rugged
and faithful heart.

Upon the great green gorge they made their way, a skein of black
figures. Before them all Sir Thomas and Lady Ducaine walked together.
The bridegroom was dressed in a simple suit of tweed, and with a soft
grey hat upon his head. The bride wore an ordinary coat and skirt, like
any mountaineering lady who has essayed the heights upon a brilliant
day.

As they went together, a little in advance of the main company, they
spoke hardly a word to each other. But their faces were eloquent. In the
man's eyes there was a thankfulness so supreme and perfect that the
girl's filled with tears when she looked at that serene and radiant
face. With no word said, they knew that they were now each other's for
ever and ever. All toil, all trouble, all heart-burnings,
heart-searchings and sorrow were over. Nothing could ever alter the
great central fact: they were married, they were one, one spirit, one
body, one for ever in the sight of earth and Heaven, one in the high
endeavor of good which was to be the purpose and completion of their
lives.

"Are you happy, dear?" he said to her once, turning his radiant face
upon her.

She looked at him for a moment without speaking, and he knew that he had
never seen her more beautiful, and perhaps never would see her more
beautiful again, than she was at that moment.

"Oh, my life and my love," she answered, "I did not know that God could
give such happiness in this world!"

And as she finished, fifty yards below them upon the mountain-side they
heard that the Brethren who accompanied them were bursting into sudden
song, into spontaneous chords of music, a wedding anthem for them.

    "O Lord of life and love,
      Come Thou again to-day;
    And bring a blessing from above
      That ne'er shall pass away.

    O bless, as erst of old,
      The bridegroom and the bride;
    Bless with the holier stream that flow'd
      Forth from Thy piercèd side.

    Before Thine altar-throne
      This mercy we implore;
    As Thou dost knit them, Lord, in one,
      So bless them evermore."

As the crashing, rolling chords ceased and echoed far away among the
purple mountains, they found that they had come into the higher lands
and were upon the last mountain moorland, from which before them the
granite peak of their final endeavor rose stark and awful, its head
still hidden by the clouds.

And then, as they moved towards the steep path among the boulders and
the slate terraces, a change came over the spirits of all of them. It
was not a chill of depression, but rather a sense of awe and the
imminence of awful things. The immediate occasion was forgotten. Out of
the minds of all of them, save only those of the man and maid who had
been made one upon that happy morning, the remembrance of the marriage
feast passed and dissolved.

They were going up the last part of their journey to meet the Teacher
who was up there in the clouds by the tomb of Lluellyn Lys, waiting for
them with a message from God.

Silently, and almost without effort, they wound up the huge, steep rock.

The bracken ceased, the heather was no more, and only the vast granite
boulders, painted a thousand fantastic colors--ash-green, crimson,
orange, and vivid grey--by the lichens which covered them, reminded them
that they were still in a world where herbs grew and the kindly nature
of the vales yet held a divided sway with the mysterious and untrodden
places of the sky.

Now the light, which had become fainter and more faint as the first
fleecy heralds of the great cloud-cap into which they were entering
enveloped them, began to fail utterly. They walked and climbed upwards,
upwards and for ever up, in a white world of ghostly vapor, until at
last, without a sound, and with profound expectation and reverence in
every heart, they knew by the change in the contour of the ground that
they were near upon the mountain-top, and close to the cairn of stones
where their old leader, Lluellyn Lys, lay in his long sleep, and where
their living guide and Master, Joseph, was awaiting them.

On the very top of the mountain itself the air was bitter chill, and the
ghostly cloud-wreaths circled round them, while their quiet,
questioning voices sounded muffled and forlorn.

They waited there, not knowing whether to advance or to call to the man
whom they had come to seek. At the head of the little group Thomas and
Mary stood hand in hand, looking at each other with questioning eyes and
waiting.

Then, through the swaying whiteness, they saw a grey shadow advancing
towards them. It grew from a shadow into a blackness, from a blackness
into the form of a tall man, and in a second more the Teacher had come
to them.

None of them there ever forgot, none of all who were there ever will be
able to forget, that sudden, silent advent of the man who led them, and
whom they loved.

He came upon them without noise, came upon them through the gloom. But
as he came he seemed to bring with him a radiance which was not of this
earth. Many of them said that round the noble head which so poignantly
resembled and so wonderfully reminded them of the face of the Man of
Sorrows, a yellow nimbus hung, a bright radiance which illuminated that
grave countenance, and shone in the gloom like a star of hope.

He came up to Thomas and kissed him upon the cheek, and, turning to the
young man's wife, he kissed her also in holy greeting. Then, standing a
little way back from them, his face alight with a supreme joy and
happiness, he raised his hands and blessed them all.

"The blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost,
be among you and remain with you always.".

The happy voice rang through the mist with an organ harmony. And it
seemed as if it was answered and echoed in its lovely music by a faint
burst of song and melody high up in the air and all around.

It was as though the angels of Heaven were rejoicing in the mating of a
pure man and maiden.

Then Joseph spoke again.

"Come, beloved brother and sister, and my dear brethren," he said, "come
to the tomb of Lluellyn Lys, whose body lies here until the glorious
Resurrection Day, and whose soul is in Paradise, walking with the blest.
Come and stand round that tomb, and pray for London, which you are sworn
to conquer for the Lord. Come and pray for Thomas and Mary, that their
lives may be a song of triumph over evil, and that they may lead you
worthily until your lives end."

With that he turned, and then all followed him until in a few steps the
long pile of granite stones rose up above them, and they stood by the
burial-place of the dead prophet of Wales. They stood round in silence,
and then old David Owen stepped out from among them and put his gnarled
old hand upon the Teacher's arm.

"Master," he said, in a voice which quivered with emotion too deep for
tears--"Master, what words are these?"

Joseph looked upon him with a smile of love.

"Old friend," he answered--"old tried and trusted friend, old captain in
the army of God, you have come here with all of us to listen to my last
message."

There was a stir and movement among them all, and through the dark each
looked at each with apprehension and fear in their hearts.

A chill descended upon all of them, that chill which comes to one who
loves when he fears that the loved one is departing or going upon a long
journey.

Once more Mary's hand stole into her husband's, and the cold hands that
sought each other, and clasped, were trembling.

They heard the Master's voice above them, for he had mounted to the top
of the great cairn of piled stones, and stood spectral up there in the
mist.

"This, beloved, is what I have to say to you," he began. "It is here and
upon this spot, that the Spirit of the Lord came to me and led me to the
work which we have carried out together. It was here that I and you knew
that it was our special mission, ordained of the Almighty and led by the
Holy Spirit, to bring London to a knowledge of God, and to do what we
could, under God's ordinance, to lead it towards the salvation of the
Cross. And it is here that I say what will be my last words to you, for
the hand of the Lord is upon me, and I think that I may not be with you
more. One and all go back to the great, dark city, and fight for its
salvation until you fall in the battle, and are caught up to the joy
which the Redeemer has promised you. One and all devote your lives,
your energies, your strength, your every power of body, mind and spirit,
to that great end. Remember always that to this special war you have
been called and summoned, and that it is your lifework and your
spiritual duty until the end. With you here to-day are our dear brother
and sister, Thomas and Mary. It is to them that I delegate my
leadership. It is to them that the guidance of the Holy Spirit which has
been so vouchsafed to me, will come. They will be your leaders in the
great battle, and it is to them that you must look for help and succor
in the material fight, as ambassadors and regents in the battle of the
Most High.

"And now, farewell! I am going a long way, whither I know not. But it
has come to me that this is the concluding moment of my ministry, and I
bow my head humbly to the Divine Will, and pray that wherever I may be
taken I may yet be permitted to labor for the Lord until the glorious
Resurrection Day, when the supreme spirit of love will rule all things
throughout all eternity.

"Love! That is the last word of one who loves you, and one who lives as
you all do, in the supreme love of the God of Heaven. Feed the
fatherless, comfort and succor the oppressed, give up all that you have
of goods, of energy, of power, to the poor. There is no other word but
love. Farewell!"

The ringing voice ceased, and they stood as figures of stone, like the
great Druid circle of old heathen tombs which still remains upon the
mountain slope.

LOVE!

That was the last word they heard, and then the Master seemed to falter
for a moment, seemed to sway and move. There was a sound of a wind
coming nearer and nearer, as though it was rushing over the
mountain-tops from the summit of distant Snowdon itself.

The sound of a great wind, and then a soft and sudden radiance showed
them the Christ-like figure of their Friend with the arms again upraised
in blessing, with love shining from his eyes. The sound of the wind
growing louder and louder and louder, a rushing, mighty wind, a wind
which enveloped them with wild, tempestuous force, which blew the
ghostly mists away--away and far away, until the sun shone upon the
tall, long tomb of Lluellyn Lys, and there was no more any man there.

THE END







