CHAPTER VII

THE FINANCIER


Sir Augustus Kirwan, the great financier, was much disturbed by the news
that his nephew Lluellyn Lys was dead. Both Sir Augustus and his wife
had hoped that the recluse of the mountains might be induced to leave
his solitudes and take an ordinary place in the world. The baronet was
sonless. His wealth was enormous, and he could leave his daughter
Marjorie enough money to make her one of the richest heiresses in
England, and still endow a male heir with a huge fortune. This he would
have done for his wife's nephew--his own nephew by marriage, for though
not a well-born man himself, he had an immense reverence for ancient
blood.

He reverenced it in his wife, and was as well informed in the history of
the House of Lys as she was herself. Now, however, there was no longer
any chance of reclaiming Lluellyn from what Sir Augustus and Lady Kirwan
had always regarded as the most incredible folly and semi-madness.

The last male Lys in the direct line was gathered to his fathers. There
still remained Mary Lys.

"My dear," the baronet said to his wife, "Lluellyn's death has been a
great blow to you, and, indeed, it has to me also, for you know that I
share your enthusiasm for your family and your hopes for it. But Mary
is still with us. She is young and beautiful. We can give her a dowry
that will attract a duke. As soon as I am well again I shall put my foot
down in no uncertain way. This time, whatever Mary may say, I shall
compel her to leave this ridiculous slum-hospital work and take her
proper place in society."

Sir Augustus spoke of his illness. He was a man by no means indifferent
to the pleasures of the table. As he himself would have expressed it, he
"did himself well" in every particular.

But people who like white truffles from Piedmont, caviare from the
Volga, comet year port, and liqueurs of brandy at seven pounds a bottle,
must expect a Nemesis.

Two days before the news of Lluellyn's death arrived Sir Augustus was
seized with a bad attack of gout.

When Mary Lys, in uncontrollable grief, had hastened to her aunt's house
in Berkeley Square, carrying the sad message from Joseph Bethune which
told her of her beloved brother's death, the banker had been quite
unable to move.

Had it been in any way possible, the worthy man would have hastened to
Wales to be present at the funeral of his nephew by marriage. But the
physicians had absolutely forbidden him the journey. He would not,
however, allow Mary to travel to the principality by herself. In the
first place he had the not uncommon dislike of men to their womenkind
attending funerals. Mary would not hear of this.

"Uncle," she said, "shall I not go to see my dear and saintly brother's
body put into the earth from which he will rise again when the trumpet
of the Resurrection Day sounds?"

This was rather above Sir Augustus.

"Tut, tut, my dear," he said; "the--er--Resurrection trumpet is not very
near to the nineteenth century. But still, if you must go, I shall
insist on your having a proper escort."

Accordingly Mary had been sent to Wales in the charge of the Kirwans'
family solicitor, who was instructed to see that everything was done
decently and in order, as befitted the obsequies of the last male member
of the House of Lys.

For her part, Mary did not in the least want the company of Mr. Owen,
the solicitor. She would have infinitely preferred to be left alone with
her grief. Nevertheless she recognized the kindly feeling and family
instinct that prompted Sir Augustus' action, and submitted with the best
grace possible.

Lluellyn Lys had been dead for seven days, and it was now two days after
the funeral.

Sir Augustus was not yet able to leave the house, but his gout was
better. After the simple dinner--which was all that the doctor allowed
him--he sat in his library reading the newspaper of that morning.

The first thing that caught his eye was a review of a new play which had
just been produced under the title of "The Golden Maiden." Sir Augustus
was an occasional patron of the burlesque stage. The sort of
entertainments provided by the theatres that produce "musical comedy"
were quite to his taste. Kindly and generous as he was, he was a man
without any religious belief whatever and with no ideals. To such a
mind, the indelicacy and lubricity of these plays appealed intensely,
and afforded him great amusement. Nor had he the slightest idea that any
blame whatever could attach to him. These places were crowded night
after night by all sections of society--who was he to stay away?

Sir Augustus chuckled over the criticism. The writer first gave a
detailed synopsis of the plot--such as it was--and recorded his general
impressions of the performance. The critic was obviously a man of taste
and decent feeling, for he spoke in no measured terms of the gross
indecency of the play, which was, to put it plainly, little more nor
less than a glorification of adultery.

"And the pity of it is," the writer concluded, "that all London will
flock to see this immoral nonsense. If the drama is to be thus
degraded--and no other form of entertainment has an equal popularity
with the one under discussion--then decent English men and women will
begin to long for the return of the Commonwealth, with its stern and
self-sacrificing simplicity."

Sir Augustus put the paper down.

"Silly fool," he muttered. "I wonder he is allowed to write such
hypocritical twaddle. Certainly, from what he says, they do seem to have
gone a little too far this time."

Nevertheless, Sir Augustus made a mental resolve to look in at the
Frivolity for an hour or two as soon as ever his leg would let him.

He put down the paper and lit a cigar. All round him were the evidences
of enormous wealth. The library was a large and beautiful room. A fire
of cedar logs glowed in the open hearth, and threw flickering
lights--rose-pink and amethyst--upon the gold and crimson books standing
in their carved-oak shelves.

The parquet floor was almost hidden by priceless rugs from
Teheran--white, brick-dust color, and peacock-blue. There was a
marvellous _console_ which had belonged to Marie Antoinette, a buhl
clock which had stood in the palace of Sans Souci, and was a gift to
Frederick The Great from Voltaire. As Sir Augustus looked round he
forgot "The Golden Maiden," and sighed. He was thinking of his dead
nephew, Lluellyn Lys, and wishing that he had a son to succeed to all
these splendors.

The door opened, and Lady Kirwan entered, tall, stately, and beautiful
still, in her flowing black dinner-gown and the heavy ropes of pearls
around the white column of her neck.

She sat down on the opposite side of the fire to her husband.

"My dear," she said, and there was distress in her voice, "I am so
worried about Mary."

"About Mary?" Sir Augustus replied, with some little surprise. "Oh, you
need not worry about Mary, Julia. Of course, this has been a great blow
to her. But she is young and level-headed in many ways. Time will heal
her wounds."

"Oh, it is not that, Augustus. Of course, the poor dear girl will get
over her grief. Besides, she is religious, you know, and that certainly
does seem to help certain natures. I have often observed it. But I am
anxious about her now. Lluellyn was buried two days ago, and except Mr.
Owen's telegram announcing the bare fact, we have not heard a word from
either of them. Mary ought to be back here now."

"Well, my dear," the baronet replied, "I really don't think there is the
slightest reason for anxiety. Mary is in perfectly safe hands. Indeed, I
am particularly grateful to Owen for accompanying her himself. It is a
thing I should hardly have ventured to ask him. I quite imagined he
would send one of the elderly confidential clerks--Mr. Simpson, for
instance--a most respectable and trustworthy person."

"I hope it's all right, I'm sure," the dame replied. "But I can't see
what is keeping the girl for two days after the funeral, all the same.
And why is there no letter? Mary has a fortnight's leave of absence from
that stupid hospital, and she had arranged to come here and stay with
us."

There was a silence. Then Lady Kirwan pressed a button in the panelled
wall.

"I will take my coffee in here," she said. Sir Augustus nodded, and
picked up the newspaper once more.

A footman with powdered hair and large shoulder-knots brought in a
little nacre-encrusted table, with a tiny silver cup, a bowl of
dark-brown sugar-candy from Jamaica, and the long-handled brass pan from
Turkey, which held the coffee.

He had hardly left the room when Lady Kirwan was startled by a sudden
loud exclamation from Sir Augustus.

She rose from her seat in alarm, thinking that he was attacked by a
sudden spasm of pain.

In a moment she was undeceived.

"Good Heavens," he said, "here are extraordinary goings on! I never read
such a thing in my life! No wonder Mary has not come back."

Trembling with anxiety, Lady Kirwan ran to the back of her husband's
chair, and, leaning over it, read the article, headed in large type, to
which Sir Augustus pointed with a shaking finger.

     STRANGE RELIGIOUS REVIVAL

     A MOUNTAIN PREACHER EXCITES A WHOLE COUNTRYSIDE

     Our North Wales correspondents telegraph accounts of some
     extraordinary scenes in Wales, which are occurring on the mountains
     of the Cader Idris district.

     It seems that for some years past a mysterious recluse has been
     living in a small cottage high up on the great slate-mountain of
     Llan-y-Van. This man was a Mr. Lluellyn Lys, a member of a very
     ancient Welsh family, and possessed of small private means. His
     method of life was peculiar. Imbued with a deeply mystical
     religious spirit, he lived very much as the preaching hermits of
     the early days of the Christian faith. Sometimes he would remain
     secluded for many days, or be found upon the summit of some lonely
     mountain praying aloud to God. At others he would go preaching
     through the villages, exhorting every one to repentance and a holy
     life, with marvellous eloquence and fervour.

     In addition to this, the "Teacher," as this strange personality
     appears to have been known among the peasants and local miners,
     would sometimes hold vast meetings upon Sundays, high up in the
     hills. Thousands of people from far and near would gather together,
     and, standing upon a rock in their midst, Lluellyn Lys would speak
     with fiery exhortation, and lead those great musical choruses and
     hymns of praise for which the Celtic people are so famous.

     A few weeks ago all those--and there seem to have been many
     thousands--who regarded the Teacher as their spiritual adviser and
     leader, became aware that he was entertaining a guest at his lonely
     mountain home, for the first time within public remembrance. A
     strange man had appeared at the little railway station in the
     valley, and by Mr. Lys' orders he was carried up the mountain by
     various of the Teacher's adherents and disciples. The man, who was
     known only by the name of Joseph, was evidently recovering from a
     severe illness. He remained in Lluellyn's lonely cottage for some
     time, and the two men were attended by an old widow lady whose name
     is Mrs. Price.

     During the stranger's sojourn strange rumors were spread round the
     countryside. The Teacher had more than once referred to him in
     public as the "Master," and had hinted that he was about to conduct
     some great religious campaign, the precise nature of which was
     never clearly specified. It was also said, and said very generally,
     that some most extraordinary things were happening at the top of
     Moel Llan-y-Van.

     Incredible as it may seem to-day, there are at the present moment
     hundreds of people in this part of Wales who confidently assert,
     and offer to prove, that Mr. Lluellyn Lys possessed the gift of
     healing. Dozens of cures are attributed to his agency. Be this as
     it may, the consensus of opinion not only credits the Teacher with
     something like miraculous power, but said that his strange visitor
     was possessed of even more wonderful attributes than he was.

     A week ago Lluellyn Lys died.

     It seems that, in mystical language, he had already foretold his
     decease. And now we come to the strange part of this excessively
     strange story.

     Two days ago Lluellyn Lys was buried. But his was no ordinary
     burial; and, moreover, it is quite within the bounds of possibility
     that it may yet become the subject of an official inquiry.

     When the news of the Teacher's decease spread over the surrounding
     country, from valley and mountain an enormous concourse of people
     assembled. The body--it is described as being like a statue of
     white marble--was taken from the cottage without a coffin and
     buried on the very highest point of the mountain Llan-y-Van--a spot
     where the dead preacher had been wont to pray.

     It is understood that this was done by the dead man's wish and
     stipulation, though, probably quite contrary to law. No one,
     however, interfered--and interference would, of course, have been
     useless against several thousand people, who appeared to be in an
     ecstasy of grief, and who were obviously determined to carry out
     the wishes of their dead friend to the letter.

     If at this point readers of the _Daily Wire_ express incredulity at
     what follows we can only say that we guarantee the substantial
     accuracy of our report in the completest way.

     After the actual interment of the corpse, and amid the wailing
     cries of the vast multitude of mourners, a man mounted the cairn of
     boulders which forms the highest part of the mountain--the exact
     summit, so to speak.

     Immediately the sounds of mourning were hushed, as if at the beat
     of a conductor's bâton.

     Our correspondents describe the scene as wonderfully impressive and
     without parallel in their very varied experience.

     It was a cloudy morning, and somewhat chill in those high places.
     Yet a beam of sunlight, white and sudden, fell upon the tall figure
     upon the cairn. Every one could see the man quite distinctly; every
     one knew that this was the stranger known as Joseph, who had been
     the companion of Lluellyn Lys during the last weeks of his life.

     The sudden silence was perhaps due to the fact of this universal
     knowledge, but equally, perhaps, to another and extraordinary
     fact.

     Joseph in appearance resembles the traditional pictures of the
     Christ in an astounding manner. It seems almost irreverent to write
     these words. But they are written with no such intention. This man,
     whoever he may be--charlatan and impostor, or sincere saint and
     reformer of our own day--is the living, walking image of that idea
     which all the world has of Him who died upon the Cross!

     The words came; not very many, neither mystical nor obscure, but
     plain statements of intention. Yet the voice hushed that vast
     multitude of people as if with a magician's wand. Deep and clear,
     full of a music that our correspondents say no orator of our day
     can compass, a voice that goes straight to the heart--so, we are
     informed, was the voice of this man Joseph.

     The substance of his speech was startling--an actual shorthand
     report of the words will be found upon another page:

     This man, call him what you will, believes that he has a Divine
     mission to come to London, that he may warn it of its sins and
     bring its inhabitants to the foot of the Cross.

     With a band of disciples--we must use the word--he is even now
     speeding towards the metropolis. A dozen or more people are with
     him, and it is also said that the sister of the late Teacher, a
     very beautiful girl, who was formerly a hospital nurse, has joined
     the little band of fanatics. One thing is quite certain. London is
     on the eve of a new and most extraordinary sensation.

Thus the article concluded.

Lady Kirwan gave a gasp of dismay.

"Augustus!" she cried, "what a terrible scandal! What does it all mean?
I was right! I knew something had happened to Mary. Why hasn't Mr. Owen
looked after her properly? The poor girl has lost her senses, of course.
She is under the influence of some unscrupulous impostor. Oh, this is
awful, awful! To think that a member of the House of Lys should come to
this! What shall we do? What can we do? Something must be done at once!"

She had but hardly finished speaking, and both husband and wife were
looking into each other's eyes with faces of perplexity and alarm, when
the door opened and the butler entered.

"Mr. Owen has returned, Sir Augustus," he said, "and asks to see you
immediately."

In a moment or two a tall, elderly gentleman, with grey side-whiskers
and a keen, though benevolent face, was ushered into the room. He was in
morning dress, carried a plaid travelling-coat upon his arm, and a hard
felt hat in his hand.

He seemed anxious and distressed.

"I can't get up, Owen," Sir Augustus said at once. "I'm still a victim
to this confounded gout. What's all this preposterous stuff I see in the
_Daily Wire_? And where is my niece?"

The lawyer choked and swallowed. His face grew red and embarrassed. For
a moment or two he did not speak.

Mr. Owen was a considerable man. He was one of the best known family
solicitors in London. His reputation was unspotted; he was the confidant
of many great folk, and he may or may not have been worth three hundred
thousand pounds. But he was, at this moment, obviously embarrassed, and
perhaps angry also.

"Kirwan," he said, at length, "we are old friends, and we have been in
business relations for many years. You know, I think, that I am no fool.
You have entrusted vast interests to my care. I have never failed you
that I know of--until to-day."

"What has happened, dear Mr. Owen?" Lady Kirwan asked, terrified by the
solemnity of the lawyer's manner. "Where is Mary?"

"I've only just arrived," Mr. Owen answered. "I came straight here from
the station, Lady Kirwan. Your niece, Miss Mary Lys, has gone with that
fellow they call Joseph, and his company of crack-brained fools. Short
of force, I did everything a man could do to restrain her; but she beat
me. It was impossible to move her from her decision. For my part, I
believe the girl's mad!"

He paused, and both Sir Augustus and his wife realized that this eminent
man was considerably affected.

In the radiance of the electric light they could see the beads of
perspiration starting out upon his forehead like little pearls. The
baronet's face had gone quite pale.

With difficulty he rose from his seat, and an oath escaped him as he did
so.

"The little fool," he cried--"the fool! It's not your fault, Owen. Of
course, I know that. But where is she now? Where is this precious
company of tomfools and madmen?"

"I have every reason to believe," Mr. Owen answered with quiet emphasis,
"that the whole crew--and Miss Lys with them--are in London at the
present moment!"




