CHAPTER XVIII

REVEALED IN A VISION


Mary Lys stood in the great hall of the East End Hospital, where she had
worked for three years. She was saying good-bye.

A little group of men and women stood round her--the men mostly young,
clean-shaven, alert, and capable in expression; the women in the uniform
of hospital nurses.

Some of the women were crying quietly, and the great visiting surgeon,
Sir Abraham Jones himself, alternately tugged at his grey, pointed beard
or polished the glasses of his pince-nez.

"Well, nurse," said the great man, "I must go. I am due in the operating
theatre. I am sure that I am only representing the thought of the whole
hospital staff when I say how deeply we all regret that you are leaving
us. You have--ahem!--endeared yourself to every one, and your work has
been splendid. You have been a pattern to your colleagues in every way.
I hope that in the new sphere of life you have chosen you will be happy
and prosperous."

Sir Abraham was not an orator in ordinary life, though he had been known
to rise to real eloquence when lecturing upon some of the obscurer forms
of appendicitis. But the short, jerky sentences came from his heart as
he shook the hand of the beautiful girl who, like himself, was a soldier
in the noble army of those who fight disease and death.

They all crowded round Mary. The nurses kissed her, the young doctors
wrung her by the hand and tried to express something of their feelings.

Men and women, they all loved and valued her, and every one knew that
when she went out through the great doors for the last time they would
all suffer a loss which could never be replaced.

It was over at last. No longer in her nurse's dress, but clothed in the
ordinary tailor-made coat and skirt that young ladies wear in London
during the mornings, Mary got into the waiting hansom cab. The driver
shook the reins, the horse lurched into a trot, there was a vision of
waving hands and kindly faces, and then the long, grimy façade of the
hospital slid past the window and was lost to view.

Mary Lys was no longer a hospital nurse.

As she drove westward--for she was on her way to her aunt's house in
Berkeley Square, where she was about to make her home for a time--she
reviewed her past life, with its many memories, bitter and sweet. It had
been a hard and difficult life--a life of unceasing work among gloomy
and often terrible surroundings. And moreover, she was not a girl who
was insensible to the beauty and softer sides of life. Culture, luxury,
and repose were all hers did she but care to speak one word to Lady
Kirwan. She was constantly implored to leave the work she had set
herself to do.

She had always refused, and now, as she looked back on the past years,
she knew that she had been right, that her character was now fixed and
immovable, that the long effort and self-control of the past had given
her a steadfastness and strength such as are the portion and attributes
of few women.

And as the cab moved slowly up the Strand, Mary Lys thanked God for
this. Humbly and thankfully she realized that she was now a better
instrument than before, a more finely tempered sword with which to fight
the battle of Christ.

For though Mary was to live beneath the roof of Sir Augustus Kirwan, she
was not going to live the social life--the life of pleasure and
excitement as her cousin Marjorie did. Mary had left the hospital for
one definite purpose--that she might join the army of Joseph, and give
her whole time to the great work which the evangelist was inaugurating
in London.

Joseph and his brethren had now definitely taken up their abode in a
large house in Bloomsbury which Sir Thomas Ducaine had given them to be
the headquarters of their mission. Workers of all classes were flocking
there, and Mary knew, without possibility of doubt, that she was called
to the work. Every fibre of her spiritual nature told her the truth.
From the first she had been mysteriously connected with the movement.
The supernormal chain of events, the long succession of occurrences that
were little less than miraculous, told their own tale. In common with
all those people who had anything to do with Joseph, and who were about
to join him, Mary was sure that she was being directly guided by the
Holy Ghost.

She thought of her dead brother, the strange, prophet-like figure of the
mountain and the mist, the real beginner of it all, the man who had
taken the empty brain and soul of Joseph himself, and as it were,
through his own death, by some strange psychical law unknown to us,
poured the Spirit of God into them as into a vessel.

Mary knew that Lluellyn was aware of her determination, and that he
approved it. There were few people who drew more comfort or believed
more heartily in the glorious truth of the Communion of Saints than Mary
Lys.

She felt that Jesus Christ had conquered death, that our loved ones are
with us still, and the time of waiting is short before we shall see them
once again.

She did not know how near she was to another special manifestation of
God's grace and power, for, saint-like and humble as were the pious
maids and matrons who listened to the teachings of Our Lord and
ministered to Him, she did not realize the growth of her own soul and
how near to the great veil her life of purity and sacrifice had brought
her.

The cab passed out of the Strand into Trafalgar Square, and, the traffic
being less congested, began to roll along at a smarter pace than before.

But Mary noticed nothing of her surroundings as the vehicle turned into
Pall Mall. From the sweet and tender memory of her dead brother her
thoughts had now fallen upon one who was becoming increasingly dear to
her, but one for whom she still prayed--and over whom she
mourned--unceasingly.

From the very first Mary had been strongly attracted by Sir Thomas
Ducaine. Even in the past, when she had definitely refused to listen to
his suit, she had known that she was upon the brink of something more
than mere affection for him. He was strong, his life was clean, his
heart kindly and unspoiled.

But she had restrained herself with the admirable self-control which her
life of sacrifice had taught her; she had put the first beginnings and
promptings of love away.

He did not believe, he could not believe. God the Father, God the Son,
God the Holy Ghost were incredible to him. He would not pretend. He
would not seek to win her by a lie, but the Holy Trinity meant nothing
at all to him.

But then Joseph had come. The Teacher had influenced the rich and famous
young man, so that he had given him everything. Without having realized
in its essential essence, the truth of Joseph's mission and the Divine
guidance the Teacher enjoyed, Sir Thomas had nevertheless changed his
whole way of life for him.

"Father, teach him of Thyself. Lord Jesus, reveal Thyself to him. Holy
Spirit, descend upon him." Thus Mary prayed as she was being driven out
of her old life into the new.

It was about one o'clock when the cab stopped at Sir Augustus Kirwan's
house in Berkeley Square.

"My lady and Miss Marjorie told me to tell you, miss," the butler said,
as he greeted Mary, "that they are both very sorry indeed that they
cannot be here to welcome you. They would have done so if they possibly
could. But my lady is lunching at Marlborough House, Miss Mary. Sir
Augustus is in the City."

The man handed her on to a footman, who conducted her up the great
staircase, at the head of which Mrs. Summers, Lady Kirwan's maid, and
confidential factotum, was waiting.

The good woman's face was one broad grin of welcome. Summers was in the
confidence of her mistress, and had long known of the efforts made by
the baronet and his wife to induce Miss Lys to give up her work at the
hospital and take up her residence in Berkeley Square.

Only that morning Lady Kirwan had said, "Everything is really turning
out quite well, after all, Summers, though, of course, one could not see
it at first. The arrival of this eccentric Joseph person has really been
a blessing in disguise. Sir Thomas Ducaine is more devoted to Miss Mary
than ever, since they are both mixed up in this mission affair. We shall
see everything come right before very long."

"Your rooms are prepared, miss," said Summers. "Bryce has told you why
m'lady and Miss Marjorie couldn't be home to welcome you. But I'll send
some lunch up at once to your boudoir. And there's a letter come this
morning. Sir Thomas' valet brought it himself. I've put it on your
writing-table, miss."

There was a world of meaning and kindly innuendo in the woman's voice as
she ushered Mary into the luxurious suite of rooms which had been made
ready for her.

But the girl noticed nothing of it. Her thoughts were in far distant
places.

Nothing could have been more dainty and beautiful than the rooms which
were to be hers.

The most loving care had been lavished on them by her aunt and cousin.
One of the head men from Waring's had been there on that very morning to
put the finishing touches.

Mary's eyes took in all the comfort and elegance, but her brain did not
respond to their message. She was still thinking of and praying for the
man who loved her and whom she loved, but the man who had not
yet--despite all his marvellous generosity--bowed his head and murmured,
"I believe."

Then she saw his letter upon the writing-table--the firm, strong
handwriting, with the up-stroke "d" and the Greek "e," which denote a
public school and University training.

Her heart throbbed as she took up the square envelope and opened it.

This is what she read--

     "Lady Kirwan has told me you are coming to them to-day. I want to
     see you most particularly. I bring you a message from Joseph, and I
     bring you news of myself. At four o'clock I will call, and please
     see me. Dearest and best,

     "THOMAS SHOLTO DUCAINE."

She smiled at the signature. Tom always signed his full name, even in
the most intimate letters. It was a trick, a habit he always had. For
the moment Mary was like any other girl who dwells fondly on some one or
other little peculiarity of the man she loves--making him in some subtle
way more than ever her own.

Mary lunched alone. Her luxurious surroundings seemed to strike an alien
note. She was not as yet at home in them, though when the meal was over
she drew up her chair to the glowing fire with a certain sense of
physical ease and enjoyment.

In truth, she was very tired. The strongly emotional incidents of her
farewell at the hospital, the concentration of nervous force during her
drive to Berkeley Square, had left her exhausted for the moment. She was
glad of the comfortable silence, the red glow from the cedar logs upon
the hearth, and, as the afternoon lengthened into the early dusk of a
London fog, she sighed herself to sleep.

Death has been defined as the cessation from correspondence with
environment--a logical and scientific statement which, while it is
perfectly accurate, still leaves room for every article of the Christian
faith. Sleep, in a sense, is this also: and we have the authority of
Holy Writ itself that many revelations have come to the dreamer of
dreams.

Mary lay back in her arm-chair, and the dewy loveliness of her face
would, in its perfection, have shown no trace of what was passing in her
sub-conscious mind to an onlooker. But all her life was being unfolded
to her in a strange panorama as she slept. From first to last everything
that had ever happened to her was unwound as if from the spool of Fate
itself. She saw all the events of her life as if she were standing apart
from them and they were another's. But, more than all this, she saw
also, in a dread and mysterious revelation, the purpose, the controlling
purpose of God, which had brought these events about.

It was as though she was vouchsafed a glimpse into the workings of the
Divine mind; as if all the operations of God's providence, as they had
been connected with her past, were now suddenly made clear.

On some dark and mysterious fabric, half seen and but little understood,
the real pattern had flashed out--clear, vivid, and unmistakable, while
the golden threads that went through warp and woof were plain at last.

On and on went the strange procession of events, until she found herself
upon the lonely mountain-tops of Wales. Her dead brother was there, and
praying for her. She heard his passionate, appealing voice, she saw with
his very mind itself. Joseph was there also, and Mary began to
understand something of the miracle that had made the Teacher what he
was, that had changed him as Saul was changed.

And at this moment the color of the dream began to be less real and
vivid, while its panoramic movement was greatly accelerated.

She was as though suddenly removed to a great distance, and saw all
things with a blurred vision as the present approached. Then her
sensations entirely changed. She no longer saw pictures of the past
explained for her in the light of a supernatural knowledge. All that was
over. Her whole heart and mind were filled with the sense of some
strange presence which was coming nearer and nearer--nearer and nearer
still.

Then, quite suddenly and plainly, she saw that the figure of Lluellyn
Lys was standing in the centre of the room, clear and luminous. The
figure was that of her dead brother as she had last seen him, and seemed
perfectly substantial and real. It was seen in the darkness by an aurora
of pale light that seemed to emanate from it, as if the flesh--if flesh
indeed it was--exhaled an atmosphere of light.

Mary fell upon her knees. "Brother--brother!" she cried, stretching out
her hands in supplication. "Dear brother, speak to me! Tell me why you
are here from the grave!"

There was no answer in words. The face of the figure grew much brighter
than the rest, and the weeping, imploring girl saw upon it a peace so
perfect, a joy so serene and high, a beatitude so unspeakable, that her
sobs and moans died away into silence as she gazed at the transfigured
countenance in breathless awe and wonder.

For the face was as the face of one who had seen God and walked the
streets of Paradise.

It smiled upon her with ineffable tenderness and greeting, and then she
saw that one arm was raised in blessing. For some seconds the figure
remained there, motionless. Then with a slight movement, though no sound
accompanied it, the luminous outline turned towards the door. The right
arm still remained in its attitude of blessing, the left pointed to the
portal.

There was a sound of footsteps outside in the passage, the figure began
to sway and shake, precisely as a column of vapor shakes in a wind. It
grew fainter and more faint, and as Mary tried to clasp it, calling
aloud on it to stay, it vanished utterly away. She was awake now, and
for some reason she could not explain she rushed to the wall and turned
on the switch of the electric light. In a second the room was
illuminated. It was just the same in its ordered daintiness and comfort.
Nothing was altered, there was nothing whatever to show that any ghostly
visitor had been there.

There was a knock at the door.

Sir Thomas Ducaine entered, and there was something upon his face which
sent the blood leaping through Mary's veins once more in the shock of a
sudden revelation.

She knew now why her brother had come to her in her vision! Sir Thomas
entered the room, and came straight up to Mary.

"My dear," he said, "I asked especially to see you alone because I have
something to tell you. Lady Kirwan knows; she gave me permission to
come. Mary, can you guess what I have to say?"

The light upon his face had told her even before he spoke; the ghostly
visitor had told her; her heart had told her.

"I think I know," she said. "I think that my prayers are answered."

He caught her by both hands, and looked steadily into her eyes.

"My love," he said, in a voice that trembled with emotion, try how he
would to control it, "I have come to tell you just that."

Her face did not change. It bore the traces of the supernatural
experiences through which she had passed; there was a rapt ecstasy in
the eyes, the lovely lips spoke of love, belief, hope. Her face did not
change, but it already wore the look he had longed to see upon it. She
had never seemed more beautiful. "It has been a gradual process, Mary,"
he continued, speaking quickly and nervously. "But it has been quickened
at the last. And I owe it all, absolutely and utterly, to Joseph. The
night that Joseph came into my life, when I saw him at the theatre, and
when I found him standing on the steps of my house late on the same
night, was the beginning of everything for me. All life is changed. I
look upon it in a new way. I see it with fresh eyes. I believe in God, I
know that Jesus died for me, I know that the Holy Ghost is immanent in
this world--I believe!"

"I knew it," she said in a low voice. "I knew it directly you entered
the room. God sent a messenger in a dream to tell me."

"He has us in His care," the young man said reverently. "But I have
much to tell you, Mary. Do not tire yourself."

He led her to a large ottoman, which came out at right angles to the
Dutch fireplace, and sat down by her side. He had released her hands
now, and by an intuition she knew his motive. He would not speak to her
of love until he had told her the whole history of his conversion, the
dawn of his belief, his acceptance of Christ!

He wanted her to be sure, to understand the change in him to the full,
and he would take nothing until it was fairly due!

He was indeed a true and gallant gentleman, Mary thought, as she heard
the grave young voice and saw the firelight playing upon the strong,
clean-cut profile.

She had been attracted to him from the first. No one had ever stirred
her as he had done. Liking and powerful attraction had grown into love,
strong, steadfast, and sure.

But there had always been that great and terrible barrier between them.
She could not give herself to an infidel. For that was what it meant,
ugly and harsh as the word was. He did not really and truly believe
there was a God. He was an atheist and infidel, even as Joseph himself
had been.

And now, and now! It was all over, God had spoken and revealed Himself
to the blind, ignorant heart!

The man was speaking. Thomas was telling her of how this marvel had come
about.

"It was not only Joseph's great magnetic powers, the marvellous way in
which he can stir one, that influenced me. A great orator is not
necessarily a Christian; the personal force which hypnotizes and directs
the thoughts and movements of a crowd is not necessarily derived from
belief. I recognized, of course, that I had come in contact with a
personality that was probably unique in the modern world. I saw it at
once, I was dominated by it; I put my money and influence at Joseph's
disposal because I was perfectly certain of his goodness and his power
for good. I knew that I was doing right. But that, after all, was not
accepting the Christian faith. Even the miraculous things that I have
seen him do, or know of his having done, did not in themselves convince
me. Natural causes might account for them. They might be produced by
powers superior in intensity, but not different in kind, to those latent
in all of us."

Mary listened carefully to the grave and reasoned statement. Every now
and then there was a little break and trembling in the young man's
voice, telling of the hidden fire beneath the veneer of self-control.
The lovely girl who listened half smiled with love and tenderness once
or twice.

"And what was it really, dear, in the end, that brought you to the foot
of the Cross?" she said gently.

At the word "dear" he started violently, and made a quick movement
towards her. His face was flushed with joy, his eyes shone.

Then, with a great effort, he restrained himself. She could see how his
hands were clenched, could hear how his breathing came fast from his
parted lips.

"It was the simplest and yet the most wonderful thing possible," he
said. "I had been thinking about these questions for months. I read
theology. I went to the churches and chapels of every sect, and, as you
know, I couldn't believe. I know the reason now. I wanted to believe in
order that we might be closer together, you and I, love of my heart. I
did not want to believe because my heart was touched, and I loved God!
Then Joseph came into my life, and more and more I tried. But it was
still of no use.

"But I think my heart must have been softened insensibly by being in
daily contact with a nature so saintly and a personality so much in
communion with the Unseen as Joseph is. A little time ago, as I was
reading the Gospel of St. John, one night, just before I went to bed, a
sudden revolution took place in all my feelings and desires. These were
the words--

"'And after eight days again His disciples were within, and Thomas was
with them; then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the
midst, and said, Peace be unto you.

"'Then saith He to Thomas, reach hither thy finger, and behold My hands;
and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into My side; and be not
faithless, but believing.

"'And Thomas answered and said unto Him, My Lord and my God.' And when
I read those words, Mary, they seemed to come straight to my heart, to
be spoken to me, Thomas Ducaine. I saw, for the first time, the long,
frightful agony upon the Cross. I knew, as I had never known before,
what the Son of God had suffered for me. A great rush of love and
adoration came over me. With streaming eyes I knelt and prayed for
forgiveness, I lost myself in Him and for His sake alone. All thoughts
of what I might gain from surrender to Jesus and from loving Him were
absent from my mind and consciousness. I loved Him for Himself--very God
and very man, begotten not made, being of one substance with the Father.

"I said the Lord's Prayer, and then I slept. I would not come to you at
once. I told Joseph, and he blessed me and seemed happier than I had
ever seen him before. 'Go to her at once, Thomas,' he said to me. Tell
her that Jesus has come to you, that your great earthly love is
irradiated and made perfect by your love for Him Who was present at the
marriage feast of Cana.'

"But I wouldn't go at once. I distrusted myself. I wanted to wait and
see if my new belief would stand the test of time, if it was more than a
mere passing emotion of the brain. Yet, every day since then it has
grown stronger and more strong. I have beaten through the waves of
doubt. I have overcome the assaults of the powers and principalities of
the air, who would obscure the light for me. I am a Christian, with all
the splendor which that word confers. I have reached the Rock of Ages,
and the tempest is over, the winds are stilled.

"To-day Joseph said this to me: 'Delay no longer. You are a new man in
Christ Jesus. It has been given to me to know that the hour has come. Go
to my dear sister in Christ, that gentle, lovely lady, and tell her of
your love. She will be ready and waiting for you. This, also, I know,
for it has been told me by the Holy Ghost.'

"That is the message which I said in my letter to you that I was to
bring you from Joseph. And now, and now, dearest, most beautiful and
best, you have heard all my story."

With these words he suddenly rose and stood above her, looking down at a
head which was now bowed, at white hands that were clasped together upon
her knees.

There was a momentary silence, and then a single deep sob of happiness
and realization came from the girl upon the sofa.

The sound dispelled all his hesitation. It brought him back from the
mystical realms of thought and spiritual memory to pure human emotion
and love.

He stooped down quickly and caught her by the arms, raising her up to
him with a strong grasp that would not be denied.

Then two words rang out like a bell in the quiet room--"At last!"

She was in his arms now, close--ah, close! to the heart that beat for
her alone. The freshness of her pure lips was pressed to his.

The moment was of heaven, and from heaven. Two pure and noble natures
were united by God in their love for each other. And now they are
sitting side by side and hand in hand.

The world is changed for them. Never again will it be the same, for they
have tasted of the fruits of Paradise, have heard music which echoes
from the shining pavements of the blest ...

"Darling, there are no words at all in which to tell you how I love you.
I have not a thought in the world which is not bound up in you, not a
wish that is not centred in you."

"And I in you. Oh, Tom, I did not know it was possible to be so happy."

How long they sat thus in the quiet, dainty room neither of them could
have said. Time, so slow moving and leaden-footed in the hours of hope,
flies with swiftest wings when hope has blossomed into fruition.

There was so much to say and tell! All their thoughts and hopes about
each other from the very first must be mutually related, all the hidden
secrets laid bare.

"Did you really think that of me, sweetheart? Oh, if I'd only known!..."

"But I wasn't different to other girls, really, darling. It was only
because you, you loved me!"

Happy, roseate moments! Perhaps they are the best and finest which life
has to give, that God bestows upon his servants here below.

The door opened, and a little group of people entered the room--Lady
Kirwan, Sir Augustus, Marjorie, and with them Joseph himself.

No one spoke for a moment. The new-comers all saw that the lovers were
sitting hand in hand, that a declaration had been made.

Then pretty Marjorie, regardless of form or ceremony or the presence of
the rest, ran to her cousin, put her arms round her neck, and kissed
her.

"Oh, you dear darling!" she said; "I am so glad--oh, so, so happy!"

It was most prettily and spontaneously done. Nothing could have been
more natural, charming or welcome.

There were tears in Sir Augustus' eyes, as that genial, kind-hearted
worldling held out his hand to Sir Thomas Ducaine.

"I congratulate you, my dear boy," he said heartily. "I see how it is
with my dear niece and you. I love Mary like a daughter, and there are
few people to whom I would rather trust her than to you. God bless you
both! Mary, love, come and kiss your uncle."

There was a hum of excited, happy talk, and then Sir Augustus, a man who
had had always a great sense of "celebrating" events by some
time-honored ceremony, suddenly said:

"Now we'll have a drink out of the loving-cup to Mary and Sir Thomas."

Nobody there wanted wine, but no one liked to baulk the genial and
excited old gentleman. But, just as he was about to press the bell and
give the order, Sir Augustus suddenly paused. He looked at Joseph, for
whom, by this time, he had acquired considerable regard, not unmixed
with fear, though quite destitute of any real understanding of him.

"Oh--er--Mr. Joseph," he said, "I hope you won't mind----"

Sir Augustus had an idea that religion and teetotalism were the same
thing and were inseparable. He was quite unable to differentiate between
the two, no doubt because he knew absolutely nothing of either.

"Mind, Sir Augustus!" Joseph said, in surprise. "Why should I mind, and
for what reason?"

The baronet did not quite know what to answer. "Oh, well, you know," he
said at length. "I had an idea that you might object. Never mind."

Joseph laughed. The grave and beautiful face seemed singularly happy.
Care had passed from it for a time; he looked with eyes of love at Mary
and Sir Thomas, with eyes of blessing and of love. The stern denunciator
of evil, the prophet and evangelist of God, who warned the world of its
wickedness, had disappeared. In his stead was the kindly friend
rejoicing in the joy of those who were dear to him.

A servant brought a great two-handled gold cup, which had been filled
with wine.

Sir Augustus handed it to Lady Kirwan. The dame lifted the heavy
chalice, jewelled with great amethysts, which had been presented to her
husband by the Corporation of the City of London.

"My dear, dear niece," she said, while the tears gathered in her eyes;
"I drink to your continual happiness, and to the name I bore, and which
you bear now, the noble name of Lys!"

Then Sir Augustus took the cup. "To my pretty Mary, whom I love as if
she were a child of mine!" said the good man; "and to you, Tom Ducaine,
who will make her a true husband, and are a gallant lover."

He passed the cup to his daughter Marjorie. The girl lifted it, looked
straight at Mary Lys with a curious meaning and intentness in her eyes,
and then said, "With my love of your true love on this happiest of all
happy hours."

She handed back the golden cup to her father, who was about to set it
down upon a side table, when the Teacher spoke.

"Are you going to leave me out of your ceremony?" Joseph said.

"Very sorry, very sorry," the baronet replied, in confusion. "I wasn't
quite sure." He handed the cup to Joseph, but the Teacher only lifted it
on high. "May God bless your union, my dear brother and sister," he said
simply, and placed it on a table nearby.

The deep music of the voice, the love in it, the deep sincerity, came to
them all like a benison.

"You have given me everything in this world and hopes of everything in
the next, Joseph," said Sir Thomas Ducaine.

"You were Lluellyn's friend," Mary whispered.

"And you're a jolly good fellow, Mr. Joseph," said Sir Augustus, "in
spite of all your critics, and I shall be glad to say so always."

At that, for the first time during their knowledge of him, Joseph began
to laugh. His merriment was full-throated and deep, came from real
amusement and pleasure, was mirth unalloyed.

Joseph finished his laughter. "May this hour," he said gravely, "be the
beginning of a long, joyous and God-fearing life for you, Mary and
Thomas. Hand in hand and heart to heart may you do the work of the
Lord."

Then, with a bow to all of the company assembled there, he went away.

When he had left the great house and walked for a few minutes, he came
upon a huge public-house--a glittering structure at the corner of two
streets.

He stopped in front of the great gaudy place, looked at it for a moment,
sighed heavily, and went in.




