The Project Gutenberg EBook of Joseph Priestley, by Thomas Edward Thorpe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Joseph Priestley

Author: Thomas Edward Thorpe

Release Date: February 28, 2018 [EBook #56663]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JOSEPH PRIESTLEY ***




Produced by Sonya Schermann, Stephen Hutcheson, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)






                                ENGLISH
                             MEN OF SCIENCE


                               EDITED BY
                        J. REYNOLDS GREEN, D.Sc.


                            JOSEPH PRIESTLEY


                         _All Rights Reserved_

                      [Illustration: J Priestley]




                            JOSEPH PRIESTLEY


                                   BY
                          T. E. THORPE, F.R.S.
                               AUTHOR OF
                   HUMPHRY DAVY, POET AND PHILOSOPHER
                               ETC., ETC.

                         PUBLISHED IN LONDON BY
                      J. M. DENT & CO., AND IN NEW
                       YORK BY E. P. DUTTON & CO.
                                  1906




                                PREFACE


In the following account of the life and work of that “hero and type of
the intellectual energy of the eighteenth century”—the “honest
heretic”—Joseph Priestley, I have, to a considerable extent, made the
subject of it tell his own story. After Priestley’s death there was
found among his papers a short autobiography, dealing with the main
events of his life up to the time of his settlement in America. This was
subsequently published, with additions and explanatory notes, by his
eldest son. Of this biography I have made full use, considering it, of
course, as the best authority on the matters to which it refers.

For the account of the Warrington Academy, with which institution
Priestley was connected for some years, and which connection profoundly
affected his career, I am mainly indebted to Mr Henry A. Bright’s paper
in the _Transactions of the Historic Society of Lancashire and
Cheshire_, 1858-59.

The Yates papers in the possession of the Royal Society have also
afforded me much assistance, and have been freely drawn upon.

I am also indebted to the late Mr Henry Carrington Bolton’s collection
for certain letters and for information concerning the Lunar Society of
Birmingham.

For the graphic account of the Birmingham Riots of 1791, when
Priestley’s house was wrecked, and his library and laboratory destroyed,
as described by an eye-witness, Miss Martha Russell, I have to express
my obligations to her relative, Dr W. J. Russell, who first made me
acquainted with her narrative. I am also indebted to Dr Russell for a
copy of the print from which has been prepared the illustration showing
the destruction of Priestley’s house.

I desire also to acknowledge my indebtedness to Dr Aikin for permission
to publish certain of Priestley’s letters to his distinguished
connection, Mrs Barbauld.

I am further under obligations to Lady Priestley, Lady Roscoe and Mr
Sydney Lupton for much useful assistance.

The portrait of Priestley, which forms the frontispiece, has been
reproduced in photogravure from the painting by Artaud, now in Dr
Williams’ Theological Library in Gordon Square. I have to thank the
Trustees of the Library for their kindness in allowing the copy to be
made.

                                                                T. E. T.

London: _May_ 1906.




                                CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

Chapter I                                                              1
Birth—Parentage—Home Life—Early Education.

