V

A SENSITIVE SOUL SEEKS SALVE

As Mr. Feuerstein left Hilda on the previous Sunday night he promised
to meet her in Tompkins Square the next evening--at the band concert.
She walked up and down with Sophie, her spirits gradually sinking after
half-past eight and a feeling of impending misfortune settling in
close.  She was not conscious of the music, though the second part of
the program contained the selections from Wagner which she loved best.
She feverishly searched the crowd and the half-darkness beyond.  She
imagined that every approaching tall man was her lover.  With the
frankness to which she had been bred she made no concealment of her
heart-sick anxiety.

"He may have to be at the theater," said Sophie, herself extremely
uneasy. Partly through shrewdness, partly through her natural suspicion
of strangers, she felt that Mr. Feuerstein, upon whom she was building,
was not a rock.

"No," replied Hilda.  "He told me he wouldn't be at the theater, but
would surely come here."  The fact that her lover had said so settled
it to her mind.

They did not leave the Square until ten o'clock, when it was almost
deserted and most of its throngs of an hour before were in bed sleeping
soundly in the content that comes from a life of labor.  And when she
did get to bed she lay awake for nearly an hour, tired though she was.
Without doubt some misfortune had befallen him--"He's been hurt or is
ill," she decided.  The next morning she stood in the door of the shop
watching for the postman on his first round; as he turned the corner of
Second Street, she could not restrain herself, but ran to meet him.

"Any letter for me?" she inquired in a voice that compelled him to feel
personal guilt in having to say "No."

It was a day of mistakes in weights and in making up packages, a day of
vain searching for some comforting explanation of Mr. Feuerstein's
failure and silence.  After supper Sophie came and they went to the
Square, keeping to the center of it where the lights were brightest and
the people fewest.

"I'm sure something's happened," said Sophie.  "Maybe Otto has told him
a story--or has--"

"No--not Otto."  Hilda dismissed the suggestion as impossible. She had
known Otto too long and too well to entertain for an instant the idea
that he could be underhanded.  "There's only one reason--he's sick,
very sick--too sick to send word."

"Let's go and see," said Sophie, as if she had not planned it hours
before.

Hilda hesitated.  "It might look as if I--"  She did not finish.

"But you needn't show yourself," replied Sophie.  "You can wait down
the street and I'll go up to the door and won't give my name."

Hilda clasped her arm more tightly about Sophie's waist and they set
out.  They walked more and more swiftly until toward the last they were
almost running.  At the corner of Fifteenth Street and First Avenue
Hilda stopped.  "I'll go through to Stuyvesant Square," she said, "and
wait there on a bench near the Sixteenth Street entrance.  You'll be
quick, won't you?"

Sophie went to Mr. Feuerstein's number and rang.  After a long wait a
slovenly girl in a stained red wrapper, her hair in curl-papers and one
stocking down  about her high-heeled slipper, opened the door and said:
"What do you want?  I sent the maid for a pitcher of beer."

"I want to ask about Mr. Feuerstein," replied Sophie.

The girl's pert, prematurely-wrinkled face took on a quizzical smile.
"Oh!" she said.  "You can go up to his room.  Third floor, back.  Knock
hard--he's a heavy sleeper."

Sophie climbed the stairs and knocked loudly.  "Come!" was the answer
in German, in Mr. Feuerstein's deep stage-voice.

She opened the door a few inches and said through the crack: "It's me,
Mr. Feuerstein--Sophie Liebers--from down in Avenue A--Hilda's friend."

"Come in," was Mr. Feuerstein's reply, in a weary voice, after a pause.
From Ganser's he had come straight home and had been sitting there ever
since, depressed, angry, perplexed.

Sophie pushed the door wide and stood upon the threshold. "Hilda's over
in Stuyvesant Square," she said.  "She thought you might be sick, so we
came.  But if you go to her, you must pretend you came by accident and
didn't see me."

Mr. Feuerstein reflected, but not so deeply that he neglected to pose
before Sophie as a tragedy-king.  And it called for little pretense, so
desperate and forlorn was he feeling.  Should he go or should he send
Sophie about her business?  There was no hope that the rich brewer
would take him in; there was every reason to suspect that Peter would
arrange to have the marriage quietly annulled.  At most he could get a
few thousands, perhaps only hundreds, by threatening a scandal.  Yes,
it would be wise, on the whole, to keep little Hilda on the string.

"I am very ill," he said gloomily, "but I will go."

Sophie felt hopeful and energetic again.  "I won't come up to her till
you leave her."

"You are a good girl--a noble creature."  Mr. Feuerstein took her hand
and pretended to be profoundly moved by her friendship.

Sophie gave him a look of simplicity and warm-heartedness.  Her talent
for acting had not been spoiled by a stage experience. "Hilda's my
friend," she said earnestly.  "And I want to see her happy."

"Noble creature!" exclaimed Mr. Feuerstein.  "May God reward you!"  And
he dashed his hand across his eyes.

He went to the mirror on his bureau, carefully arranged the yellow
aureole, carefully adjusted the soft light hat.  Then with feeble step
he descended the stairs.  As he moved down the street his face was
mournful and his shoulders were drooped--a stage invalid.  When Hilda
saw him coming she started up and gave a little cry of delight; but as
she noted his woebegone appearance, a very real paleness came to her
cheeks and very real tears to her great dark eyes.

Mr. Feuerstein sank slowly into the seat beside her.  "Soul's wife," he
murmured. "Ah--but I have been near to death.  The strain of the
interview with your father--the anguish--the hope--oh, what a curse it
is to have a sensitive soul!  And my old trouble"--he laid his hand
upon his heart and slowly shook his head--"returned.  It will end me
some day."

Hilda was trembling with sympathy.  She put her hand upon his. "If you
had only sent word, dear," she said reproachfully, "I would have come.
Oh--I do love you so, Carl!  I could hardly eat or sleep--and--"

"The truth would have been worse than silence," he said in a hollow
voice.  He did not intend the double meaning of his remark; the Gansers
were for the moment out of his mind, which was absorbed in his acting.
"But it is over for the present--yes, over, my priceless pearl.  I can
come to see you soon.  If I am worse I shall send you word."

"But can't I come to see you?"

"No, bride of my dreams.  It would not be--suitable.  We must respect
the little conventions.  You must wait until I come."

His tone was decided.  She felt that he knew best.  In a few minutes he
rose.  "I must return to my room," he said wearily. "Ah, heart's
delight, it is terrible for a strong man to find himself thus weak.
Pity me.  Pray for me."

He noted with satisfaction her look of love and anxiety.  It was some
slight salve to his cruelly wounded vanity.  He walked feebly away, but
it was pure acting, as he no longer felt so downcast.  He had soon put
Hilda into the background and was busy with his plans for revenge upon
Ganser--"a vulgar animal who insulted me when I honored him by marrying
his ugly gosling." Before he fell asleep that night he had himself
wrought up to a state of righteous indignation.  Ganser had cheated,
had outraged him--him, the great, the noble, the eminent.


Early the next morning he went down to a dingy frame building that
cowered meanly in the shadow of the Criminal Court House. He mounted a
creaking flight of stairs and went in at a low door on which "Loeb,
Lynn, Levy and McCafferty" was painted in black letters.  In the narrow
entrance he brushed against a man on the way out, a man with a hangdog
look and short bristling hair and the pastily-pallid skin that comes
from living long away from the sunlight.  Feuerstein shivered
slightly--was it at the touch of such a creature or at the suggestions
his appearance started?  In front of him was a ground-glass partition
with five doors in it. At a dirty greasy pine table sat a boy--one of
those child veterans the big city develops.  He had a long and
extremely narrow head.  His eyes were close together, sharp and shifty.
His expression was sophisticated and cynical.  "Well, sir!" he said
with curt impudence, giving Feuerstein a gimlet-glance.

"I want to see Mr. Loeb."  Feuerstein produced a card--it was one of
his last remaining half-dozen and was pocket-worn.

The office boy took it with unveiled sarcasm in his eyes and in the
corners of his mouth.  He disappeared through one of the five doors,
almost immediately reappeared at another, closed it mysteriously behind
him and went to a third door.  He  threw it open and stood aside.  "At
the end of the hall," he said. "The door with Mr. Loeb's name on it.
Knock and walk right in."

Feuerstein followed the directions and found himself in a dingy little
room, smelling of mustiness and stale tobacco, and lined with law
books, almost all on crime and divorce.  Loeb, Lynn, Levy and
McCafferty were lawyers to the lower grades of the criminal and shady
only.  They defended thieves and murderers; they prosecuted or defended
scandalous divorce cases; they packed juries and suborned perjury and
they tutored false witnesses in the way to withstand cross-examination.
In private life they were four home-loving, law-abiding citizens.

Loeb looked up from his writing and said with contemptuous cordiality:
"Oh--Mr. Feuerstein.  Glad to see you--AGAIN. What's the trouble--NOW?"

At "again" and "now" Feuerstein winced slightly.  He looked nervously
at Loeb.

"It's been--let me see--at least seven years since I saw you,"
continued Loeb, who was proud of his amazing memory.  He was a squat,
fat man, with a coarse brown skin and heavy features.  He was carefully
groomed and villainously perfumed and his clothes were in the extreme
of the loudest fashion.  A diamond of great size was in his bright-blue
scarf; another, its match, loaded down his fat little finger.  Both
could be unscrewed and set in a hair ornament which his wife wore at
first nights or when they dined in state at Delmonico's.  As he studied
Feuerstein, his face had its famous smile, made by shutting his teeth
together and drawing his puffy lips back tightly from them.

"That is all past and gone," said Feuerstein.  "As a lad I was saved by
you from the consequences of boyish folly.  And now, a man grown, I
come to you to enlist your aid in avenging an insult to my honor, an--"

"Be as brief as possible," cut in Loeb.  "My time is much occupied.
The bald facts, please--FACTS, and BALD."

Feuerstein settled himself and prepared to relate his story as if he
were on the stage, with the orchestra playing low and sweet. "I met a
woman and loved her," he began in a deep, intense voice with a
passionate tremolo.

"A bad start," interrupted Loeb.  "If you go on that way, we'll never
get anywhere.  You're a frightful fakir and liar, Feuerstein.  You
were, seven years ago; of course, the habit's grown on you.  Speak out!
What do you want?  As your lawyer, I must know things exactly as they
are."

"I ran away with a girl--the daughter  of the brewer, Peter Ganser,"
said Feuerstein, sullen but terse.  "And her father wouldn't receive
me--shut her up--put me out."

"And you want your wife?"

"I want revenge."

"Of course--cash.  Well, Ganser's a rich man.  I should say he'd give
up a good deal to get rid of YOU."  Loeb gave that mirthless and
mirth-strangling smile as he accented the "you."

"He's got to give up!" said Feuerstein fiercely.

"Slowly!  Slowly!" Loeb leaned forward and looked into Feuerstein's
face.  "You mustn't forget."

Feuerstein's eyes shifted rapidly as he said in a false voice: "She got
a divorce years ago."

"M-m-m," said Loeb.

"Anyhow, she's away off in Russia."

"I don't want you to confess a crime you haven't come to me about,"
said Loeb, adding with peculiar emphasis:  "Of course, if we KNEW you
were still married to the Mrs. Feuerstein of seven years ago we
couldn't take the present case.  As it is--the best way is to bluff the
old brewer.  He doesn't want publicity; neither do you.  But you know
he doesn't, and he doesn't know that you love quiet."

"Ganser treated me infamously.  He must sweat for it.  I'm nothing if
not a good hater."

"No doubt," said Loeb dryly.  "And you have rights which the law
safeguards."

"What shall I do?"

"Leave that to us.  How much do you want--how much damages?"

"He ought to pay at least twenty-five thousand."

Loeb shrugged his shoulders.  "Ridiculous!" he said. "Possibly the five
without the twenty.  And how do you expect to pay us?"

"I'm somewhat pressed just at the moment.  But I thought"--Feuerstein
halted.

"That we'd take the case as a speculation?  Well, to oblige an old
client, we will.  But you must agree to give us all we can get over and
above five thousand--half what we get if it's below that."

"Those are hard terms," remonstrated Feuerstein.  The more he had
thought on his case, the larger his expectations had become.

"Very generous terms, in the circumstances.  You can take it or leave
it."

"I can't do anything without you.  I accept."

"Very well."  Loeb took up his pen, as if he were done with Feuerstein,
but went on:  "And you're SURE that the--the FORMER Mrs. Feuerstein is
divorced--and won't turn up?"

"Absolutely.  She swore she'd never enter any country where I was."

"Has she any friends who are likely to hear of this?"

"She knew no one here."

"All right.  Go into the room to the left there.  Mr. Travis or Mr.
Gordon will take your statement of the facts--names, dates, all
details.  Good morning."

Feuerstein went to Travis, small and sleek, smooth and sly.  When
Travis had done with him, he showed him out.  "Call day after
to-morrow," he said, "and when you come, ask for me.  Mr. Loeb never
bothers with these small cases."

Travis reported to Loeb half an hour later, when Feuerstein's statement
had been typewritten.  Loeb read the statement through twice with great
care.

"Most complete, Mr. Travis," was his comment.  "You've done a good
piece of work."  He sat silent, drumming noiselessly on the table with
his stumpy, hairy, fat fingers.  At last he began: "It ought to be
worth at least twenty thousand.  Do you know Ganser?"

"Just a speaking acquaintance."

"Excellent.  What kind of a man is he?"

"Stupid and ignorant, but not without a certain cunning.  We can get at
him all right, though.  He's deadly afraid of social scandal.  Wants to
get into the German Club and become a howling swell.  But he don't
stand a chance, though he don't know it."

"You'd better go to see him yourself," said Loeb.

"I'll be glad to do it, Mr. Loeb.  Isn't your man--this Feuerstein--a
good bit to the queer?"

"A dead beat--one of the worst kind--the born gentleman.  You've
noticed, perhaps, that where a man or woman has been brought up to live
without work, to live  off other people's work, there's nothing they
wouldn't stoop to, to keep on living that way.  As for this chap, if he
had got started right, he'd be operating up in the Fifth Avenue
district.  He used to have a wife.  He SAYS he's divorced."

Loeb and Travis looked each at the other significantly.  "I see," said
Travis.

"Neither side wants scandal.  Still, I think you're right, that
Ganser's good for twenty thousand."

"You can judge better after you've felt him," replied Loeb. "You'd
better go at once.  Give him the tip that Feuerstein's about to force
him to produce his daughter in court.  But you understand.  Try to
induce him to go to Beck."  Travis grinned and Loeb's eyes twinkled.
"You might lay it on strong about Feuerstein's actor-craze for getting
into the papers."

"That's a grand idea," exclaimed Travis.  "I don't think I'll suggest
any  sum if he agrees to go to Beck.  Beck can get at least five
thousand more out of him than any other lawyer in town."

"Beck's the wonder," said Loeb.

"LOEB and Beck," corrected Travis in a flattering tone.

Loeb waved his hot, fat head gently to and fro as if a pleasant cooling
stream were being played upon it.  "I think I have got a 'pretty good
nut on me,' as John L. used to say," he replied. "I think I do know a
little about the law.  And now hustle yourself, my boy.  This case must
be pushed.  The less time Ganser has to look about, the better for--our
client."


Travis found Ganser in his office at the brewery.  The old man's face
was red and troubled.

"I've come on very unpleasant business, Mr. Ganser," said Travis with
deference.  "As you know, I am with Loeb, Lynn, Levy and McCafferty.
Our client, Mr. Feuerstein--"

Ganser leaped to his feet, apoplectic.

"Get out!" he shouted, "I don't speak with you!"

"As an officer of the court, Mr. Ganser," said Travis suavely, "it is
my painful duty to insist upon a hearing.  We lawyers can't select our
clients.  We must do our best for all comers. Our firm has sent me out
of kindly feeling for you.  We are all men of family, like yourself,
and, when the case was forced on us, we at once tried to think how we
could be of service to you--of course, while doing our full legal duty
by our client. I've come in the hope of helping you to avoid the
disgrace of publicity."

"Get out!" growled Peter.  "I know lawyers--they're all thieves.  Get
out!"  But Travis knew that Peter wished him to stay.

"I needn't enlarge on our client--Mr. Feuerstein.  You know he's an
actor.  You know how they crave notoriety.  You know how eager the
newspapers are to take up and make a noise about matters of this kind."

Peter was sweating profusely, and had to seat himself.  "It's
outrageous!" he groaned in German.

"Feuerstein has ordered us to have your daughter brought into court at
once--to-morrow.  He's your daughter's lawful husband and she's well
beyond the legal age.  Of course, he can't compel her to live with him
or you to support him.  But he can force the courts to inquire
publicly.  And I'm sorry to say we'll not be able to restrain him or
the press, once he gets the ball to rolling."

Peter felt it rolling over him, tons heavy.  "What you talk about?" he
said, on his guard but eager.

"It's an outrage that honest men should be thus laid open to attack,"
continued Travis in a sympathetic tone.  "But if the law permits these
outrages, it also provides remedies.  Your daughter's mistake may cost
you a little something, but there need be no scandal."

"What do you mean by that?" asked Ganser.

"Really, I've talked too much already, Mr. Ganser.  I almost forgot,
for the moment, that I'm representing Mr. Feuerstein. But, as between
friends, I'd advise you to go to some good divorce lawyers--a firm that
is reputable but understands the ins and outs of the business, some
firm like Beck and Brown.  They can tell you exactly what to do."

Ganser regarded his "friend" suspiciously but credulously. "I'll see,"
he said.  "But I won't pay a cent."

"Right you are, sir!  And there may be a way out of it without paying.
But Beck can tell you."  Travis made a motion toward the inside pocket
of his coat, then pretended to change his mind. "I came here to serve
the papers on you," he said apologetically.  "But I'll take the
responsibility of delaying--it can't make Feuerstein any less married,
and your daughter's certainly safe in her father's care.  I'll wait in
the hope that YOU'LL take the first step."

Ganser lost no time in going to his own lawyers--Fisher, Windisch and
Carteret, in the Postal Telegraph Building.  He told Windisch the whole
story.  "And," he ended, "I've got a detective looking up the rascal.
He's a wretch--a black wretch."

"We can't take your case, Mr. Ganser," said Windisch.  "It's wholly out
of our line.  We don't do that kind of work.  I should say Beck and
Brown were your people.  They stand well, and at the same time they
know all the tricks."

"But they may play me the tricks."

"I think not.  They stand well at the bar."

"Yes, yes," sneered Peter, who was never polite, was always insultingly
frank to any one who served him for pay.  "I know that bar."

"Well, Mr. Ganser," replied Windisch, angry but willing to take almost
anything from a rich client, "I guess you can look out for yourself.
Of course there's always danger, once you get outside the straight
course of justice.  As I understand it, your main point is no
publicity?"

"That's right," replied Ganser.  "No newspapers--no trial."

"Then Beck and Brown.  Drive as close a bargain as you can.  But you'll
have to give up a few thousands, I'm afraid."

Ganser went over into Nassau Street  and found Beck in his office.  He
gazed with melancholy misgivings at this lean man with hair and
whiskers of a lifeless black.  Beck suggested a starved black spider,
especially when you were looking into his cold, amused, malignant black
eyes.  He made short work of the guileless brewer, who was dazed and
frightened by the meshes in which he was enveloped.  Staring at the
horrid specter of publicity which these men of craft kept before him,
he could not vigorously protest against extortion.  Beck discovered
that twenty thousand was his fighting limit.

"Leave the matter entirely in our hands," said Beck.  "We'll make the
best bargain we can.  But Feuerstein has shrewd lawyers--none better.
That man Loeb--"  Beck threw up his arms. "Of course," he continued, "I
had to know your limit.  I'll try to make the business as cheap for you
as possible."

"Put 'em off," said Ganser.  "My Lena's sick."

His real reason was his hopes from the reports on Feuerstein's past,
which his detective would make.  But he thought it was not necessary to
tell Beck about the detective.



