X

RECONSTRUCTION FROM THE WAR

We have seen how impossible it is to forecast the new world that will
follow the War, we know merely that it will be utterly new.
Nevertheless, the great tendencies already at work we can partly discern
and recognize something of what they promise.  It is well to try to see
them, that we may be not too unready to welcome the opportunity and
accept the burden of the world that is being born in pain.

Peace and prosperity produce a peculiar type of conservatism.  People
are then relatively free in action and expression, things are going well
with them, and they are instinctively inclined to let well enough alone.
Thus in thought they tend to a conservative inertia.

On the other hand, in periods of great strain and suffering, as in war
time, thought is stimulated, all ordinary views are broken down and the
most radical notions are widely disseminated and even taken for granted
by those who, shortly before, would have been scandalized by them.
Action and certain phases of free speech are, in such a period, much
more widely restrained by authority.  There is a swift and strong
development of social control, urged by necessity.

Thus, in war time, there is the curious paradox of ever widening
radicalism in thought, with constantly decreasing freedom in action and
expression. When the discrepancy becomes too great, you have the
explosion--Revolution. This cause hastened and made more extreme the
Russian Revolution, which had been simmering for a century.  It has not
yet appeared in Germany because of the forty years of successful work in
drilling the mind of the German people to march in goose-step; yet the
increasing signs of questioning the infallibility of the existing regime
and system in Germany give evidence that there, too, the conflict is at
work.

With ourselves, the opposition appears, as yet, only in minor degree.
Nevertheless, it is here.  On the one hand, are the registration,
conscription and espionage measures, the effort to control news, the
governmental supervision of food supplies, transportation, production
and corporation earnings, the war taxes.  On the other hand, thought is
so stimulated that everything is questioned: our political system, our
social institutions--marriage, the family, education.  As some one says,
"Nothing is radical now."  We probably shall escape a sudden revolution,
but the conflict must produce profound readjustment in every aspect of
our life; for thought and action must come measurably together, since
they are related as soul and body.

There are singular eddies in the main current both ways.  For instance,
the exigencies and sufferings of war produce a reaction toward narrower,
orthodox forms of religion and a harsher spirit of nationalism; while in
fields of action apart from the struggle, freedom and even license may
increase, as in sex-relations.  Nevertheless these cross-currents, while
they may obscure, do not alter the main tendencies, which move swiftly
and increasingly toward the essential conflict.

Even before our actual entrance into the War, its profound influence
upon both our thinking and our conduct and institutions was evident.
Now that we are in the conflict that influence is multiplied.  We are
aroused to new seriousness of thought.  The frivolity and selfish
pleasure-seeking that have marked our life for recent decades are
decreasing.  We may reasonably hope that the literature of superficial
cleverness and smart cynicism, which has been in vogue for the last
period, will have had its day, that the perpetrators of such literature
will be, measurably speaking, without audience at the conclusion of the
War.

The philosophy of complacency, at least, will be at an end, and the
world will face with new earnestness the problem of life.  This
generation will be tired, perhaps exhausted, by the titanic struggle;
but youth comes on, fresh and eager, with exhaustless vital energy, and
the generations to come will take the heritage and work out the new
philosophy.  As Nature quickly and quietly covers the worst scars we
make in her breast, so Man has a power of recovery, beyond all that we
could dream.  It is to that we must look, across the time of demoniac
destruction.

We may even dare to hope that the next half-century will see a great
development of noble literature in our own land.  War for liberty,
justice and humanity always tends to create such a productive period in
literature and the other fine arts.  The struggle with Persia was behind
the Periclean age in Athens.  It was the conflict of England with the
overshadowing might of Spain that so vitalized the Elizabethan period.
The Revolution was behind the one important school of literature our own
country has produced hitherto.

Since this War is waged on a scale far more colossal than any other in
human history, and since liberty and democracy are at stake, not only in
one land, but throughout the world and for the entire future of
humanity, it is reasonable to expect that the stimulation to the
creation of art and literature will be far greater than that following
any previous struggle. Where the sacrifice for high aims has been
greatest, the inspiration should be greatest, as in France.  The
literature currently produced, as in the books of Loti, Maeterlinck and
Rolland, is scrappy and disappointing, it is true; but that is to be
expected when the whole nation is strained to its last energy and
gasping for breath, under the titanic struggle, and is no test of what
will be.  In spite of the destruction of so large a fraction of her
manhood, France will surely rise from the ashes of this world
conflagration regenerated and reinspired.  The pessimism of her late
decades will be gone.  The literature and other art she will produce
will be instinct with new earnestness and exalted vision, and she may
excel even her own great past.

We too are awakening.  Since the War began, all over the United States,
men and women have been thinking more earnestly and have been more
willing to listen to the expression of serious thought than ever before
for the last quarter century.  Now that the hour of sacrifice has
struck, this earnestness must greatly deepen.  Perhaps we, too, may have
our golden age of art.

The same inspiration carries naturally into the religious life.  It is
true, as we have seen, that there is a cross-current of reversion to
narrower orthodoxy, caused by the War.  The Gods of War are all national
and tribal divinities.  While they rule, the face of the God of Humanity
is veiled. The Kaiser's possessive attitude toward the Divine is but the
extreme case of what War does to the religious life.  Even among
ourselves the tendency shows in such phenomena as the current popular
evangelism--an eloquent, if artfully calculated and vulgarized preaching
of the purely personal virtues, with an ignorance that there is a social
problem in modern civilization, profound as that displayed by a
mediaeval churchman. The evangelist's list of inmates, whom he relegates
to the kingdom of the lost, makes the place singularly attractive to the
lover of good intellectual society.

Nevertheless, the reversion to narrower creeds but indicates the newly
awakened hunger of the religious life.  Men who sacrifice live with
graver earnestness than those who are carelessly prosperous.  Cynicism
and pessimism are children of idleness and frivolity, never of heroic
sacrifice and nobly accepted pain.  These latter foster faith in life
and its infinite and eternal meaning.  Thus, with all the tragic
submerging of our spiritual heritage the War involves, we may hope that
it will cause a revival, not of emotional hysteria, but of deepened
faith in the spirit, in the supreme worth of life, until at last we may
see the dawn of the religion of humanity.




