VII

AMERICA'S DUTY IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

Since the world solution is, at best, so remote, our question is: what
are we to do meantime?  Our entrance into the War partially answers the
question.  We have before us the immediate task of aiding in
overthrowing autocracy and tyranny and of defending our liberties and
those of the nations that stand for democracy.  This is the first duty,
but not the only one.

More definitely than any other nation we have thrown down to the world
the challenge of democracy.  We have said, "Away with kings, we will
have no more of them!  Away with castes and ruling classes, we will have
no more of them!"  As a matter of fact, democracies have no rulers--the
word survives from an older order of society--they have guides, leaders
and representatives.  If you wish to use the word, in a democracy every
man is the ruler--and every woman too, we hope, before long.  To this
ideal we are committed and it carries certain obligations; for every
right carries a duty, and every duty, a right.  Often the best way to
get a privilege is by assuming a responsibility.  That is a truth it
would be well for the leaders of the feminist and labor movements to
recognize. The obligations carried by the challenge of our democracy are
clear.

We Americans should have done, once and for all time, with the diplomacy
of lying and deceit.  Fortunately our recent traditions are in harmony
with this demand; but we should not depend upon the happy accident of an
administration which takes the right attitude.  It should be the open
and universal demand of the American people that those who represent us
shall place the relations we sustain to other nations permanently on the
same plane of frank honesty, generally prevailing among individuals.
Incidentally, any politician or statesman who, at this heart-breaking
crisis of the world's life, dares play party politics with our
international relations, should be damned forever by the vote of the
American people.

Further, it is our duty to have done with all dream of empire building.
It is not for us: let us abandon it frankly and forever.  Those
dependencies which have come to us through the accidents of our history
should be granted autonomous self-government at the earliest moment at
which they can safely take it over--which does not necessarily mean
to-morrow.  If they remain affiliated with us it should be only through
the voluntary choice of the majority of the population dwelling upon
them.

It is, moreover, our duty to lead the world in the effort to form a
federation of the nations and establish the aforesaid world court of
justice, with the international military and naval police to enforce its
judgments.

More than this is demanded: on the basis of the challenge of our
democracy, it is our duty to rise to the point of placing justice higher
than commercial interest.  It is a hard demand; but, with the latent
idealism in our American life, surely we can rise to it.  For instance,
the vexed puzzle of the tariff will never be justly and permanently
settled, till it is settled primarily as a problem of moral
international relationship, and not as one merely of economic interest
and advantage.

For example, a tariff wall between the United States and Canada is as
preposterous an absurdity as would be a long line of bristling
fortifications along the three thousand and more miles of international
boundary.  We are not protecting ourselves from slave labor over there.
They are not protecting themselves from slave labor here.  Barring a few
lines of industry, there are the same conditions of labor, production
and distribution both sides of the line.  The only reason for a tariff
wall is their wish, or our wish, or the wish of each, to gain some
advantage at the expense of the other party.  Now every business man
knows that any trade that benefits one and injures the other party to it
is bad business, as well as bad ethics, in the long run.  Good business
benefits both traders all the time.

On the other hand, when it comes to protecting our labor from
competition with slave labor in other quarters of the earth, we have not
only the right, but the duty to do it.  So when it is a matter of
protecting our industries from being swamped by the unloading of vast
quantities of goods, produced under the feverish and abnormal
conditions, sure to prevail in Europe after the War, we have again, not
only the right, but the duty to do it.

Finally, a still higher call is upon us: we must somehow rise to the
point of placing humanity above the nation.  It is true, "Charity begins
at home," certainly justice should.  One should educate one's own
children, before worrying over the children of the neighborhood; clean
up one's own town, before troubling about the city further away.  Often
the whole is helped best by serving the part; but it is with national
patriotism as it is with family affection.  The latter is a lovely
quality and the source of much that is best in the world; but when
family affection is an instrument for gaining special privilege at the
expense of the good of society, a means of attaining debauching luxury
and selfish aggrandisement, it is an abomination.  The man who prays
God's blessing on himself, his wife and his children, and nobody else,
is a mean man, and he never gets blessed--not from God.  Similarly, the
man who seeks the interest of his own nation, against the welfare of
mankind, who prays God's blessing only on his own people, is equally a
mean man, and his prayer, also, is never answered from the Most High.
The world has advanced too far for the spirit of a narrow nationalism.
The recrudescence of such a spirit is one of the sad consequences of
this world War.  Only in a spirit of international brotherhood, in
dedication to the welfare of humanity, can democracy go towards its
goal.

These are the obligations following upon the challenge of democracy we
have proclaimed to the nations.





