XV

DEMOCRACY AND EDUCATION

All just government is a transient device to make ordered progress
possible. In the kingdom of heaven there would be no government, for if
all human beings saw the best, loved the best and willed the best, the
function of government would be at an end.  Obviously there is no hope
or fear that we shall get into the kingdom of heaven soon, and the
necessity for government will exist for an indefinitely long time.
Nevertheless, government is due to the imperfection of human nature and,
as stated, its aim is ordered progress.  Progress without order is
anarchy; order without progress is stagnation and death.

It must frankly be admitted, moreover, that democracy is not the
shortest road to good government nor to economic efficiency.  That we
recognize this as a people is proved by the drift of our opinion and of
the changes in our lesser institutions.  Take, for instance, our city
government. A few decades ago our cities were so notoriously misgoverned
that they were the scandal of the world.  Our boards of aldermen or
councilmen, representing ward constituencies, with all sorts of local
strings tied to them, were clumsy and unwieldy and easily subject to
corruption.

So, about twenty years ago, all across the country went the cry, "Get a
good mayor, and give him a free hand."  That is the way our great
industries are conducted: a wise captain of industry is secured and
given full control. Being a practical people, and imagining ourselves to
be much more practical than really we are, we said, let us conduct our
city business in the same way. Why not?  Plato showed long ago that you
can get the best government in the shortest time by getting a good
tyrant, and giving him a free hand.

There arc just two objections.  The first is incidental: it is
exceedingly difficult to keep your tyrant good.  Arbitrary authority
over one's fellows is about the most corrupting influence known to man.
No one is great and good enough to be entrusted with it.  Responsible
power sobers and educates, irresponsible power corrupts.  Nevertheless
we pay the price of this error and learn the lesson.

The other objection is more significant.  It is the effect on the rank
and file of the citizenship, for the meaning of democracy is not
immediate results in government, but the education of the citizen, and
that education can come only by fulfilling the functions of citizenship.
Thus it is better to be the free citizen of a democracy, with all the
waste and temporary inefficiency democracy involves, than to be the
inert slave of the most perfect paternal despotism ever devised by man.
Thus the movement away from democratic city government is gravely to be
questioned, no matter what economic results it secures.

The same argument applies to more recent changes, as the commission form
of city government.  As in the previous case, reacting upon the
scandalous situation, we said, "Let us choose the three to five best men
in the community, and let them run the city's business for us."  Nearly
every time this change has been made, the result has been an immediate
cleaning up of the city government; but why?  Chiefly because "a new
broom sweeps clean,"--not so much for the reason that it is new, as
because you are interested in the instrument.  You can get a dirty room
remarkably clean with an old broom, if you will sweep hard enough.  The
cleaning up is due, not primarily to the instrument, but to the hand
that wields it.

To speak less figuratively: the cleaning up of the city government with
the inauguration of the commission system, came because the change was
made by an awakening of the good people of the community.  Good people
have a habit, however, of going to sleep in an astoundingly short time;
but _the gang never sleeps_.  Now suppose, while the good people are
dozing in semi-somnolence, assured that the new broom will sweep of
itself, the gang gets together and elects the three to five worst
gangsters in the city to be the commission?  Is it not evident that the
very added efficiency of the instrument means greater graft and
corruption?

Equally the argument applies to the most recent device suggested--the
city manager plan.  As we have largely taken our schools out of
politics, and have a non-partisan educational expert as superintendent,
so it is suggested we should conduct our city business.  Again, suppose
the gang appoints the city manager: he will be an expert in graft,
rather than in government.

The moment a people gets to trusting to a device it is headed for
danger. There is just one safeguard of democracy, and that is _to keep
the good people awake and at the task all the time_.  Some instruments
are better and some are worse, but the instrument never does the work,
it is the hand and brain that wield it.

If there is one field where we could reasonably expect to find pure
democracy, it is in our higher educational institutions.  In a college
or university, where a group of young men and women, and a group of
older men and women are gathered apart, out of the severer economic
struggle, dedicated to ideal ends: there, surely, we could expect pure
democracy in organization and relationship; yet the tendency has been
steadily toward autocracy.  One can count the fingers of both hands and
not cover the list of college and university presidents who have taken
office during the last fifteen years, only on condition that they have
complete authority over the educational policy of the institution, and
often over its financial policy as well.  The reason is obvious: we run
a railroad efficiently by getting a good president and giving him
arbitrary control; why not a university?

There are just the two objections cited above: even in a university, it
is difficult to keep your tyrant good.  This, again, is the minor
objection.  The real evil is in the effect upon the rank and file of
those governed by the autocrat.  There are men in university faculties
to-day who say, privately, that if they could get any other opportunity,
they would resign to-morrow, for they feel like clerks in a department
store, with no opportunity to help determine the educational policy of
the institutions of which they are integral parts.

The German university, under all the autocracy and bureaucracy of the
German state, is more democratic in its organization than our own. Its
faculty is a self-governing body, electing to its own membership. The
Rectorship is an honor conferred for the year on some faculty member for
superior worth and scholarship.  Each member of the faculty may thus
feel the self-respect and dignity, resulting from the power and
initiative he possesses as a free citizen of the institution.

Let me suggest what would be the ideal democratic organization of a
college or university.  Why not apply the same division of functions of
government that has proved so successful in the state?  The board of
Trustees is the natural judiciary; the President, the executive.  The
faculty is the legislative body, with the student body as a sort of
lower house, cooperating in enacting the legislation for its own
government.  Where has such a plan been tried?

If the primary purpose of democracy is thus, not immediate results in
government, but the education of the citizen, on the other hand,
democracy rests, for its safety and progress, on the ever better
education of the citizen.  Under the older forms of human society, laws
may be passed and executed that are far in advance of public opinion.
That cannot be done in a democracy.  The law may be a slight step in
advance, and so perhaps educate public opinion to its level; but if it
goes beyond that step, after the first flurry of interest in the law is
past, it remains a dead letter on the statute books--worse than useless,
because cultivating that dangerous disrespect for all law, which we have
seen growing upon us as a people.

Thus from either side, the problem of democracy is a problem of
education. It rests upon education, its aim is education.  In a
democracy, the supreme function of the state is, not to establish a
military system for defense, or a police system for protection, it is
not the enforcement of public and private contract: it is to take the
children and youth of each generation and develop them into men and
women able to fulfill the responsibility and enjoy the opportunity of
free citizenship in a free society.





