IV

MORAL STANDARDS AND THE MORAL ORDER

There is only one moral order of the universe--one range of moral as of
physical law.  For instance, the law of gravitation--simplest of
physical principles--holds the last star in the abyss of space, rounds
the dew-drop on the petal of a spring violet and determines the symmetry
of living organisms; but it is one and unchanging, a fundamental pull in
the nature of matter itself.  So with moral laws: they are not
superadded to life by some divine or other authority.  They are simply
the fundamental principles in the nature of life itself, which we must
obey to grow and be happy.

If the moral order is one and unchanging, man does change in relation to
it, and moral standards are relative to the stage of his growth.
History is filled with illustrations of this relativity of ethical
standards.

For instance: human slavery doubtless began as an act of beneficence on
the part of some philanthropist well in advance of his age.  The first
man who, in the dim dawn of history, said to the captive he had made in
war, "I will not kill you and eat you; I will let you live and work for
me the rest of your life": that man instituted human slavery; but it was
distinctly a step upward, from something that had been far worse.

Homer represents Ulysses as the favorite pupil of Pallas Athena, goddess
of wisdom: why?  Baldly stated, because Ulysses was the shrewdest and
most successful liar in classic antiquity.  If Ulysses were to appear in
a society of decent men to-day, he would be excluded from their
companionship, and for the same reason that led Homer to glorify him as
the favorite pupil of the goddess of wisdom.  Thus what is a virtue at
one stage of development becomes a vice as man climbs to higher
recognition of the moral order.

Just because the moral standard is relative, it is absolutely binding
where it applies.  In other words, if you see the light shining on your
path, you owe obedience to the light; one who does not see it, does not
owe obedience in the same way.  If you do not obey your light, your
punishment is that you lose the light--degenerate to a lower plane, and
it is the worst punishment imaginable.

Thus the same act may be for the undeveloped life, non-moral, for the
developed, distinctly immoral.  Before the instincts of personal modesty
and purity were developed, careless sex-promiscuity meant something
entirely different from what a descent to it means in our society.  When
a man of some primitive tribe went out and killed a man of another
tribe, the action was totally different morally from .the murder by a
man of one community of a citizen of a neighboring town to-day.

This gradual elevation of moral standards, or growth in the recognition
of the sacredness of life and the obligation to other individuals, can
be traced historically as a long and confused process.  There was a
time, in the remote past, when no law was recognized except that of the
strong arm. The man who wanted anything, took it, if he was strong
enough, and others submitted to his superior force.  Then follows an age
when the family is the supreme social unit.  Each member of the family
group feels the pain or pleasure of all the others as something like his
own, but all outside this circle are as the beasts.  This is the
condition among the Veddahs of Ceylon, studied so interestingly by
Haeckel.  Living in isolated family groups, scattered through the
tropical wilderness: one man, one woman and their children forming the
social unit: they as nearly represent primitive life as any other body
of people now on the earth.

Then follows a long roll of ages when the tribe is the highest social
unit. Each member of the tribe is conscious of the sacredness of life of
all the other members and of some obligation toward them; but men of
other tribes may be slain as freely as the beasts.  Then comes a period
when appreciation of the sacredness of life is extended over all those
of the same race, tested generally by their speaking somewhat the same
language.  That was the condition in classic antiquity: it was "Jew and
Gentile," "Greek and barbarian"--the very word "barbarous" coming from
the unintelligible sounds, to the Greeks, of those who spoke other than
the Hellenic tongue.  Even Plato, with all his far-sighted humanism,
says, in the _Republic_, that in the ideal state, "Greeks should deal
with barbarians as Greeks now deal with one another."  If one remembers
what occurred in the Peloponnesian war--how Greek men voted to kill all
the men of military age in a conquered Greek city and sell all the women
and children into slavery--one will see that Plato's dream of humanity
was not so very wide.

From that time on, there has been further extension of the appreciation
of the sacredness of life and of the consciousness of moral obligation
toward other human beings.  We are far from the end of the path.  Our
sympathies are still limited by accidents of time and place, race and
color; but we have gone far enough to see what the end would be, were we
to reach it: a sympathy so wide, an appreciation of the sacredness of
life so universal, that each of us would feel the joy or sorrow of every
other human being, alive to-day or to be alive to-morrow, as something
like his own.  Moreover, in all civilized society, we have gone far
enough to renounce the right to private vengeance and adjustment of
quarrels: we live under established courts of law, with organized civil
force to carry out their judgments.  This gives relative peace and
security, and a general, if imperfect, application of the moral law.




V

THE PRESENT STATE OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

The astounding anomaly of modern civilization is the way we have lagged
behind in applying to groups and nations of men the moral laws,
universally recognized as binding over individuals.  For instance, about
twenty years ago we coined and used widely the phrase, "soulless
corporation," to designate our great combinations of capital in industry
and commerce.  Why was that phrase used so widely?  The answer is
illuminating: we took it for granted that an individual employer would
treat his artisans to some extent as human beings and not merely as
cog-wheels in a productive machine; but we also took it for granted that
an impersonal corporation, where no individual was dominantly
responsible, would regard its artisans merely as pieces of machinery,
with no respect whatever for their humanity.

The supreme paradox, however, is in the relation of nations: it is there
that we have most amazingly lagged behind in applying the moral laws
universally accepted in the relations of individuals.  For instance,
long before this War began we heard it proclaimed, even proudly, by
certain philosophers, in more than one nation, that the state is the
supreme spiritual unit, that there is no law higher than its interest,
that the state makes the law and may break it at will.  When a great
statesman in Germany, doubtless in a moment of intense anger and
irritation, used the phrase that has gone all across the earth, "_scrap
of paper_," for a sacred treaty between nations, he was only making a
pungent practical application of the philosophy in question.

Do we regard self-preservation as the highest law for the individual?
Distinctly not.  Here is a crowded theater and a sudden cry of fire,
with the ensuing panic: if strong men trample down and kill women and
children, in the effort to save their own lives, we regard them with
loathing and contempt.  On the other hand, it is just this plea of
national self-preservation that the German regime has used in cynical
justification of its every atrocity--the initial violation of Belgium,
the making war ruthlessly on civil populations, the atrocious spying and
plotting in the bosom of neutral and friendly nations, the destruction
of monuments of art and devastation of the cities, fields, orchards and
forests of northern France, and finally the submarine warfare on the
world's shipping.  No civilized human being would, for a moment, think
of using the plea of self-preservation to justify comparable conduct in
individual life.

Consider international diplomacy: much of it has been merely shrewd and
skillful lying.  If you will review the list of the most famous
diplomats of Europe for the last thousand years, you will find that a
considerable portion of them won their fame and reputation by being a
little more shrewd and successful liars than the diplomats with whom
they had to deal in other lands.  In other words, their conduct has been
exactly on the plane that Ulysses represented in personal life, afar
back in classic antiquity.

Take an illustration a little nearer home.  If you were doing business
on one side of the street and had two competitors in the same line,
across the way, and a cyclone swept the town, destroying their
establishments and sparing yours: you, as an individual, would be
ashamed to take advantage of the disaster under which your rivals were
suffering, using the time while they were out of business to lure their
customers away from them and bind those customers to you so securely
that your competitors would never be able to get them back.  You would
scorn such conduct as an individual; but when it comes to a relation of
the nations: during the first two years of the War, from the highest
government circles down to the smallest country newspaper, we were urged
to take advantage of the disaster under which our European rivals were
suffering, win their international customers away from them and bind
those customers to us so securely that Europe would never be able to get
them back.  Not that we were urged to industry and enterprise--that is
always right--but actually to seek to profit by the sufferings of
others--conduct we would regard as utterly unworthy in personal life.

If your neighbor were to say, "My personal aspirations demand this
portion of your front yard," and he were to attempt to fence it in: the
situation is unimaginable; but when a nation says, "My national
aspirations demand this portion of your territory," and proceeds to
annex it: if the nation is strong enough to carry it out, a large part
of the world acquiesces.

The relations of nations are thus still largely on the plane of
primitive life among individuals, or, since nations are made up of
civilized and semi-civilized persons, it would be fairer to say that the
relations of nations are comparable to those prevailing among
individuals when a group of men goes far out from civil society, to the
frontier, beyond the reach of courts of law and their police forces:
then nearly always there is a reversion to the rule of the strong arm.
That is what Kipling meant in exclaiming,

"There's never a law of God or man runs north of fifty-three."

That condition prevailed all across our frontier in the early days. For
instance, the cattle men came, pasturing their herds on the hills and
plains, using the great expanse of land not yet taken up by private
ownership.  A little later came the sheep men, with vast flocks of
sheep, which nibbled every blade of grass and other edible plant down to
the ground, thus starving out the cattle.  What followed?  The cattle
men got together by night, rode down the sheep-herders, shot them or
drove them out, or were themselves driven out.

So on the frontier, in the early days, a weakling staked out an
agricultural or mining claim.  A ruffian appears, who is a sure shot,
jumps the claim and drives the other out.  It was the rule of the strong
arm, and it was evident on the frontier all across the country.

This is exactly the state that a considerable part of the world has
reached in international relationship to-day.  Claim-jumping is still
accepted and widely practised among the nations.  That is, in fact, the
way in which all empires have been built--by a succession of successful
claim-jumpings. Consider the most impressive of them all, the old Roman
empire.  Rome was a city near the mouth of the Tiber.  She reached out
and conquered a few neighboring cities in the Latin plain, binding them
securely to herself by domestic and economic ties.  Then she extended
her power south and north, crossed into northern Africa, conquered Gaul
and Spain, swept Asia Minor, until a territory three thousand by two
thousand miles in extent was under the sway of her all-conquering arm.

What justified Rome, as far as she had justification, was the remarkable
strength and wisdom with which she established law and order and the
protections of civil society over all the conquered territory, until
often the subject populations were glad they had come under the
all-dominant sway of Rome, since their situation was so much more
peaceful and happy than before.  Such justification, however, is after
the fact: it is not moral justification of the building of the empire.
That represented a succession of claim-jumpings.

For an illustration from more modern history, take the greatest
international crime of the last five hundred years, with one exception--
the partition of Poland. It is true the Polish nobles were a nuisance to
their neighbors, ever quarreling among themselves, with no central
authority powerful enough to restrain them, but that did not justify the
action taken.  Three nations, or rather the autocratic sovereigns of
those nations, powerful enough to accomplish the crime, agreed to
partition Poland among themselves.  They did it, with the result that
there are plenty of Poles in the world to-day, but there is no Poland.

Consider the possession of Silesia by Prussia.  Silesia was an integral
part of the Austrian domain, long so recognized.  Friedrich the Great
wanted it.  He annexed it.  The deed caused him many years of recurring,
devastating wars; again and again he was near the point of utter defeat;
but he succeeded in bringing the war to a successful conclusion, and
Silesia is part of Prussia to-day.  The strong arm conquest is the only
reason.

So is it with Germany's possession of Schleswig-Holstein, with Austria
in Herzegovina and Bosnia, France in Algiers, Italy in Tripoli: they are
all instances of claim-jumping, reprehensible in varying degrees.

I suppose no thoughtful Englishman would attempt to justify, on high
moral grounds, the building up of the British empire: for instance, the
possession of Egypt and India by Britain.  How does India happen to be a
part of the British realm?  Every one knows the answer. The East India
Company was simply the most adventurous and enterprising trading company
then in the world.  It grew rich trading with the Orient, established
the supremacy of the British merchant marine, got into difficulties with
French rivals and native rulers, fought brilliantly for its rights, as
it had every reason to do, conquered territory and consolidated its
possessions, ruling chiefly through native princes. It became so
powerful that it did not seem wise to the British government to permit a
private corporation to exercise such ever-growing political authority.
It was regulated, and in the end abolished, by act of Parliament; its
possessions were taken over by the Crown; the conquests were extended
and completed, and India today is a gem in the crown of the British
empire.

What justifies Britain, as far as she has justification, is the
remarkable wisdom and generosity with which she has extended, not
onlylaw and order and protection to life and property, but freedom and
autonomous self-government, to her colonies and subject populations,
with certain tragic exceptions, about as fast as this could safely be
done.  It is that which holds the British empire together.  Great
irregular empire, stretching over a large part of the globe: but for
this it would fall to pieces over night.  It would be impossible for
force, administered at the top, to hold it together.  The splendid
response of her colonies in this War has been purely voluntary.  That
Canada has four hundred thousand trained men at the front, or ready to
go, is due wholly to her free response to the wise generosity of
England's policy, and in no degree to compulsion, which would have been
impossible.  This justification of the British empire is, nevertheless,
as in the case of Rome, after the fact, and does not justify morally the
building up of the empire.

Our own hands are not entirely clean.  It is true we came late on the
stage of history, and, starting as a democracy, were instinctively
opposed to empire building.  Thus our brief record is cleaner than that
of the older nations.  Nevertheless, there are examples of claim-jumping
in our history. The most tragic of all is a large part of our treatment
of the American Indians.  It is true, with Anglo-Saxon hypocrisy, we
tried to make every steal a bargain.  Many an expanse of territory has
been bought with a jug of rum.  The Indian knew nothing about the
ownership of land; we did. So we made the deed, and he accepted it.
Then, to his surprise, he found he had to move off from land where for
generations his ancestors had hunted and fought, with no idea of private
ownership.  So we pushed him on and on. Of late decades we have become
ashamed, tried in awkward fashion to render some compensation for the
wrongs done, but the larger part of the story is sad indeed.

There is, of course, another side to all this: the more highly developed
nations do owe leadership and service in helping those below to climb
the path of civilization; but let one answer fairly how much of empire
building has been due to this altruistic spirit, and how much to
selfishness and the lust for power and possession.





