XIII

THE WAR AND FEMINISM

Of all consequences of the War, perhaps none is more significant than
its effect upon the position of women.  Militarism and feminism are
counter currents in the tide of history.  All recrudescence of brute
force carries the subjugation of women.  In the degree to which
professional militarism prevails in any society, women are forced into
hard industrial activities, despised because fulfilled by women.  On the
other hand, a group of carefully protected women is held apart as a fine
adornment of life. Both ways militarism accentuates the property idea in
reference to women: the one type, useful, the other, adorning, property.
The one shows in marriage by purchase, the other in the dowry system.
It is hard to say which is more dishonoring to women.  It would,
perhaps, seem preferable and less offensive to be bought as useful,
rather than accepted with a money payment, as an adorning but expensive
possession, where, as with the automobile, "it is the upkeep that
counts."  Surely, however, either attitude is degrading enough.

The accentuation, in the present War, of the notion of women as
property, is evident in more brutal form in the horrors of rape, in the
deliberate and organized use of women as breeders, with the same
efficiency with which Germany breeds her swine.

Nevertheless, here, too, strong counter currents are at work.  As this
is a war of nations, not of armies, it is the whole people that, in each
instance, has had to be mobilized and organized.  In all the democracies
women have voluntarily risen to this need, just as citizens have
voluntarily become soldiers.  Thus women, by the legion, are working in
munition factories, on the farms, in productive plants of every kind, in
public service and commerce organizations.  The noble way in which women
have accepted the double burden has created a wave of reverent
admiration throughout the world.  Thus where professional militarism
tends to despise the industrial activities into which it forces women,
war for defense and justice causes reverence for the same socially
necessary activities and for the women who so courageously undertake
them for the sake of all.

Moreover, the increased freedom of action for women will outlast its
temporary cause.  Once so admitted to new fields of industrial, business
and professional activity, women can never be generally excluded from
them again.  Thus when the soldiers become citizens, many of the women
will remain producers, working beside men under new conditions of
equality.

The result, with the general stimulation of radical thinking that the
War involves, will be a profound acceleration of the feminist movement
throughout, at least, the democracies of the world.  Already it is being
recognized that all valid principles of democracy apply to women equally
with men. Regenerated, if chaotic, Russia takes for granted the farthest
reaches of feminism.  The regime in England, that bitterly opposed
suffrage for women, is now voluntarily granting it before the close of
the War.

Thus the victory of the allied nations will mean the fruition of much of
the feminism that is a phase of humanism.  It will mean freeing women
from outgrown custom and tradition, from unjust limitations in
industrial, social and political life.  It will mean men and women
working together, on a plane of moral equality, with free initiative and
voluntary co-operation, for the fruition of democracy.  Just as that
fruition will see the end of idle rich and poor, so there will be no
more women slaves or parasites, none regarded or possessed as property,
but only free human beings, each self-directed and self-controlled, and
responsible for his or her own personality and conduct.





XIV

THE TRANSFORMATION OF DEMOCRACY

The nineteenth century was the period of rapid growth in adhesion to
those ideals of democracy for which the War is being fought.  It is not
so well recognized that during the same hundred years democracy was so
transformed as to be to-day a new thing under the sun.

Up to the time of the French and American revolutions democracy rested
largely upon certain abstract ideas of human nature.  Rousseau could
argue that in primitive times men sat down together to form a state,
each giving up a part of his natural right to a central authority, and
thus justifying it.  We now know that nothing of the kind ever happened,
that society had undergone a long process of development before men
began to think about it at all.  We continue to repeat the splendid at
all. I refer, of course, to the women of antiquity.  Where respectable,
these were the head of the household slaves, scarcely removed from the
condition of the latter.  The few women who did achieve freedom of
thought and action, and became the companions of cultivated men--the
Aspasias of antiquity--bought their freedom at a sad price.

So Rome is called a republic, and it is true that, during the first half
of her long history, freedom gradually broadened down from the patrician
class to the plebeian multitude.  When Rome reached out, however, to the
mastery of the most impressive empire the world has seen, she never
dreamed of extending that freedom to the conquered populations.  If she
did grant Roman citizenship to an occasional community, to enjoy the
rights and exercise the privileges of that citizenship, it was necessary
to journey to Rome.  It was the city and the world: the city ruling the
world as subject.

The same principle holds with the republics developing at the close of
the middle age, in Italy, in the towns of the Hanseatic League and
elsewhere. Always the freedom achieved was for a city, a group or a
class, never for all the people.  Our dream, on the contrary, is to take
all the men and women in the land, ultimately in the world, and help
them, through the free and cooperative activity of each with all the
rest, on toward life, liberty, happiness, intelligence--all the ends of
life that are worth while.  If we demand life for ourselves, we ask it
only in harmony with the best life for all.  We want no special
privilege, no benefit apart, bought at the price of the best welfare of
humanity.  "We," unfortunately, does not yet mean all of us, but it does
signify an increasing multitude, rallying to this that is the standard
of to-morrow.

A third transformation, at least equally important with these, is in the
invention, for it is no less, of representative government.  Political
thinkers, such as John Fiske, have tried to make us understand what this
invention means: we do not yet realize it.  The development of
representative government is the cause, first of all, of the tremendous
expansion of the area over which we apply democracy.  Plato, in the
_Laws_, limits the size of the ideal state--the one realizable in this
world--to 5040 citizens.  Why?  Well, the exact number has a certain
mystical significance, but the main reason is, Plato could not imagine a
much larger body of citizens than 5000 meeting together in public
assembly and fulfilling the functions of citizenship.

We have extended democracy over a hundred millions of population,
dwelling on the larger part of a continent; and if one travels North,
South, East, West, to-day, one is impressed that, in spite of
unassimilated elements, everywhere men and women are proud, first of
all, of being American citizens, and only in subordinate ways devoted to
the section or community to which they belong.  This has been made
possible by the invention and development of representative government.

That is not all: it is representative government that takes the sting
out of all the older criticisms of democracy.  Plato devotes one of the
saddest portions of his _Republic_ to showing how in a brief time,
democracy must inevitably fall and be replaced by tyranny.  With the
democracy Plato knew this was true.  It was impossible for Athens to
protect and make permanent her constitution.  She might pass a law
declaring the penalty of death on any one proposing a change in the
constitution.  It did no good.  Let some demagogue arise, sure of the
suffrage of a majority of the citizens: he could call them into public
assembly, cause a repeal of the law, and make any change in the
constitution he desired.  There was no way to prevent it.

It is the invention and development of representative government that
has changed all that.  We chafe under the slow-moving character of our
democracy--over the time it takes to get laws enacted and the longer
time to get them executed.  We may well be patient: this slow-moving
character of democracy is the other side of its greatest safe-guard.  It
is because we cannot immediately express in action the popular will and
opinion, but must think two, three, many times, working through chosen
and responsible representatives of the people, that our democracy is not
subject to the perils and criticisms of those of antiquity.

The voice of the people in the day and hour, under the impulse of sudden
caprice or passion, is anything but the voice of God: it is much more
apt to be the voice of all the powers of darkness.  It is common
thought, sifted through uncommon thought, that approaches as near the
voice of God as we can hope to get in this world.  It is not the surface
whim of public opinion, it is its _greatest common denominator_ that
approximates the truth.

It behooves us to remember this at a time when changes are coming with
such swiftness.  Our life has developed so rapidly that the old
political forms proved inadequate to the solution of the new problems.
As a practical people, we therefore quickly adopted or invented new
forms. Doubtless this is, in the main, right, but we should understand
clearly what we are doing.

For instance, one of the great changes, recently inaugurated, is the
election of national senators by popular vote.  Our forefathers planned
that the national upper house should represent a double sifting of
popular opinion. We elected state legislatures; they, in turn, chose the
national senators: thus these were twice removed from the popular will.
It proved easy to corrupt state legislatures; the national senate came
to represent too much the moneyed interests; and so, through an
amendment to the constitution, we changed the process, and now elect our
senators by direct vote of the people.  This makes them more immediately
representative of the popular will, and perhaps the change was wise; but
we should recognize that we have removed one more safe-guard of
democracy.

A story, told for a generation, and fixed upon various British
statesmen, will illustrate my meaning.  The last repetition attributed
it to John Burns. On one occasion, while he was a member of Parliament,
it is said he was at a tea-party in the West End of London.  The
hostess, pouring his cup of tea, anxious to make talk and show her deep
interest in politics, said, "Mr. Burns, what is the use of the house of
Lords anyway?"  The statesman, without replying, poured his tea from the
cup into the saucer.  The hostess, surprised at the breach of etiquette,
waited, and then said, "but Mr. Burns, you didn't answer my question."
He pointed to the tea, cooling in the saucer: that was the function, to
cool the tea of legislation.  That was the function intended for our
national senate.  The trouble was, the tea of legislation often became
so stone cold in the process that it was fit only for the political
slop-pail, and that was not what we wanted.  So we have changed it all,
but one more safe-guard of democracy is gone.

So with other reforms, loudly acclaimed, as the initiative and
referendum. With the new problems and complications of an
extraordinarily developed life, it is doubtless wise that the people
should be able to initiate legislation and should have the final word as
to what legislation shall stand.  On the other hand, if we are not to
suffer under a mass of hasty and ill-considered legislation, if laws are
to stand, they must always be formulated by a body of trained
legislators, and not by the changing whim of popular opinion.

So with the recall, now so widely demanded in many sections of the
country. In the old days, our candidates were most obsequious and
profuse in promises to their constituents _before_ election; but once
elected, only too often they turned their backs on their constituents,
went merrily their own way, making deals and bargains, in the spirit
that "to the victor belong the spoils."  Therefore we justly demanded
some control of them, after, as before, election: hence the recall.
Again the movement is right; but if the fundamentals of democracy are to
be permanent, that body of men, concerned with the interpretation of the
constitution and the fundamental law of the land, must not be subject to
the immediate whim of mob mind, and the power to recall those judges
occupied with this task would be a graver danger than advantage.  They
will make mistakes, at times they will be ultra conservative and
servants of special interests, but that is one of the incidental prices
we have to pay for the permanence of free institutions.  The problem is
to keep the basic principles of democracy unchanged, the forms on the
surface as fluid and adjustable as possible.

It is these three transformations--the abandonment of the old abstract
notions and the testing of democracy by its results, the expansion of
its application over the entire population, and the invention and
development of representative government--it is these three changes that
make our democracy a new order of society, new in its problems, its
menaces, its solutions.





