IX

PREPAREDNESS FOR SELF-DEFENSE

Since force is still the weapon of international justice, readiness and
willingness to use it for defense, when necessary, is then the first
condition of fulfilling the aims and serving the causes for which
America stands.  In other words, since the relations of the nations are
still so largely those of individuals under the conditions of frontier
life, as with the honest man on the frontier, so for the
self-respecting, peace-loving nation to-day, it is well to carry a gun
and know how to shoot.

Carrying a gun is a dangerous practice, for two reasons: it may go off
in your pocket; you may get drunk and shoot when you ought not.  Those
are the only two rational arguments against national preparation for
defense, in the present state of the world.  Let us see.  The gun may go
off in your pocket: that is, if a strong armament for defense is built
up, there is always danger that it may be used internally, against the
people, unjustly.  That, indeed, has been one of the curses of Europe
for a thousand years. It is a grave danger, but recognizing it is partly
forestalling it; moreover, we would better face that danger than one far
worse.  So with the other menace: you may get drunk and shoot when you
ought not.  Nations get drunk: they get drunk with pride, arrogance,
aggressive ambition, revenge, even with panic terror, and so shoot when
they should not.  This, also, is a grave danger; but here, as well,
recognizing it is part way forestalling it, and this danger, too, we
would better face than one far more terrible. Moreover, it is armament
for the gratification of aggressive ambition, and under the control of
the arbitrary authority of a despotic individual or group, that tends to
initiate war, not armament solely to defend the liberties of a people.

Thus, under the conditions cited, it is well to be armed and prepared.
If a wolf is at large, if a mad dog is loose, if a madman is abroad with
an ax, it is the part of wisdom to have an adequate weapon and be
prepared to use it.  If the Athenians had not resisted the hordes of
Asia, what would have been the history of Europe?  If the French had not
resisted tyranny and injustice in the Revolution, what would have been
the civilization of the last hundred years?  If the English colonists
had not resisted taxation without representation, what would be the
present status of America?  If the artisan groups had not united and
fought economic exploitation, what would be their life to-day?  If
Belgium had not resisted Germany, what would be the future of democracy
in Europe?  Thus, now and after the War, the need is for all necessary
armament for self-respecting self-defense and not an atom to gratify
aggressive ambition.  This does not mean that, once involved in war, the
military tactics of democracy should be merely defensive.  As has often
and wisely been said, in war the best defense is a swift and hard
attack.

It is widely argued, however, since our aim is peace and a world-court
of justice to settle the disputes among the nations, making general
disarmament possible, should not one great nation, fortunately free from
the quarrels of Europe, occupying the major portion of a continent, its
shores washed by two great oceans, with peaceful friendship on the north
and weak anarchy on the south--should not such a nation take the lead,
disarm and set an example to mankind?  It is a beautiful dream!  Would
that those who really believe in non-resistance to evil would be
logical, and apply it to internal as well as external policy.  What is a
police force? It is a body of men, trained, employed and paid to use
force in resisting evil.  If you wish to try out non-resistance, why not
let some city apply it? Let Chicago do it: abolish its police force and
set the example to the rest of the benighted cities of the country.
What would happen?  As long as there are criminals in all cities of the
land, how they would flock to that fat pasturage.  What devastation of
property, destruction of life, injury to innocent women and children!
Until the best men of Chicago would get together, form a vigilance
committee, shoot some of the criminals, hang others, drive the rest out;
and Chicago would get back to law and order, with courts of justice and
a regular police body, composed of men trained, employed and paid to use
force in resisting evil.

The example of Canada and the United States is cited, and a noble
example it is: three thousand and more miles of international boundary,
with never a shining gun or bristling fortress on the entire frontier.
A glorious example, prophetic of what is coming all over the world,
perhaps more quickly than we dare hope to-day; but what made it
possible?  Agreement in advance, and that at a time when one of the
parties was too weak to be feared. Canada is getting strong: she has at
present four hundred thousand trained men at the front or ready to go.
Before the War closes she will have over a half million.  Now suppose
Canada fortified: we would be compelled to, there would be no other way.

Thus one nation cannot disarm while the others are strongly armed, and
among them are those whose autocratic rulers and imperialistic castes
are watching for signs of weakness in order to perpetrate international
claim-jumping.

It is true that, on the frontier, in the early days, there were
individuals who went about unarmed among the gun men, did it
successfully, and some of them died peacefully in their beds: Christian
ministers--sky-pilots, they were called.  Please note, however, that the
sky-pilot never had any money. He had no claims to be jumped.

We are not sky-pilots--far from it.  As to money: the wealth of the
world has been flowing into our coffers in a golden stream, to the
embarrassment of our financial institutions, to the exaltation of the
cost of living to such a point that, with more money than we ever
dreamed of having, we find it more difficult to buy enough to eat and
wear.  As for claims to be jumped: they are on every hand: Panama Canal,
Hawaiian Islands, Philippine Islands, ports of New York and San
Francisco, vast reaches of unprotected coast.  No, we are not
sky-pilots, we cannot claim exemption on that ground.

Suppose, after the War, we attempted to disarm, without the protection
of a world court and international police, while the other nations
retained war armament.  They, the victors and perhaps the defeated,
would possess a great army and navy, manned with seasoned veterans, and
be burdened with an intolerable debt; for the War has gone too far for
any one to be able to pay adequate indemnity.  We, rich, young,
heedless, sure that no one on earth could ever whip us, chiefly because
no one worth while has ever seriously tried: suppose we were completely
disarmed.  It would require only a little meddling with Mexico or
Brazil, and we should have to give up the Monroe Doctrine or fight.
Well, perhaps we shall give it up: it has even been suggested in the
halls of Congress that we should--to the shame of the suggester, be it
said.  People do not understand the Monroe Doctrine: they talk of it as
if it were a law.  It is in no sense a law, but is merely a rather
arrogant expression of our desires. We said to the other nations: "We
desire that none of you henceforth shall fence in any part of our front
or back yard, or the front or back yard of any of our neighbors,
dwelling on the North and South American continents."  That is the
Monroe Doctrine, and that is all that it is: an expression of our
wishes.  All very well if others choose to respect them, but suppose
some one does not?  Perhaps, as stated, we may abandon the Monroe
Doctrine: that is the easiest way, and the easiest way, for a nation or
an individual, is usually the way of damnation. Even so, suppose the
nation in question to say, "My national aspirations demand the Panama
Canal, the Philippine Islands, or Long Island and the Port of New York."
Why not?  The Atlantic Ocean is only a mill-pond. It is not half so wide
as Lake Erie was fifty years ago, in relation to modern means of
transportation and communication.  People say, "Do we want to give up
our traditional isolation?"  They are too late in asking the question:
that isolation is irrecoverably gone.  That should be now evident even
to people dwelling in fatuously fancied security between the Alleghenies
and the Rockies.  We are inevitably drawn into relation with the rest of
mankind.  The question is no longer, "Shall we take a part in world
problems?", but "What part shall we take?"

The point is, that if, under the circumstances cited, any one wished to
do so, we could quickly be driven to such a condition of abject
humiliation that we should be compelled to fight.  Now suppose,
disarmed, we should enter the conflict utterly unprepared?  The result
would be, hundreds of thousands of young men, going out bravely in
obedience to an ideal--untrained and half equipped--to be butchered, a
humiliating peace, and an indemnity of many billions to be groaned under
for fifty years.

On the other hand, if we were adequately armed for defense, there would
be much less temptation to any one to trouble us; and if we were
compelled to fight, would it not be better to fight reasonably prepared?

There is a story, going the rounds of the press, about the bandit, Jesse
James: telling how, on one occasion, he went to a lonely farm house to
commandeer a meal.  Entering, he found one woman, a widow, alone and
weeping bitterly.  He asked her what was the matter, and she replied
that, in one hour, the landlord was coming, and if she did not have her
mortgage money, she would lose her little farm and home and be out in
the world, shelterless.  The heart of the bandit was touched.  He gave
her the money to pay off the mortgage, hid in the brush and held up the
landlord on the way back.

Need the moral be pointed?  We have been getting the mortgage money.
During the first years of the War it rolled in, an ever-increasing
golden stream, until we held a mortgage on numerous European nations.
We have the mortgage money, but _beware of the way back!_

Thus the agitation, in one nation, for disarmament, unpreparedness and a
patched up peace, while the other nations are armed and embittered, not
only renders the situation of the one people critically perilous, but
actually cripples its power to serve the cause of world peace and
humanity.  If only the peace-at-any-price people had to pay the price,
one would be willing to wait and see what happened; but they never pay
it, they take to cover.  It is those hundreds of thousands of splendid
young men, going out blithely in obedience to duty, to be butchered, it
is the millions of women and children, who cannot escape from a
devastated area, who pay that price.

Every people in the past that turned to money and mercenaries for
defense has gone down.  No people ever survived that was unable and
unwilling to fight for its liberties and spend, if necessary, the last
drop of its blood for the principles it believed.





