XIX

THE SOLUTION FOR DEMOCRACY

When we say that the path of democracy is education, we do not mean that
there is an easy solution of its problem.  There is no patent medicine
we can feed the American people and cure it of its diseases.  There is
no specific for the menaces that threaten.  Eternal vigilance and effort
are the price, not only of liberty, but of every good of man.  Let
things alone, and they get bad; to keep them good, we must struggle
everlastingly to make them better.  Leave the pool of politics unstirred
by putting into it ever new individual thought and ideal, and how
quickly it becomes a stagnant, ill-smelling pond.  Leave a church
unvitalized, by ever fresh personal consecration, and how quickly it
becomes a dead form, hampering the life of the spirit.  Leave a
university uninfluenced by ever new earnestness and devotion on the part
of student and teacher, and how soon it becomes a scholastic machine,
positively oppressing the mind and spirit.

There is a true sense in which the universe exists momentarily by the
grace of God.  Take light away, and you have darkness.  Take darkness
away, and you have not necessarily light; you might have chaos. Take
health away, and you have disease.  Take disease away, and you have not
necessarily health; you may have death.  Take virtue away, and you have
vice.  Take vice away, and you have not necessarily virtue; you might
have negative respectability.  Thus it is the continual affirmation of
the good that keeps the heritage of yesterday and takes the step toward
to-morrow.

Nevertheless, if there is no easy solution of the problem, there are
certain big lines of attack.  If we are right in our diagnosis, that the
problem of democracy is a problem of education, then our whole system of
education, for child, youth and adult, should be reconstructed to focus
upon the building of positive and effective moral personality.

American education began as a subsidiary process.  Children got organic
education in the home, on the farm, in the work shop.  They went to
school to get certain formal disciplines, to learn to read, write and
cipher and to acquire formal grammar.  With the moving into the cities,
the industrial revolution and the entire transformation of our life, the
school has had to take over more and more of the process of organic
education. If children fail to get such education in the school, they
are apt to miss it altogether.

With this entire change in the meaning of the school, old notions of its
purpose still survive.  Probably no one is so benighted to-day as to
imagine that the chief function of the school is to fill the mind with
information; but there are many who still hold to the tradition that the
chief purpose of education is to sharpen the intellectual tools of the
individual for the sake of his personal success.  This notion is a
misleading survival, for tools are of value only in terms of the
character using them.  The same equipment may serve, equally, good or
bad ends.  Only as education focusses on the development of positive and
effective moral character can it aid in solving the problem of
democracy.

Need it be added that this does not mean teaching morals and manners to
children, thirty minutes a day, three times a week?  That is a minor
fragment of moral education.  It means that all phases of the process--
the relation of pupil and teacher, school and home, the government and
discipline, the lessons taught in every subject, the environment, the
proportioning of the curriculum, of physical, emotional and intellectual
culture--all shall be focussed and organized upon the one significant
aim of the whole--_character_.

Further, if education is to overcome the menaces and solve the dilemma
of democracy, it must be carried beyond childhood and youth and outside
the walls of academic institutions.  The ever wider education of adult
citizenship is indispensable to the progress and safety of democracy. It
is one of the glaring illustrations of the inefficiency of our democracy
that there are still communities where school boards build school houses
with public money, open them five or six hours, five days in the week,
and refuse to allow them to be opened any other hour of the day or
night, for a civic forum, parents' meeting, public lecture or other
activity of adult education; and yet we call ourselves a practical
people!  Surely, in a democracy, the state is as vitally interested in
the education of the adult citizen as of the child.

Herein is the significance of those various extensions of education,
developing and spreading so widely to-day.  University-extension and
Chautauqua movements, civic forums, free lectures to the people by
boards of education and public libraries, summer schools, night schools
for adults--all are illustrations of this movement, so vital to the
progress of democracy.  Through these instrumentalities the popular
ideal may be elevated, the public mind may be trained to more logical
and earnest thought, citizenship may be made more serious and
intelligent, and finally a most helpful influence may be exerted on the
academic institutions themselves.  It is an easily verifiable truth that
any academic institution that builds around itself an enclosing
scholastic wall, refuses to go outside and serve and learn in the larger
world of humanity, in the long run inevitably dies of academic dry rot.

In the endeavor to solve the problem of democracy cannot we do more than
we have done hitherto in cultivating reverence for moral leadership--the
quality so much needed in democracy at the present hour?  This may be
achieved through many aspects of education, but especially through
contact with noble souls in literature and history.  History, above all,
is the great opportunity, and, from this point of view, is it not
necessary to rewrite our histories: instead of portraying solely
statesmen and warriors, to fill them with lofty examples of leadership
in all walks of life?

Women as well as men: for surely ideals of both should be fostered. A
colleague, interested in this problem, recently took one of the most
widely used text-books of American history, and counted the pages on
which a woman was mentioned.  Of the five hundred pages, there were
four: not four pages devoted to women; but four mentioning a woman.
What does it mean: that women have contributed less than one part in a
hundred and five to the development of American life?  Surely no one
would think that.  What, then, are the reasons for the discrepancy?
There are several, but one may be mentioned: men have written the
histories, and they have written chiefly of the two fields of action
where men have been most important and women least, war and
statesmanship.  Surely, however, if American history is to reveal the
American spirit, exercise the contagion of noble ideals and develop
reverence for true moral leadership, it must present types of both
manhood and womanhood in all fields of action and endeavor.

One who has stood with Socrates in the common criminal prison in Athens
and watched him drink the hemlock poison, saying "No evil can happen to
a good man in life or after death," who has heard the oration of Paul on
Mars Hill or that of Pericles over the Athenian dead, who has thrilled
to the heroism of Joan of Arc and Edith Cavell, the noble service of
Elizabeth Fry and Florence Nightingale, the high appeal of Helen Hunt
Jackson and Elizabeth Barrett Browning, who has heard Giordano Bruno
exclaim as the flames crept up about him, "I die a martyr, and
willingly," who has responded to the calm elevation of Marcus Aurelius,
the cosmopolitan wisdom of Goethe, the sweet gentleness of Maeterlinck's
spirit and the titan dreams of Ibsen, can scarcely fail to appreciate
the brotherhood of all men and to learn that reverence for the true
moral leader, that dignifies alike giver and recipient.




