
THE SOUL OF DEMOCRACY

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE WORLD WAR
IN RELATION TO HUMAN LIBERTY

BY

EDWARD HOWARD GRIGGS




Man for the State means autocracy and imperialism;
MAN FOR MANKIND is the soul of democracy.



1918



CONTENTS

I     THE WORLD TRAGEDY
II    THE CONFLICT OF IDEAS IN THE WAR
III   THE IDEAS FOR WHICH THE ALLIED NATIONS FIGHT
IV    MORAL STANDARDS AND THE MORAL ORDER
V     THE PRESENT STATE OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
VI    THE ETHICS OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONSHIP
VII   AMERICA'S DUTY IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
VIII  THE GOSPEL AND THE SUPERSTITION OF NON-RESISTANCE
IX    PREPAREDNESS FOR SELF-DEFENSE
X     RECONSTRUCTION FROM THE WAR
XI    THE WAR AND EDUCATION
XII   SOCIALISM AND THE WAR
XIII  THE WAR AND FEMINISM
XIV   THE TRANSFORMATION OF DEMOCRACY
XV    DEMOCRACY AND EDUCATION
XVI   MENACES OF DEMOCRACY
XVII  THE DILEMMA OF DEMOCRACY
XVIII PATERNALISM VERSUS DEMOCRACY
XIX   THE SOLUTION FOR DEMOCRACY
XX    TRAINING FOR MORAL LEADERSHIP
XXI   DEMOCRACY AND SACRIFICE
XXII  THE HOUR OF SACRIFICE



THE SOUL OF DEMOCRACY


I

THE WORLD TRAGEDY

We are living under the shadow of the greatest world tragedy in the
history of mankind.  Not even the overthrow of the old Roman empire was
so colossal a disaster as this.  Inevitably we are bewildered by it.
Utterly unanticipated, at least in its world extent, for we had believed
mankind too far advanced for such a chaos of brute force to recur, it
overwhelms our vision.  Man had been going forward steadily, inventing
and discovering, until in the last hundred years his whole world had
been transformed. Suddenly the entire range of invention is turned
against Man.  The machinery of comfort and progress becomes the enginery
of devastation.  Under such a shock, we ask, "Has civilization
over-reached itself?  Has the machine run away with its maker?"  The
imagination is staggered.  We are too much in the storm to see across
the storm.

When the War began, it was over our minds as a dark cloud.  It was the
last conscious thought as we went to sleep at night, and the first to
which we awakened in the morning: wakening with a dumb sense of
something wrong, as if we had suffered a personal tragedy, and then as
we came to clear consciousness we said, "O yes, the War!"  The days have
passed into weeks, the weeks into months and years: inevitably we become
benumbed to the long continued disaster.  It is impossible to think
deaths and mutilations in terms of millions.  Even those who stand in
the immediate presence of it and suffer most terribly become calloused
to it: much more must we who stood so long apart and have not yet felt
the brunt of it.  Even our entrance into the whirling vortex, drawing
ever nearer our shores, has failed to waken us to a realizing sense of
it.  Nevertheless, these years through which we are now living are the
most important in the entire history of the world.  It is probable that
the future will look back upon them as the years determining the destiny
of mankind for ages to come.

How this terrible fact of War falls across all philosophies!  Complacent
optimisms, so widely current recently, are put out of court by it. The
pleasant interpretations mediocrity formulates of the universe are torn
to tatters.  There is at least the refreshment of standing face to face
with brute actuality, though it crash all our "little systems" to the
ground. Philosophy must wait.  The interpretations cannot be hastened,
while the facts are multiplying with such bewildering rapidity.  The one
certainty is that an entirely new world is being born--_what_ it will
be, no one knows.

Nevertheless, we have gone far enough to recognize that all our thinking
will be transformed under the influence of the struggle.  It will be
impossible for us, after the War, to do what we have done so widely
hitherto: proclaim one range of ethical ideals and standards, and live
to something widely different in practice.  Either we shall have to
abandon the standards, or bring our conduct measurably into harmony with
them. We shall be unable longer to hold unconsciously in solution
Christianity and the gospel of brute force.  One or the other must be
rejected, or both consciously reconstructed. The effect on the thought
life of the world will be even greater--vastly greater--than that of the
French Revolution.  The twentieth century will differ from the
nineteenth more than that did from the eighteenth. The effect on the
relations of different social groups throughout the world will be so
far-reaching that possibly the democracy and socialism of the nineteenth
century may look like remote historic phenomena, such as the Athenian
tribal system or mediaeval feudalism.

Thus our whole social philosophy will have to be remolded.  We Americans
are still in the patent medicine period of politics, trusting to
political devices on the surface for the cure of any evils that arise.
All across the country, like an epidemic of disease has gone the notion
--if anything is the matter with us, just pass another law.  Thus we are
suffering under an ill-considered mass of legislation, while blindly
trusting to it to solve all problems.  Legislation is no solution for
moral evils.  It is possible, to some extent, to suppress vice by
legislation, but not to create virtue.  Virtue can be developed only by
conduct and education. You cannot drive men into the kingdom of heaven
with the whip of legislation; and if you could, you would so change the
atmosphere of the place that one would prefer to take the other road.

If our democracy is to survive, we must think it through; carrying it
down, from these superficial political devices, into our industry and
commerce, still so largely dominated by feudal ideas of the middle age,
into our science and art, far more completely into our education, into
our social relationship, and beyond all else, into our fundamental
attitude of mind.  Democracy is, at bottom, not a series of political
forms, but a way of life.

Thus the War will be the supreme test of democracy.  The question it
will settle is this: can free men, by voluntary cooperation, develop an
efficiency and an endurance which will make it possible for them to
stand and protect their liberties against the machinery and aggressive
ambitions of autocratic empires where everything is done paternally from
the top?  If they can, then democracy will survive and grow as the
highest form of society for ages to come; if not, then democracy will
pass and be succeeded by some other social order.

That is why this War has been our war from the beginning, though we have
entered it so late.  As we look back upon the struggle of Athens and the
other free Greek cities with the overwhelming hordes of Asia, at
Marathon and Salamis, as the conflict that saved democracy for Europe
and made possible the civilization of the Occident, so it is probable
that the world will look back upon this colossal War as the same
struggle, multiplied a thousand times in the men and munitions employed,
the struggle determining the future of democracy and civilization for
generations, perhaps for all time.





