VI

THE ETHICS OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONSHIP

We have seen that all empires have been built up by a series of
successful aggressions, and that claim-jumping still characterizes the
relations of the nations.  Nevertheless, there has been some progress in
applying to groups and nations the moral principles we recognize as
binding upon individuals.  Consider again our internal life: it was
twenty years ago that we coined and used so widely the phrase "soulless
corporations" for our great combinations of capital in industry.  To-day
that phrase is rarely heard.  One sees it seldom even in the pages of
surviving "muck-raking" magazines.  Why has a phrase, used so widely in
the past, all but disappeared? Again the answer is illuminating: there
has been tremendous growth in twenty years, on the part of our great
corporations, in treating their employees as human beings and not merely
as cog-wheels in a productive machine.  When the greatest corporation in
the United States voluntarily raises the wages of all its employees in
the country ten per cent., five several times, within a few months, as
the Steel trust has recently done, something has happened.  It may be
said, "they did it because it was good business": twenty years ago they
would not have recognized that it was good business. It may be said,
"they did it to avoid strikes": twenty years ago they would have
welcomed the strikes, fought them through and gained what selfish
advantage was possible.  The point is, there has been vast increase in
the consciousness of moral responsibility on the part of corporations
toward their artisans.  This has been due partly to legislation, but
mainly to education and the awakening of public conscience.  If you wish
to find the greatest arrogance and selfishness now, you will discover
it, not among the capitalists: they are timid and submissive--strangely
so.  You will find it rather in certain leaders of the labor  movement,
with their consciousness of newly-gained powers.

Some growth there has been in the application of the same moral
principles even to the relations of the nations.  For instance: a
hundred years ago the Napoleonic wars had just come to an end.  In the
days of Napoleon men generally gloried in war; to-day most of them
bitterly regret it, and fight because they believe they are fighting for
high moral aims or for national self-preservation, whether they are
right or wrong.

When Napoleon conquered a country, often he pushed the weakling king off
the throne, and replaced him with a member of his own family--at times a
worse weakling.  Think of such a thing being attempted to-day: it is
unimaginable, unless the worst tyranny on earth got the upper hand for
the next three hundred years of human history.

A more pungent illustration of progress is the feverish desire, shown by
each of the  combatants in this world struggle, to prove that he did not
begin it. Now some one began it.  A hundred years ago belligerents would
not have been so anxious to prove their innocence: then victory closed
all accounts and no one went behind the returns.  The feverish anxiety
each combatant has shown to establish his innocence of initiating this
devastating War is conclusive proof that even the worst of them
recognizes that they all must finally stand before the moral court of
the world's conscience and be judged.  The same tendency is shown in the
efforts of Germany--grotesquely and tragically sophistical as they are--
to justify her ever-expanding, freshly-invented atrocities.  At least
she is aware that they require justification.

This explains why we react so bitterly even on what would have been
accepted a century ago.  What was taken for granted yesterday is not
tolerated to-day, and what is taken for granted to-day will not be
tolerated in a to-morrow that maybe is not so distant as in our darker
moments we imagine.

What would be the conclusion of this process?  It would be, would it
not, the complete application to the relations of the nations, of the
moral principles universally accepted as binding upon individuals?  If
it is true that the moral order of the universe is one and unchanging,
then _what is right for a man is right for a nation of men, and what is
wrong for a man is wrong for a nation_; and no fallacious reasoning
should be allowed to blind us to that basic truth.

This would mean the end of all diplomacy of lying and deceit.  The
relations of the nations would be placed on the same plane of relative
honesty and frankness now prevailing among individuals: not absolute
truth--few of us practice that--but that general ability to trust each
other, in word and conduct, that is the foundation of our business and
social life.

It would mean the end of empire building.  Those empires that exist
would fall naturally into their component parts.  If those parts
remained affiliated with the central government, it would be only
through the voluntary choice of the majority of the population dwelling
upon the territory.  Thus every people would be affiliated with the
government to which it naturally belonged and with which it wished to be
affiliated.

It would mean finally a voluntary federation of the nations, with the
establishment of a world court of justice; but no weak-kneed, spineless
arbitration court: rather a court of justice, comparable to those
established over individuals, whose judgments would be enforced by an
international military and naval police, contributed by the federated
nations.

People misunderstand this proposal.  They imagine it would mean the
giving over of the entire military and naval equipment of each federated
nation to the central court.  Far from it: each nation would retain, for
defense purposes, the mass of its manhood and the larger fraction of its
limited equipment, while a minor fraction would be contributed to the
world court.

When this is achieved there will be, for the first time in the history
of the world, the dawn of the longed-for era of universal and relatively
permanent peace for mankind.

It is a far-off dream, is it not?  Let us admit it frankly, and it seems
further off than it did four years ago; for the approximations to it,
achieved through international law, we have seen go down in a blind
welter, through the invention of new instruments of destruction and the
willful perpetration of illegal and immoral atrocities in this horrible
War.

Nevertheless, it is not so far off as in ourdarker moments we fear.  If
this world War ends justly; which means if it ends so that the people
dwelling on any territory are affiliated with the government to which
they naturally belong and with which they wish to be affiliated, the
dream will be brought appreciably nearer.  If the War ends unjustly,
which means if it ends with the gratification of the ambitions of
aggressive tyranny, the dream will be put remotely far off.  If a peace
is patched up meantime, with no solution, it will mean Europe sleeping
on its arms, and the breaking out of the war with multiplied devastation
within twenty years.  That is why these blithely undertaken peace
missions and other efforts at peace without victory, even when not
cloaks for pro-German movements, are such preposterous absurdities or
else play directly into the hands of tyranny.

At best, however, the dream is a long way ahead.  Men dislike to give up
power, nations equally.  It will take a long process of international
moral education to induce the nations to renounce their arbitrary
powers, their right to adjust all their own quarrels, and lead them to
enter voluntarily a federation under a world court of Justice.  This,
nevertheless, is the hope of the world, toward which we should work with
all our might.




