XI

THE WAR AND EDUCATION

Equally far-reaching are the changes the War must produce in our
education. Temporarily, our higher institutions will be crippled by the
drawing off of the youth of the land for war.  This is one of the
unfortunate sacrifices such a struggle involves.  We must see to it that
it is not carried too far. One still hears old men in the South
pathetically say, "I missed my education because of the Civil War."  Let
us strive to keep open our educational institutions and continue all our
cultural activities, in spite of the drain and strain of the War.  For
never was intellectual guidance and leadership more needed than in the
present crisis.

The paramount effect of the War on education is, however, in the
multiplied demand for efficiency.  This is the cry all across the
country to-day, and, in the main, it is just.  Our education has been
too academic, too much molded by tradition.  It must be more closely
related to life and to the changed conditions of industry and commerce.
Each boy and girl, youth and maiden, must leave the school able to take
hold somewhere and make a significant contribution to the society of
which he or she is an integral part.  Vocational training must be
greatly increased.  The problems of the school must be increasingly
practical problems, and thought and judgment must be trained to the
solution of those problems.  This is all a part of that socialization of
democracy which must be achieved if democracy is to survive in the new
world following the War.

There is, nevertheless, an element of emotional hysteria in the demand
for efficiency and only efficiency.  Efficiency is too narrow a standard
by which to estimate anything concerning human conduct and character.
In the effort to meet and conquer Germany, let us beware of the mistake
of Germany. One of the world tragedies of this epoch is the way in which
Germany has sacrificed her spiritual heritage, first for economic, then
for purely military efficiency.  When we recall that spiritual heritage,
as previously described, when we think of Schiller, Herder and Goethe,
Froebel, Herbart and Richter, Tauler, Luther and Schleiermacher, Kant,
Fichte and Schopenhauer, Mozart, Beethoven and Wagner, we stand aghast
at the way in which she has plunged it all into the abyss,--for what?
Shall it profit a people, more than a man, if it gain the whole world
and lose its own soul?

In such a time, then, all of us who believe in the spirit must hold high
the torch of humanistic culture.  Education is for life and not merely
for efficiency.  Of what worth is life, if one is only a cog-wheel in
the economic machine?  It is to save the spiritual heritage of humanity
that we are fighting, and it is that heritage that education must bring
to every child and youth, if it fulfills its supreme trust.  Education
for the purposes of autocratic imperialism seeks to make a people a
perfect economically productive and militarily aggressive machine.
Education for democracy means the development of each individual to the
most intelligent, self-directed and governed, unselfish and devoted,
sane, balanced and effective humanity.





XII

SOCIALISM AND THE WAR

One of the surprises of the War was the complete breakdown of
international socialism.  Not only socialists, but those of us who had
been thoughtfully watching the movement from without, had come to
believe that the measure of consciousness of international brotherhood
it had developed in the artisan groups of many lands, would be a
powerful lever against war.  We were wrong: the superficial
international sympathy evaporated like mist under the rays of a revived
nationalism.  The socialists fell in line, almost as completely as any
other group, with the purely nationalist aims in each land.

This must have gratified certain despots; for one cause of the War, not
the cause, was undoubtedly the preference on the part of various
autocrats, to face an external war rather than the rising tide of
democracy within the nation.  Temporarily, they have been successful,
but surely only for a brief time.  The victory of democracy will vastly
accelerate the growth of the spirit of brotherhood throughout the world.

The terrible waste of the War must of itself produce a reaction of the
people on kings and castes in all lands.  The suffering that will follow
the War, in the period of economic readjustment, will accentuate this.
Surely the _people_, in England, France, America, Italy, Russia, and
among the neutral nations, will strive that no such war may come again.
Even in Germany, when the people find out what they have paid and why,
inevitably they must struggle so to reform their institutions that no
ruler or class may again plunge them into such disaster for the selfish
benefit or ambitions of that ruler or class.  How our hearts have warmed
to Liebknecht!

The realignment of nations must work to the same end.  War, like
politics, makes strange bed-fellows.  Germany and Austria, for centuries
rivals, and, at times, enemies, we behold united so completely that it
is difficult to imagine them disentangled after the War.

France and England, long regarding each other as natural enemies, are
fused heart and soul.  Strangest of all, we have seen England struggling
to win for Russia that prize of Constantinople, which for generations it
has been a main object of British diplomacy to keep from Russian grasp.
Most impressive of all, has been the new consciousness of unity and
common cause among the nations of the earth, and the groups within all
nations, standing for democracy.

Thus the tide, checked for a time, will inevitably break forth with
renewed force.  It is probable that the next fifty years will be a
period of great change--even of revolutions, peaceful or otherwise,
throughout the earth.

To understand the effect on the whole socialist movement, one must
distinguish clearly the two contrasting types of socialism.  It is the
curse of the orthodox, or Marxian, type of socialism, that it was "made
in Germany." Its economic state is modeled directly on the Prussian
bureaucratic and paternalistic state.  Its dream realized, would mean
Prussian efficiency carried to the _nth_ power, in a society of as
merciless slavery as that prevailing among the ants and the bees.  It is
doubtless this characteristic that has made so many bureaucratic or
orthodox socialists instinctively Pro-German in sentiment and sympathy
during the War.

The contrasting type of socialism is that which is really the full
development of democracy, its movement from a narrow individualism to
ever wider voluntary co-operation.  It moves, not toward government
ownership, but toward ownership by the people, of natural monopolies.
It means, not the turning over to a bureaucratic government, of plants
and instruments of production, but the progressive cooperative ownership
of them by the workers themselves.  It will end, not in the overthrow of
the capitalist regime, but in all workers becoming co-operative
capitalists, and all capitalists, productive workers, since no idle
rich--or poor, will be tolerated.  Such socialism, if it be so called,
will depend upon the highest individual initiative, the most voluntary
co-operation and will include the individualism which is the cherished
boon of democracy.  It is significant that those who represent this type
of socialism and who think for themselves, are breaking away from the
orthodox party, under the courageous leadership and example of John
Spargo, in increasing numbers, since our entrance into the War.  They
are as instinctively American and democratic in sympathy, as those of
the opposite type are Pro-German.

Even in the most democratic countries, however, the War has caused a
vast increase of the undesirable type of socialism: that is one of its
temporary penalties.  To carry on such a war successfully, it is
necessary to multiply the authority of the central government.  That has
been the experience of England, now being repeated here.  Men, who were
_citizens_ of a democracy, become, as soldiers, and in part as workers,
_subjects_ of the government in war.  To some extent we are forced to
imitate the tendencies we deplore and seek to overthrow in Germany, to
be able to meet and defeat Germany.

Even so, the difference is profound.  The subordination to the
government is, for the people as a whole, voluntary, achieved through
laws passed by chosen representatives of the people, and not by the
arbitrary will of a kaiser and ruling caste.  Thus the freedom,
voluntarily relinquished for a time, can be quickly regained when the
crisis is past.  Subjects will become citizens again, when soldiers
return to civil life.

Nevertheless, there will be no return to the old, selfishly
individualistic regime.  The lesson of organized action will have been
learned, and a vast increase of voluntary co-operation, that is, of the
socialism that is true democracy may be anticipated as a beneficent
result of the War.  This will be one of the great compensations for the
waste of our heritage, spiritual and material, through the War.  _The
voluntary socialization of previously individualistic democracy will be
the next great forward movement of the human spirit_.





