VIII

THE GOSPEL AND THE SUPERSTITION OF NON-RESISTANCE

The first condition of fulfilling the responsibilities imposed upon us
by the challenge of our democracy is, now and hereafter, readiness and
willingness for self-respecting self-defense, defense of our liberties
and of the principles and ideals for which we stand.  There is much
nonsense talked about non-resistance to evil.  It is a lovely thing in
certain high places of the moral life.  It was well that Socrates
remained in the common criminal prison in Athens and drank the hemlock
poison; but nine times out of ten it would have been better to run away,
as he had an opportunity to do. It was good that Jesus healed the ear of
the servant of the high priest,--and good that St. Peter cut it off.

In other words, acts of non-resistance and self-sacrifice are fine
flowers of the moral life; but you cannot have flowers unless their
roots are below ground, otherwise they quickly wither.  Thus, to have
sound value, these acts of non-resistance and self-sacrifice must rest
on a solid foundation of self-affirmation and resistance to evil.

As with the individual, so with the nation: there come high moments in a
nation's life, when a strong people might resist and deliberately
chooses not to.  As an illustration, take our Mexican problem.  The
announcement that under no circumstances would we intervene, may have
led to misunderstanding.  Our purpose to let the Mexican people work out
their own problem may have been taken to mean that we would not justly
protect ourselves, with consequent encouragement to border raiding.
Nevertheless, if there has been any error in handling the situation, it
has been on the better side--on the side of patience, generosity,
long-suffering, giving the other fellow another chance, and another and
another, even though he does not deserve them.  Now that is not the side
on which human nature usually errs.  The common temptation is to
selfishness and unjust aggression. Since that is the case, if we cannot
strike the just balance, it is better to push too far on the other side
and avoid the common mistake.

Suppose, after the War, Japan, alone or in conjunction with one or
another European power, closes the door to China: one can imagine
circumstances where we, with the right to insist that the door be kept
open, and perhaps, by that time, something of the strength to enforce
that right, might deliberately say, "No, we will not resist."  Not that,
with our present situation, such action is desirable, but that one can
imagine conditions arising where it might be the higher choice.

Let me repeat that, for the nation as with the individual, these high
moments must rest on something else.  They are the high mountain peaks
of the moral life; but detached mountain peaks are impossible,--except
as a mirage.  They must rest upon the granite foundation of the hills
and plateaus below. So these high virtues of non-resistance, magnanimity
and self-sacrifice must always rest upon the granite foundation of the
masculine virtues of self-affirmation, endurance, heroism, strong
conflict with evil. It takes strength to make magnanimity and
self-sacrifice  possible, if their lesson is not lost.  A weak man
cannot be magnanimous, since his generosity is mistaken for servile
cowardice. After all, the best time to forgive your enemy, for his good
and yours, is not when he has his foot on your neck: he is apt to
misunderstand and think you are afraid.  It is often better to wait
until you can get on your feet and face him, man to man, and then if you
can forgive him, it is so much the better for you, for him and for all
concerned.

Thus there are two opposite lines of error in the moral life.  The
philosophy of the one is given by Nietzsche, while Tolstoy, in certain
extremes of his teaching, represents the other.  Nietzsche, I suppose,
should be regarded as a symptom, rather than a cause of anything
important; but the ancestors of Nietzsche were Goethe and Ibsen, with
their splendid gospel of self-realization.  Nietzsche, on the contrary,
with his contempt for the morality of Christianity as the morality of
slaves and weaklings, with his eulogy of the blond brute striding over
forgotten multitudes of his weaker fellows to a stultifying isolation
apart--Nietzsche is self-realization in the mad-house.  It has always
seemed to me not without significance that his own life ended there.

On the other hand, when Tolstoy responded to an inquirer that, if he saw
a child being attacked by a brutal ruffian, he would not use force to
intervene and protect the child: that, too, is non-resistance fit for
the insane asylum. One of these is just as far from sane, balanced human
morality as the other.

It is a terrible thing to suffer injustice; it is far worse to
perpetrate it. If one had to choose between being victim or tyrant, one
would always choose to be victim: it is safer for the moral life and
there is more recovery afterward.  If, however, it is better to suffer
injustice than to perpetrate it, better than either is to resist it,
fight it and, if possible, overthrow it.

It has been said so many times by extreme pacifists that even sane human
beings sometimes take it for granted, that "force never accomplished
anything permanent in human history."  It is false, and the reasoning by
which it is supported involves the most sophistical of fallacies.  All
depends on who uses the force and the purpose for which it is used.  The
force employed by tyranny and injustice accomplishes nothing permanent
in history.  Why? Because tyranny and injustice are in their very nature
transient, they are opposed to the moral order of the universe and, in
the end, must pass. On the other hand, the force employed on the part of
liberty and justice has attained most of the ends of civilization we
cherish to-day.  The force of the million of mercenaries, collected
through Asia and Africa by Darius and Xerxes, to overwhelm a few Greek
cities, accomplished nothing permanent in history; but the force of the
ten thousand Athenians who fought at Marathon and of the other thousands
at Salamis, saved democracy for Europe and made possible the
civilization of the Occident.  The force employed by King Louis of
France to support a tottering throne and continue the exploitation of
the people by an idle and selfish aristocratic caste, accomplished
nothing permanent in history; but the force of those Frenchmen who
marched upon Paris, singing the Marseillaise, made possible the freedom
and culture of the last hundred years.  The force employed by King
George of England, to wring taxes without representation from reluctant
colonies, accomplished nothing permanent in history, but the force
which, at Bunker Hill and Concord Bridge, "fired the shot heard round
the world," achieved the liberty and democracy of the American
continent.

It may be freely admitted that all use of force is a confession of
failure to find a better way.  If you use force in the education of a
child, it is such a confession of failure.  So is it if force is used in
controlling defectives and criminals, or in adjusting the relations of
the nations; but note that the failure may be one for which the
individual parent, teacher, society, state or nation is in no degree
responsible.   Force is a tragic weapon--and the ultimate one.





