XX

TRAINING FOR MORAL LEADERSHIP

Since the path of democracy is education, moral leadership is more
necessary to it, than in any other form of society; yet there are
exceptional obstacles to its development.  We speak of "the white light
that beats upon a throne": it is nothing compared to the search light
played upon every leader of democracy.  With our lack of reverence, we
delight in pulling to pieces the personalities of those who lead us.
Thus it is increasingly difficult to get men of sensitive spirit to pay
the price of leadership for democracy.

Is it not possible to do more than we have done, consciously to develop
such leadership?  Where is it trained?  In life, the college and
university, the normal school, the schools of law, medicine and
theology.  Yes, but if not one boy and girl in ten graduates from the
high school, surely we want one man and woman in ten to fulfill some
measure of moral leadership, and the high school is directly concerned
with the task of furnishing such leadership for American democracy.

If that is true, is it not a pity that the high school is so largely
dominated from above by the demand of the college upon the entering
freshman?  It is not to be taken for granted that the particular regimen
of studies, best fitting the student to pass the entrance examinations
of a college or university, is the best possible for the nine out of ten
students, who go directly from the high school into the world, and must
fulfill some measure of moral leadership for American democracy.  The
presumption is to the contrary.  College professors are human--some of
them.  They want students prepared to enter as smoothly as possible into
the somewhat artificial curricula of academic studies they have
arranged. The Latin professor wishes not to go back and start with the
rudiments of his subject, as the professor of mathematics with the
beginnings of Algebra and Geometry.  The result is they demand of the
high school what fits most smoothly into their scheme.

Now if it is not possible to serve equally the needs of both groups,
would it not be better to neglect the one tenth of the students, going
on to college, even assuming they are the pick of the flock, which they
are not always?  They have four more years to correct their mistakes and
round out their culture.  If any one must be subordinated, it would be
better to neglect them, and focus upon the needs of the nine out of ten,
who go directly from the high school into life and have not another
chance; yet there are states in the Union, where it is possible for a
committee of the state university at the top to say to every high school
teacher in the state, "Conform to our requirements, or leave the state,
or get out of the profession."  The threat, moreover, has been carried
out more than once.

That situation is utterly wrong.  We want organization of the
educational system, with each unit cooperating with the next higher, but
if education is to solve the problem of democracy and furnish moral
leadership for American life, we want each unit to be free, first of
all, to serve its own constituency to the best of its power.  The
problem is not serious for the big city high school, with its multiplied
elective courses, but for the small rural or town high school, with its
limited corps of teachers and its necessarily fixed courses, the burden
is onerous indeed.

Is the American college and university doing all that it might do in
cultivating moral leadership for American democracy?  The last decades
have seen an astounding and unparalleled development of higher education
in America.  In the old days, the college was usually on a
denominational foundation.  It was supported by the dollars and pennies
of earnest religionists who believed that education was necessary to
religion and morality.  The president was generally a clergyman of the
denomination; he taught the ethics course, and all students were
required to take it. There was compulsory chapel attendance, and once a
day the entire student body gathered together to listen to some moral
and religious thought.

Then came the immense expansion of higher education.  Courses were
multiplied and diversified.  Universities were established or endowed by
the state.  Academies became colleges, and colleges, universities.
Institutions were generally secularized.  Compulsory chapel attendance
was rightly abandoned.  Each department served its own interest apart.
Until to-day certain of our great universities are not unlike vast
intellectual department stores, with each professor calling his goods
across the counter, and the president, a sort of superior floorwalker,
to see that no one clerk gets too many customers.  It is an impressive
illustration of what has happened to our higher institutions that, in
certain of them, the one regular meeting place of the entire student
body in a common interest, is the bleachers by the athletic field. One
continues to believe in college athletics, in spite of the frequent
absurdities and worse, done in their name; only if the numbers of those
playing the game and those exercising only their lungs and throats from
the bleachers, were reversed, better all-round athletic education would
result.  Is it not, however, a trenchant criticism on the situation in
our higher education, that so often the one common interest should be in
something that is, at least, aside from the main business of the
institution?

Moreover, no institution can rightly serve democracy, unless it is
itself democratic.  Thus the growth of an aristocratic spirit in our
colleges and universities is an ominous sign.  For instance, it is still
true that any boy or girl, with a sound body and a good mind and no
family to support, can get a college education.  Money is not
indispensable: it is possible to work one's way through.  Will this
always be true?  One wonders.  It is significant that it is easiest to
work your way through college, and keep your self-respect and the
respect of your fellows, in the small, meagerly endowed college on the
frontier.  It is most difficult, with a few exceptions one gladly
recognizes, in the great, rich universities of the East. What does that
mean?

Straws show the tide: it was announced some time ago by the president of
one of our richest and oldest universities that henceforth scholarships
in that institution would be given solely on the basis of intellectual
scholarship, as tested by examination; and applause went up from the
alumni all across the country; yet what does it mean?  It means that the
boy who has to work on a threshing machine, sell books to an
unsuspecting public, or do some other semi-honorable work all summer to
get back into college in the Fall, cannot pass those examinations
equally with a rich man's son of equal mind, who can take a tutor to the
seashore or the mountains and coach up all summer.  Thus foundations,
established by well-meaning people to help poor boys self-respectingly
through college, become intellectual prizes for those who do not need
them.  That is all wrong.

Take the special student problem.  When a college or university is
founded, it needs students: they are the life-blood of the institution.
Really all that is needed to make a college is a teacher and some
students: buildings are not indispensable, but students the school must
have.  Thus it is apt to keep its bars down and its entrance
requirements flexible.  Special students, often mature men and women,
who are not prepared to pass the freshman examinations, are admitted on
the recommendation of heads of d epartments, to special courses they are
well fitted to take.  Students are admitted freely, and then sifted out
afterward, if they prove unworthy of their opportunity: not a bad
method, by the way.

A dozen years pass, and the institution wants to become respectable.
It is just as with the individual: the man, at first, is absorbed in
money-getting, and when he has it, yearns for respectability.  Now
getting respectable, for a college or university, is called "raising the
standard of scholarship."  Let this not be misunderstood: painstaking,
infinitely laborious, accurate scholarship is a noble aim, well worth
the consistent effort of a lifetime; but there are two sides to raising
the standard of scholarship.  Does an educational institution exist for
the sake of its reputation, or to serve its constituency?  If it seeks
to advance its reputation at the expense of its fullest and best service
to those who need its help, is it not recreant to its duty and
opportunity?

Well, in the mood cited, the institution raises and standardizes its
entrance-requirements and generally excludes special students.  One
readily sees why: it is much easier to work with the regularly prepared
freshman, he fits much more smoothly and comfortably into the machinery
of the institution.  Many a wise teacher will admit, nevertheless, that
the best students he ever taught and the ones whose lives he is proudest
of having influenced, were often men and women, thirty, forty, fifty
years of age--teachers who suddenly realized that the ruts of their
calling had become so deep they could no longer see over them, ministers
awakening to the fact that they had given all their store and must get a
new supply, business men aware of a call to another field of action--
working with a consistent earnestness the average fledgling freshman
cannot imagine--he is not old enough; yet generally the tendency is to
exclude such students, unless they will go back and do the arduous, and
often for them useless, work of preparing to pass the examinations for
entrance to the freshman class.  That, too, is all wrong.

The American college and university stands to-day at the parting of the
ways: this generation will largely determine its future.  If the
American college and university ever becomes a social club for the sons
and daughters of the rich, an institution making it easy for them to
secure business and professional opportunity and advancement, to the
exclusion of their poorer fellows, it may be as necessary to
disestablish the foundations of our great universities, as statesmen in
Europe thought it necessary to disestablish the monastic foundations at
the close of the middle age.  They, too, began as educational
institutions. If, on the other hand, the American college and university
remains true to its task, if it keeps its doors open and its spirit
democratic, if it seeks to render ever larger service to the great
public and to develop moral leadership for American democracy, then,
indeed, it will go ever forward upon its noble path.




