XVII

THE DILEMMA OF DEMOCRACY

We have seen that the gravest menaces of democracy are the faults in
mind and character in the multitude.  Selfishness, fickleness,
ignorance, irreverence in the people, with demagoguery in the leader--
these are the menaces of American democracy.  How then can the people be
trusted, since democracy depends upon trusting them?  This is an old
indictment, searching to the very heart of democracy.  Plato made it of
ancient Athens, while, more recently and trenchantly, Ibsen has made it
for all modern society.

The argument runs thus: democracy means the rule of the majority.  Well,
there are more fools than wise men in the world, more ignorant than
intelligent.  Thus the rule of the majority must mean the rule of the
fools over the wise men, of the ignorant over the intelligent.  Such is
the significant indictment, and we are compelled to admit that our
political life is filled with illustrations that would seem to
substantiate it. The ward bosses, the demagogues and grafters who are
given power by the multitude, one campaign after another, would seem to
justify the pessimism of Plato and Ibsen.

Is there not, however, a subtle fallacy in the very phrasing of the
indictment?  The majority does not "rule": it elects representatives who
guide.  That is something entirely different.  When the worst is said of
them those representatives of the people are distinctly above the
average of the majorities electing them.  Take the roll of our
presidents, for instance.  With all the corruption and vulgarity of our
national politics, that list, from Washington, through such altitudes as
Jefferson and Lincoln, to the present occupant of the White House, is
superior to any roster of kings or emperors in the history of mankind.

What does this mean?  It means that _the hope of democracy is the
instinctive power in the breast of common humanity to recognize the
highest when it appears_.  Were this not true, democracy would be the
most hopeless of mistakes, and the sooner we abandoned it, with its
vulgarity and waste, the better it would be for us.  The instinctive
power is there, however: to recognize, not to live, the highest.

How many have followed the example of Socrates, remaining in prison and
accepting the hemlock poison for the sake of truth?  Yet all who know of
him thrill to his sacrifice.  Of all who have borne the name, Christian,
how many have followed consistently the footsteps of Jesus and obeyed
literally and unvaryingly the precepts of the Sermon on the Mount?  Of
the millions, perhaps ten or twenty individuals--to be generous in our
view; but _all the world recognizes him_.

Here, then, is the hope that takes the sting from the indictment of
Plato, Ibsen and how many other critics of democracy.  Plato said,
"Until philosophers are kings, . . . cities will never have rest from
their evils,--no, nor the human race, as I believe."  Once, perhaps once
only, Plato's dream was realized: in that noblest of philosopher
emperors, wholly dedicated to the welfare of the world he ruled with
autocratic power; yet the soul of Marcus Aurelius was burdened with an
impossible task. It is one of the tragic ironies of history that, in
this one realization of Plato's lofty dream, the noble emperor could
postpone, he could not avert, the colossal doom that threatened the
world he ruled.  So he wrapped his Roman cloak about him and lay down to
sleep, with stoic consciousness that he had done his part in the place
where Zeus had put him, but relieved that he might not see the disaster
he knew must swiftly come.

How different our dream: it is no illusion of a happy accident of
philosopher kings.  We want no arbitrary monarchs, wise or brutal: from
the noblest of emperors to the butcher of Berlin, we would sweep them
all aside, to the ash-heap of outworn tools.  Our dream is the awakening
and education of the multitude, so that the majority will be able and
glad to choose, as its guides, leaders and representatives, the noblest
and best.  When that day comes, there will be, for the first time in the
history of mankind, the dawn of a true _aristocracy_ or rule of the
best; and it will come through the fulfillment of democracy. A long and
troubled path, with many faults and evils meantime?  Yes, but not so
hopelessly long, when one considers the ages of slow struggle up the
mountain and the swiftly multiplying power of education over the mind of
all.





XVIII

PATERNALISM VERSUS DEMOCRACY

The contrast between paternalism and democracy in aim and method is thus
extreme.  Paternalism seeks directly organization, order, production and
efficiency, incidentally and occasionally the welfare of the subject
population.  Democracy seeks directly the highest development of all men
and women, their freedom, happiness and culture, in the end it hopes
this will give social order, good government and productive power.  It
is willing, meantime, to sacrifice some measure of order for freedom, of
good government for individual initiative, of efficiency for life.
Paternalism seeks to achieve its aims, quickly and effectively, through
the boss's whip of social control.  Democracy works by the slower, but
more permanently hopeful path of education, never sacrificing life to
material ends.  Paternalism ends in a social hierarchy, materially
prosperous, but caste-ridden and without soul.  Democracy ends in the
abolishment of castes, equality of opportunity, with the freest
individual initiative and finest flowering of the personal spirit. Which
shall it be: God or Mammon, Men or Machines?

There is no doubt that efficiency can be achieved most quickly under a
well-wielded boss's whip, but at the sacrifice of initiative and
invention. Moreover, remove the whip, and the efficiency quickly goes to
pieces. On the other hand, the efficiency achieved by voluntary effort
and free cooperation comes much more slowly, but it lasts.  Moreover, it
develops, hand in hand, with initiative and invention.

The negro, doubtless, has never been so generally efficient as before
the civil war, in the South, under the overseer's whip; yet every negro
who, to-day, has character enough to save up and buy a mule and an acre
of ground, tills it with a consistent and permanent effectiveness of
which slave labor is never capable.  In the one case, moreover, there is
the average economic result, in the other, the gradual development of
manhood.

Organize a factory on the feudal lines so prevalent in current industry.
Get a strong, dominating superintendent and give him autocratic
authority. Quickly he will show results.  Always, however, there is the
danger of strikes, and if the strong hand falters, the organization
disintegrates. On the other hand, let a corporation take its artisans
into its confidence, give each a small proportionate share in the annual
earnings.  Each worker will feel increasingly that the business is his
business.  He will take pride in his accomplishment.  Gradually he will
attain efficiency, and work permanently, without oversight, with a
consistent earnestness no boss's whip ever attained,

The experience of the National Cash Register Company at Dayton, Ohio,
proves this.  The experiments of Henry Ford are a step toward the same
solution.  So, in lesser measure, is the plan of the Steel trust to
permit and encourage its employees to purchase annually its stock,
somewhat below the current market price, giving a substantial bonus if
the stock is held over ten years.

If you wish an illustration on a larger scale, consider the mass
formation tactics of the German soldiers, in contrast to the individual
courage, initiative and action of the French.  There are the two types
of efficiency in sheerest contrast, but beyond is always the question of
their effect on manhood.  France has saved and regenerated her soul; but
Germany--?

Further, the breakdown of paternalistically achieved efficiency has been
evident in Germany's utter failure to understand the mind of other
peoples, particularly of democracies.  She had voluminous data, gathered
by the most atrociously efficient spy system ever developed, yet she
utterly misread the mind of France, England and the United States.  The
same break-down is evident in Germany's failure in colonization in
contrast to England's success.

For offensive war, it must be admitted, the efficiency under the boss's
whip will go further.  For defensive war, or war for high moral aims, it
is desirable that the individual soldier should think for himself,
respond to the high appeal.  Thus for such warfare the efficiency of
voluntary effort and cooperation is superior.  An autocracy would better
rule its soldiers by a military caste; there can be no excuse for such
in a democracy.  Thus, the utmost possible fraternization of officers
and men is desirable, and social snobbery, the snubbing of officers who
come up from the ranks, and other anachronistic survivals, should be
stamped out, as utterly foreign to what should be the spirit of the
military arm of democracy.

Further, in estimating the two types, one must remember that paternalism
may exercise its power in secret and that it accomplishes much in the
dark. Democracy, on the other hand, is afflicted and blessed with
pitiless publicity.  Thus its evils are all exposed, it washes all its
dirty linen in public; but the main thing is to get it clean.

When it comes to invention and initiative, as already indicated,
democracy has the advantage, immediately, as in the long run.  We are
the most inventive people on earth, and that quality is a direct result
of our democratic individualism.  It is a significant fact that most of
the startling inventions used in this War were made in America--but
_developed and applied in Germany._  There, again, are evident the
contrasting results of the two types of social organization.  The
indefatigably industrious and docile German mind can work out and apply
the inventions furnished it, with marvelous persistency and
effectiveness, under paternal control. We have the problem of achieving
by voluntary effort and cooperation a persistent thoroughness in working
out the ideas and inventions that come to us in such abundant measure.

The path of democracy is education.




