IX

THINGS WORTH THINKING ABOUT


 The man who cannot wonder, who does not habitually wonder, is but a
 pair of spectacles behind which there is no eye.—CARLYLE.

Up to now I have treated exclusively of _how_ to think, but have made
no mention of _what_ to think. I have treated of the best methods of
dealing with different subjects and questions; I have not considered
what subjects or problems are most worth dealing with.

Of course the important thing is that you do think. It is not
absolutely essential that the results of your thinking are results
which can be directly made use of. Thinking is an end in itself. Most
men imagine that “thinking for the sake of thinking” may appeal to
philosophers, but means nothing to them, as they like to think only
when by so doing they can forward some practical end. These people do
themselves an injustice.

Perhaps you, O reader, are among them. If so, let me appeal to your
personal experience. Have you ever tried to solve a toy puzzle, tried
to take the two wire hooks apart without bending them? Or have you
ever stopped to tackle a problem on the family page of your evening
or Sunday newspaper? “A grocer buys fifteen dozen eggs, he sells—”
you know what I mean. You admit that you have. Exactly. You have been
thinking for the mere sake of thinking.

If you protest that you didn’t care about the thinking, that you took
no pleasure in the thinking, which was merely incidental, but that
what really urged you on and gave you pleasure was the solution of
the puzzle, you are again deceiving yourself. The thinking was not
incidental. Thinking and problem solving are identical. The fact is
that you set yourself to solving a problem, to removing a mental
hindrance, for the mere sake of getting the answer, with absolutely no
thought of what you were going to do with the answer when you got it.

But if you can derive so much pleasure from thinking which you cannot
put to use, how much greater should be your pleasure when your
conclusions can be utilized? For when you think of something useful,
you have not only the present pleasure of solving your problem, but
the ulterior pleasure of applying your solution to action, or to the
solution of some further problem. And while I again admit that thinking
is an end in itself, this does not prevent it from being at the same
time a means to some further end. After all is said there is really no
reason why we should be prejudiced against problems or subjects that
are useful.

The mere decision that we should think of useful questions is
insufficient. Very few questions are without _some_ use. Even the
solution of the family page puzzle might some day be useful in solving
a similar problem arising in your own business; and even if this never
came to pass you might spring the puzzle on your friends, and make
yourself socially more interesting. Thought given to a question in a
debating book now before me, “Resolved, that Ferocious Wild Beasts are
more to be dreaded than Venomous Reptiles,” might result in knowledge
which would come handy in selecting equipment if one decided to journey
to the wilderness of South America. But there are millions of problems
of as much use as these; and it is not within the power of one lone
mortal, of years three score and ten, to compass even a corner of them.
Our question is not—what problems are of use?, but—of _how much_ use
are certain problems?, or stated in another way,—what is the _relative_
utility of problems?

Any adequate consideration of this question would involve the selection
of some criterion for utility, and the testing of individual problems
by that criterion. But to treat such a question with anything like
justice is beyond the scope of this book; it would require almost
a volume in itself. It is almost the same as the problem, What
knowledge is of most worth?, and the most masterly treatise on that
question which has ever been written can be found in Herbert Spencer’s
epoch-making little work, _Education_. I sincerely hope that the reader
study this. But I hope even more earnestly that before he does so he
first think the problem out independently, for it is one of the most
important he can put before himself.

But our present question—that of the relative importance of
problems—is slightly different from that of the relative importance
of knowledge. The first deals with thought and the second with
information, or the materials of thought; the first with a process of
getting knowledge and the second with knowledge itself.

I believe for example that a knowledge of his own body and of the
laws of health is the most valuable a man can have, but there are few
problems concerning the body which I would include in the first rank.
There are several reasons for this. In the first place, while it may
be true that such questions _taken as a whole_ are more important than
any other class of questions, taken separately they are relatively
minor; there are no one or two questions of all-encompassing importance
to which all the others are subsidiary. Moreover, such questions,
while they undoubtedly require thought for their solution, depend to a
relatively great extent on observation and experiment. No sane medical
student would sit down and follow out a lengthy course of reasoning
as to where the heart is; he would merely observe or dissect, or
consult the book of a man who had dissected, and save mental fatigue.
Not least of all, questions of physiology require extensive, highly
technical and detailed information—information which requires years of
special study to acquire—before any thinking that is at all safe can be
put upon them. So in estimating the relative value of problems, there
are other considerations besides the value of knowledge.

But it is not my purpose here to discuss the general principles upon
which the selection of worth-while questions should be made. That
task I leave to the reader. I have chosen rather the concrete path of
suggesting a list of questions which I consider of great import. I
believe that no matter how much thought the reader gives to any one of
them he will not be losing his time.

I have elsewhere pointed out that the more knowledge a man has the
more problems he will have. It is equally true that unless a man has
some knowledge on a subject he will not be able to appreciate or even
understand some of its most important problems. It is only when we
begin to think of subjects that we discover problems and realize their
significance. In stating most of the following problems, therefore, I
have often thought it necessary to add a few sentences in explanation,
and have sometimes stated a question in a variety of forms in order to
more clearly convey the thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Are specific characteristics, acquired during the lifetime of an
individual, inherited by his offspring?_ I have referred so often to
this problem and its importance that further explanation is hardly
necessary. “Characteristics” of course refer to intellectual and moral
as well as physical characteristics.

_What is the influence of the individual mind on society and of social
environment on the individual?_

_Does the form of government determine the character of a people, or
does the character of a people determine their form of government?_
Or do government and character react on each other, and how? The same
question may be asked of all other social institutions. Does the
religion of a people determine their character, or does the character
of a people determine their religion? This whole problem is somewhat
similar to that immediately preceding, regarding the interaction of the
individual and the social mind.

_Is society for the benefit of the individual or is the individual for
the benefit of society?_

_Should the jurisdiction of the government be extended or curtailed?_
Or should it be extended in some directions and curtailed in others?
Does the answer to this problem depend on the answer to the previous
one? Another form of the same problem is: What is the proper sphere of
government?

_Should the government grant monopolies?_ Patents, for example?

_What would be the most practicable plan for abolishing or minimizing
war?_ Those who do not wish to beg the previous question may first
ask whether it is always desirable to prevent war, whether war is
always an evil. What is the effect of war on the physical future of
the race? on national and individual character? on government? on
national liberty? on personal liberty? What are the ethics of war?
for aggression? for territorial conquest? for “national honor”? for
defense of a weaker nation? for defense against invasion? What is the
effect of preparedness? of universal preparedness? of preparedness of
an individual nation? In each case what are the principles on which the
extent of preparedness should be determined? What are the fundamental
causes of war? How can they be removed? Is it possible to remove all of
them?

_Which is the rightful owner of land, the community or the individual?_
To state the problem in another form: Should private land ownership be
abolished?

_Who should be entitled to vote?_ This of course is a question similar
to woman suffrage, but it is much broader. It deals not only with the
qualification of sex, but of age. Should any one under twenty-one have
the vote? The validity of property and educational qualifications
should also be considered.

_How should the relations of the sexes be regulated?_ Put in slightly
narrower and perhaps less objectionable form: What would be just laws
governing marriage and divorce?

_What is the effect of attempted State interference with the law of
supply and demand?_ Does the unrestricted working out of this law
forward ultimate justice? Just what is the validity and the meaning
of the expression “The _law_ of supply and demand”? The question
could be taken up in connection with minimum wage laws, railroad rate
regulations, “extra crew” laws, etc.

_Which is the best policy: free trade, revenue tariff, or protective
tariff?_ Or under what conditions is each best? With what classes of
commodities?

_What would be an equitable and sound currency system?_ This question
is somewhat technical, and would have to be considered in the form of a
number of subsidiary problems. Ought money to have an intrinsic value?
What is the effect of “fiat” paper currency on money of intrinsic
value and on prices? The effect of credit? The effect of fluctuations
in the supply of gold? Ought there be a double standard or a multiple
standard? etc.

_Should conduct be judged by the pleasure or happiness it yields?_
Stated in another form, almost a different problem: Is utility a good
moral guide?

_Should conduct be judged by its tendency to produce individual
well-being, or should it be judged by its tendency to produce the
well-being of all humanity, or of all sentient beings?_ This problem
cannot be lightly dismissed in favor of universal well-being.
This becomes apparent when we attempt to give an undogmatic and
non-question-begging answer to the query: Why should a man act for the
benefit of others?

No science is more provocative of thought than ethics. The question of
whether acts should be declared good or bad as they tend to produce
pleasure or happiness, either individual or in humanity as a whole, or
whether “virtue” or “morality” is an end in itself, is one of the most
subtle and elusive we can attempt to solve; no matter which answer we
give we are brought into logical and psychological dilemmas from which
it seems impossible to escape. This is also true of the problem of
whether our knowledge of what constitutes right and wrong comes from
experience or from intuition.

The broadest form of the ethical problem, which includes the two
preceding italicized problems, is:

_What is the proper criterion for determining right and wrong conduct?_
Or even less dogmatic: Can there be a criterion for determining right
and wrong conduct, and what is it?

Somewhat allied with the ethical problem is that problem of problems:
how to live? By this is meant how to put the most into life and get
the most out of it; what vocation to follow; what hobbies, amusements,
avocations to take up; how to plan time by months, by weeks, by days,
by hours. How much time and energy do certain activities deserve? How
much can we afford to give them? Restated: what activities are of most
worth?

Of course every one does think of problems connected with the art of
living. But he thinks of them as little unconnected questions. Barely
indeed does any one go about the solution of the general problem of
living in an orderly, systematic manner. To insist upon the broad
practical bearings of the problem would be unnecessary, absurd. By
its very nature it is the most “practical” question we can ask. Any
particular solution or treatment may be impractical, but this does not
affect the question itself.

_What are the respective influences of environment (education,
experience, etc.) and innate tendencies in determining character?_
Which is the greater determinant?

_Does pleasure depend upon the satisfaction of instinctive desires, or
do desires for certain activities depend upon the pleasure accompanying
the previous performance of such activities?_ Does an activity or the
possession of an object give us pleasure because we have previously
desired it, or do we desire an activity or an object because we have
previously obtained pleasure from it? Or do pleasure and desire
interact, and just how? The solution of this psychological problem is
of tremendous importance in ethics.

_Does the mind depend entirely on the brain?_ That is, are all
thoughts, emotions, feelings, due to material changes in the brain? The
answer we give to this problem may determine our answer to the question
of immortality.

_What knowledge is of most worth?_ I have so fully discussed the
importance of this question and the method of proceeding with its
solution that further explanation is needless.

One sphere of thought where the thinker is compelled to be original;
where it is practically impossible for him to fall into beaten tracks,
is invention. But there is useless as well as useful invention. A
man’s ambition may range all the way from inventing a machine to
harness directly the limitless power of the sun, down to devising a
tenacious tip for shoelaces. But he should be careful about inventing
something already patented. He should be even more careful to avoid
inventing something for which there is no demand. One of Edison’s first
patents was for a machine to register quickly the votes of legislative
assemblies. And it worked. But the legislative assemblies didn’t want
it, because they didn’t want their votes quickly registered. That
would have ended good old filibuster methods. Another invention of
great uselessness which has been several times attempted is a machine
to write words just like the human hand writes them. There are really
so many useful things which do not exist and for which there is a
demand, that it seems quite a pity nine out of ten patents in the
files at Washington are for things inutile. If the would-be inventor
cannot himself think of something really needed, almost any big patent
attorney house will send him an entire book of suggestions on “What to
Invent.”

Invention usually requires highly technical knowledge, not to speak of
facilities for experiment and a well-supplied purse. But nothing gives
more solid satisfaction to its creator than a successful appliance.
While the conscientious philosopher is constantly harassed by doubts as
to whether, after all, he has discovered truth; the inventor need not
worry. His machine either works or it does not work, and he _knows_ the
truth of his thought thereby. On the other hand the philosopher will
always have _some_ thoughts. Be they true or not they may at least be
interesting and worth recording, whereas the inventor may toil on for
years and years with absolutely nothing to show for his exertion at the
end. . . .

There are a number of problems that are not of great “practical”
importance, but whose theoretic value is so transcendent as to compel
attention. Among these are certain problems in psychology, but more
especially in metaphysics, philosophy and even religion, insofar as
religion can be said to have problems.

_Is there a God and is it possible for man to learn anything of His
nature?_ Some readers may object to the first part of this question.
But I state it because I am anxious to avoid dogmatism.

_Is the soul immortal?_ What do we mean by the soul? Does science
disprove the life after death?

_What is the test of truth?_ How shall we know truth when we have it?
What after all is “truth”?

_Are our wills free, or are our actions predetermined?_ Some may object
to this way of stating the question. Much confusion exists as to the
meaning of the problem. A different way of stating it would lead to
different treatment. What is the “will”? What do we mean by “free”?
What do we mean by “predetermined”?

_The problem of existence._ How did the universe come into being? This
is the last problem in which interest can be stimulated from without.
No matter in how many different ways he phrases it, a writer cannot
convey this sense of mystery to another. It must arise from within.
Most of the time we accept, we take for granted, the universe and the
existent order of things, and it requires the greatest effort to keep
alive our mystification and doubt for even short periods.

       *       *       *       *       *

The list of questions foregoing is of course merely suggestive. It is
impossible to select, say twenty-five questions, and pronounce them the
twenty-five most important that can be asked. I fully realize there are
questions of greater importance than some I have propounded. But I have
not gone so far as to advise that every one of these should be thought
over. The list has been given merely for thought stimulation, and to
indicate what is meant by “worth while” questions.

Unfortunately I have not been able to explain why most of these are so
important. To have done so would have required too much time for each
individual problem. It would have drawn us too far out of our subject.
The reader must find out or sense the importance for himself.

Practically all of the problems given in the list come under one of
the sciences, especially if we count metaphysics or philosophy as a
science, which it is in so far as it is organized knowledge. This may
seem somewhat narrow. Now I admit there are important problems which
are not included in any science. But there are very few. As soon as
deep thought is given to a problem its treatment becomes systematic.
It either falls into one of the sciences or a new science evolves
about it. John Stuart Mill once started a journal in which he promised
himself to put one thought a day, but he did not permit himself to
record there any thought on a problem falling within one of the special
sciences. None of the thoughts he put in the journal is of any great
value. It came to an abrupt end in about two months.

It may be objected that though the questions selected are most
important _in themselves_, there are other things more worth thinking
about, because of the mental discipline they yield. Now putting aside
the fact that questions important in themselves should be dealt with
ultimately—that mental discipline would be useless unless applied to
important problems—I must voice my suspicion that the most useful
questions are also the best for training the mind. It may be true
that punching the bag will help a prizefighter in boxing. But other
things equal, a man who has spent one week in actual boxing is better
prepared to enter the prize ring than one who has devoted a month to
bag punching. The best practice for boxing is boxing. The best practice
for solving important questions is solving important questions.

Nor do I admit the contention is valid that one problem rather than
another should be thought of because it is “deeper.” We cannot
truthfully say that psychology is a “deeper” science than ethics,
or that metaphysics is deeper than psychology, or vice versa. Most
subjects and most problems are just as deep as we care to make them.
Their depth depends entirely on how deep we go into them. This applies
especially to the so-called philosophical sciences. We may give them
shallow treatment or we may give them profound treatment. But we
shall usually find that the deepest questions are the most important
questions. For the most important questions have generally attracted
the greatest minds; consequently they have been given the deepest
treatment; and when a man reads the attempted solutions of these great
minds his thoughts tend toward this deeper plane. Of course certain
problems, especially in mathematics, can be dealt with by only one
method. In this case we may properly speak of some problems being
objectively deeper or at least more difficult than others.

Some objections may be offered to several of the questions in my list,
on the ground that they are invalid. Such problems as the immortality
of the soul and the problem of existence may be declared inscrutable,
unsolvable. Such a problem as “Is society for the benefit of the
individual or is the individual for the benefit of society?” may be
said to imply that society is something which has been voluntarily
formed like the State. It may be declared that this is not the case; it
may be objected that this question is meaningless. All these objections
may be justified. But their truth cannot be determined until we
actually attempt a solution. The determination of the validity of a
problem is part of the problem.

       *       *       *       *       *

We come now to the question of what is most worth reading. The simplest
answer is that that is most worth reading which is most worth thinking
about, and therefore we should read those books which deal with such
problems as I have indicated. But this counsel needs to be supplemented.

A conservative estimate places the number of books in the world at
4,500,000. (This estimate was made before the war broke out, and the
war-books by now have doubtless brought the number to 5,000,000.) This
does not mean books as collections of printed sheets of paper bound
together—books as physical objects—for if it did the number would be
immensely greater. It means 4,500,000 (or more) separate and distinct
treatises. If you were to read one book every two weeks, you would read
about twenty-five a year, and if you read for fifty years you would
cover 1,250. One book in every three thousand six hundred! (3,600!)

From this it is apparent that even the most omnivorous reader, even
the reader who can cover a book swiftly by efficient skipping, will at
least have to ask himself before beginning a volume, “Is this a book
in a thousand? Can I afford to read this at the cost of missing nine
hundred and ninety-nine others?” And most men who ask this question
will have to substitute the number five thousand, or even ten thousand.

Nine-tenths of our reading is on mere chance recommendation, passing
whim or by sheer accident. We catch sight of a book on a library table.
Having nothing better to do we pick it up; we start perusing it. Every
book read in this way means a sinful waste of time. To be sure, a book
read in this chance manner _might_ (accidentally) be very good—even
better than some you would have planned for; but this will happen
seldom, and is never a justification of the practice. By going a round
about way to a place a man might stumble across a lost pocketbook, but
this would not justify taking round about ways.

The first thing needed, then, is that we should plan our reading.
Perhaps the best way to do this would be to make out a list of the
books we intend to read for the coming year, or say a list of from a
dozen to twenty-five volumes, and then read them in the order listed.
Another good plan is to jot down the title of every book we intend to
read, and keep the list about with us. Then when we meet with a book
which we think would be good to read, or which we feel we simply must
read, we can before starting it glance at our list. The formidable
array we find there will probably induce us either to give up entirely
our intention to read the book before us, or at least to put it
somewhere on the list which will allow more important books to be read
first.

Some people cannot endure planning their reading in this manner. It
grates on them to think they are tied down to any sort of program;
it seems to deprive them of the advantages of spontaneous interest.
Well, if you cannot plan your reading prospectively, at least plan it
retrospectively. If you cannot keep a list of books you _intend_ to
read, at least keep a list of books you _have_ read. Refer to this
from time to time. See whether you have been reading uniformly good
literature. See whether you have been reading too much on one topic and
not enough on another, and what topics you have been long neglecting.
But at best this method is a poor substitute for planning your reading
prospectively.

We should plan not only with regard to topics and subjects, but with
regard to authors. Obviously if two men of equal ability both study
the same subject, one will get more out of his study than the other if
he reads authors who treat the subject on a deeper plane—provided of
course he understands them.

Whether consciously or not, we tend to imitate the authors we read. If
we read shallow books we are forced, while reading them, to do shallow
thinking. Our plane of thought tends toward the plane of thought of
the authors we study; we acquire either habits of careful critical
thinking, or of dogmatic lack of thinking.

This emphasizes the importance of reading the best books, and _only_
the best books. Our plane of thinking is determined not alone by the
good books we read, but by all the books we read; it tends toward
the _average_. Most men imagine that when they read a good book they
get a certain amount of good out of it, and that this good will stay
with them undiminished. Provided they read a certain number of serious
books, they see no reason why they should not read any number of
superficial or useless books, or any amount of ephemeral magazine or
newspaper literature. They expect the serious reading to benefit them.
They do not expect the shallow reading to harm them. This is just as if
they were to buy and eat unnutritious and indigestible food, and excuse
themselves on the ground that they ate nourishing and digestible food
along with it.

The analogy may be carried further. As it is the average of the
physical food you digest which ultimately determines the constitution
of your body, so it is the average of the mental food you absorb which
determines the constitution of your mind. One good meal will not offset
a week of bad ones; one good book will never offset any number of poor
books. Further, as no one has a perfect memory, you do not retain all
you read any more than you retain all you eat. Therefore if you do
not want your mind to retrogress, you should not rest satisfied with
books already read, but should continue to read books at least as good
as any previous. As at any given time your bodily health—so far as it
depends on food—is mainly determined by the meals of the last few days
or weeks, so is your mental health dependent on the last few books you
have read.

One of the first things we should look to in selecting books is their
comprehensiveness. To quote Arnold Bennett: “Unless and until a man has
formed a scheme of knowledge, be it but a mere skeleton, his reading
must necessarily be unphilosophical. He must have attained to some
notion of the interrelations of the various branches of knowledge
before he can properly comprehend the branch of knowledge in which
he specializes.”[23] As an aid in forming this scheme of knowledge,
Mr. Bennett suggests Herbert Spencer’s _First Principles_. I heartily
endorse his choice. I would add to it the essay on _The Classification
of the Sciences_ by the same author.

These works are classics, and one of the most regrettable of
difficulties is that of getting people to read the classics. Mention
to a man Darwin’s _Origin of Species_ or _Descent of Man_, and he
will reply, “Oh, yes, that’s the theory that says men descended from
monkeys.” Satisfied that he knows all there is to know about it, he
never reads any of Darwin’s works. Now passing over the fact that
the theory does not assert that man descended from monkeys and never
intended to assert it;—what a compliment to Darwin’s thought and
brevity to assume that all his books can be summed up in a phrase!
But Darwin is not the only sufferer. If we come across the title of a
classic often enough, and hear a lot of talk “about it and about” and
a few quotations from it, we gradually come to believe we know all
the contents worth knowing. This is why Shakespeare, and in fact most
of the classics, are so seldom actually read, and why we go for our
serious reading to a book on “How to Read Character from Handwriting”
or to a sensational volume on prostitution by one of our modern
“sociologists.” The only way we can keep ourselves from such stuff is
to lay out some definite end, some big objective, to be attained; and
before reading a book we should ask how that helps us to attain it.

I have not given a formal list of books worth reading, nor do I intend
to; one of the reasons being that the work has been done so well by
others. Ever since Sir John Lubbock published his list of one hundred
best books, the number of selections has been legion. Charles Eliot’s
selection for his _Five Foot Shelf_ is to be commended, and a little
volume by Frank Parsons _The World’s Best Books_. Of course our purpose
is special:—to find the best books for making thinkers; but the remarks
already made should aid the reader sufficiently in making his own
selection from these lists. As previously pointed out, if the reader
is studying a specialty he can usually find a fairly well selected
bibliography at the end of the article on that specialty in any
standard encyclopedia.

       *       *       *       *       *

The reader probably sees clearly by now that it is impossible to do
his own thinking in every case; that if he is to have sound knowledge
on important questions he must have the courage to be ignorant of
many things. How much trouble to go to in any particular case it is
difficult to say.

We can lay it down as a general principle that questions of the
highest importance, such as those of which I have given a suggestive
list—questions which deal with facts known or easily ascertainable,
and which depend for their right solution more on thinking than on
anything else—a man should solve for himself, and should take the
greatest caution in so doing. On the other hand, questions of the
highest importance which depend for their solution mainly on full and
detailed knowledge of highly technical facts which lie outside of one’s
specialty, should be dealt with by consulting authorities and taking
their word for it.

There still remains the great mass of questions which are relatively
unimportant, but continually coming up in our daily life, the answers
to which greatly influence our conduct. Time forbids us not only
from thinking these out for ourselves, but even from consulting an
authority—for the selection of an authority often involves almost as
much intellectual responsibility as self-thinking. The only thing we
can do is to accept the verdict of popular opinion.

Custom, convention and popular belief, no matter how many times they
have been overthrown, have fairly reliable foundations. Popular ideas,
to be sure, are products of mere unorganized experience. They are
empirical; seldom if ever scientific. But though they are founded on
experience which is _unorganized_, they are founded on so much of it
that they are worthy of respect. Society could not long exist if it
persisted in acting on beliefs altogether wrong, though it is safe to
say that popular ideas are never more than approximately right. But
unless and until you have either thoroughly thought over a question for
yourself or have consulted an acknowledged and trustworthy authority,
it is best tentatively to accept and act on common belief. To think
and act differently, merely for the sake of being different, is
unprofitable and dangerous, all questions of ethics aside.




