letter in a word, then spell it out. Finally its meaning dawned upon
us. As we became more proficient we did not have to look at every
letter; we could read words as wholes with the same rapidity as the
separate letters. Accurate psychological tests have determined that a
man can read such words as “and” and “the” with even greater rapidity
than any single letter composing them. We finally reach the point where
we can read short phrases at the same rate as we formerly could single
words.

But the secret of the scholar who can cover efficiently much more
ground than ordinary men is not so much that he reads _faster_, as
that he reads _less_. In other words, instead of reading every word
he glances down a page and sees certain “cue” words or rather “cue”
phrases, for the eye and mind take in phrases as wholes. If he is
familiar with the subject (and he is not to employ this method unless
and until he is) he knows immediately, by “a sort of instinct” as
Buckle called it, whether any new or valuable thought is on that page.
When he finds that there is he involuntarily slackens his pace and
reads that thought at ordinary reading pace or even slower. Sometimes
indeed he will read whole chapters slowly, word for word, if the
contents are sufficiently novel and important to warrant it.

Read by this “hop, skip and jump” fashion a book the size of the
present volume might take an hour or even less. But it is almost
impossible to give even an approximate estimate of the time such
reading ought to take. Of course the longer you spend the more you
will get out of a book, but the return per time invested will be less
and less. On the other hand if you read the book too fast you may be
wasting your time altogether; you may end by understanding nothing at
all. Much will depend upon the originality and depth of the book, upon
the reader’s familiarity with the subject, and upon his native mental
qualities.

Many may object to practicing the foregoing method because they have
a vague feeling that it is their duty to read every word in a book. I
suspect that the real reason for this is simply so that when asked they
can conscientiously say they have _read_ the book. Whereas if they had
followed this skipping method they would be able to say only that they
had “glanced through it” or at best that they had “read parts of it.”
To this objection I have nothing to say, for I am confining my remarks
to those in search of truth and knowledge rather than conversation and
the good opinion of those who believe that reading from cover to cover
is the only path to wisdom. I might point out in passing, however, that
if we do follow this method there will be a half dozen books which we
can say we have “glanced through” to one which we would otherwise have
been able to say we had “read.”

This way of dealing with a book is constructive and positive as opposed
to the negative method of critical reading. For we read for suggestion
only; we carry forward some line of thought of an author, which is
better for intellectual development than trying to find if he was
wrong and where he was wrong. Not only is this positive method more
interesting; in some respects it is better even for criticism. For in
carrying forward an author’s line of thought, noting its consequences
and implications and considering different cases where it applies, we
find whether or not it leads to absurd conclusions; whether or not all
concrete instances conform with it. It should be kept in mind that this
method is not to be followed until the main text-book has been studied.
Consequently when it is followed your mind will have been fortified by
previous reading and thinking; valuable thoughts of an author will tend
to impress you and be remembered, while his trite or erroneous ideas
will tend to be ignored.

But after all, what is important is not your attitude or method at
the time of reading a book, but the thinking done later. The critical
attitude has its shortcomings, for when we are on the lookout for an
author’s mistakes we often miss the full significance of his truths.
On the other hand when “reading for suggestion” we may too often allow
an error to pass unquestioned. But both these disadvantages may be
overcome if we do enough thinking afterward.

Only one thing I must insist on: make sure you understand every
sentence of a book. Do not “guess” you understand it. Do not slide
over it in the hope that the author will explain it later. Do not work
yourself into the belief that after all it is not really important.
Rather than this, better by far do not read the book at all. Not only
will you get little or nothing from it but you will be forming the
worst of intellectual habits—that of thinking you understand when
you do not. If you have made every reasonable effort to understand
an author and then have not succeeded, write in the margin “I do not
understand this,” or draw a line alongside the sentence or passage. If
you have to do this too often you should put the volume aside for a
time. It is either too advanced for you or it is not worth reading.

As to the thinking you do after reading. Often problems connected with
the subject of a book you have read may arise spontaneously in mind,
or an objection to a statement may suddenly occur to you when thinking
on some other topic. Of course when this happens you should not stifle
your thoughts. But besides this, definite periods should be put aside
for thinking on what you have read and on the problems you have
written. I cannot insist on this too strenuously or too often.

A good task to set before yourself is to take every idea you agree with
in a book and try to treat it as a “germ.” Tell yourself that you will
develop it beyond the point where the author left off. Of course this
will not always be possible. You will seldom succeed. But there is
nothing like hitching your wagon to a star, and it will do no harm to
set this up as an ideal.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few miscellaneous problems remain to be considered.

How should we deal with authors with whom we disagree fundamentally?
Herbert Spencer relates that he twice started Kant’s _Critique of
Pure Reason_, but disagreeing fundamentally with the first and main
proposition he ceased reading. Now to do this is to give an author too
much credit for consistency. For even if every other proposition he
sets forth is ostensibly a corollary from his leading one, some of them
will contain much truth. It is impossible to be consistently wrong.
Add to this the possibility that the author may be right on his first
proposition after all. However, no book with a viewpoint radically
different from our own should be used as a main text, for we would
get little benefit from it. If the book is by an obscure author we
may safely lay it aside altogether. But if it is by so famous and so
bepraised a philosopher as Kant we should at least glance through the
entire volume for suggestions.

How many times ought we to read a book? I have already partly answered
this in formulating the law of diminishing returns. Few books are worth
re-reading. Rather than read one book twice on any given subject it
will most often be more profitable to read another book on it. For the
second will not only serve as a review of previous knowledge, but will
furnish you with new ideas, different aspects and new problems.

Certain books, however, can never be replaced by others. They occupy
this position either because they deal with a subject not elsewhere
dealt with or because they take an entirely novel aspect, or solely
because they are the works of supreme genius, for while the main
conclusions reached in works of this last type may be found elsewhere,
the _manner of thinking_ can never be. These books should be read
twice. The main text-book selected on any subject will usually be
chosen because it is the best and most comprehensive work on that
subject. For this reason it should be read a second time even if such
reading is only of the hop, skip and jump variety.

We should not re-read a book immediately upon the first completion
but should always allow a long interval to elapse. There are several
reasons for this. After an interval we acquire perspective; we are
in a position to know whether a book has done us any good and just
about how much. We may find after this interval that a work of which
we thought quite highly at the time of reading has really not helped
us appreciably either in thought or action. We may find that we have
outgrown the need of it. Even if we finally decide to re-read we shall
find the wait of immense help to our memory. If we re-read a book after
an interval of six months, three years after our second reading we will
remember its contents much better than if we had read it three times
in unbroken succession. Add to this that in the lapse of time we shall
have forgotten most of the work, and shall therefore approach it the
second time with greater interest than if it were still fresh in mind;
that our experience, reading and thinking in the meantime will make us
see every sentence in a different light, enabling us to judge our own
marginal criticisms (if we have made any) as well as the book, and the
advantage of waiting cannot be doubted. I do not believe it will ever
be necessary to read a book more than twice, that is, so far as thought
and knowledge are concerned. With books read for their style or for
mere amusement the case is different.

How long should one read at a sitting? Some men find that their
thought is choked by reading. Some find it stimulated. But results
vary according to the length of time reading is carried on. Reading
for very long periods at a stretch often deadens original thought. The
writer finds that he nearly always derives benefit from reading for
short periods, say ten or fifteen minutes. This is in some measure due
to the increased concentration which short periods allow. On the other
hand, some people find that a certain momentum is acquired during long
reading periods. The reader can only experiment to find how long a
period best suits his individual case.

How about concentration? This has been considered in relation to
independent thinking, but in reading the problem is somewhat different.
In thinking our task is to choose relevant associates. In reading the
associates are chosen for us. Our task is to stick to them, instead of
following the associates which occur to us either from what we read
or from sights and sounds about us. But associates which occur to us
from what we read are of two kinds: relevant and irrelevant, and the
former should of course be followed out. This however should be done
deliberately, in the manner I have previously indicated, and when the
vein of suggested thought has been exhausted we should bring attention
back to our book. The problem of concentration is not a very serious
one in reading. It may sometimes be difficult to concentrate on a book.
But it is infinitely easier than concentrating on a problem by unaided
independent thought.

       *       *       *       *       *

The plan of reading I have laid out is merely suggestive. What I
chiefly wanted to show was that all books cannot be treated alike, that
we cannot lay down dogmatic inflexible rules to apply to every volume.
Our method of reading will vary with the nature of a book or of the
subject it treats. It will depend upon the books we have already read
and even upon the books we contemplate reading later.

The good you get out of reading will depend entirely on how you allow
it to affect you. If every book you read suggests more problems,
gives you worth-while questions and topics to think about in spare
moments, enriches your intellectual life and stimulates your thought,
it is performing its proper function. But if you read solely to answer
problems you cannot answer for yourself, if every time you are puzzled
about anything you run to a book to have it explained, and accept
without question the explanation there given; in short, if you use your
reading to save yourself from thinking, you had better stop reading
altogether. Smoking is a far less harmful form of dissipation.

I have not yet definitely indicated the ratio which time given to
reading should bear to time devoted to thinking. I have avoided this
because of the many factors to be taken into account. But if the reader
happens to have a spare hour to devote to the improvement of his mind,
he will not go very far wrong if he gives thirty minutes to reading and
thirty minutes to thinking. His thinking may be on the subject he has
read, or part of it may be on other problems. That is not so important.
But the reader must not imagine that his thinking need be restricted
to these thirty minutes or any other thirty minutes. The glorious
advantage of thinking is that it can be fitted in at any odd moment.
The entire apparatus for carrying it on is always with you. You do not
even need a book for it. I remind the reader of this at the risk of
repeating myself.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was pointed out at the beginning of this chapter that the reading
of any book is not an end in itself, but should be subordinated to the
larger end of obtaining the best from reading in general. But for the
sake of clearness our end was temporarily considered as the mastery of
some particular subject. I indicated a plan of reading to best serve
that end. I also promised that needful qualifications would come later.

In stating the law of diminishing returns it was pointed out that it
applied to whole subjects as well as to books, that “past a certain
point every book we read on a subject, while it will probably add to
our knowledge, will not yield as much return as a book of equal merit
on another subject new to us.”

While this is true it applies to but a small extent when subjects are
read by the method just outlined, for while we do not get as much out
of any book as we would out of one of equal merit on another subject,
we read it so much faster that the return per time and energy expended
is practically as great. This fast reading is made possible by our
previous knowledge on the old subject. If the book on the new subject
were read in the same manner, we might get little or nothing from it.

With this objection out of the way I suggest that the reader get a
specialty. Books read in the ordinary unsystematic fashion, now on
this subject and now on that, leave little permanent impression. Even
if they do, we feel that though our range of reading may be wide we
have at best but a smattering of many things. In the final analysis
a smattering of knowledge is in most cases of no more use than total
ignorance. Better by far be ignorant of many things and know one thing
well, than know many things badly.

Besides the utility of having a specialty is the pleasure we derive.
There is always an intense satisfaction in feeling that one is an
“expert,” an “authority” in some subject. When some Congressman makes
an inaccurate remark which trespasses on your specialty you can write
a letter to the _Times_ or the _Sun_ explaining the error of his ways,
and incidentally exhibiting your own limitless erudition. When your
friends get into an argument on some question within your chosen field
they will remark, “Ask John Jones. He ought to know.” And even when
you have to confess abysmal ignorance on some question outside of your
domains, you may still have the satisfaction of believing that people
are excusing you within themselves with an “Oh, well, but he knows a
lot about someology.”

One writer estimates that “fifteen minutes a day or a half hour three
days a week devoted to one definite study will make one a master in
that field in a dozen years.”[20] This statement should interest
those people who “haven’t the time” to take up any specialty outside
their own business, but who spend at least half an hour every day in
newspaper or magazine reading—with nothing to show for it at the end
of twenty years.

Just what subject you make your specialty I am not at present
concerned. It may be aeronautics, astronomy, banking, Greek history,
differential calculus, social psychology, electricity, music,
philosophy of law, submarines, soap manufacture, religion, metaphysics,
sun-motors, education, literary style or the moon. But whatever it
is, it ought to be a subject in which you are interested for its
own sake—which most frequently means one which you do not make your
vocation. If you get tired of it, drop it and take up something in
which you are interested. Your thinking and study should be pursued as
a pleasure—not as a duty.

If your subject is a narrow one, if let us say it is merely a branch of
what is generally considered a science, you should first get a clear
idea of the broad outlines of the science before taking the specialty
up. Should you, for instance, select the tariff, begin your study by
using as your main text a book on general economics.

Even if you make your specialty an entire science you will derive
great help by reading in other sciences. In ethics, for instance, a
knowledge of psychology, biology and sociology will prove of surprising
value. This means that for the sake of knowing the specialty itself,
if for nothing else, you should not pursue it exclusively. If ever you
find yourself in danger of doing this it would be well to lay down a
rule that every third or fourth book you read must be one which does
not deal with the subject you have chosen as your own.




