Project Gutenberg's Thinking as a Science, by Henry Hazlitt (1894-1993)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Thinking as a Science

Author: Henry Hazlitt (1894-1993)

Release Date: May 31, 2018 [EBook #57243]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THINKING AS A SCIENCE ***




Produced by Turgut Dincer, RichardW, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









THINKING AS A SCIENCE, BY HENRY HAZLITT




 THINKING
 AS A SCIENCE

 BY
 HENRY HAZLITT

 [Illustration]

 NEW YORK
 E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY
 681 FIFTH AVENUE




 Copyright, 1916
 BY E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY




CONTENTS


        I • The Neglect of Thinking • 1

         II • Thinking With Method • 11

              III • A Few Cautions • 51

                IV • Concentration • 68

     V • Prejudice and Uncertainty • 99

     VI • Debate and Conversation • 129

       VII • Thinking and Reading • 135

    VIII • Writing One’s Thoughts • 191

 IX • Things Worth Thinking About • 207

           X • Thinking as an Art • 237

           XI • Books on Thinking • 248




THINKING AS A SCIENCE

I

THE NEGLECT OF THINKING


Every man knows there are evils in the world which need setting right.
Every man has pretty definite ideas as to what these evils are. But
to most men one in particular stands out vividly. To some, in fact,
this stands out with such startling vividness that they lose sight of
other evils, or look upon them as the natural consequences of their own
particular evil-in-chief.

To the Socialist this evil is the capitalistic system; to the
prohibitionist it is intemperance; to the feminist it is the subjection
of women; to the clergyman it is the decline of religion; to Andrew
Carnegie it is war; to the staunch Republican it is the Democratic
Party, and so on, _ad infinitum_.

I, too, have a pet little evil, to which in more passionate moments
I am apt to attribute all the others. This evil is the neglect of
thinking. And when I say thinking I mean real thinking, independent
thinking, hard thinking.

You protest. You say men are thinking more now than they ever were.
You bring out the almanac to prove by statistics that illiteracy is
declining. You point to our magnificent libraries. You point to the
multiplication of books. You show beyond a doubt that people are
reading more now than ever before in all history. . . .

Very well, exactly. That is just the trouble. Most people, when
confronted with a problem, immediately acquire an inordinate desire to
“read-up” on it. When they get stuck mentally, the first thing such
people do is to run to a book. Confess it, have you not often been in
a waiting room or a Pullman, noticed people all about you reading, and
finding yourself without any reading matter, have you not wished that
you had some?—something to “occupy your mind”? And did it ever occur to
you that you had within you the power to occupy your mind, and do it
more profitably than all those assiduous readers? Briefly, did it ever
occur to you to _think_?

Of course you “thought”—in a sense. Thinking means a variety of
things. You may have looked out of your train window while passing a
field, and it may have occurred to you that that field would make an
excellent baseball diamond. Then you “thought” of the time when you
played baseball, “thought” of some particular game perhaps, “thought”
how you had made a grand stand play or a bad muff, and how one day it
began to rain in the middle of the game, and the team took refuge in
the carriage shed. Then you “thought” of other rainy days rendered
particularly vivid for some reason or other, or perhaps your mind came
back to considering the present weather, and how long it was going to
last. . . . And of course, in one sense you were “thinking.” But when
I use the word thinking, I mean thinking with a purpose, with an end
in view, thinking to solve a problem. I mean the kind of thinking that
is forced on us when we are deciding on a course to pursue, on a life
work to take up perhaps; the kind of thinking that was forced on us
in our younger days when we had to find a solution to a problem in
mathematics, or when we tackled psychology in college. I do not mean
“thinking” in snatches, or holding petty opinions on this subject and
on that. I mean thought on significant questions which lie outside the
bounds of your narrow personal welfare. This is the kind of thinking
which is now so rare—so sadly needed!

Of course before this can be revived we must arouse a desire for it. We
must arouse a desire for thinking for its own sake; solving problems
for the mere sake of solving problems. But a mere desire for thinking,
praiseworthy as it is, is not enough. We must know _how_ to think, and
to that end we must search for those rules and methods of procedure
which will most help us in thinking creatively, originally, and not
least of all surely, correctly.

When they think at all, the last thing men think about is their
own thoughts. Every sensible man realizes that the perfection of a
mechanical instrument depends to some extent upon the perfection of the
tools with which it is made. No carpenter would expect a perfectly
smooth board after using a dented or chipped plane. No gasolene engine
manufacturer would expect to produce a good motor unless he had the
best lathes obtainable to help him turn out his product. No watchmaker
would expect to construct a perfectly accurate timepiece unless he had
the most delicate and accurate tools to turn out the cogs and screws.
Before any specialist produces an instrument he thinks of the tools
with which he is to produce it. But men reflect continually on the
most complex problems—problems of vital importance to them—and expect
to obtain satisfactory solutions, without once giving a thought to
the manner in which they go about obtaining those solutions; without
a thought to their own mind, the tool which produces those solutions.
Surely this deserves at least some systematic consideration.

Some remarks of Ella Wheeler Wilcox under this head will bear quoting:
“Human thinking is still in as great a state of disorder and jumble
as language was before the alphabet, music before the scale was
discovered, printing before Gutenberg, or mathematics before Pythagoras
formulated its laws.” “This systematization of all thought,” she tells
us, would be “a more far reaching improvement than all the others, for
it will do for education, health, economics, government, etc., what the
alphabet did for language, movable type for printing and literature,
the scale for music, and the rules of arithmetic for calculation. Being
the exact counterpart of these in its particular field, its mission,
like theirs, will be to bring order out of chaos.”

I believe Miss Wilcox exaggerates matters. Incidentally I for one
do not pretend to have discovered anything revolutionary. But the
importance of the subject warrants its formulation into as near
scientific form as we can bring it.

I beg no one to get frightened. Science does not necessarily mean test
tubes and telescopes. I mean science in its broadest sense; and in
this sense it means nothing more than organized knowledge. If we are
to find rules and methods of procedure, these methods must come from
somewhere—must be based on certain principles—and these principles can
come only from close, systematic investigation.

It may indeed be urged that we can think best by disregarding all
“rules,” by not paying any attention to method. But the man who
maintains this must give reasons; and once he attempts this he himself
is bordering closely on the science of the matter. In short, the
settlement of even this question is part of the science of thinking.

And what is to be the nature of this science?

For our purposes, all sciences may be divided into two kinds:
_positive_ and _normative_. A positive science investigates the nature
of things as they are. It deals simply with matters of fact. Such a
science is physics, chemistry, psychology. A normative science is one
which studies things as they ought to be. As the name implies, it
seeks to establish a _norm_ or pattern which ought to be adhered to.
It studies means of reaching desired ends. To this class belong such
sciences as ethics, education, agriculture.

Now these normative sciences, with the exception of ethics, are nearly
always referred to either as “arts” or “applied sciences.” To both
of these terms I technically but strenuously object. I object to the
term “art” to designate any set of organized rules for doing a thing,
because “art” also means the actual doing of that thing. And this
thing may be done, and often is done, in total ignorance of the rules
governing it. A man may possess the art of swimming—he may be able to
swim—without any previous instruction, without any knowledge of how he
ought to hold his body, arms and legs; just as a dog may do the same
thing.

I object also to the term “applied science,” because to me this term
implies that the science it refers to is based on one positive science
only. I can think of no so-called applied science which is so based.
Hygiene, not alone dependent on physiology, must derive some of its
rules from the chemistry of foods, as well as from the sciences of
sanitation and ventilation, themselves normative. Agriculture is based
not only on biology and botany, but on chemistry and meteorology.

The science of thinking, then, if such a science there be, is
normative. Its purpose is to find those methods which will help us to
think constructively and correctly.

One more distinction and our preliminaries are over. There are two
other sciences with which the science of thinking is liable to become
confused; one positive, the other normative.

The positive science is that branch of psychology which deals with
the reasoning process and examines the basis of belief. We shall make
frequent use of this science in trying to find rules for thinking, but
it will not be the only science we shall use, nor will that science be
the subject of this book.

The normative science with which the science of thinking may become
confused is logic. Indeed, logic has sometimes been called the science
of thinking. Now for our purposes logic is a part of the science of
thinking, but it is not the part which we are primarily to consider.
Its function is merely negative; it consists in leading us from
error. The part of the science of thinking in which we are interested
deals with those positive rules which will help to make us creative
thinkers. . . .

Our ship is headed for the port Truth. Our mind is the engine, the
science of thinking the propeller, and logic the rudder. Without our
engine, the mind, the propeller of the science of thinking, which
transforms our mental energy most effectively into motion, would be
useless. Without the propeller, which gives motion, the rudder of logic
would be useless. But all three are needed to reach our goal.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now I must bespeak a little patience. The next chapter, and the one
following it, are going to deal very largely with method and methods.
They will touch on classification, and a lot of other things to which
the plain man has an aversion; to which, at least, he usually evinces
no very active interest. But it is necessary to consider these things
in order to make our study complete.




