VI

DEBATE AND CONVERSATION


The mind engages in many activities which have power either for evil or
good. Just what influence they will exert depends on how we use them.
One of the most important of these activities is debate.

Debate brings in that unequaled form of incentive for all action which
psychologists call “social pressure” and which here means nothing more
than the desire to excel a fellow-being in some line of endeavor. When
debating we concentrate, and we do so without conscious effort. We are
too interested in defeating our opponent to wander from the subject.
We are forced to think rapidly. Not least of all, we are compelled to
think articulately.

But with all its advantages, debate is one of the most potent sources
of prejudice. In the heat of controversy, we adopt any and every
argument that comes handy. Every statement of our opponent is
considered only in the light of how it can be refuted. We are willing
to use almost any objection against him, so long as we believe he will
see no flaw in it. It is of utmost importance that we find how to avoid
these pitfalls.

The first thing we must do is to adopt a complete change of attitude
toward an opponent’s arguments. Whenever we meet with a fact which
we would not like to cite in a debate; because, to put it mildly, it
would not help our side; we should carefully investigate that fact.
We should consider whether if true it changes the aspect of things.
We should get rid of the idea that in order to vindicate our side we
must answer every contention our opponent advances. For this opponent
of ours will very likely be a man in full possession of his senses; at
least some of his arguments will be rational. When they are, we should
be willing to acknowledge it. Their truth does not necessarily make his
side right. His arguments may be irrelevant; they may be outbalanced by
some other reason or reasons. Attempts to prove too much are liable to
put us into the position of the lawyer whose client is alleged to have
been sued for putting a hole in a borrowed umbrella. The lawyer proved
first, that his client did not borrow the umbrella; second, that there
was a hole in it when he got it; third, that there was nothing the
matter with it when he returned it.

After you have had a friendly argument with an acquaintance, you
take leave either with the satisfaction that you have bested him, or
with a vague consciousness that though you were right, he was just a
trifle more skillful at bringing forward arguments. But having this
satisfaction or dissatisfaction, you seldom think any more of the
matter until the next time you meet him. Now this practice is helpful
neither to your debating nor your thinking. After you have taken
leave of your acquaintance, and are left to the quietude of your own
thoughts, you should mentally run over your controversy. You should
dispassionately consider the bearing and weight of his arguments; and
then, reviewing your own, ask yourself which were valid and relevant
and which were not. If you find you have used a sophism you should
resolve never to use it again, even though your opponent may have
been unable to answer it. The question of morals aside, this is poor
practice if you ever hope to become a thinker. In the end, it will tell
against you even as a debater.

You can use your debates for constructive material as well as for
criticism. After a controversy you can go over the arguments of your
opponent which you could not refute, or refuted but lamely, and think
of the answers you might have given. Of course you should take care
that these answers are not sophistical. The question will very likely
come up again; if not with the same friend, then with another, and when
it does you will find yourself prepared.

But the best debater, or at least he who gets the most from debating,
is the man who looks for evidence and thinks not for debate, but to
obtain a correct conclusion. After he has reached a conclusion in
this manner, he does not advance every possible reason to support it.
He does not even utilize the reasons on which others base a similar
belief, if he does not himself accept these reasons. He states merely
that evidence and those reasons which have led him to accept his
conclusion, nothing more.

While we are considering debate, I may well say a few words about
conversation in general. We do not and cannot always argue with our
friends, even though we scorn the dictums of formal etiquette. But
because we do not argue, it does not follow that we gain nothing. In
fact, ordinary conversation has advantages numerous over debate, not
the least of which is the comparative freedom it gives from prejudice.
But the value of conversation depends both on what we talk about,
and whom we talk with. Too much of our talk is on petty matters, is
uneducative. And even if we converse on worthy topics, it will profit
us little if we do not talk with worthy people. When we commune with a
dull mind, our thoughts are forced, in some degree, down to the level
of that mind. But dull people do not usually talk of weighty matters,
nor do active intellects dwell long on trifles. Therefore if we
rightly choose our companion we can conscientiously leave our path of
conversation to choose itself.

One aspect of conversation remains to be treated—its corrective
power. “There is a sort of mental exposure in talking to a companion;
we drag our thoughts out of their hiding-places, naked as it were,
and occasionally we are not a little startled at the exhibition.
Unexpressed ideas are often carefully cherished until, placed before
other eyes as well as our own, we see them as they really are.”[14]




