CHAPTER XX

THE CONCLUSION


I have accomplished, to the best of my ability, this work which
has occupied me for fifteen years, on a subject near to me--that
of art. By saying that this subject has occupied me for fifteen
years, I do not mean that I have been writing this book fifteen
years, but only that I began to write on art fifteen years ago,
thinking that when once I undertook the task I should be able to
accomplish it without a break. It proved, however, that my views
on the matter then were so far from clear that I could not arrange
them in a way that satisfied me. From that time I have never ceased
to think on the subject, and I have recommenced to write on it six
or seven times; but each time, after writing a considerable part of
it, I have found myself unable to bring the work to a satisfactory
conclusion, and have had to put it aside. Now I have finished it;
and however badly I may have performed the task, my hope is that
my fundamental thought as to the false direction the art of our
society has taken and is following, as to the reasons of this, and
as to the real destination of art, is correct, and that therefore my
work will not be without avail. But that this should come to pass,
and that art should really abandon its false path and take the new
direction, it is necessary that another equally important human
spiritual activity,--science,--in intimate dependence on which art
always rests, should abandon the false path which it too, like art,
is following.

Science and art are as closely bound together as the lungs and the
heart, so that if one organ is vitiated the other cannot act rightly.

True science investigates and brings to human perception such
truths and such knowledge as the people of a given time and society
consider most important. Art transmits these truths from the region
of perception to the region of emotion. Therefore, if the path
chosen by science be false, so also will be the path taken by art.
Science and art are like a certain kind of barge with kedge-anchors
which used to ply on our rivers. Science, like the boats which took
the anchors up-stream and made them secure, gives direction to the
forward movement; while art, like the windlass worked on the barge
to draw it toward the anchor, causes the actual progression. And
thus a false activity of science inevitably causes a correspondingly
false activity of art.

As art in general is the transmission of every kind of feeling,
but in the limited sense of the word we only call that art which
transmits feelings acknowledged by us to be important, so also
science in general is the transmission of all possible knowledge;
but in the limited sense of the word we call science that which
transmits knowledge acknowledged by us to be important.

And the degree of importance, both of the feelings transmitted by
art and of the information transmitted by science, is decided by the
religious perception of the given time and society, _i.e._ by the
common understanding of the purpose of their lives possessed by the
people of that time or society.

That which most of all contributes to the fulfilment of that purpose
will be studied most; that which contributes less will be studied
less; that which does not contribute at all to the fulfilment of the
purpose of human life will be entirely neglected, or, if studied,
such study will not be accounted science. So it always has been, and
so it should be now; for such is the nature of human knowledge and
of human life. But the science of the upper classes of our time,
which not only does not acknowledge any religion, but considers
every religion to be mere superstition, could not and cannot make
such distinctions.

Scientists of our day affirm that they study _everything_
impartially; but as everything is too much (is in fact an infinite
number of objects), and as it is impossible to study all alike, this
is only said in the theory, while in practice not everything is
studied, and study is applied far from impartially, only that being
studied which, on the one hand, is most wanted by, and on the other
hand, is pleasantest to, those people who occupy themselves with
science. And what the people, belonging to the upper classes, who
are occupying themselves with science most want is the maintenance
of the system under which those classes retain their privileges; and
what is pleasantest are such things as satisfy idle curiosity, do
not demand great mental efforts, and can be practically applied.

And therefore one side of science, including theology and philosophy
adapted to the existing order, as also history and political economy
of the same sort, are chiefly occupied in proving that the existing
order is the very one which ought to exist; that it has come into
existence and continues to exist by the operation of immutable
laws not amenable to human will, and that all efforts to change
it are therefore harmful and wrong. The other part, experimental
science,--including mathematics, astronomy, chemistry, physics,
botany, and all the natural sciences,--is exclusively occupied with
things that have no direct relation to human life: with what is
curious, and with things of which practical application advantageous
to people of the upper classes can be made. And to justify that
selection of objects of study which (in conformity to their own
position) the men of science of our times have made, they have
devised a theory of science for science's sake, quite similar to the
theory of art for art's sake.

As by the theory of art for art's sake it appears that occupation
with all those things that please us--is art, so, by the theory of
science for science's sake, the study of that which interests us--is
science.

So that one side of science, instead of studying how people should
live in order to fulfil their mission in life, demonstrates the
righteousness and immutability of the bad and false arrangements
of life which exist around us; while the other part, experimental
science, occupies itself with questions of simple curiosity or with
technical improvements.

The first of these divisions of science is harmful, not only because
it confuses people's perceptions and gives false decisions, but also
because it exists, and occupies the ground which should belong to
true science. It does this harm, that each man, in order to approach
the study of the most important questions of life, must first refute
these erections of lies which have during ages been piled around
each of the most essential questions of human life, and which are
propped up by all the strength of human ingenuity.

The second division--the one of which modern science is so
particularly proud, and which is considered by many people to be the
only real science--is harmful in that it diverts attention from the
really important subjects to insignificant subjects, and is also
directly harmful in that, under the evil system of society which the
first division of science justifies and supports, a great part of
the technical gains of science are turned, not to the advantage, but
to the injury of mankind.

Indeed, it is only to those who are devoting their lives to such
study that it seems as if all the inventions which are made in the
sphere of natural science were very important and useful things.
And to these people it seems so only when they do not look around
them and do not see what is really important. They only need tear
themselves away from the psychological microscope under which they
examine the objects of their study, and look about them, in order
to see how insignificant is all that has afforded them such naïve
pride, all that knowledge not only of geometry of _n_-dimensions,
spectrum analysis of the Milky Way, the form of atoms, dimensions
of human skulls of the Stone Age, and similar trifles, but even our
knowledge of micro-organisms, X-rays, etc., in comparison with such
knowledge as we have thrown aside and handed over to the perversions
of the professors of theology, jurisprudence, political economy,
financial science, etc. We need only look around us to perceive that
the activity proper to real science is not the study of whatever
happens to interest us, but the study of how man's life should be
established,--the study of those questions of religion, morality,
and social life, without the solution of which all our knowledge of
nature will be harmful or insignificant.

We are highly delighted and very proud that our science renders it
possible to utilize the energy of a waterfall and make it work in
factories, or that we have pierced tunnels through mountains, and so
forth. But the pity of it is that we make the force of the waterfall
labor, not for the benefit of the workmen, but to enrich capitalists
who produce articles of luxury or weapons of man-destroying war.
The same dynamite with which we blast the mountains to pierce
tunnels we use for wars, from which latter we not only do not intend
to abstain, but which we consider inevitable, and for which we
unceasingly prepare.

If we are now able to inoculate preventatively with diphtheritic
microbes, to find a needle in a body by means of X-rays, to
straighten a hunched-back, cure syphilis, and perform wonderful
operations, we should not be proud of these acquisitions either
(even were they all established beyond dispute) if we fully
understood the true purpose of real science. If but one-tenth of
the efforts now spent on objects of pure curiosity or of merely
practical application were expended on real science organizing the
life of man, more than half the people now sick would not have the
illnesses from which a small minority of them now get cured in
hospitals. There would be no poor-blooded and deformed children
growing up in factories, no death-rates, as now, of fifty per
cent among children, no deterioration of whole generations, no
prostitution, no syphilis, and no murdering of hundreds of thousands
in wars, nor those horrors of folly and of misery which our present
science considers a necessary condition of human life.

We have so perverted the conception of science that it seems strange
to men of our day to allude to sciences which should prevent the
mortality of children, prostitution, syphilis, the deterioration
of whole generations, and the wholesale murder of men. It seems
to us that science is only then real science when a man in a
laboratory pours liquids from one jar into another, or analyzes
the spectrum, or cuts up frogs and porpoises, or weaves in a
specialized, scientific jargon an obscure network of conventional
phrases--theological, philosophical, historical, juridical, or
politico-economical--semi-intelligible to the man himself, and
intended to demonstrate that what now is, is what should be.

But science, true science,--such science as would really deserve
the respect which is now claimed by the followers of one (the
least important) part of science,--is not at all such as this:
real science lies in knowing what we should and what we should not
believe, in knowing how the associated life of man should and should
not be constituted; how to treat sexual relations, how to educate
children, how to use the land, how to cultivate it oneself without
oppressing other people, how to treat foreigners, how to treat
animals, and much more that is important for the life of man.

Such has true science ever been and such it should be. And such
science is springing up in our times; but, on the one hand, such
true science is denied and refuted by all those scientific people
who defend the existing order of society, and, on the other hand, it
is considered empty, unnecessary, unscientific science by those who
are engrossed in experimental science.

For instance, books and sermons appear, demonstrating the
antiquatedness and absurdity of Church dogmas, as well as the
necessity of establishing a reasonable religious perception suitable
to our times, and all the theology that is considered to be real
science is only engaged in refuting these works and in exercising
human intelligence again and again to find support and justification
for superstitions long since outlived, and which have now become
quite meaningless. Or a sermon appears showing that land should
not be an object of private possession, and that the institution
of private property in land is a chief cause of the poverty of
the masses. Apparently science, real science, should welcome such
a sermon and draw further deductions from this position. But the
science of our times does nothing of the kind: on the contrary,
political economy demonstrates the opposite position; namely, that
landed property, like every other form of property, must be more
and more concentrated in the hands of a small number of owners.
Again, in the same way, one would suppose it to be the business of
real science to demonstrate the irrationality, unprofitableness,
and immorality of war and of executions; or the inhumanity and
harmfulness of prostitution; or the absurdity, harmfulness,
and immorality of using narcotics or of eating animals; or the
irrationality, harmfulness, and antiquatedness of patriotism. And
such works exist, but are all considered unscientific; while works
to prove that all these things ought to continue, and works intended
to satisfy an idle thirst for knowledge lacking any relation to
human life, are considered to be scientific.

The deviation of the science of our time from its true purpose is
strikingly illustrated by those ideals which are put forward by some
scientists, and are not denied, but admitted, by the majority of
scientific men.

These ideals are expressed not only in stupid, fashionable books,
describing the world as it will be in 1000 or 3000 years' time, but
also by sociologists who consider themselves serious men of science.
These ideals are that food, instead of being obtained from the land
by agriculture, will be prepared in laboratories by chemical means,
and that human labor will be almost entirely superseded by the
utilization of natural forces.

Man will not, as now, eat an egg laid by a hen he has kept, or bread
grown on his field, or an apple from a tree he has reared and which
has blossomed and matured in his sight; but he will eat tasty,
nutritious, food which will be prepared in laboratories by the
conjoint labor of many people in which he will take a small part.
Man will hardly need to labor, so that all men will be able to yield
to idleness as the upper, ruling classes now yield to it.

Nothing shows more plainly than these ideals to what a degree the
science of our times has deviated from the true path.

The great majority of men in our times lack good and sufficient food
(as well as dwellings and clothes and all the first necessaries of
life). And this great majority of men is compelled, to the injury of
its well-being, to labor continually beyond its strength. Both these
evils can easily be removed by abolishing mutual strife, luxury, and
the unrighteous distribution of wealth, in a word, by the abolition
of a false and harmful order and the establishment of a reasonable,
human manner of life. But science considers the existing order of
things to be as immutable as the movements of the planets, and
therefore assumes that the purpose of science is--not to elucidate
the falseness of this order and to arrange a new, reasonable way of
life--but, under the existing order of things, to feed everybody and
enable all to be as idle as the ruling classes, who live a depraved
life, now are.

And, meanwhile, it is forgotten that nourishment with corn,
vegetables, and fruit raised from the soil by one's own labor is the
pleasantest, healthiest, easiest, and most natural nourishment, and
that the work of using one's muscles is as necessary a condition of
life as is the oxidation of the blood by breathing.

To invent means whereby people might, while continuing our false
division of property and labor, be well nourished by means of
chemically prepared food, and might make the forces of nature work
for them, is like inventing means to pump oxygen into the lungs of a
man kept in a closed chamber, the air of which is bad, when all that
is needed is to cease to confine the man in the closed chamber.

In the vegetable and animal kingdoms a laboratory for the
production of food has been arranged, such as can be surpassed by
no professors, and to enjoy the fruits of this laboratory, and
to participate in it, man has only to yield to that ever joyful
impulse to labor, without which man's life is a torment. And lo and
behold! the scientists of our times, instead of employing all their
strength to abolish whatever hinders man from utilizing the good
things prepared for him, acknowledge the conditions under which man
is deprived of these blessings to be unalterable, and instead of
arranging the life of man so that he might work joyfully and be fed
from the soil, they devise methods which will cause him to become an
artificial abortion. It is like not helping a man out of confinement
into the fresh air, but devising means, instead, to pump into him
the necessary quantity of oxygen and arranging so that he may live
in a stifling cellar instead of living at home.

Such false ideals could not exist if science were not on a false
path.

And yet the feelings transmitted by art grow up on the bases
supplied by science.

But what feelings can such misdirected science evoke? One side of
this science evokes antiquated feelings, which humanity has used
up, and which, in our times, are bad and exclusive. The other side,
occupied with the study of subjects unrelated to the conduct of
human life, by its very nature cannot serve as a basis for art.

So that art in our times, to be art, must either open up its own
road independently of science, or must take direction from the
unrecognized science which is denounced by the orthodox section of
science. And this is what art, when it even partially fulfils its
mission, is doing.

It is to be hoped that the work I have tried to perform concerning
art will be performed also for science--that the falseness of the
theory of science for science's sake will be demonstrated; that
the necessity of acknowledging Christian teaching in its true
meaning will be clearly shown, that on the basis of that teaching
a reappraisement will be made of the knowledge we possess, and of
which we are so proud; that the secondariness and insignificance
of experimental science, and the primacy and importance of
religious, moral, and social knowledge will be established; and
that such knowledge will not, as now, be left to the guidance of
the upper classes only, but will form a chief interest of all free,
truth-loving men, such as those who, not in agreement with the
upper classes, but in their despite, have always forwarded the real
science of life.

Astronomical, physical, chemical, and biological science, as also
technical and medical science, will be studied only in so far as
they can help to free mankind from religious, juridical, or social
deceptions, or can serve to promote the well-being of all men, and
not of any single class.

Only then will science cease to be what it is now,--on the one hand
a system of sophistries, needed for the maintenance of the existing
worn-out order of society, and, on the other hand, a shapeless mass
of miscellaneous knowledge, for the most part good for little or
nothing,--and become a shapely and organic whole, having a definite
and reasonable purpose comprehensible to all men; namely, the
purpose of bringing to the consciousness of men the truths that flow
from the religious perception of our times.

And only then will art, which is always dependent on science, be
what it might and should be, an organ co-equally important with
science for the life and progress of mankind.

Art is not a pleasure, a solace, or an amusement; art is a great
matter. Art is an organ of human life, transmitting man's reasonable
perception into feeling. In our age the common religious perception
of men is the consciousness of the brotherhood of man--we know
that the well-being of man lies in union with his fellow-men.
True science should indicate the various methods of applying this
consciousness to life. Art should transform this perception into
feeling.

The task of art is enormous. Through the influence of real art,
aided by science guided by religion, that peaceful coöperation of
man which is now obtained by external means--by our law-courts,
police, charitable institutions, factory inspection, etc.--should
be obtained by man's free and joyous activity. Art should cause
violence to be set aside.

And it is only art that can accomplish this.

All that now, independently of the fear of violence and punishment,
makes the social life of man possible (and already now this is
an enormous part of the order of our lives)--all this has been
brought about by art. If by art it has been inculcated how people
should treat religious objects, their parents, their children,
their wives, their relations, strangers, foreigners; how to conduct
themselves to their elders, their superiors, to those who suffer,
to their enemies, and to animals; and if this has been obeyed
through generations by millions of people, not only unenforced by
any violence, but so that the force of such customs can be shaken in
no way but by means of art--then, by the same art, other customs,
more in accord with the religious perception of our time, may be
evoked. If art has been able to convey the sentiment of reverence
for images, for the eucharist, and for the king's person; of shame
at betraying a comrade, devotion to a flag, the necessity of revenge
for an insult, the need to sacrifice one's labor for the erection
and adornment of churches, the duty of defending one's honor or
the glory of one's native land--then that same art can also evoke
reverence for the dignity of every man and for the life of every
animal; can make men ashamed of luxury, of violence, of revenge, or
of using for their pleasure that of which others are in need; can
compel people freely, gladly, and without noticing it, to sacrifice
themselves in the service of man.

The task for art to accomplish is to make that feeling of
brotherhood and love of one's neighbor, now attained only by the
best members of society, the customary feeling and the instinct of
all men. By evoking, under imaginary conditions, the feeling of
brotherhood and love, religious art will train men to experience
those same feelings under similar circumstances in actual life; it
will lay in the souls of men the rails along which the actions of
those whom art thus educates will naturally pass. And universal
art, by uniting the most different people in one common feeling,
by destroying separation, will educate people to union, will show
them, not by reason, but by life itself, the joy of universal union
reaching beyond the bounds set by life.

The destiny of art in our time is to transmit from the realm of
reason to the realm of feeling the truth that well-being for men
consists in being united together, and to set up, in place of the
existing reign of force, that kingdom of God, _i.e._ of love, which
we all recognize to be the highest aim of human life.

Possibly, in the future, science may reveal to art yet newer and
higher ideals, which art may realize; but, in our time, the destiny
of art is clear and definite. The task for Christian art is to
establish brotherly union among men.




APPENDIX I


This is the first page of Mallarmé's book, "Divagations":--

LE PHÉNOMÈNE FUTUR

     Un ciel pâle, sur le monde qui finit de décrépitude, va
     peut-être partir avec les nuages: les lambeaux de la pourpre
     usée des couchants déteignent dans une rivière dormant à
     l'horizon submergé de rayons et d'eau. Les arbres s'ennuient,
     et, sous leur feuillage blanchi (de la poussière du temps plutôt
     que celle des chemins) monte la maison en toile de Montreur
     de choses Passées: maint réverbère attend le crépuscule et
     ravive les visages d'une malheureuse foule, vaincue par la
     maladie immortelle et le péché des siècles, d'hommes près de
     leurs chétives complices enceintes des fruits misérables avec
     lesquels périra la terre. Dans le silence inquiet de tous les
     yeux suppliant là-bas le soleil qui, sous l'eau, s'enfonce
     avec le désespoir d'un cri, voici le simple boniment: "Nulle
     enseigne ne vous régale du spectacle intérieur, car il n'est
     pas maintenant un peintre capable d'en donner une ombre triste.
     J'apporte, vivante (et préservée à travers les ans par la
     science souveraine) une Femme d'autrefois. Quelque folie,
     originelle et naïve, une extase d'or, je ne sais quoi! par elle
     nommé sa chevelure, se ploie avec la grâce des étoffes autour
     d'un visage qu' éclaire la nudité sanglante de ses lèvres. A la
     place du vêtement vain, elle a un corps; et les yeux, semblables
     aux pierres rares! ne valent pas ce regard qui sort de sa chair
     heureuse: des seins levés comme s'ils étaient pleins d'un lait
     éternel, la pointe vers le ciel, les jambes lisses qui gardent
     le sel de la mer première." Se rappelant leurs pauvres épouses,
     chauves, morbides et pleines d'horreur, les maris se pressent:
     elles aussi par curiosité, mélancoliques, veulent voir.

     Quand tous auront contemplé la noble créature, vestige de
     quelque époque déjà maudite, les uns indifférents, car ils
     n'auront pas eu la force de comprendre, mais d'autres navrés et
     la paupière humide de larmes résignées, se regarderont; tandis
     que les poètes de ces temps, sentant se rallumer leur yeux
     éteints, s'achemineront vers leur lampe, le cerveau ivre un
     instant d'une gloire confuse, hantés du Rythme et dans l'oubli
     d'exister à une époque qui survit à la beauté.

THE FUTURE PHENOMENON--BY MALLARMÉ.

     A pale sky, above the world that is ending through decrepitude,
     going, perhaps, to pass away with the clouds: shreds of worn-out
     purple of the sunsets wash off their color in a river sleeping
     on the horizon, submerged with rays and water. The trees are
     weary and, beneath their foliage, whitened (by the dust of
     time rather than that of the roads), rises the canvas house
     of "Showman of things Past." Many a lamp awaits the gloaming,
     and brightens the faces of a miserable crowd vanquished by the
     immortal illness and the sin of ages, of men by the sides of
     their puny accomplices pregnant with the miserable fruit with
     which the world will perish. In the anxious silence of all the
     eyes supplicating the sun there, which sinks under the water
     with the desperation of a cry, this is the plain announcement:
     "No sign-board now regales you with the spectacle that is
     inside, for there is no painter now capable of giving even a
     shadow of it. I bring living (and preserved by sovereign science
     through the years) a Woman of other days. Some kind of folly,
     naïve and original, an ecstasy of gold, I know not what, by her
     called her hair, clings with the grace of some material round a
     face brightened by the blood-red nudity of her lips. In place of
     vain clothing, she has a body; and her eyes, resembling precious
     stones! are not worth that look, which comes from her happy
     flesh: breasts raised as if full of eternal milk, the points
     toward the sky; the smooth legs, that keep the salt of the first
     sea." Remembering their poor spouses, bald, morbid, and full
     of horrors, the husbands press forward: the women, too, from
     curiosity, gloomily wish to see.

     When all shall have contemplated the noble creature, vestige of
     some epoch already damned, some indifferently, for they will not
     have had strength to understand, but others, broken-hearted, and
     with eyelids wet with tears of resignation, will look at each
     other; while the poets of those times, feeling their dim eyes
     rekindled, will make their way toward their lamp, their brain
     for an instant drunk with confused glory, haunted by Rhythm, and
     forgetful that they exist at an epoch which has survived beauty.




APPENDIX II[127]

[127] The translations in Appendices I., II., and IV., are by Louise
Maude. The aim of these renderings has been to keep as close to the
originals as the obscurity of meaning allowed. The sense (or absence
of sense) has therefore been more considered than the form of the
verses.


No. 1

The following verses are by Vielé-Griffin, from page 28 of a volume
of his Poems:--

OISEAU BLEU COULEUR DU TEMPS

    1

    Sait-tu l'oubli
    D'un vain doux rêve,
    Oiseau moqueur
    De la forêt?
    Le jour pâlit,
    La nuit se lève,
    Et dans mon cœur
    L'ombre a pleuré;

    2

    O chante-moi
    Ta folle gamme,
    Car j'ai dormi
    Ce jour durant;
    Le lâche emoi
    Où fut mon âme
    Sanglote ennui
    Le jour mourant....

    3

    Sais-tu le chant
    De sa parole
    Et de sa voix,
    Toi qui redis
    Dans le couchant
    Ton air frivole
    Comme autrefois
    Sous les midis?

    4

    O chante alors
    La mélodie
    De son amour,
    Mon fol espoir,
    Parmi les ors
    Et l'incendie
    Du vain doux jour
    Qui meurt ce soir.

    FRANCIS VIELÉ-GRIFFIN.

BLUE BIRD

    1

    Canst thou forget,
    In dreams so vain,
    Oh, mocking bird
    Of forest deep?
    The day doth set,
    Night comes again,
    My heart has heard
    The shadows weep;

    2

    Thy tones let flow
    In maddening scale,
    For I have slept
    The livelong day;
    Emotions low
    In me now wail,
    My soul they've kept:
    Light dies away....

    3

    That music sweet,
    Ah, do you know
    Her voice and speech?
    Your airs so light
    You who repeat
    In sunset's glow,
    As you sang, each,
    At noonday's height.

    4

    Of my desire,
    My hope so bold,
    Her love--up, sing,
    Sing, 'neath this light,
    This flaming fire,
    And all the gold
    The eve doth bring
    Ere comes the night.


No. 2

And here are some verses by the esteemed young poet Verhaeren, which
I also take from page 28 of his Works:--

ATTIRANCES

    Lointainement, et si étrangement pareils,
    De grands masques d'argent que la brume recule,
    Vaguent, au jour tombant, autour des vieux soleils.

    Les doux lointaines!--et comme, au fond du crépuscule,
    Ils nous fixent le cœur, immensément le cœur,
    Avec les yeux _défunts de leur_ visage d'âme.

    C'est toujours du silence, à moins, dans la pâleur
    Du soir, un jet de feu soudain, un cri de flamme,
    Un départ de lumière inattendu vers Dieu.

    On se laisse charmer et troubler de mystère,
    Et l'on dirait des morts qui taisent un adieu
    Trop mystique, pour être écouté par la terre!

    Sont-ils le souvenir matériel et clair
    Des éphèbes chrétiens couchés aux catacombes
    Parmi les lys? Sont-ils leur regard et leur chair?

    Ou seul, ce qui survit de merveilleux aux tombes
    De ceux qui sont partis, vers leurs rêves, un soir,
    Conquérir la folie à l'assaut des nuées?

    Lointainement, combien nous les sentons vouloir
    Un peu d'amour pour leurs œuvres destituées,
    Pour leur errance et leur tristesse aux horizons.

    Toujours! aux horizons du cœur et des pensées,
    Alors que les vieux soirs éclatent en blasons
    Soudains, pour les gloires noires et angoissées.

                                       ÉMILE VERHAEREN,
                                           _Poèmes_.

ATTRACTIONS

    Large masks of silver, by mists drawn away,
    So strangely alike, yet so far apart.
    Float round the old suns when faileth the day.

    They transfix our heart, so immensely our heart,
    Those distances mild, in the twilight deep,
    Looking out of dead faces with their spirit eyes.

    All around is now silence, except when there leap
    In the pallor of evening, with fiery cries,
    Some fountains of flame that God-ward do fly.

    Mysterious trouble and charms us infold,
    You might think that the dead spoke a silent good-by,
    Oh! too mystical far on earth to be told!

    Are they the memories, material and bright,
    Of the Christian youths that in catacombs sleep
    'Mid the lilies? Are they their flesh or their sight?

    Or the marvel alone that survives, in the deep,
    Of those that, one night, returned to their dream
    Of conquering folly by assaulting the skies?

    For their destitute works--we feel it seems,
    For a little love their longing cries
    From horizons far--for their errings and pain.

    In horizons ever of heart and thought,
    While the evenings old in bright blaze wane
    Suddenly, for black glories anguish fraught.


No. 3

And the following is a poem by Moréas, evidently an admirer of Greek
beauty. It is from page 28 of a volume of his Poems:--

ENONE AU CLAIR VISAGE

    Enone, j'avais cru qu'en aimant ta beauté
    Où l'âme avec le corps trouvent leur unité,
    J'allais, m'affermissant et le cœur et l'esprit,
    Monter jusqu'à cela qui jamais ne périt,
    N'ayant été crée, qui n'est froideur ou feu,
    Qui n'est beau quelque part et laid en autre lieu;
    Et me flattais encor' d'une belle harmonie
    Que j'eusse composé du meilleur et du pire,
    Ainsi que le chanteur qui chérit Polimnie,
    En accordant le grave avec l'aigu, retire
    Un son bien élevé sur les nerfs de sa lyre.
    Mais mon courage, hélas! se pâmant comme mort,
    M'enseigna que le trait qui m'avait fait amant
    Ne fut pas de cet arc que courbe sans effort
    La Vénus qui naquit du mâle seulement,
    Mais que j'avais souffert cette Vénus dernière,
    Qui a le cœur couard, né d'une faible mère.
    Et pourtant, ce mauvais garçon, chasseur habile,
    Qui charge son carquois de sagette subtile,
    Qui secoue en riant sa torche, pour un jour,
    Qui ne pose jamais que sur de tendres fleurs,
    C'est sur un teint charmant qu'il essuie les pleurs,
    Et c'est encore un Dieu, Enone, cet Amour.
    Mais, laisse, les oiseaux du printemps sont partis,
    Et je vois les rayons du soleil amortis.
    Enone, ma douleur, harmonieux visage,
    Superbe humilité, doux honnête langage,
    Hier me remirant dans cet étang glacé
    Qui au bout du jardin se couvre de feuillage,
    Sur ma face je vis que les jours ont passé.

                                           JEAN MORÉAS.

ENONE

    Enone, in loving thy beauty, I thought,
    Where the soul and the body to union are brought,
    That mounting by steadying my heart and my mind,
    In that which can't perish, myself I should find.
    For it ne'er was created, is not ugly and fair;
    Is not coldness in one part, while on fire it is there.
    Yes, I flattered myself that a harmony fine
    I'd succeed to compose of the worst and the best,
    Like the bard who adores Polyhymnia divine,
    And mingling sounds different from the nerves of his lyre,
    From the grave and the smart draws melodies higher.
    But, alas! my courage, so faint and nigh spent,
    The dart that has struck me proves without fail
    Not to be from that bow which is easily bent
    By the Venus that's born alone of the male.
    No, 'twas that other Venus that caused me to smart,
    Born of frail mother with cowardly heart.
    And yet that naughty lad, that little hunter bold,
    Who laughs and shakes his flowery torch just for a day,
    Who never rests but upon tender flowers and gay,
    On sweetest skin who dries the tears his eyes that fill,
    Yet oh, Enone mine, a God's that Cupid still.
    Let it pass; for the birds of the Spring are away,
    And dying I see the sun's lingering ray.
    Enone, my sorrow, oh, harmonious face,
    Humility grand, words of virtue and grace,
    I looked yestere'en in the pond frozen fast,
    Strewn with leaves at the end of the garden's fair space,
    And I read in my face that those days are now past.


No. 4

And this is also from page 28 of a thick book, full of similar
poems, by M. Montesquiou.

BERCEUSE D'OMBRE

    Des formes, des formes, des formes
    Blanche, bleue, et rose, et d'or
    Descendront du haut des ormes
    Sur l'enfant qui se rendort.
            Des formes!

    Des plumes, des plumes, des plumes
    Pour composer un doux nid.
    Midi sonne: les enclumes
    Cessent; la rumeur finit....
            Des plumes!

    Des roses, des roses, des roses
    Pour embaumer son sommeil,
    Vos pétales sont moroses
    Près du sourire vermeil.
            O roses!

    Des ailes, des ailes, des ailes
    Pour bourdonner à sont front,
    Abeilles et demoiselles,
    Des rythmes qui berceront.
            Des ailes!

    Des branches, des branches, des branches
    Pour tresser un pavillon,
    Par où des clartés moins franches
    Descendront sur l'oisillon.
            Des branches!

    Des songes, des songes, des songes
    Dans ses pensers entr' ouverts
    Glissez un peu de mensonges
    A voir le vie au travers
            Des songes!

    Des fées, des fées, des fées
    Pour filer leurs écheveaux
    Des mirages, de bouffées
    Dans tous ces petits cerveaux.
            Des fées!

    Des anges, des anges, des anges
    Pour emporter dans l'éther
    Les petits enfants étranges
    Qui ne veulent pas rester....
            Nos anges!

             COMTE ROBERT DE MONTESQUIOU-FEZENSAC,
                   _Les Hortensias Bleus_.

THE SHADOW LULLABY

    Oh forms, oh forms, oh forms
    White, blue, and gold, and red
    Descending from the elm trees,
    On sleeping baby's head.
            Oh forms!

    Oh feathers, feathers, feathers
    To make a cozy nest.
    Twelve striking: stops the clamor;
    The anvils are at rest....
            Oh feathers!

    Oh roses, roses, roses
    To scent his sleep awhile,
    Pale are your fragrant petals
    Beside his ruby smile.
            Oh roses!

    Oh wings, oh wings, oh wings
    Of bees and dragon-flies,
    To hum around his forehead,
    And lull him with your sighs.
            Oh wings!

    Branches, branches, branches
    A shady bower to twine,
    Through which, oh daylight, faintly
    Descend on birdie mine.
            Branches!

    Oh dreams, oh dreams, oh dreams
    Into his opening mind,
    Let in a little falsehood
    With sights of life behind.
            Dreams!

    Oh fairies, fairies, fairies
    To twine and twist their threads
    With puffs of phantom visions
    Into these little heads.
            Fairies!

    Angels, angels, angels
    To the ether far away,
    Those children strange to carry
    That here don't wish to stay....
            Our angels!




APPENDIX III


These are the contents of "The Nibelung's Ring":--

The first part tells that the nymphs, the daughters of the Rhine,
for some reason guard gold in the Rhine, and sing: Weia, Waga, Woge
du Welle, Walle zur Wiege, Wagala-weia, Wallala, Weiala, Weia, and
so forth.

These singing nymphs are pursued by a gnome (a nibelung) who desires
to seize them. The gnome cannot catch any of them. Then the nymphs
guarding the gold tell the gnome just what they ought to keep
secret, namely, that whoever renounces love will be able to steal
the gold they are guarding. And the gnome renounces love, and steals
the gold. This ends the first scene.

In the second scene a god and a goddess lie in a field in sight of
a castle which giants have built for them. Presently they wake up
and are pleased with the castle, and they relate that in payment for
this work they must give the goddess Freia to the giants. The giants
come for their pay. But the god Wotan objects to parting with Freia.
The giants get angry. The gods hear that the gnome has stolen the
gold, promise to confiscate it, and to pay the giants with it. But
the giants won't trust them, and seize the goddess Freia in pledge.

The third scene takes place underground. The gnome Alberich, who
stole the gold, for some reason beats a gnome, Mime, and takes from
him a helmet which has the power both of making people invisible
and of turning them into other animals. The gods, Wotan and others,
appear and quarrel with one another and with the gnomes, and wish to
take the gold, but Alberich won't give it up, and (like everybody
all through the piece) behaves in a way to insure his own ruin. He
puts on the helmet, and becomes first a dragon and then a toad. The
gods catch the toad, take the helmet off it, and carry Alberich away
with them.

Scene IV. The gods bring Alberich to their home, and order him to
command his gnomes to bring them all the gold. The gnomes bring
it. Alberich gives up the gold, but keeps a magic ring. The gods
take the ring. So Alberich curses the ring, and says it is to bring
misfortune on any one who has it. The giants appear; they bring
the goddess Freia, and demand her ransom. They stick up staves of
Freia's height, and gold is poured in between these staves: this is
to be the ransom. There is not enough gold, so the helmet is thrown
in, and they also demand the ring. Wotan refuses to give it up,
but the goddess Erda appears and commands him to do so, because it
brings misfortune. Wotan gives it up. Freia is released. The giants,
having received the ring, fight, and one of them kills the other.
This ends the Prelude, and we come to the First Day.

The scene shows a house in a tree. Siegmund runs in tired, and lies
down. Sieglinda, the mistress of the house (and wife of Hunding),
gives him a drugged draught, and they fall in love with each other.
Sieglinda's husband comes home, learns that Siegmund belongs to
a hostile race, and wishes to fight him next day; but Sieglinda
drugs her husband, and comes to Siegmund. Siegmund discovers that
Sieglinda is his sister, and that his father drove a sword into the
tree so that no one can get it out. Siegmund pulls the sword out,
and commits incest with his sister.

Act II. Siegmund is to fight with Hunding. The gods discuss the
question to whom they shall award the victory. Wotan, approving of
Siegmund's incest with his sister, wishes to spare him, but, under
pressure from his wife, Fricka, he orders the Valkyrie Brünnhilda to
kill Siegmund. Siegmund goes to fight; Sieglinda faints. Brünnhilda
appears and wishes to slay Siegmund. Siegmund wishes to kill
Sieglinda also, but Brünnhilda does not allow it; so he fights with
Hunding. Brünnhilda defends Siegmund, but Wotan defends Hunding.
Siegmund's sword breaks, and he is killed. Sieglinda runs away.

Act III. The Valkyries (divine Amazons) are on the stage. The
Valkyrie Brünnhilda arrives on horseback, bringing Siegmund's body.
She is flying from Wotan, who is chasing her for her disobedience.
Wotan catches her, and as a punishment dismisses her from her post
as a Valkyrie. He casts a spell on her, so that she has to go to
sleep and to continue asleep until a man wakes her. When some one
wakes her she will fall in love with him. Wotan kisses her; she
falls asleep. He lets off fire, which surrounds her.

We now come to the Second Day. The gnome Mime forges a sword in
a wood. Siegfried appears. He is a son born from the incest of
brother with sister (Siegmund with Sieglinda), and has been brought
up in this wood by the gnome. In general the motives of the actions
of everybody in this production are quite unintelligible. Siegfried
learns his own origin, and that the broken sword was his father's.
He orders Mime to reforge it, and then goes off. Wotan comes in the
guise of a wanderer, and relates what will happen: that he who has
not learnt to fear will forge the sword, and will defeat everybody.
The gnome conjectures that this is Siegfried, and wants to poison
him. Siegfried returns, forges his father's sword, and runs off,
shouting, Heiho! heiho! heiho! Ho! ho! Aha! oho! aha! Heiaho!
heiaho! heiaho! Ho! ho! Hahei! hoho! hahei!

And we get to Act II. Alberich sits guarding a giant, who, in form
of a dragon, guards the gold he has received. Wotan appears, and
for some unknown reason foretells that Siegfried will come and kill
the dragon. Alberich wakes the dragon, and asks him for the ring,
promising to defend him from Siegfried. The dragon won't give up
the ring. Exit Alberich. Mime and Siegfried appear. Mime hopes the
dragon will teach Siegfried to fear. But Siegfried does not fear.
He drives Mime away and kills the dragon, after which he puts his
finger, smeared with the dragon's blood, to his lips. This enables
him to know men's secret thoughts, as well as the language of birds.
The birds tell him where the treasure and the ring are, and also
that Mime wishes to poison him. Mime returns, and says out loud
that he wishes to poison Siegfried. This is meant to signify that
Siegfried, having tasted dragon's blood, understands people's secret
thoughts. Siegfried, having learnt Mime's intentions, kills him. The
birds tell Siegfried where Brünnhilda is, and he goes to find her.

Act III. Wotan calls up Erda. Erda prophesies to Wotan, and gives
him advice. Siegfried appears, quarrels with Wotan, and they fight.
Suddenly Siegfried's sword breaks Wotan's spear, which had been
more powerful than anything else. Siegfried goes into the fire to
Brünnhilda: kisses her; she wakes up, abandons her divinity, and
throws herself into Siegfried's arms.

Third Day. Prelude. Three Norns plait a golden rope, and talk about
the future. They go away. Siegfried and Brünnhilda appear. Siegfried
takes leave of her, gives her the ring, and goes away.

Act I. By the Rhine. A king wants to get married, and also to give
his sister in marriage. Hagen, the king's wicked brother, advises
him to marry Brünnhilda and to give his sister to Siegfried.
Siegfried appears; they give him a drugged draught, which makes
him forget all the past and fall in love with the king's sister,
Gutrune. So he rides off with Gunther, the king, to get Brünnhilda
to be the king's bride. The scene changes. Brünnhilda sits with
the ring. A Valkyrie comes to her and tells her that Wotan's spear
is broken, and advises her to give the ring to the Rhine nymphs.
Siegfried comes, and by means of the magic helmet turns himself into
Gunther, demands the ring from Brünnhilda, seizes it, and drags her
off to sleep with him.

Act II. By the Rhine. Alberich and Hagen discuss how to get the
ring. Siegfried comes, tells how he has obtained a bride for Gunther
and spent the night with her, but put a sword between himself and
her. Brünnhilda rides up, recognizes the ring on Siegfried's hand,
and declares that it was he, and not Gunther, who was with her.
Hagen stirs everybody up against Siegfried, and decides to kill him
next day when hunting.

Act III. Again the nymphs in the Rhine relate what has happened.
Siegfried, who has lost his way, appears. The nymphs ask him for
the ring, but he won't give it up. Hunters appear. Siegfried tells
the story of his life. Hagen then gives him a draught, which causes
his memory to return to him. Siegfried relates how he aroused and
obtained Brünnhilda, and every one is astonished. Hagen stabs him
in the back, and the scene is changed. Gutrune meets the corpse of
Siegfried. Gunther and Hagen quarrel about the ring, and Hagen
kills Gunther. Brünnhilda cries. Hagen wishes to take the ring
from Siegfried's hand, but the hand of the corpse raises itself
threateningly. Brünnhilda takes the ring from Siegfried's hand, and
when Siegfried's corpse is carried to the pyre, she gets on to a
horse and leaps into the fire. The Rhine rises, and the waves reach
the pyre. In the river are three nymphs. Hagen throws himself into
the fire to get the ring, but the nymphs seize him and carry him
off. One of them holds the ring; and that is the end of the matter.

The impression obtainable from my recapitulation is, of course,
incomplete. But however incomplete it may be, it is certainly
infinitely more favorable than the impression which results from
reading the four booklets in which the work is printed.




APPENDIX IV


Translations of French poems and prose quoted in Chapter X.

BAUDELAIRE'S "FLOWERS OF EVIL"

No. XXIV

    I adore thee as much as the vaults of night,
    O vase full of grief, taciturnity great,
    And I love thee the more because of thy flight.
    It seemeth, my night's beautifier, that you
    Still heap up those leagues--yes! ironically heap!
    That divide from my arms the immensity blue.

    I advance to attack, I climb to assault,
    Like a choir of young worms at a corpse in the vault;
    Thy coldness, oh cruel, implacable beast!
    Yet heightens thy beauty, on which my eyes feast!


BAUDELAIRE'S "FLOWERS OF EVIL"

No. XXXVI

DUELLUM

      Two warriors come running, to fight they begin,
      With gleaming and blood they bespatter the air;
    These games, and this clatter of arms, is the din
      Of youth that's a prey to the surgings of love.

      The rapiers are broken! and so is our youth,
      But the dagger's avenged, dear! and so is the sword,
      By the nail that is steeled and the hardened tooth.
    Oh, the fury of hearts aged and ulcered by love!

      In the ditch, where the ounce and the pard have their lair,
      Our heroes have rolled in an angry embrace;
      Their skin blooms on brambles that erewhile were bare.

    That ravine is a friend-inhabited hell!
      Then let us roll in, oh woman inhuman,
      To immortalize hatred that nothing can quell!


FROM BAUDELAIRE'S PROSE WORK ENTITLED "LITTLE POEMS"

THE STRANGER

Whom dost thou love best? say, enigmatical man--thy father, thy
mother, thy brother, or thy sister?

"I have neither father, nor mother, nor sister, nor brother."

Thy friends?

"You there use an expression the meaning of which till now remains
unknown to me."

Thy country?

"I ignore in what latitude it is situated."

Beauty?

"I would gladly love her, goddess and immortal."

Gold?

"I hate it as you hate God."

Then what do you love, extraordinary stranger?

"I love the clouds ... the clouds that pass ... there ... the
marvelous clouds!"


BAUDELAIRE'S PROSE POEM

THE SOUP AND THE CLOUDS

My beloved little silly was giving me my dinner, and I was
contemplating, through the open window of the dining-room, those
moving architectures which God makes out of vapors, the marvelous
constructions of the impalpable. And I said to myself, amid my
contemplations, "All these phantasmagoria are almost as beautiful as
the eyes of my beautiful beloved, the monstrous little silly with
the green eyes."

Suddenly I felt the violent blow of a fist on my back, and I heard a
harsh, charming voice, an hysterical voice, as it were hoarse with
brandy, the voice of my dear little well-beloved, saying, "Are you
going to eat your soup soon, you d---- b---- of a dealer in clouds?"


BAUDELAIRE'S PROSE POEM

THE GALLANT MARKSMAN

As the carriage was passing through the forest, he ordered it to be
stopped near a shooting-gallery, saying that he wished to shoot off
a few bullets to _kill_ Time. To kill this monster, is it not the
most ordinary and the most legitimate occupation of every one? And
he gallantly offered his arm to his dear, delicious, and execrable
wife--that mysterious woman to whom he owed so much pleasure, so
much pain, and perhaps also a large part of his genius.

Several bullets struck far from the intended mark--one even
penetrated the ceiling; and as the charming creature laughed madly,
mocking her husband's awkwardness, he turned abruptly toward her and
said, "Look at that doll there on the right with the haughty mien
and her nose in the air; well, dear angel, _I imagine to myself that
it is you!_" And he closed his eyes and pulled the trigger. The doll
was neatly decapitated.

Then, bowing toward his dear one, his delightful, execrable wife,
his inevitable pitiless muse, and kissing her hand respectfully, he
added, "Ah! my dear angel, how I thank you for my skill!"


VERLAINE'S "FORGOTTEN AIRS"

No. I

                    "The wind in the plain
                    Suspends its breath."--FAVART.

    'Tis ecstasy languishing,
    Amorous fatigue,
    Of woods all the shudderings
    Embraced by the breeze,
    'Tis the choir of small voices
    Toward the gray trees.

    Oh, the frail and fresh murmuring!
    The twitter and buzz,
    The soft cry resembling
    That's expired by the grass....
    Oh, the roll of the pebbles
    'Neath waters that pass!

    Oh, this soul that is groaning
    In sleepy complaint!
    In us is it moaning?
    In me and in you?
    Low anthem exhaling
    While soft falls the dew.


VERLAINE'S "FORGOTTEN AIRS"

No. VIII

    In the unending
    Dullness of this land,
    Uncertain the snow
    Is gleaming like sand.

    No kind of brightness
    In copper-hued sky,
    The moon you might see
    Now live and now die.

    Gray float the oak trees--
    Cloudlike they seem--
    Of neighboring forests,
    The mists in between.

    Wolves hungry and lean,
    And famishing crow,
    What happens to you
    When acid winds blow?

    In the unending
    Dullness of this land,
    Uncertain the snow
    Is gleaming like sand.


SONG BY MAETERLINCK

      When he went away,
      (Then I heard the door)
      When he went away,
      On her lips a smile there lay....

      Back he came to her,
      (Then I heard the lamp)
      Back he came to her,
      Someone else was there....

      It was death I met,
      (And I heard her soul)
      It was death I met,
      For her he's waiting yet....

      Someone came to say,
      (Child, I am afraid)
      Someone came to say
      That he would go away....

      With my lamp alight,
      (Child, I am afraid)
      With my lamp alight,
      Approached I in affright....

      To one door I came,
      (Child, I am afraid)
      To one door I came,
      A shudder shook the flame....

      At the second door,
      (Child, I am afraid)
      At the second door
      Forth words of flame did pour....

      To the third I came,
      (Child, I am afraid)
      To the third I came,
      Then died the little flame....

      Should he one day return
      Then what shall we say?
    Waiting, tell him, one
      And dying for him lay....

      If he asks for you,
      Say what answer then?
    Give him my gold ring
      And answer not a thing....

      Should he question me
      Concerning the last hour?
    Say I smiled for fear
      That he should shed a tear....

      Should he question more
      Without knowing me?
    Like a sister speak;
      Suffering he may be....

      Should he question why
      Empty is the hall?
    Show the gaping door,
      The lamp alight no more....


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's note:

Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

Small capital text has been replaced with all capitals.

Variations in spelling, punctuation and hyphenation have been
retained except in obvious cases of typographical error.

Missing page numbers are page numbers that were not shown in the
original text.

Page 5: The transcriber has completed the word "meeting". "In 1838,
on the occasion of a meet- of the Society for the Promotion of
Peace" ...

Page 372: Footnote 86, Knight, pp. 139-141. The number the
transcriber has rendered as 139 is unclear.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Kingdom of God is Within You, What
is Art, by Lyof N. Tolstoi

