CHAPTER VI

ATTITUDE OF MEN OF THE PRESENT DAY TOWARD WAR

     Men do not endeavor to destroy the contradiction between life
     and consciousness by a change of life, but educated men use
     all their power to stifle the demands of consciousness and to
     justify their lives, and thus degrade society to a condition
     worse than pagan, to a state of primeval savagery--Uncertainty
     of the attitude of our leading men toward war, universal
     armament, and general military conscription--Those who regard
     war as an accidental political phenomenon easily to be remedied
     by external measures--The Peace Congress--Article in the Revue
     des Revues--Proposition of Maxime du Camp--Significance of
     Courts of Arbitration and Disarmament--Relations of governments
     to these, and the business they pursue--Those who regard war as
     a cruel inevitable phenomenon--Maupassant--Rod--Those who regard
     it as indispensable, even useful--Camille Doucet, Claretie,
     Zola, Vogüé.


The contradictions of life and of consciousness may be solved in two
ways: by change of life, or by change of consciousness; and it would
seem as if there could be no hesitation in a choice between the two.

When a man acknowledges a deed to be evil he may refrain from the
deed itself, but he can never cease to regard it as evil. Indeed,
the whole world might cease from evil-doing, and yet have no power
to transform, or even to check for a season, the progress of
knowledge in regard to that which is evil, and which ought not to
exist. One would think that the alternative of a change of life to
accord with consciousness might be settled without question, and
that it would therefore seem unavoidable for the Christian world of
the present day to abandon those pagan forms which it condemns, and
regulate its life by the Christian precepts which it acknowledges.

Such would be the result were it not for the principle of inertia
(a principle no less unalterable in human life than in the world
of matter), which finds its expression in the psychological law
defined in the gospel by the words: "Men loved darkness rather than
light, because their deeds were evil" (John iii. 19). Most persons,
in conformity to this principle, do not use their reason in order
to ascertain the truth, but rather to persuade themselves that they
possess it, and that their daily life, which is pleasant for them,
is in harmony with the precepts of truth.

Slavery conflicted with all the moral principles taught by Plato
and Aristotle, and yet neither of them perceived this, because the
disavowal of slavery must have destroyed that life by which they
lived. And the same thing is repeated in our times.

The division of mankind into two classes, the existence of political
and military injustice, is opposed to all those moral principles
which our society professes, and yet the most progressive and
cultivated men of the age seem not to perceive this.

Almost every educated man at the present day is striving
unconsciously to preserve the old-time conception of society, which
justifies his attitude, and to conceal from others and from himself
its inconsistencies, chief among which is the necessity of adopting
the Christian ideal, which is subversive of the very structure of
our social existence. It is this antiquated social system, in which
they no longer believe, because it is really a thing of the past,
that men are trying to uphold.

Contemporary literature, philosophical, political, and
artistic,--all contemporary literature affords a striking proof
of the truth of my statement. What wealth of imagination, what
form and color, what erudition and art, but what a lack of serious
purpose, what reluctance to face any exact thought! Ambiguity of
expression, indirect allusion, witticisms, vague reflection, but no
straightforward or candid dealing with the subject they treat of,
namely, life.

Indeed, our writers treat of obscenities and improprieties; in the
guise of refined paradox they convey suggestions which thrust men
back to primeval savagery, to the lowest dregs, not only of pagan
life, but animal life, which we outlived 5000 years ago. Delivering
themselves from the Christian life-conception, which for some simply
interferes with the accustomed current of their lives, while for
others it interferes with certain advantages, men must of necessity
return to the pagan life-conception and to the doctrines to which it
gave rise. Not only are patriotism and the rights of the aristocracy
preached at the present time as they used to be 2000 years ago, but
also the coarsest epicureanism and sensuality, with this difference
only,--that the teachers of old believed in the doctrines they
taught, whereas those of the present day neither do nor can possess
any faith in what they utter, because there is no longer any sense
in it. When the ground is shifting under our feet, we cannot stand
still, we must either recede or advance. It sounds exaggerated to
say that the enlightened men of our time, the advanced thinkers, are
speciously degrading society, plunging it into a condition worse
than pagan,--into a state of primeval barbarism.

In no other matter has this tendency of the leading men of our
time been so plainly shown as in their attitude toward that
phenomenon in which at present all the inconsistency of social life
is concentrated,--toward war, universal armament, and military
conscription.

The equivocal, if not unscrupulous, attitude of the educated men
of our time toward this question is a striking one. It may be
stated from three points of view. Some regard this phenomenon as
an accidental state of affairs, which has sprung from the peculiar
political situation of Europe, and believe it to be susceptible
of adjustment by diplomatic and international mediation, without
injury to the structure of nations. Others look upon it as something
appalling and cruel, fatal yet unavoidable,--like disease or
death. Still others, in cold blood, calmly pronounce war to be an
indispensable, salutary, and therefore desirable event.

Men may differ in their views in regard to this matter, but all
discuss it as something with which the will of the individuals who
are to take part in it has nothing whatever to do; therefore they
do not even admit the natural question which presents itself to
most men; viz., "Is it my duty to take part in it?" In the opinion
of these judges there is no reason in such a question, and every
man, whatever may be his personal prejudices in regard to war, must
submit in this matter to the demands of the ruling powers.

The attitude of those in the first category, who expect deliverance
from war by means of diplomatic and international mediation, is
well defined in the results of the London Peace Congress, and in
an article, together with letters concerning war from prominent
writers, which may be found in the _Revue des Revues_ (No. 8, 1891).

These are the results of the Congress.

Having collected from all parts of the globe the opinions of
scientists, both written and oral, the Congress, opening with a _Te
Deum_ in the cathedral, and closing with a dinner and speeches,
listened for five days to numerous addresses, and arrived at the
following conclusions:--

Resolution I. The Congress affirms its belief that the brotherhood
of man involves as a necessary consequence a brotherhood of
nations, in which, the true interests of all are acknowledged to
be identical. The Congress is convinced that the true basis for an
enduring peace will be found in the application by nations of this
great principle in all their relations one to another.

II. The Congress recognizes the important influence which
Christianity exercises upon the moral and political progress of
mankind, and earnestly urges upon ministers of the gospel and other
teachers of religion and morality the duty of setting forth these
principles of Peace and Good-will, which occupy such a central
place in the teaching of Jesus Christ, of philosophers and of
moralists, and _it recommends that the third Sunday in December in
each year be set apart for that purpose_.

III. The Congress expresses its opinion that all teachers of history
should call the attention of the young to the grave evils inflicted
on mankind in all ages by war, and to the fact that such war has
been waged, as a rule, for most inadequate causes.

IV. The Congress protests against the use of military drill in
connection with the physical exercises of schools, and suggests
the formation of brigades for saving life rather than any of
quasi-military character; and it urges the desirability of
impressing on the Board of Examiners, who formulate the questions
for examination, the propriety of guiding the minds of children into
the principles of Peace.

V. The Congress holds that the doctrine of the universal rights
of man requires that aboriginal and weaker races shall be guarded
from injustice and fraud when brought into contact with civilized
peoples, alike as to their territories, their liberties, and their
property, and that they shall be shielded from the vices which are
so prevalent among the so-called advanced races of men. It further
expresses its conviction that there should be concert of action
among the nations for the accomplishment of these ends. The Congress
desires to express its hearty appreciation of the conclusions
arrived at by the late Anti-Slavery Conference, held in Brussels,
for the amelioration of the condition of the peoples of Africa.

VI. The Congress believes that the warlike prejudices and traditions
which are still fostered in the various nationalities, and the
misrepresentations by leaders of public opinion in legislative
assemblies, or through the press, are not infrequently indirect
causes of war. The Congress is therefore of opinion that these ends
should be counteracted by the publication of accurate statements
and information that would tend to the removal of misunderstanding
amongst nations, and recommends to the Inter-Parliamentary
Committee the importance of considering the question of starting an
international newspaper, which should have such a purpose as one of
its primary objects.

VII. The Congress proposes to the Inter-Parliamentary Conference
that the utmost support should be given to every project for the
unification of weights and measures, of coinage, tariffs, postal
and telegraphic arrangements, means of transport, etc., which would
assist in constituting a commercial, industrial, and scientific
union of the peoples.

VIII. In view of the vast moral and social influence of woman, the
Congress urges upon every woman throughout the world to sustain, as
wife, mother, sister, or citizen, the things that make for peace,
as otherwise she incurs grave responsibilities for the continuance
of the systems of war and militarism, which not only desolate
but corrupt the home-life of the nation. To concentrate and to
practically apply this influence, the Congress recommends that
women should unite themselves with societies for the promotion of
international peace.

IX. This Congress expresses the hope that the Financial Reform
Association and other similar societies in Europe and America should
unite in convoking at an early date a conference to consider the
best means of establishing equitable commercial relations between
States by the reduction of import duties as a step toward Free
Trade. The Congress feels that it can affirm that the whole of
Europe desires Peace, and is impatiently waiting for the moment when
it shall see the end of those crushing armaments which, under the
plea of defense, become in their turn a danger, by keeping alive
mutual distrust, and are, at the same time, the cause of the general
economic disturbance which stands in the way of settling in a
satisfactory manner the problems of labor and poverty, which should
take precedence of all others.

X. This Congress, recognizing that a general disarmament would be
the best guarantee of _Peace_, and would lead to the solution,
in the general interest, of those questions which now must divide
States, expresses the wish that a Congress of Representatives of
all the States of Europe may be assembled as soon as possible to
consider the means of effecting a gradual general disarmament, which
already seems feasible.

XI. This Congress, considering that the timidity of a single Power
or other cause might delay indefinitely the convocation of the
above-mentioned Congress, is of the opinion that the Government
which should first dismiss any considerable number of soldiers would
confer a signal benefit on Europe and mankind, because it would
oblige other Governments, urged on by public opinion, to follow its
example, and by the moral force of this accomplished fact would have
increased rather than diminished the conditions of its national
defense.

XII. This Congress, considering the question of disarmament, as
well as the Peace question generally, depends upon public opinion,
recommends the Peace Societies here represented, and all friends of
Peace, to carry on an active propaganda among the people, especially
at the time of Parliamentary elections, in order that the electors
should give their votes to those candidates who have included in
their programme Peace, Disarmament, and Arbitration.

XIII. This Congress congratulates the friends of Peace on the
resolution adopted by the International American Conference
(with the exception of the representatives of Chili and Mexico)
at Washington in April last, by which it was recommended that
arbitration should be obligatory in all controversies concerning
diplomatic and consular privileges, boundaries, territories,
indemnities, right of navigation, and the validity, construction,
and enforcement of treaties, and in all other causes, whatever
their origin, nature, or occasion, except only those which, in the
judgment of any of the nations involved in the controversy, may
imperil its independence.

XIV. This Congress respectfully recommends this resolution to the
statesmen of Europe, and expresses the ardent desire that treaties
in similar terms be speedily entered into between the other nations
of the world.

XV. This Congress expresses its satisfaction at the adoption
by the Spanish Senate, on June 18th last, of a project of law
authorizing the Government to negotiate general or special treaties
of arbitration for the settlement of all disputes, except those
relating to the independence and internal government of the States
affected; also at the adoption of resolutions to a like effect
by the Norwegian Storthing on March 6th last, and by the Italian
Chamber on July 11th.

XVI. That a committee of five be appointed to prepare and address
communications, in the name of the Congress, to the principal
religious, political, economical, labor, and peace organizations
in civilized countries, requesting them to send petitions to the
governmental authorities of their respective countries, praying that
measures be taken for the formation of suitable tribunals for the
adjudication of international questions, so as to avoid the resort
to war.

XVII. Seeing (1) that the object pursued by all Peace Societies is
the establishment of juridical order between nations:

(2) That neutralization by international treaties constitutes a step
toward this juridical state, and lessens the number of districts in
which war can be carried on:

This Congress recommends a larger extension of the rule of
neutralization, and expresses the wish:--

(1) That all treaties which at present assure to certain States
the benefit of neutrality remain in force, or, if necessary, be
amended in a manner to render the neutrality more effective, either
by extending neutralization to the whole of the State, of which
a part only may be neutralized, or by ordering the demolition of
fortresses, which constitute rather a peril than a guarantee for
neutrality.

(2) That new treaties, provided that they are in harmony with the
wishes of the populations concerned, be concluded for establishing
the neutralization of other States.

XVIII. The Committee Section proposes:--

(1) That the next Congress be held immediately before or immediately
after the next session of the Inter-Parliamentary Conference, and at
the same places.

(2) That the question of an international Peace Emblem be postponed
_sine die_.

(3) The adoption of the following resolutions:--

(_a_) Resolved, that we express our satisfaction at the formal and
official overtures of the Presbyterian Church in the United States
of America, addressed to the highest representatives of each church
organization in Christendom, inviting the same to unite with itself
in a general conference, the object of which shall be to promote the
substitution of international arbitration for war.

(_b_) That this Congress, assembled in London from the 14th to
the 19th July, desires to express its profound reverence for the
memory of Aurelio Salfi, the great Italian jurist, a member of the
Committee of the International League of Peace and Liberty.

(4) That the memorial to the various heads of the civilized States
adopted by this Congress, and signed by the President, should, so
far as practicable, be presented to each Power by an influential
deputation.

(5) That the Organization Committee be empowered to make the needful
verbal emendations in the papers and resolutions presented.

(6) That the following resolutions be adopted:--

(_a_) A resolution of thanks to the Presidents of the various
sittings of the Congress.

(_b_) A resolution of thanks to the chairman, the secretary, and the
members of the Bureau of this Congress.

(_c_) A resolution of thanks to the conveners and members of the
sectional committees.

(_d_) A resolution of thanks to Rev. Canon Scott Holland, Rev. Dr.
Reuan Thomas, and Rev. J. Morgan Gibbon, for their pulpit addresses
before the Congress, and that they be requested to furnish copies
of the same for publication; and also Stamford Hall Congregational
Church for the use of those buildings for public services.

(_e_) A letter of thanks to Her Majesty for permission to visit
Windsor Castle.

(_f_) And also a resolution of thanks to the Lord Mayor and Lady
Mayoress, to Mr. Passmore Edwards, and other friends who have
extended their hospitality to the members of the Congress.

XIX. This Congress places on record a heartfelt expression of
gratitude to Almighty God for the remarkable harmony and concord
which have characterized the meetings of the Assembly, in which so
many men and women of varied nations, creeds, tongues, and races
have gathered in closest coöperation; and in the conclusion of
the labors of this Congress, it expresses its firm and unshaken
belief in the ultimate triumph of the cause of _Peace_, and of the
principles which have been advocated at these meetings.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fundamental idea of the Congress is--firstly, that it is
necessary to disseminate by all means among all men the belief that
war is not advantageous for mankind, and that peace is a great
benefit; and secondly, to influence governments, impressing upon
them the advantages and necessity of disarmament.

To accomplish the first end, the Congress advises teachers of
history, women, and ministers of the gospel, to teach people, every
third Sunday of December, the evils of war and the benefits of
peace; to accomplish the second, the Congress addresses itself to
governments, suggesting to them disarmament and arbitration.

To preach the evils of war and the benefits of peace! But the evils
of war are so well known to men, that from the earliest ages the
most welcome greeting was always: "Peace be unto you!"

Not only Christians but all pagans were fully aware of the benefits
of peace and of the evils of war thousands of years ago, so that the
advice to the ministers of the gospel to preach against the evils
of war and to advocate the benefits of peace every third Sunday in
December is quite superfluous.

A real Christian cannot do otherwise than preach thus, constantly,
as long as he lives. But if there are those who are called
Christians, or Christian preachers, who do not do this, there must
be a cause for it, and so long as this cause exists no advice will
avail. Still less effective will be the advice to governments
to disband armies and have recourse to International Courts of
Arbitration. Governments know very well all the difficulties and
burdens of conscription and of maintaining armies, and if in the
face of such difficulties and burdens they still continue to do
so, it is evident that they have no means of doing otherwise, and
the advice of a Congress could in no way bring about a change.
But scientists will not admit this, and still hope to find some
combination of influences by means of which those governments which
make war may be induced to restrain themselves.

"Is it possible to avoid war?" writes a scientist in the _Revue des
Revues_ (No. 8 of 1891). "All agree in recognizing the fact that
if war should ever break out in Europe, its consequences would be
similar to those of the great invasions. It would imperil the very
existence of nations; it would be bloody, atrocious, desperate. This
consideration, and the consideration of the terrible nature of the
engines of destruction at the command of modern science, retards
its declaration and temporarily maintains the present system,--a
system which might be continued indefinitely, if it were not for the
enormous expenses that burden the European nations and threaten to
culminate in disasters fully equal to those occasioned by war.

"Impressed with these thoughts, men of all nationalities have
sought for means to arrest, or at least to diminish, the shocking
consequences of the carnage that threatens us.

"Such are the questions which are to be debated by the next Congress
of Universal Peace to be held in Rome, which have already been
discussed in a recently published pamphlet on Disarmament.

"Unfortunately, it is quite certain that with the present
organization of the greater number of the European states, isolated
one from the other and controlled by different interests, the
absolute cessation of war is an illusion which it would be folly to
cherish. Still, the adoption of somewhat wiser rules and regulations
in regard to these international duels would at least tend to
limit their horrors. It is equally Utopian to build one's hope on
projects of disarmament, whose execution, owing to considerations of
a national character, which exist in the minds of all our readers,
is practically impossible." (This probably means that France cannot
disarm until she has retaliated.) "Public opinion is not prepared
to accept them, and, furthermore, the international relations make
it impossible to adopt them. Disarmament demanded by one nation
of another, under conditions imperiling its security, would be
equivalent to a declaration of war.

"Still, we must admit that an exchange of opinions between the
nations interested may to a certain extent aid in establishing an
international understanding, and also contribute to lessen the
military expenses that now crush European nations, to the great
detriment of the solution of social questions, the necessity of the
solution of which is realized by each nation individually, under the
penalty of being confronted by a civil war, due to the efforts made
to prevent a foreign one.

"One may at least hope for a decrease of the enormous expenses
necessary for the present military organization, which is maintained
for the purpose of invading a foreign territory in twenty-four
hours, or of a decisive battle a week after the declaration of war."

It ought not to be possible for one nation to attack another and
take possession of its territory within twenty-four hours. This
practical sentiment was expressed by Maxime du Camp, and is the
conclusion of his study of the subject.

Maxime du Camp offers the following propositions:--

"1st. A Diplomatic Congress, to assemble every year.

"2d. No war to be declared until two months after the incident
which gave rise to it." (Here the difficulty lies in determining
the nature of the incident that kindled the war--that is, every
declaration of war is caused by several circumstances, and it would
be necessary to determine from which one the two months are to be
reckoned.)

"3d. No war shall be declared until the vote of the people shall
have been taken.

"4th. Hostilities must not begin until a month after the declaration
of war."

"_No war shall be declared_ ..." etc. But who is to _prevent_
hostilities _beginning_? Who will compel men to do this or that?
Who will compel governments to wait a certain stated time? Other
nations. But all the other nations are in the very same position,
requiring to be restrained and kept within bounds, in other words,
_coerced_. And who will _coerce_ them? And how is it to be done?
By public opinion. But if public opinion has sufficient influence
to force a nation to postpone its action until a stated time, this
public opinion can prevent it from waging war at any time.

But, it is said, there might be a balance of power, which would
oblige nations to restrain themselves. This very experiment has been
and is still being tried; this was the object of the Holy Alliance,
the League of Peace, etc.

But all would agree to this, it is said. If all would agree to this,
then wars would cease, and there would be no need of Courts of
Appeal or of Arbitration.

"A Court of Arbitration would take the place of war. Disputes would
be decided by a Board of Arbitrators, like that which pronounced
on the Alabama claims. The Pope has been requested to decide the
question concerning the Caroline Islands: Switzerland, Belgium,
Denmark, and Holland have declared that they prefer the decision of
a Court of Arbitration to war."

I believe Monaco has expressed a similar wish. It is a pity that
Germany, Russia, Austria, and France have thus far shown no sign of
imitating their example.

It is astonishing how easily men can deceive themselves when they
feel inclined.

The governments will agree to allow their disputes to be decided
by a Board of Arbitration and to dismiss their armies. The trouble
between Russia and Poland, England and Ireland, Austria and the
Czechs, Turkey and the Slavs, France and Germany, will be settled
by mutual consent. This is very much like suggesting to merchants
and bankers that they shall sell at cost price, and devote their
services gratuitously to the distribution of property.

Of course the essence of commerce and banking consists in buying
cheap and selling dear, and therefore the suggestion to sell at cost
price and the consequent overthrow of money amounts to a proposal of
self-destruction.

The same is true in regard to governments.

The suggestion to governments to desist from violence, and to adjust
all differences by arbitration, would be to recommend a suicidal
policy, and no government would ever agree to that. Learned men
found societies (there are more than one hundred of them), they
assemble in Congresses (like those held in London and Paris and the
one which is to be held in Rome), they read essays, hold banquets,
make speeches, edit journals devoted to the subject, and by all
these means they endeavor to prove that the strain upon nations who
are obliged to support millions of soldiers has become so severe
that something must be done about it; that this armament is opposed
to the character, the aims, and the wishes of the populations;
but they seem to think that if they consume a good deal of paper,
and devote a good deal of eloquence to the subject, that they may
succeed in conciliating opposing parties and conflicting interests,
and at last effect the suppression of war.

When I was a child I was told that if I wished to catch a bird I
must put salt on its tail. I took a handful and went in pursuit of
the birds, but I saw at once that if I could sprinkle salt on their
tails I could catch them, and that what I had been told was only a
joke. Those who read essays and works on Courts of Arbitration and
the disarmament of nations must feel very much the same.

If it were possible to sprinkle salt on a bird's tail it would be
tantamount to saying that the bird could not fly, and therefore it
would be no effort to catch it. If a bird has wings and does not
wish to be caught, it will not allow any salt to be put on its tail,
for it is the nature of a bird to fly. Likewise it is the nature
of a government not to be ruled, but to rule its subjects. And a
government rightly is named such only when it is able to rule its
subjects, and not be ruled by them. This, therefore, is its constant
aim, and it will never voluntarily resign its power. And as it
derives its power from the army it will never give up the army, nor
will it ever renounce that for which the army is designed,--war.

The misapprehension springs from the fact that the learned jurists,
deceiving themselves as well as others, depict in their books an
ideal of government,--not as it really is, an assembly of men who
oppress their fellow-citizens, but in accordance with the scientific
postulate, as a body of men who act as the representatives of the
rest of the nation. They have gone on repeating this to others
so long that they have ended by believing it themselves, and
they really seem to think that justice is one of the duties of
governments. History, however, shows us that governments, as seen
from the reign of Cæsar to those of the two Napoleons and Prince
Bismarck, are in their very essence a violation of justice; a man or
a body of men having at command an army of trained soldiers, deluded
creatures who are ready for any violence, and through whose agency
they govern the State, will have no keen sense of the obligation of
justice. Therefore governments will never consent to diminish the
number of those well-trained and submissive servants, who constitute
their power and influence.

Such is the attitude of certain scientists toward that
self-contradiction under which the world groans, and such are their
expedients for its relief. Tell these scientists that the question
deals only with the personal relations of each individual toward
the moral and religious question, and then ask them what they think
of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of taking part in the general
conscription, and their sole reply will be a shrug of the shoulders;
they will not even deign to give a thought to your question. Their
way of solving the difficulty is to make speeches, write books,
choose their presidents, vice-presidents, and secretaries; assembled
in a body, to hold forth in one city or another. They think that
the result of their efforts will be to induce governments to
cease to recruit soldiers, on whom all their power depends; they
expect that their appeals will be heard, and that armies will be
disbanded, leaving governments defenseless, not only in the presence
of neighbors, but of their subjects; that they, like highwaymen
who, having bound their defenseless victims in order to rob them,
no sooner hear the outcries of pain than they loosen the rope that
causes it, and let their prisoners go free.

And there really are men who believe in this, who spend their time
in promoting Leagues of Peace, in delivering addresses, and in
writing books; and of course the governments sympathize with it all,
pretending that they approve of it; just as they pretend to support
temperance, while they actually derive the larger part of their
income from intemperance; just as they pretend to maintain liberty
of the constitution, when it is the absence of liberty to which they
owe their power; just as they pretend to care for the improvement
of the laboring classes, while on oppression of the workman rest
the very foundations of the State; just as they pretend to uphold
Christianity, when Christianity is subversive of every government.

In order to accomplish these ends they have long since instituted
laws in regard to intemperance that can never avail to destroy it;
educational projects that not only do not prevent the spread of
ignorance, but do everything to increase it; decrees in the name
of liberty that are no restraint upon despotism; measures for the
benefit of the working-man which will never liberate him from
slavery; they have established a Christianity which serves to prop
the government rather than destroy it. And now another interest
is added to their cares,--the promotion of peace. Governments,
or rather those rulers who are going about at present with their
ministers of state, making up their minds on such radical questions
as, for instance, whether the slaughter of millions shall begin
this year or next,--they are quite well assured that discussions on
peace are not going to prevent them from sending millions of men to
slaughter whenever they see fit to do so. They like to hear these
discussions, they encourage them, and even take part themselves.

It does no harm to the government; on the contrary, it is useful, by
way of diverting observation from that radical question: When a man
is drafted, ought he or ought he not to fulfil his military duty?

Thanks to all these unions and congresses, peace will presently be
established; meanwhile put on your uniforms, and be prepared to
worry and harass each other for our benefit, say the governments.
And the scientists, the essayists, and the promoters of congresses
take the same view.

This is one way of looking at it, and so advantageous for the State
that all prudent governments encourage it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The way another class has of regarding it is more tragic. They
declare that although it is the fate of humanity to be forever
striving after love and peace, it is nevertheless abnormal and
inconsistent. Those who affirm this are mostly the sensitive men of
genius, who see and realize all the horror, folly, and cruelty of
war, but by some strange turn of mind never look about them for any
means of escape, but who seem to take a morbid delight in realizing
to the utmost the desperate condition of mankind. The view of the
famous French writer, Maupassant, on the subject of war, affords a
noteworthy example of this kind. Gazing from his yacht upon a drill
and target-practice of French soldiers, the following thoughts arise
in his mind:--

     "I have but to think of the word 'war' and a paralyzing sense
     of horror creeps over me, as though I were listening to stories
     of witchcraft, or tales of the Inquisition, or of things
     abominable, monstrous, unnatural, of ages past.

     "When people talk of cannibals we smile contemptuously with a
     sense of superiority to such savages. But who are the savages,
     the true savages? Those who fight that they may drive off the
     conquered, or those who fight for the pure pleasure of killing?
     Those sharp-shooters running over yonder are destined to be
     killed like a flock of sheep who are driven by the butcher to
     the slaughter-house. Those men will fall on some battlefield
     with a sabre-cut in the head, or with a ball through the heart.
     Yet they are young men, who might have done useful work. Their
     fathers are old and poor; their mothers, who have idolized them
     for twenty years as only mothers can idolize, will learn after
     six months, or perhaps a year, that the son, the baby, the
     grown-up child on whom so much love and pains were lavished,
     who was reared at such an expense, has been torn by a bullet,
     trampled under foot, or crushed by a cavalry charge, and finally
     flung like a dead dog into some ditch. Why must her boy, her
     beautiful, her only boy, the hope and pride of her life, why
     must he be killed? She knows not; she can but ask why.

     "War!... The fighting!... The murdering!... The slaughter of
     men!... And to-day, with all our wisdom, civilization, with the
     advancement of science, the degree of philosophy to which the
     human spirit has attained, we have schools where the art of
     murder, of aiming with deadly accuracy and killing large numbers
     of men at a distance, is actually taught, killing poor, harmless
     devils who have families to support, killing them without even
     the pretext of the law.

     "_It is stupefying that the people do not rise up in arms
     against the governments. What difference is there between
     monarchies and republics? It is stupefying that society does not
     revolt as a unit at the very sound of the word war._

     "Alas! we shall never be free from oppression of the hateful,
     hideous customs, the criminal prejudices, and the ferocious
     impulses of our barbarous ancestors, for we are beasts; and
     beasts we shall remain, moved by our instincts and susceptible
     of no improvement.

     "Any one but Victor Hugo would have been banished when he
     uttered his sublime cry of freedom and truth:--

     "'To-day force is called violence, and the nations condemn it;
     they inveigh against war. Civilization, listening to the appeal
     of humanity, undertakes the case and prepares the accusation
     against the victors and the generals. The nations begin to
     understand that the magnitude of a crime cannot lessen its
     wickedness; that if it be criminal to kill one man, the killing
     of numbers cannot be regarded in the light of extenuation; that
     if it be shameful to steal, it cannot be glorious to lead an
     invading army.

     "'Let us proclaim these absolute truths, let us dishonor the
     name of war!'

     "But the wrath and indignation of the poet are all in vain,"
     continues Maupassant. "War is more honored than ever.

     "A clever expert in this business, a genius in the art of
     murder, Von Moltke, once made to a peace-delegate the following
     astonishing reply:--

     "'War is sacred; it is a divine institution; it fosters
     every lofty and noble sentiment in the human heart: honor,
     self-sacrifice, virtue, courage, and saves men, so to speak,
     from settling into the most shocking materialism.'

     "Assembling in herds by the hundred thousand, marching night and
     day without rest, with no time for thought or for study, never
     to read, learning nothing, of no use whatsoever to any living
     being, rotting with filth, sleeping in the mud, living like a
     wild beast in a perennial state of stupidity, plundering cities,
     burning villages, ruining whole nations; then to encounter
     another mountain of human flesh, rush upon it, cause rivers
     of blood to flow, and strew the fields with the dead and the
     dying, all stained with the muddy and reddened soil, to have
     one's limbs severed, one's brain scattered as wanton waste, and
     to perish in the corner of a field while one's aged parents,
     one's wife and children, are dying of hunger at home,--this
     is what it means to be saved from falling into the grossest
     materialism!

     "Soldiers are the scourge of the world. We struggle against
     nature, ignorance, all kinds of obstacles, in the effort to make
     our wretched lives more endurable. There are men, scientists
     and philanthropists, who devote their whole lives to benefit
     their fellow-men, seeking to improve their condition. They
     pursue their efforts tirelessly, adding discovery to discovery,
     expanding the human intelligence, enriching science, opening
     new fields of knowledge, day by day increasing the well-being,
     comfort, and vigor of their country.

     "Then war comes upon the scene, and in six months all the
     results of twenty years of patient labor and of human genius are
     gone forever, crushed by victorious generals.

     "And this is what they mean when they speak of man's rescue from
     materialism!

     "We have seen war. We have seen men maddened; returned to the
     condition of the brutes, we have seen them kill in wanton sport,
     out of terror, or for mere bravado and show. Where right exists
     no longer, and law is dead, where all sense of justice has
     been lost, we have seen innocent men shot down on the highway,
     because they were timid and thus excited suspicion. We have
     seen dogs chained to their masters' doors killed by way of
     target-practice, we have seen cows lying in a field fired at by
     the mitrailleuses, just for the fun of shooting at something.

     "And this is what they call saving men from the most shocking
     materialism!

     "To invade a country, to kill the man who defends his home
     because he wears a blouse and does not wear a _kepi_, to burn
     the dwellings of starving wretches, to ruin or plunder a man's
     household goods, to drink the wine found in the cellars, to
     violate the women found in the streets, consume millions of
     francs in powder, and to leave misery and cholera in their track.

     "This is what they mean by saving men from the most shocking
     materialism!

     "What have military men ever done to prove that they possess the
     smallest degree of intelligence? Nothing whatever. What have
     they invented? The cannon and the musket; nothing more.

     "Has not the inventor of the wheelbarrow, by the simple and
     practical contrivance of a wheel and a couple of boards,
     accomplished more than the inventor of modern fortification?

     "What has Greece bequeathed to the world? Its literature and its
     marbles. Was she great because she conquered, or because she
     produced? Was it the Persian invasion that saved Greece from
     succumbing to the most shocking materialism?

     "Did the invasions of the Barbarians save and regenerate Rome?

     "Did Napoleon I. continue the great intellectual movement
     started by the philosophers at the end of the last century?

     "Very well, then; can it be a matter of surprise, since
     governments usurp the rights of life and death over the people,
     that the people from time to time assume the right of life and
     death over their governments?

     "They defend themselves, and they have the right. No man has an
     inalienable right to govern others. It is allowable only when it
     promotes the welfare of the governed. It is as much the duty of
     those who govern to avoid war as it is that of a captain of a
     ship to avoid shipwreck.

     "When a captain has lost his ship he is indicted, and if he
     is found to have been careless or even incompetent, he is
     convicted. As soon as war has been declared why should not the
     people sit in judgment upon the act of the government?

     "If they could once be made to understand the power that would
     be theirs, _if they were the judges of the rulers who lead them
     on to slay their fellow-men, if they refused to allow themselves
     to be needlessly slaughtered, if they were to turn their weapons
     against the very men who have put them into their hands--that
     day would see the last of war.... But never will that day
     arrive."_--"Sur l'Eau."

The author perceives the full horror of war, realizes that the
government is its author, that government forces men to go slay, or
be slain, when there is no need for it; he realizes that the men who
make up the armies might turn their weapons against the government
and demand a reckoning. Still the author does not believe that this
will ever happen, or that there is any possible deliverance from the
existing condition of affairs.

He grants that the result of war is shocking, but he believes it
to be inevitable; assuming that the never ceasing requisition of
soldiers on the part of government is as inevitable as death, then
wars must follow as a matter of course.

These are the words of a writer of talent, endowed with a faculty of
vividly realizing his subject, which is the essence of the poetic
gift. He shows us all the cruel contradictions between creed and
deed; but since he fails to offer a solution, it is evident that
he feels that such a contradiction must exist, and regards it as a
contribution to the romantic tragedy of life. Another and an equally
gifted writer, Edouard Rod, paints with colors still more vivid the
cruelty and folly of the present situation, but he, like Maupassant,
feels the influence of the dramatic element, and neither suggests a
remedy nor anticipates any change.

     "Why do we toil? Why do we plan and hope to execute? And how
     can one even love one's neighbor in these troublous times,
     when the morrow is nothing but a menace?... Everything that
     we have begun, our ripening schemes, our plans for work, the
     little good that we might accomplish, will it not all be swept
     away by the storm that is gathering?... Everywhere the soil
     quakes beneath our feet, and threatening clouds hang low on the
     horizon. Ah! if we had nothing more to fear than the bugbear of
     the Revolution!... Unable to conceive a society worse than our
     own, I am more inclined to distrust than to fear the one that
     may replace it, and if I should suffer in consequence of the
     change, I should console myself with the reflection that the
     executioners of the present were victims of the past, and the
     hope of a change for the better would make me endure the worst.
     But it is not this remote danger which alarms me. I see another
     close at hand and far more cruel, since it is both unjustifiable
     and irrational, and nothing good can come out of it. Day by day
     the chances of war are weighed, and day by day they become more
     pitiless.

     "The human mind refuses to believe in the catastrophe which even
     now looms up before us, and which the close of this century
     must surely witness, a catastrophe which will put an end to all
     the progress of our age, and yet we must try to realize it.
     Science has devoted all her energy these twenty years to the
     invention of destructive weapons, and soon a few cannon-balls
     will suffice to destroy an army;[10] not the few thousands of
     wretched mercenaries, whose life-blood has been bought and paid
     for, but whole nations are about to exterminate each other;
     during conscription their time is stolen from them in order to
     steal their lives with more certainty. By way of stimulating a
     thirst for blood mutual animosities are excited, and gentle,
     kind-hearted men allow themselves to be deluded, and it will
     not be long before they attack each other with all the ferocity
     of wild beasts; multitudes of peace-loving citizens will obey
     a foolish command, God only knows on what pretext,--some
     stupid frontier quarrel, perhaps, or it may be some colonial
     mercantile interest.... They will go like a flock of sheep to
     the slaughter, yet knowing where they go, conscious that they
     are leaving their wives and their children to suffer hunger;
     anxious, but unable to resist the enticement of those plausible
     and treacherous words that have been trumpeted into their ears.
     _Unresistingly they go; although they form a mass and a force,
     they fail to realize the extent of their power, and that if
     they were all agreed they might establish the reign of reason
     and fraternity_, instead of lending themselves to the barbarous
     trickeries of diplomacy.

       [10] The book was published a year ago, and since then dozens
       of new weapons and smokeless powder have been invented for the
       annihilation of mankind.--AUTHOR.

     "So self-deceived are they that bloodshed takes on the aspect of
     duty, and they implore the blessing of God upon their sanguinary
     hopes. As they march, they trample underfoot the harvests which
     they themselves have planted, burning the cities which they have
     helped to build, with songs, shouts of enthusiasm, and music.
     And their sons will raise a statue to those who have slain them
     by the most approved methods.... The fate of a whole generation
     hangs on the hour when some saturnine politician shall make the
     sign, and the nations will rush upon each other. We know that
     the noblest among us will be cut down, and that our affairs
     will go to destruction. _We know this, we tremble in anger, yet
     are powerless._ We have been caught in a snare of bureaucracy
     and waste paper from which we can only escape by measures too
     energetic for us. We belong to the laws which we have made for
     our protection, and which oppress us. _We are nothing more
     than the creatures of that antinomic abstraction, the State,
     which makes of each individual a slave in the name of all, each
     individual of which all, taken separately, would desire the
     exact contrary of what he will be made to do._

     "And if it were but the sacrifice of a single generation! But
     many other interests are involved.

     "Paid orators, demagogues, taking advantage of the passions
     of the masses and of the simple-minded who are dazzled by
     high-sounding phrases, have so embittered national hatreds
     that to-morrow's war will decide the fate of a race: one of
     the component parts of the modern world is threatened; the
     vanquished nation will morally disappear; it matters not which
     chances to be the victim, a power will disappear (as though
     there had ever been one too many for the good). A new Europe
     will then be established on a basis so unjust, so brutal, so
     bloodstained, that it cannot fail to be worse than that of
     to-day,--more iniquitous, more barbarous, and more aggressive....

     "Thus a fearful depression hangs over us. We are like men
     dashing up and down a narrow passageway, with muskets pointed at
     us from all the roofs. We work like sailors executing their last
     manœuver after the ship has begun to sink. Our pleasures are
     those of the prisoner to whom a choice dish is offered a quarter
     of an hour before his execution. Anxiety paralyzes our thought,
     and the utmost we can do is to wonder, as we con the vague
     utterances of ministers, or construe the meaning of the words
     of monarchs, or turn over those ascribed to the diplomatists,
     retailed at random by the newspapers, never sure of their
     information, whether all this is to happen to-morrow or the day
     after, whether it is this year or next that we are all to be
     killed. In truth, one might seek in vain throughout the pages
     of history for an epoch more unsettled or more pregnant with
     anxiety."--"Le Sens de la Vie."

He shows us that the power is really in the hands of those who allow
themselves to be destroyed, in the hands of separate individuals who
compose the mass; that the root of all evil is the State. It would
seem as if the contradiction between one's faith and one's actual
life had reached its utmost limit, and that the solution could not
be far to seek.

But the author is of a different opinion. All that he sees in
this is the tragedy of human life, and having given us a detailed
description of the horror of this state of things, he perceives
no reason why human life should not be spent in the midst of this
horror. Such are the views of the second class of writers, who
consider only the fatalistic and tragic side of war.

There is still another view, and this is the one held by men who
have lost all conscience, and are consequently dead to common sense
and human feeling.

To this class belong Moltke, whose opinions are quoted by
Maupassant, and nearly all military men who have been taught to
believe this cruel superstition, who are supported by it, and who
naturally regard war not only as an inevitable evil, but as a
necessary and even profitable occupation. And there are civilians
too, scientists, men of refinement and education, who hold very much
the same views.

The famous academician Doucet, in reply to a query of the editor of
the _Revue des Revues_ in regard to his opinions on war, replies as
follows in the number containing letters concerning war:[11]--

     "DEAR SIR,--When you ask of the least belligerent of all the
     academicians if he is a partizan of war, his reply is already
     given. Unfortunately you yourself classify the peaceful
     contemplations which inspire your fellow-countrymen at the
     present hour as idle visions.

     "Ever since I was born I have always heard good men protesting
     against this shocking custom of international carnage. All
     recognize this evil and lament it. But where is its remedy?

     "The effort to suppress duelling has often been made. It seems
     to be so easy. Far from it. All that has been accomplished
     toward achieving this noble purpose amounts to nothing, nor
     will it ever amount to more. Against war and duelling the
     congresses of the two hemispheres vote in vain. Superior to all
     arbitrations, conventions, and legislations will ever remain
     human honor, which has always demanded the duel, and national
     interests, which have always called for war. Nevertheless, I
     wish with all my heart that the Universal Peace Congress may
     succeed at last in its difficult and honorable task.--Accept the
     assurance, etc.,

                                           "CAMILLE DOUCET."

  [11] _La Revue des Revues_, "La guerre, état de la question, jugé
  par nos grands hommes contemporains."--TR.

It amounts to this, that honor obliges men to fight, that it is for
the interest of nations that they should attack and destroy one
another, and that all endeavors to abolish war can but excite a
smile.

Jules Claretie expresses himself in similar terms:--

     "DEAR SIR,--A sensible man can have but one opinion on the
     question of war and peace. Humanity was created to live--to
     live for the purpose of perfecting its existence by peaceful
     labor. The mutual relations of cordiality which are promoted and
     preached by the Universal Congress of Peace may be but a dream
     perhaps, yet certainly is the most delightful of dreams. The
     vision of the land of promise is ever before the eyes, and upon
     the soil of the future the harvest will ripen, secure from the
     plowing of the projectile, or the crushing of cannon-wheels.
     But, alas!... Since philosophers and philanthropists are not the
     rulers of mankind, it is fit that our soldiers should guard our
     frontiers and our homes, and their weapons, skilfully wielded,
     are perhaps the surest guarantees of the peace we love so well.
     Peace is given only to the strong and the courageous.--Accept
     the assurances of, etc.,

                                           "JULES CLARETIE."

The substance of this is, that there is no harm in talking about
what no one intends to do, and what ought not in any event to be
done. When fighting is in order, there is no alternative but to
fight.

Émile Zola, the most popular novelist in Europe, gives utterance to
his views on the subject of war in the following terms:--

     "I look upon war as a fatal necessity which seems to us
     indispensable because of its close connection with human nature
     and all creation. Would that it might be postponed as long as
     possible! Nevertheless a time will come when we shall be forced
     to fight. At this moment I am regarding the subject from the
     universal standpoint, and am not hinting at our unfriendly
     relations with Germany, which are but a trifling incident in the
     world's history. I affirm that war is useful and necessary,
     since it is one of the conditions of human existence. The
     fighting instinct is to be found not only among the different
     tribes and peoples, but in domestic and private life as
     well. It is one of the chief elements of progress, and every
     advancing step taken by mankind up to the present time has been
     accompanied by bloodshed.

     "Men have talked, and still do talk, of disarmament; and yet
     disarmament is utterly impossible, for even though it were
     possible, we should be compelled to renounce it. It is only an
     armed nation that can be powerful and great. I believe that a
     general disarmament would be followed by a moral degradation,
     assuming the form of a widespread effeminacy which would impede
     the progress of humanity. Warlike nations have always been
     vigorous. The military art has contributed to the development
     of other arts. History shows us this. In Athens and Rome, for
     instance, commerce, industry, and literature reached their
     highest development when these cities ruled the world by the
     force of arms. And nearer to our own time we found an example
     in the reign of Louis XIV. The wars of the great king, so far
     from impeding the advance of arts and sciences, seemed rather to
     promote and to favor their progress."

War is useful!

But chief among the advocates of these views, and the most talented
of all the writers of this tendency, is the academician Vogüé, who,
in an article on the military section of the Exhibition of 1889,
writes as follows:--

     "On the Esplanade des Invalides, the center of exotic and
     colonial structures, a building of a more severe order stands
     out from the midst of the picturesque bazaar; these various
     fragments of our terrestrial globe adjoin the palace of war. A
     magnificent theme and antithesis for humanitarian rhetoric which
     never loses a chance to lament a juxtaposition of this kind, and
     to utter its 'this will kill that' [_ceci tuera cela_[12]];
     that the confederacy of nations brought about by science and
     labor will overpower the military instinct. Let it cherish this
     vision of a golden age, caressing it with fond hopes. We have
     no objection; but should it ever be realized, it would very
     soon become an age of corruption. History teaches us that the
     former has been accomplished by the means of the latter, that
     blood is necessary to hasten and to seal the confederacy of
     nations. In our own time the natural sciences have strengthened
     the mysterious law which revealed itself to Joseph de Maistre
     through the inspiration of his genius and meditation on
     primordial dogmas; he saw how the world would redeem its
     hereditary fall by offering a sacrifice. Science shows us that
     the world is made better by struggle and violent selection;
     this affirmation of the same law, with varied utterance, comes
     from two sources. It is by no means a pleasant one. The laws
     of the world, however, are not established for our pleasure,
     but for our perfection. Let us then enter this necessary and
     indispensable palace of war, and we shall have the opportunity
     to observe how our most inveterate instinct, losing nothing
     of its power, is transformed in its adaptation to the various
     demands of historical moments."

  [12] Words taken from Victor Hugo's "Notre Dame," where he says that
  printing will kill architecture.--AUTHOR.

This idea, namely, that the proof of the necessity of war may
be found in the writings of De Maistre and of Darwin, two great
thinkers, as he calls them, pleases Vogüé so much that he repeats it.

"Sir," he writes to the editor of the _Revue des Revues_, "you ask
my opinion in regard to the possible success of the Universal Peace
Congress. I believe, with Darwin, that vehement struggle is the
law governing all being, and I believe, with Joseph de Maistre,
that it is a divine law,--two different modes of characterizing
the same principle. If, contrary to all expectations, a certain
fraction of humanity--for example, all the civilized West--should
succeed in arresting the issue of this law, the more primitive races
would execute it against us; in these races the voice of nature
would prevail over human intellect. And they would succeed, because
the certainty of _peace_--I do not say peace, but the absolute
_certainty of peace_--would in less than half a century produce a
corruption and a decadence in men more destructive than the worst of
wars. I believe that one should act in regard to war--that criminal
law of humanity--as in regard to all criminal laws: modify it, or
endeavor to make its execution as rare as possible, and use every
means in our power to render it superfluous. But experience of all
history teaches us that it cannot be suppressed, so long as there
shall be found on earth two men, bread, money, and a woman between
them. I should be very glad if the Congress could prove to me the
contrary; but I doubt if it can disprove history, and the law of God
and of nature.--Accept my assurance, etc.,

                                           "E. M. DE VOGÜÉ."

This may be summed up as follows: History and nature, God and man,
show us that so long as there are two men left on earth, and the
stakes are bread, money, and woman, just so long there will be war.
That is, that no amount of civilization will ever destroy that
abnormal concept of life which makes it impossible for men to divide
bread, money (of all absurdities), and woman without a fight. It is
odd that people meet in congresses and hold forth as to the best
method of catching birds by putting salt on their tails, although
they must know that this can never be done! It is astonishing that
men like Rod, Maupassant, and others, clearly realizing all the
horrors of war, and all the contradictions that ensue from men not
doing what they ought to do, and what it would be to their advantage
to do, who bemoan the tragedy of life, and yet fail to see that
this tragic element would vanish as soon as men ceased to discuss a
subject which should not be discussed, and ceased to do that which
is both painful and repulsive for them to do!

One may wonder at them; but men who, like Vogüé and others, believe
in the law of evolution, and look upon war as not only unavoidable,
but even useful, and therefore desirable,--such men are fairly
shocking, horrible in their moral aberration. The former at least
declare that they hate evil and love good, but the latter believe
there is neither good nor evil.

All this discussion of the possibility of establishing peace instead
of continual warfare is but the mischievous sentimentalism of idle
talkers. There is a law of evolution which seems to prove that I
must live and do wrong. What, then, can I do? I am an educated
man,--I am familiar with the doctrine of evolution; hence it follows
that I shall work evil. "Entrons au palais de la guerre." There is a
law of evolution, and therefore there can be no real evil; and one
must live one's life and leave the rest to the law of evolution.
This is the last expression of refined civilization; it is with
this idea that the educated classes at the present day deaden their
conscience.

The desire of these classes to preserve their favorite theories and
the life that they have built up on them can go no further. They
lie, and by their specious arguments deceive themselves as well as
others, obscuring and deadening their intuitive perceptions.

Rather than adapt their lives to their consciousness, they try by
every means to befog and to silence it. But the light shines in the
darkness, and even now it begins to dawn.




