
  LYOF N. TOLSTOÏ

  XIX

  THE KINGDOM OF GOD
  IS WITHIN YOU

  WHAT IS ART?

  [Illustration: COUNT TOLSTOÏ PLOWING

  FROM THE PAINTING BY REPIN]




  THE NOVELS AND OTHER WORKS OF

  LYOF N. TOLSTOÏ

  THE KINGDOM OF
  GOD IS WITHIN YOU

  WHAT IS ART?

  [Illustration: publisher mark]

  NEW YORK
  CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS
  1902




  COPYRIGHT, 1899,
  BY THOMAS V. CROWELL & CO.




INTRODUCTION


The present volume contains two contrasting treatises. The first is
religious, and shows in Count Tolstoï's earnest and eloquent manner
the meaning of Christ's words which he takes for his text,--"The
Kingdom of God is within you." The outward forms of religion,
however helpful they may be to some souls, are not essential; the
superstitions with which Faith sometimes clothes or masks herself
may or may not be uplifting; but the foundation of Christianity is
the truth contained in Christ's words, his simple, plain, undogmatic
commands and prohibitions.

One word sums it all up, and that word is Love. If the world should
take love for its guiding star, it is evident that all the evils
of the world would cease,--wars, crimes, poverty, ambitions; the
millennium would come! Count Tolstoï shows how that blessed period
may begin in every man. The translation of this beautiful and
inspiring book has been made by Mrs. Aline Delano of Boston.

In answering the question, "What is Art?" Count Tolstoï analyzes and
tests the various definitions given by other writers. He shows up
with merciless severity what he considers the fallacy in the popular
delusion that the fetish of Art pardons bestiality, obscenity, and
whatever conduces to stimulating the passions. The work is strongly
controversial, and attacks unsparingly many of the popular notions
of the day, as, for instance, that "Art is the manifestation of some
mysterious idea of God," or "the expression of man's emotions by
external signs," or the production of pleasing objects. He believes
that art has a loftier function, and he proceeds elaborately to
argue in favor of this universal activity, which should be to effect
a union among men so that they may have the same noble feelings and
progress together toward universal and individual well-being. "Art
for art's sake" is meaningless to him. It is interesting to notice
that the most original and independent of the French critics has
recently taken practically the same ground in a lecture, in which he
asserts that it is the critic's business to test art and literature,
and that art has a most intimate relation with morality.

Much of the book is racy and amusing; much of it is abstruse,
and requires close attention. But whether one follows the author
in his individual opinions or not, it cannot be denied that the
general tone of the treatise is helpful and uplifting, and that it
is based on sound common sense. Mr. Aylmer Maude of England is the
translator of this work, and has had the benefit of Count Tolstoï's
own suggestions in regard to certain points. As the special preface
explains, the translation accurately represents the author's views,
while the edition published in Russia was in many ways garbled
and distorted. The translators of both treatises have seized the
opportunity of carefully revising their work.




CONTENTS


  THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU

  PAGE

  INTRODUCTORY        1

  CHAPTER I

  Doctrine of non-resistance to evil, from the origin
      of Christianity, has been, and still is, professed
      by the minority of men                                 3

  CHAPTER II

  Opinions of believers and unbelievers in regard to
       non-resistance                                       30

  CHAPTER III

  Misconception of Christianity by non-believers            47

  CHAPTER IV

  Misconception of Christianity by scientists               79

  CHAPTER V

  Contradiction of our life and Christian consciousness    100

  CHAPTER VI

  Attitude of men of the present day toward war            122

  CHAPTER VII

  Significance of the military conscription                152

  CHAPTER VIII

  Certainty of the acceptance of the Christian doctrine
      of non-resistance to evil by violence by the men
      of our world                                         171

  CHAPTER IX

  The acceptance of the Christian life-conception
     delivers men from the miseries of our pagan life      194

  CHAPTER X

  Uselessness of violence for the destruction of
      evil--The moral advance of mankind is accomplished,
      not only through the knowledge of truth, but also
      through the establishment of public opinion          218

  CHAPTER XI

  Christian public opinion already arises in our
      society, and will inevitably destroy the system
      of violence of our life--When this will come about   242

  CHAPTER XII

  Conclusion: "Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
      hand!"                                               254




  WHAT IS ART?

  TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE                                     339

  AUTHOR'S PREFACE                                         341

  CHAPTER I

  Time and labor spent on art--Lives stunted in its
      service--Morality sacrificed to and anger
      justified by art--The rehearsal of an opera
      described                                            345

  CHAPTER II

  Does art compensate for so much evil?--What is
      art?--Confusion of opinions--Is it "that which
      produces beauty"?--The word "beauty" in
      Russian--Chaos in æsthetics                          351

  CHAPTER III

  Summary of various æsthetic theories and definitions,
      from Baumgarten to to-day                            360

  CHAPTER IV

  Definitions of art founded on beauty--Taste not
      definable--A clear definition needed to enable
      us to recognize works of art                         376

  CHAPTER V

  Definitions not founded on beauty--Tolstoï's
      definition--The extent and necessity of
      art--How people in the past have distinguished
      good from bad in art                                 383

  CHAPTER VI

  How art for pleasure has come into esteem--Religions
      indicate what is considered good and bad--Church
      Christianity--The Renaissance--Skepticism of the
      upper classes--They confound beauty with goodness    389

  CHAPTER VII

  An æsthetic theory framed to suit this view of life      396

  CHAPTER VIII

  Who have adopted it?--Real art needful for all men--Our
      art too expensive, too unintelligible, and too
      harmful for the masses--The theory of "the elect"
      in art                                               401

  CHAPTER IX

  Perversion of our art--It has lost its natural
      subject-matter--Has no flow of fresh
      feeling--Transmits chiefly three base emotions       406

  CHAPTER X

  Loss of comprehensibility--Decadent art--Recent French
      art--Have we a right to say it is bad and that what
      we like is good art?--The highest art has always
      been comprehensible to normal people--What fails
      to infect normal people is not art                   412

  CHAPTER XI

  Counterfeits of art produced by: Borrowing; Imitating;
      Striking; Interesting--Qualifications needful for
      production of real works of art, and those
      sufficient for production of counterfeits            436

  CHAPTER XII

  Causes of production of counterfeits--Professionalism--
      Criticism--Schools of art                            446

  CHAPTER XIII

  Wagner's "Nibelung's Ring" a type of counterfeit
      art--Its success, and the reasons thereof            455

  CHAPTER XIV

  Truths fatal to preconceived views are not readily
      recognized--Proportion of works of art to
      counterfeits--Perversion of taste and incapacity
      to recognize art--Examples                           468

  CHAPTER XV

  THE QUALITY OF ART, CONSIDERED APART FROM ITS
      SUBJECT-MATTER--The sign of art: Infectiousness--
      Incomprehensible to those whose taste is
      perverted--Conditions of infection: Individuality;
     Clearness; Sincerity                                  476

  CHAPTER XVI

  THE QUALITY OF ART, CONSIDERED ACCORDING TO ITS
      SUBJECT-MATTER--The better the feeling the better
      the art--The cultured crowd--The religious
      perception of our age--The new ideals put fresh
      demands to art--Art unites--Religious art--Universal
      art--Both coöperate to one result--The new
      appraisement of art--Bad art--Examples of art--How
      to test a work claiming to be art                    479

  CHAPTER XVII

  Results of absence of true art--Results of perversion
      of art: Labor and lives spent on what is useless
      and harmful--The abnormal life of the rich--
      Perplexity of children and plain folk--Confusion
      of right and wrong--Nietzsche and Redbeard--
      Superstition, Patriotism, and Sensuality             497

  CHAPTER XVIII

  The purpose of human life is the brotherly union of
      man--Art must be guided by this perception           507

  CHAPTER XIX

  The art of the future not a possession of a select
      minority, but a means toward perfection and unity    510

  CHAPTER XX

  The connection between science and art--The mendacious
      sciences; the trivial sciences--Science should deal
      with the great problems of human life, and serve as
      a basis for art                                     517

  APPENDICES

  APPENDIX I                                               528

  APPENDIX II                                              530

  APPENDIX III                                             537

  APPENDIX IV                                              542




  THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS
  WITHIN YOU

  OR,

  CHRISTIANITY NOT AS A MYSTICAL DOCTRINE,
  BUT AS A NEW-LIFE CONCEPTION




AUTHOR'S PREFACE


In this book I have endeavored to show that our modern Christianity
has been tried and found wanting, that the armed camp of Europe
is not Christian, but Pagan, as is latter-day religion, of which
the present state of affairs is the outcome. The book contains
three principal ideas,--the first, that Christianity is not only
the worship of God and a doctrine of salvation, but is, above all
things, a new conception of life, which is changing the whole fabric
of human society; the second, that from the first appearance of
Christianity there entered into it two opposite currents,--the one
establishing the true and new conception of life, which it gave to
humanity, and the other perverting the true Christian doctrine and
converting it into a Pagan religion, and that this contradiction
has attained in our days the highest degree of tension which now
expresses itself in universal armaments, and on the Continent in
general conscription; and the third, that this contradiction, which
is masked by hypocrisy, can only be solved by an effort of sincerity
on the part of every individual endeavoring to conform the acts of
his life,--independent of what are regarded as the exigencies of
family, society, and the State,--with those moral principles which
he considers to be true.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The above is an extract (slightly adapted) from an article on
Count Tolstoï which appeared in the London_ Daily Chronicle _of
26th December,1893. Sent by Miss Tatiana Tolstoï, on behalf of
her father, to the publishers of this edition of his work, it is
inserted here as a Preface at the suggestion of Count Tolstoï._



  THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS
  WITHIN YOU;

  OR,

  CHRISTIANITY NOT AS A MYSTICAL DOCTRINE,
  BUT AS A NEW LIFE-CONCEPTION

     "And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
     free."--JOHN viii. 32.

     "And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill
     the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul
     and body in hell."--MATTHEW x. 28.

     "Ye are bought with a price; be not ye the servants of men."--I
     CORINTHIANS vii. 23.


INTRODUCTORY

In 1884 I wrote a book entitled "My Religion," wherein I formulated
my creed.

While affirming my faith in the doctrine taught by Christ, I could
not refrain from manifesting at the same time the reason why I look
upon the ecclesiastical doctrine commonly called Christianity as
erroneous, and to me incredible.

Among the many deviations of the latter from the doctrine of Christ,
I called attention to the principal one; namely--the evasion of
the commandment that forbids man to resist evil by violence, as a
striking example of the perversion of the doctrine of Christ by
ecclesiastical interpretation.

I knew but little, no more than other men, of what had been taught
or written on the subject of non-resistance in former times. I
was familiar with the opinions of the Fathers of the Church,
Origen, Tertullian, and others; and I also knew of the existence
of certain sects called Mennonites, Herrnhuters, and Quakers, all
of which forbid Christians the use of arms, and will not submit to
conscription, but I never knew the arguments by which these sects
sought to maintain their views.

My book, as I had anticipated, was prohibited by the Russian
censors, but partly in consequence of my reputation as a writer,
partly because it excited curiosity, it had a circulation in
manuscript, and while, on the one hand, it called forth from those
persons who sympathized with my ideas, information concerning works
written on the same subject, on the other, it excited criticisms on
the opinions therein maintained.

These two results, together with the historical events of recent
years, made many things clear to me, and led me to many new
deductions and conclusions which I now desire to set forth.

I shall speak in the first place of the information I received in
regard to the history of this matter of non-resistance to evil;
and in the second place, of the arguments upon the subject offered
by religious critics, that is, by critics who profess the religion
of Christ, as well as those of secular critics, that is to say, of
men who make no such profession; and finally, the conclusions which
I drew from the arguments of both parties, as well as from the
historical events of later years.




CHAPTER I

DOCTRINE OF NON-RESISTANCE TO EVIL FROM THE ORIGIN OF CHRISTIANITY,
HAS BEEN, AND STILL IS, PROFESSED BY THE MINORITY OF MEN

     Concerning the book "My Religion"--Information called forth by
     this book--Letters of Quakers--Professions of Garrison--Adin
     Ballou, his works and Catechism--"The Net of Faith" of
     Helchitsky--Relations of men toward works that explain the
     teachings of Christ--The book of Dymond "On War"--Assertion of
     Non-resistance by Musser--Relations of government in 1818 toward
     those who refuse to join the military service--General inimical
     attitude of governments and liberal men toward those who refused
     to take part in the violence of governments and their conscious
     effort to conceal and ignore these demonstrations of Christian
     Non-resistance.


Among the early responses called forth by my book were letters
from American Quakers. In these letters, while expressing their
sympathy with my ideas in regard to the unlawfulness of violence
and war where Christians are concerned, the Quakers made known to
me many details in relation to their sect, which for more than two
hundred years has professed the doctrine of Christ in the matter of
non-resistance, and which never has, nor does it now use weapons for
self-defense. Together with the letters, the Quakers sent me many
of their pamphlets, periodicals, and books. From these publications
I learned that already, many years ago, they had demonstrated the
Christian's duty of keeping the commandment of non-resistance to
evil by violence, and the error of the church which countenances
wars and executions.

Having shown by a succession of arguments and texts that war--the
slaughter and mutilation of men--is inconsistent with a religion
founded on peace and good-will to men, the Quakers go on to assert
that nothing is so conducive to the defamation of Christ's truth in
the eyes of the heathen, or so successful in arresting the spread
of Christianity throughout the world, as the refusal to obey this
commandment, made by men who call themselves Christians, and by the
sanction thus given to war and violence. The doctrine of Christ,
which has entered into the consciousness of men, not by force or by
the sword, as they say, but by non-resistance to evil, by humility,
meekness, and the love of peace, can only be propagated among men by
the example of peace, love, and concord given by its followers.

A Christian, according to the teaching of the Lord, should be guided
in his relations toward men only by the love of peace, and therefore
there should be no authority having power to compel a Christian to
act in a manner contrary to God's law, and contrary to his chief
duty toward his fellow-men.

The requirements of the civil law, they say, may oblige men, who,
to win some worldly advantages, seek to conciliate that which is
irreconcilable, to violate the law of God; but for a Christian,
who firmly believes that his salvation depends upon following the
teaching of Christ, this law can have no meaning.

My acquaintance with the activity of the Quakers and with their
publications, with Fox, Paine, and particularly with a work
published by Dymond in 1827, proved to me not only that men have
long since recognized the impossibility of harmonizing Christianity
and war, but that this incompatibility has been proved so clearly
and irrefragably, that one can only wonder how it is possible for
this incongruous union of Christianity with violence--a doctrine
which is still taught by the church--to remain in force.

Besides the information obtained from the Quakers, I also received
from America about the same time advices on the subject from another
and hitherto unknown source. The son of William Lloyd Garrison, the
famous anti-slavery champion, wrote to me that, having read my book,
wherein he had found ideas similar to those expressed by his father
in 1838, and taking it for granted that I should be interested to
know that fact, he sent me a book written by Mr. Garrison some fifty
years ago, entitled "Non-resistance."

This avowal of principle took place under the following
circumstances:--In 1838, on the occasion of a meeting of the Society
for the Promotion of Peace, William Lloyd Garrison, while discussing
means for the suppression of war, arrived at the conclusion that the
establishment of universal peace can have no solid foundation save
in the literal obedience to the commandment of non-resistance by
violence (Matthew v. 39), as understood by the Quakers, with whom
Garrison was on friendly terms. Having arrived at this conclusion,
he wrote, offering to the Society the following proclamation, which
at that time, in 1838, was signed by many of its members:--

     "_Declaration of Sentiments adopted by the Peace Convention,
     held in Boston, September 18, 19, and 20, 1838_:--

     "Assembled in Convention, from various sections of the American
     Union, for the promotion of Peace on earth and Good-will among
     men, We, the undersigned, regard it as due to ourselves, to the
     cause which we love, to the country in which we live, and to the
     world, to publish a Declaration, expressive of the principles
     we cherish, the purposes we aim to accomplish, and the measures
     we shall adopt to carry forward the work of peaceful, universal
     reformation.

     "We cannot acknowledge allegiance to any human government;
     neither can we oppose any such government by a resort to
     physical force. We recognize but one King and Lawgiver, one
     Judge and Ruler of mankind. We are bound by the laws of a
     Kingdom which is not of this world; the subjects of which are
     forbidden to fight; in which Mercy and Truth are met together,
     and Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other; which has no
     state lines, no national partitions, no geographical boundaries;
     in which there is no distinction of rank or division of caste,
     or inequality of sex; the officers of which are Peace, its
     exactors Righteousness, its walls Salvation, and its gates
     Praise; and which is destined to break in pieces and consume
     all other kingdoms. Our country is the world, our countrymen
     are all mankind. We love the land of our nativity only as
     we love all other lands. The interests, rights, liberties of
     American citizens are no more dear to us than are those of the
     whole human race. Hence, we can allow no appeal to patriotism to
     revenge any national insult or injury; the Principle of Peace,
     under whose stainless banner we rally, came not to destroy, but
     to save, even the worst of enemies. He has left us an example,
     that we should follow His steps. God commendeth his love toward
     us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.

     "We conceive that if a nation has no right to defend itself
     against foreign enemies, or to punish its invaders, no
     individual possesses that right in his own case. The unit
     cannot be of greater importance than the aggregate. If one
     man may take life, to obtain or defend his rights, the same
     license must necessarily be granted to communities, states,
     and nations. If _he_ may use a dagger or a pistol, _they_ may
     employ cannon, bombshells, land and naval forces. The means
     of self-preservation must be in proportion to the magnitude
     of interests at stake, and the number of lives exposed to
     destruction. But if a rapacious and bloodthirsty soldiery,
     thronging these shores from abroad, with intent to commit
     rapine and destroy life, may not be resisted by the people
     or magistracy, then ought no resistance to be offered to
     domestic troubles of the public peace or of private security.
     No obligation can rest upon Americans to regard foreigners as
     more sacred in their persons than themselves, or to give them a
     monopoly of wrong-doing with impunity.

     "The dogma, that all the governments of the world are
     approvingly ordained of God, and that the powers that be in the
     United States, in Russia, in Turkey, are in accordance with His
     will, is not less absurd than impious. It makes the impartial
     Author of human freedom and equality unequal and tyrannical. It
     cannot be affirmed that the powers that be, in any nation, are
     actuated by the spirit or guided by the example of Christ, in
     the treatment of enemies; therefore, they cannot be agreeable
     to the will of God; and therefore their overthrow, by a
     spiritual regeneration of their subjects, is inevitable.

     "We register our testimony not only against all wars, whether
     offensive or defensive, but all preparations for war; against
     every naval ship, every arsenal, every fortification; against
     the militia system and a standing army; against all military
     chieftains and soldiers; against all monuments commemorative
     of victory over a fallen foe, all trophies won in battle, all
     celebrations in honor of military or naval exploits; against all
     appropriations for the defense of a nation by force and army,
     on the part of any legislative body; against every edict of
     government requiring of its subjects military service. Hence we
     deem it unlawful to bear arms, or to hold a military office.

     "As every human government is upheld by physical strength, and
     its laws are enforced virtually at the point of the bayonet,
     we cannot hold any office which imposes upon its incumbent the
     obligation to compel men to do right, on pain of imprisonment
     or death. We therefore voluntarily exclude ourselves from every
     legislative and judicial body, and repudiate all human politics,
     worldly honors, and stations of authority. If we cannot occupy
     a seat in the legislature or on the bench, neither can we elect
     _others_ to act as our substitutes in any such capacity.

     "It follows that we cannot sue any man at law, to compel him by
     force to restore anything which he may have wrongfully taken
     from us or others; but if he has seized our coat, we shall
     surrender up our cloak, rather than subject him to punishment.

     "We believe that the penal code of the old covenant, 'An eye
     for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth,' has been abrogated by
     Jesus Christ; and that under the new covenant, the forgiveness
     instead of the punishment of enemies has been enjoined upon all
     His disciples, in all cases whatsoever. To extort money from
     enemies, or set them upon a pillory, or cast them into prison,
     or hang them upon gallows, is obviously not to forgive, but to
     take retribution. 'Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the
     Lord.'

     "The history of mankind is crowded with evidences proving that
     physical coercion is not adapted to moral regeneration; that the
     sinful disposition of men can be subdued only by love; that evil
     can be exterminated from the earth only by goodness; that it is
     not safe to rely upon an arm of flesh, upon man whose breath is
     in his nostrils, to preserve us from harm; that there is great
     security in being gentle, harmless, long-suffering, and abundant
     in mercy; that it is only the meek who shall inherit the earth,
     for the violent who resort to the sword are destined to perish
     with the sword. Hence, as a measure of sound policy--of safety
     to property, life, and liberty--of public quietude and private
     enjoyment--as well as on the ground of allegiance to Him who
     is King of kings and Lord of lords, we cordially adopt the
     non-resistance principle; being confident that it provides for
     all possible consequences, will insure all things needful to us,
     is armed with omnipotent power, and must ultimately triumph over
     every assailing force.

     "We advocate no jacobinical doctrine. The spirit of jacobinism
     is the spirit of retaliation, violence, and murder. It neither
     fears God nor regards man. We would be filled with the spirit of
     Jesus Christ. If we abide by our principles, it is impossible
     for us to be disorderly, or plot treason, or participate in any
     evil work; we shall submit to every ordinance of man, for the
     Lord's sake; obey all the requirements of government, except
     such as we deem contrary to the commands of the gospel; and in
     no case resist the operation of law, except by meekly submitting
     to the penalty of disobedience.

     "But while we shall adhere to the doctrine of non-resistance and
     passive submission, we purpose, in a moral and spiritual sense,
     to speak and act boldly in the cause of God; to assail iniquity
     in high places and in low places; to apply our principles
     to all existing civil, political, legal, and ecclesiastical
     institutions; and to hasten the time when the kingdoms of this
     world will have become the kingdoms of our Lord and of His
     Christ, and He shall reign forever.

     "It appears to us a self-evident truth, that, whatever the
     gospel is designed to destroy at any period of the world, being
     contrary to it, ought now to be abandoned. If, then, the time
     is predicted when swords shall be beaten into plowshares, and
     spears into pruning-hooks, and men shall not learn the art of
     war any more, it follows that all who manufacture, sell, or
     wield those deadly weapons do thus array themselves against the
     peaceful dominion of the Son of God on earth.

     "Having thus briefly stated our principles and purposes, we
     proceed to specify the measures we propose to adopt in carrying
     our object into effect.

     "We expect to prevail through the foolishness of
     preaching,--striving to commend ourselves unto every man's
     conscience, in the sight of God. From the press we shall
     promulgate our sentiments as widely as practicable. We shall
     endeavor to secure the coöperation of all persons, of whatever
     name or sect. The triumphant progress of the cause of Temperance
     and of Abolition in our land, through the instrumentality of
     benevolent and voluntary associations, encourages us to combine
     our own means and efforts for the promotion of a still greater
     cause. Hence, we shall employ lecturers, circulate tracts
     and publications, form societies, and petition our state and
     national governments, in relation to the subject of Universal
     Peace. It will be our leading object to devise ways and means
     for effecting a radical change in the views, feelings, and
     practices of society, respecting the sinfulness of war and the
     treatment of enemies.

     "In entering upon the great work before us, we are not unmindful
     that, in its prosecution, we may be called to test our sincerity
     even as in a fiery ordeal. It may subject us to insult, outrage,
     suffering, yea, even death itself. We anticipate no small amount
     of misconception, misrepresentation, calumny. Tumults may arise
     against us. The ungodly and violent, the proud and pharisaical,
     the ambitious and tyrannical, principalities and powers, and
     spiritual wickedness in high places, may contrive to crush
     us. So they treated the Messiah, whose example we are humbly
     striving to imitate. If we suffer with Him we know that we
     shall reign with Him. We shall not be afraid of their terror,
     neither be troubled. Our confidence is in the Lord Almighty,
     not in man. Having withdrawn from human protection, what can
     sustain us but that faith which overcomes the world? We shall
     not think it strange concerning the fiery trial which is to
     try us, as though some strange thing had happened unto us; but
     rejoice, inasmuch as we are partakers of Christ's sufferings.
     Wherefore, we commit the keeping of our souls to God, in
     well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator. For every one that
     forsakes house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother,
     or wife, or children, or lands, for Christ's sake, shall receive
     a hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

     "Firmly relying upon the certain and universal triumph of the
     sentiments contained in this declaration, however formidable may
     be the opposition arrayed against them--in solemn testimony of
     our faith in their divine origin--we hereby affix our signatures
     to it, commending it to the reason and conscience of mankind,
     giving ourselves no anxiety as to what may befall us, and
     resolving in the strength of the Lord God calmly and meekly to
     abide the issue."

Later on, Garrison founded a Non-resistance Society and started
a periodical entitled _The Non-resistant_, wherein the full
significance and consequences of the doctrine were plainly
set forth, as has been stated in the proclamation. I gained,
subsequently, further information concerning the fate of this
society and the periodical from a biography of William Lloyd
Garrison, written by his sons.

Neither the periodical nor the society enjoyed a long life. The
majority of Garrison's associates in the work of liberating the
slaves, apprehensive lest the too radical views expressed in
the _The Non-resistant_ might alienate men from the practical
business of the abolition of slavery, renounced the doctrine of
non-resistance as expressed in the declaration, and both periodical
and society passed out of existence.

One would suppose that this declaration of Garrison, formulating,
as it did, an important profession of faith in terms both energetic
and eloquent, would have made a deeper impression on men, and have
become a subject for universal consideration. On the contrary, not
only is it unknown in Europe, but even among those Americans who
honor the memory of Garrison there are but few who are familiar with
this.

A similar fate befell another American champion of the same
doctrine, Adin Ballou, who died recently, and who for fifty years
had preached in favor of non-resistance to evil. How little is known
in regard to the question of non-resistance may be gathered from
the fact that the younger Garrison (who has written an excellent
biography of his father in four large volumes), in answer to my
inquiry whether any society for the defense of the principles of
non-resistance was yet alive and possessed adherents, wrote me
that, so far as he knew, the society had dissolved and its members
were no longer interested, while at this very time Adin Ballou, who
had shared Garrison's labors, and who had devoted fifty years of
his life to the teaching of the doctrine of non-resistance, both
by pen and by tongue, was still living in Hopedale, Massachusetts.
Afterward I received a letter from Wilson, a disciple and co-worker
of Ballou, and subsequently I entered into correspondence with
Ballou himself. I wrote to him, and he sent me his works, from
one of which I made the following extract:--"Jesus Christ is my
Lord and Master," says Ballou in one of his articles, written to
show the inconsistency of Christians who believe in the right of
defensive and offensive warfare. "I have covenanted to forsake all
and follow Him, through good and evil report, until death. But I am
nevertheless a Democratic Republican citizen of the United States,
implicitly sworn to bear true allegiance to my country, and to
support its Constitution, if need be, with my life. Jesus Christ
requires me to do unto others as I would that others should do
unto me. The Constitution of the United States requires me to do
unto twenty-seven hundred thousand slaves" (they had slaves then;
now they could easily be replaced by workmen) "the very contrary
of what I would have them do unto me--viz., assist to keep in a
grievous bondage.... But I am quite easy. I vote on. I help govern
on. I am willing to hold any office I may be elected to under the
Constitution. And I am still a Christian. I profess on. I find
difficulty in keeping covenant both with Christ and the Constitution.

"Jesus Christ forbids me to resist evil-doers by taking
'eye for eye, tooth for tooth, blood and life for life.' My
government requires the very reverse, and depends, for its own
self-preservation, on the halter, the musket, and the sword,
seasonably employed against its domestic and foreign enemies.

"In the maintenance and use of this expensive life-destroying
apparatus we can exemplify the virtues _of forgiving our injuries,
loving our enemies, blessing them that curse us, and doing good
to those that hate us_. For this reason we have regular Christian
chaplains to pray for us and call down the smiles of God on our holy
murders.

"I see it all" (that is, the contradiction between profession and
life), "and yet I insist that I am as good a Christian as ever. I
fellowship all; I vote on; I help govern on; I profess on; _and I
glory in being at once a devoted Christian and a no less devoted
adherent to the existing government_. I will not give in to those
miserable non-resistant notions. I will not throw away my political
influence, and leave unprincipled men to carry on government alone.

"The Constitution says--'Congress shall have power to declare
war, grant letters of marque and reprisal,' and I agree to this,
I indorse it. I swear to help carry it through. I vote for men to
hold office who are sworn to support all this. What, then, am I less
a Christian? Is not war a Christian service? Is it not perfectly
Christian to murder hundreds of thousands of fellow human beings; to
ravish defenseless females, sack and burn cities, and enact all the
other cruelties of war? Out upon these new-fangled scruples! This is
the very way to forgive injuries, and love our enemies! If we only
do it all in true love nothing can be more Christian than wholesale
murder!"

In another pamphlet, entitled "How many does it take?" he says--"One
man must not kill. If he does, it is murder; two, ten, one hundred
men, acting on their responsibility, must not kill. If they do, it
is still murder. But a state or nation may kill as many as they
please, and it is no murder. It is just, necessary, commendable, and
right. Only get people enough to agree to it, and the butchery of
myriads of human beings is perfectly innocent. But how many does it
take? This is the question. Just so with theft, robbery, burglary,
and all other crimes. Man-stealing is a great crime in one man, or
a very few men only. But a whole nation can commit it, and the act
becomes not only innocent, but highly honorable."

The following is, in substance, a catechism of Ballou, compiled for
the use of his congregation:--


THE CATECHISM OF NON-RESISTANCE.[1]

  [1] From the Russian version, which Count Tolstoï calls a free
  translation made with some omissions. After diligent search and
  inquiry I have been unable to find this catechism among Ballou's
  works.--TR.

_Q._ Whence comes the word non-resistance?

_A._ From the utterance: "But I say unto you, That ye resist not
evil."--Matthew v. 39.

_Q._ What does this word denote?

_A._ It denotes a lofty Christian virtue, commanded by Christ.

_Q._ Are we to understand the word non-resistance in its broad
sense, that is, as meaning that one should offer no resistance to
evil whatsoever?

_A._ No; it should be understood literally as Christ taught it--that
is, not to return evil for evil. Evil should be resisted by all
lawful means, but not by evil.

_Q._ From what does it appear that Christ gave that meaning to
non-resistance?

_A._ From the words which he used on that occasion. He said: "Ye
have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth. But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but
whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other
also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy
coat, let him have thy cloke also."

_Q._ Whom did he mean by the words: "Ye have heard that it hath been
said"?

_A._ The patriarchs and the prophets, and that which they spoke and
which is contained in the Old Testament, that the Jews generally
call the Law and Prophets.

_Q._ To what laws did Christ allude in the words: "Ye have heard"?

_A._ To those in which Noah, Moses, and other prophets grant the use
of personal violence against those who commit it, for the purpose of
punishing and destroying evil deeds.

_Q._ Mention such commandments.

_A._ "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed."--Genesis ix. 6.

"He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to
death. And if any mischief follow, then thou shalt give life for
life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe."--Exodus
xxi. 12, 23, 24, 25.

"And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death. And if
a man cause a blemish in his neighbor; as he hath done, so shall
it be done to him; breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for
tooth."--Leviticus xxiv. 17, 19, 20.

"And the judges shall make diligent inquisition: and, behold, if
the witness be a false witness, and hath testified falsely against
his brother; then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have
done unto his brother. And thine eye shall not pity; but life shall
go for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for
foot."--Deuteronomy xix. 18, 19, 21.

These are the injunctions of which Jesus speaks.

Noah, Moses, and the prophets taught that he who murders, mutilates,
or tortures his neighbor doeth evil. In order to combat and destroy
this evil, the evil-doer must be chastised by death, mutilation,
or some personal torture. Transgressions are to be avenged by
transgressions, murder by murder, torture by torture, evil by evil.
Thus taught Noah, Moses, and the prophets. But Christ forbids all
this. The gospel says: "I say unto you, resist ye not evil, avenge
not one transgression by another, but rather bear a repetition of
the offense from the evil-doer." That which has been allowed is now
forbidden. Having understood what resistance we have been taught, we
know exactly what Christ meant by non-resistance.

_Q._ Did the teaching of the Ancients admit of resisting
transgression by transgression?

_A._ Yes; but Christ forbade it. A Christian has no right in any
case to take the life of, or to offend against, the evil-doer.

_Q._ May he not kill or wound another in self-defense?

_A._ No.

_Q._ May he enter a complaint to the magistrates for the purpose of
chastising the offender?

_A._ No. For that which he does through others, he practically does
himself.

_Q._ May he fight in the army against foreign or domestic enemies?

_A._ Certainly not. He can take no part in war, or in the
preparation therefor. He cannot make use of weapons. He cannot
resist one transgression by another, whether he is alone or in
company, either personally or through other agents.

_Q._ May he voluntarily select or drill soldiers for the government?

_A._ He cannot do this, if he wishes to be _faithful_ to the law of
Christ.

_Q._ May he voluntarily contribute money to assist a government
which is supported by military power, executions, and violence in
general?

_A._ No; unless the money is to be used for some special purpose,
justifiable in itself, where the object and the means employed are
good.

_Q._ May he pay taxes to such a government?

_A._ No; he should not pay taxes on his own accord, but he should
not resist the levying of a tax. A tax imposed by the government
is levied independently of the will of the citizens. It may not be
resisted without recourse to violence, and a Christian should not
use violence; therefore he must deliver his property to the forced
damage caused by authorities.

_Q._ May a Christian vote at elections and take part in courts of
law or in the government?

_A._ No. To take a part in elections, courts of law, or in the
administration of government is the same thing as a participation in
the violence of the government.

_Q._ What is the chief significance of the doctrine of
non-resistance?

_A._ To show that it is possible to extirpate evil from one's own
heart, as well as from that of one's neighbor. This doctrine forbids
men to do that which perpetuates and multiplies evil in this world.
He who attacks another, and does him an injury, excites a feeling
of hatred, the worst of all evil. To offend our neighbor because he
has offended us, with ostensible motive of self-defense, means but
to repeat the evil act against him as well as against ourselves,--it
means to beget, or at least to let loose, or to encourage the Evil
Spirit whom we wish to expel. Satan cannot be driven out by Satan,
falsehood cannot be purged by falsehood, nor can evil be conquered
by evil. True non-resistance is the only real method of resisting
evil. It crushes the serpent's head. It destroys and exterminates
all evil feeling.

_Q._ But admitting that the idea of the doctrine is correct, is it
practicable?

_A._ As practicable as any virtue commanded by the law of God.
Good deeds cannot be performed under all circumstances without
self-sacrifice, privations, suffering, and, in extreme cases,
without the loss of life itself. But he who prizes life more than
the fulfilment of God's will is already dead to the only true life.
Such a man, in trying to save his life, will lose it. Furthermore,
wherever non-resistance costs the sacrifice of one's life, or of
some essential advantage of life, resistance costs thousands of such
sacrifices.

_Non-resistance preserves; resistance destroys._

It is much safer to act justly than unjustly; to endure an offense
rather than resist it by violence; safer even in regard to the
present life. If all men refused to resist evil, the world would be
a happy one.

_Q._ But if only a few were to act thus, what would become of them?

_A._ Even if but one man were to act thus, and the others should
agree to crucify him, would it not be more glorious for him to die
in the glory of non-resisting love, praying for his enemies, than
live wearing the crown of Cæsar, besprinkled with the blood of the
murdered? But whether it be one man or thousands of men who are
firmly determined not to resist evil by evil, still, whether in the
midst of civilized or uncivilized neighbors, men who do not rely
on violence are safer than those who do. A robber, a murderer, a
villain, will be less likely to harm them if he finds them offering
no armed resistance. "All they that take the sword shall perish with
the sword," and he who seeks peace, who acts like a friend, who is
inoffensive, who forgives and forgets injuries, generally enjoys
peace, or if he dies, he dies a blessed death.

Hence, if all were to follow the commandment of non-resistance,
there would manifestly be neither offense nor evil-doing. If even
the majority were composed of such men they would establish the rule
of love and good-will even toward the offenders, by not resisting
evil by evil nor using violence. Even if such men formed a numerous
minority, they would have such an improving moral influence over
society that every severe punishment would be revoked, and violence
and enmity would be replaced by peace and good-will. If they formed
but a small minority, they would rarely experience anything worse
than the contempt of the world, while the world, without preserving
it or feeling grateful therefor, would become better and wiser from
its latent influence. And if, in the most extreme cases, certain
members of the minority might be persecuted unto death, these men,
thus dying for the truth, would have left their doctrine already
sanctified by the blood of martyrdom.

Peace be with all ye who seek peace; and may the all-conquering love
be the imperishable inheritance of every soul who submits of its own
accord to the law of Christ.

_Resist not evil by violence._--ADIN BALLOU.

       *       *       *       *       *

For fifty years Ballou wrote and published books chiefly on the
subject of non-resistance. In these writings, remarkable for their
eloquence and simplicity of style, the question is considered in
all its aspects. He proved it to be the duty of every Christian
who professes to believe that the Bible is a revelation from God,
to obey this commandment. He enumerates the arguments against the
commandment of non-resistance, drawn from the Old as well as the
New Testament, the expulsion from the Temple, among others, and
answers each one in turn. Setting the Bible aside, he points out the
practical good sense on which this principle is founded, sums up the
arguments against it, and refutes them. For instance, in one chapter
of his work he treats of non-resistance to evil in exceptional
cases, and affirms that granting the truth of the supposition that
there are cases to which the rule of non-resistance cannot be
applied, that would prove that the rule in general is inconsistent.
Citing such exceptional cases, he proves that these are the very
occasions when the application of this rule is both wise and
necessary. The question has been viewed from every side, and no
argument, whether of opponent or sympathizer, has been neglected or
left unanswered. I mention this in order to call attention to the
deep interest which works of this class ought to excite in men who
profess Christianity; and it would seem therefore that Ballou's
zeal should have been recognized, and the ideas he expressed either
accepted or disproved. But such was not the case.

The life-work of Garrison, the father, his founding the society
of the Non-resistant, and his declaration, convinced me, more
even than my intercourse with the Quakers, that the divergence of
the Christianity of the State from Christ's law of non-resistance
by violence has been long since noticed and pointed out, and men
have labored and still do labor to counteract it. Thus Ballou's
earnestness has fortified my opinion. But the fate of Garrison, and
particularly that of Ballou, almost unknown, notwithstanding fifty
years of active and persistent work in one direction, has confirmed
me in the belief that there exists a certain inexpressed but fixed
determination to oppose all such attempts by a wall of silence.

In August of 1890 Ballou died, and his obituary appeared in the
American _Religio-Philosophical Journal_ of August 23d.

From this obituary we learn that Ballou was the spiritual leader of
a community, that he had preached from 8000 to 9000 sermons, married
1000 couples, and written 500 articles, but in regard to the object
of his life's devotion not a word is said; the word "non-resistance"
is never mentioned.

All the exhortations of the Quakers for 200 years, all the efforts
of Garrison, the father, the foundation of his society, his
periodical, and his declarations, as well as the life-work of
Ballou, are the same as if they had never existed.

Another striking example of the obscurity into which a work written
for the purpose of explaining the principle of non-resistance, and
to denounce those who refuse to recognize this commandment, may
fall, is the fate of a book by the Czech Helchitsky, which has only
recently been discovered, and which up to the present time has never
been printed.

Shortly after the publication of my book in German, I received a
letter from a professor of the Prague University, who wrote to tell
me of a book which had never been printed, a work written in the
fifteenth century by the Czech Helchitsky, and entitled "The Net of
Faith." In this work, written four centuries ago, Helchitsky, as
the professor tells me, has expressed exactly the same opinion in
regard to true and false Christianity that I did in my work entitled
"My Religion." The professor wrote that the work of Helchitsky was
to appear in print for the first time in the Czech language in one
of the publications of the St. Petersburg Academy of Science. As I
was unable to obtain the book, I endeavored to ascertain all that
was known of Helchitsky himself, and this knowledge I gained from
a German book sent to me by the same professor in Prague. Besides
that I learned something from Pipin's "History of Czech Literature."
Pipin says:--

     "'The Net of Faith' is the doctrine of Christ, wherewith man
     is to be raised from the gloomy depths of the social sea of
     iniquity. True faith is to believe the words of God; but we are
     living in times when men call the true faith heresy; hence it is
     upon our own reason that we must rely to discover the truth if
     we possess it not. Darkness has concealed it from men, and they
     no longer recognize the true law of Christ.

     "As an illustration of the law, Helchitsky cites the original
     social organization of Christian society, which is considered by
     the Church of Rome of the present time as rank heresy.

     "This primitive church was his own ideal of a social order
     founded upon equality, liberty, and fraternity. Christianity,
     according to Helchitsky, still preserves this foundation, and
     has but to return to its pure teaching to render any other
     social order, whose existence requires the authority of pope or
     king, quite superfluous. The law of love will suffice for all....

     "Historically, Helchitsky assigns the decadence of Christianity
     to the time of Constantine the Great, whom the Pope Silvester
     received into the Church in spite of his pagan life and morals.
     Constantine, in return, rewarded the Pope by endowing him with
     riches and temporal power. Since then these two forces have
     played into each other's hands, seeking only outward glory.
     Doctors, men of learning, and the clergy, caring only to
     maintain their influence over the world, excited the nations one
     against the other, encouraging the crimes of murder and rapine,
     and thus destroying Christianity, both in faith and practice.
     Helchitsky totally denies the right of man to wage war or to
     exact the penalty of death. According to him, every soldier,
     even if he be a 'knight,' is only a transgressor, a criminal,
     and a murderer."

All this, with the addition of some biographical details and
extracts from the correspondence of Helchitsky, is related in the
German book.

Having thus become acquainted with the essence of Helchitsky's
teachings, I waited with still greater impatience the appearance of
"The Net of Faith" in the Academy's periodical. But one, two, three
years passed, and the book was not forthcoming. It was only in 1888
that I learned that the printing had been suspended. I obtained
the proof-sheets of what had been printed, and read them. In many
respects it was a wonderful book.

Its contents have been accurately summarized by Pipin. Helchitsky's
principal idea is that Christianity, in league with sovereignty
during the reign of Constantine the Great, and continuing to
develop under these conditions, became corrupted, and ceased to be
Christianity. He called his book "The Net of Faith" because he had
chosen for his motto that verse from the New Testament which speaks
of the disciples as fishers of men. He carries on the simile thus:
"Through His disciples, Christ caught the world in the net of His
faith, but the larger fishes, breaking the net, escaped; then others
followed through these same holes made by the large fishes, and the
net was left almost empty." By the big fish he means the popes,
emperors, and sovereigns who, without giving up their authority,
accepted Christianity, not in its reality, but in its semblance.

Helchitsky teaches the same doctrine that is now taught by the
non-resistant Mennonites and Quakers, and in former times by
the Bogomiles, the Paulicians, and other sects. He teaches that
Christianity, requiring, as it does from its followers, humility,
gentleness, a forgiving spirit, the turning of the other cheek when
one is struck, and the love of one's enemies, is not compatible
with that violence which is an essential element of authority. A
Christian, according to Helchitsky, should not only refuse to be a
commander or a soldier, but he should take no part in government,
neither should he become a tradesman, nor even a landowner. He
might be an artisan or a farmer. This book is among the few which
have been saved from the flame into which books denouncing official
Christianity were commonly cast. As all such so-called heretical
works were usually burned with their authors, very few of those
which denounce official Christianity have been preserved--and for
this reason the book of which we speak has a special interest.

But apart from its interest, concerning which there may be
differences of opinion, it is one of the most remarkable results of
human thought, both on account of its profundity and the wonderful
power and beauty of its language, not to mention its antiquity. And
yet this book has remained unprinted for centuries, and continues to
be unknown except to a few specialists. (_See Note, end of Chapter._)

One would think that works like these of the Quakers, of Garrison,
of Ballou, and of Helchitsky,--which affirm and prove by the
authority of the Bible that the world misinterprets the teaching of
Christ,--would arouse an interest, would make a sensation, would
give rise to discussions between the clergy and their flocks.

One might suppose that works which deal with the very essence of the
Christian doctrine would be reviewed, and either acknowledged to be
just, or else refuted and condemned.

Not at all. Every one of these works suffers the same fate. Men
of widely differing opinions, believers, and, what is still more
surprising, unbelieving liberals, as though by common consent,
preserve an obstinate silence in regard to them. Thus every attempt
to explain the true meaning of Christ's doctrine goes for nothing.

And more astonishing still is the ignorance concerning two works
whose existence was made known to me after the publication of my
own book. One is a work by Dymond, "On War," printed for the first
time in London in 1824, and the other by Daniel Musser, entitled
"Non-resistance Asserted," was written in 1864.

The ignorance in regard to these books is amazing; the more so, that
apart from their merit, both treat, not so much of the theory as of
its practical application to life; of the relations of Christianity
to military service, which is particularly interesting in view of
the system of conscription. It may be asked, perhaps, what action is
befitting for a subject who believes that war is incompatible with
religion when his government calls upon him for military service?

One would take this to be a vital question, whose answer, in view
of our present system of conscription, becomes one of serious
importance. All men, or the majority of mankind, are Christians,
and every male is required to do military duty. How man, in his
Christian character, is to meet this demand, Dymond gives the
following reply:--

"_It is his duty, mildly and temperately, yet firmly, to refuse to
serve._

"There are some persons who, without any determinate process of
reasoning, appear to conclude that responsibility for national
measures attaches solely to those who direct them; that it is the
business of governments to consider what is good for the community,
and that, in these cases, the duty of the subject is merged in the
will of the sovereign. Considerations like these are, I believe,
often voluntarily permitted to become opiates of the conscience. I
have no part, it is said, in the councils of the government, and
am not, therefore, responsible for its crimes. We are, indeed, not
responsible for the crimes of our rulers, but we are responsible for
our own; and the crimes of our rulers are our own, if, whilst we
believe them to be crimes, we promote them by our coöperation....

"Those who suppose that obedience in all things is required, or that
responsibility in political affairs is transferred from the subject
to the sovereign, reduce themselves to a great dilemma. It is to
say that we must resign our conduct and our consciences to the will
of others, and act wickedly, or well, as their good or evil may
preponderate, without merit for virtue or responsibility for crime."

It is worthy of notice that the same is expressed in a maxim to
soldiers, which they are required to memorize. Dymond says that only
a commander answers for the consequences of his order. But this
is unjust. A man cannot remove the responsibility for his actions
from himself. And this is evident from the following: "If your
superior orders you to kill your child, your neighbor, your father,
or your mother, will you obey? If you will not, there is an end of
the argument; for if you may reject his authority in one instance,
where is the limit to rejection? There is no rational limit but that
which is assigned by Christianity, and that is both rational and
practicable....

"We think, then, that it is the business of every man who believes
that war is inconsistent with our religion, respectfully, but
steadfastly, to refuse to engage in it. Let such as these remember
that an honorable and an awful duty is laid upon them. It is upon
their fidelity, so far as human agency is concerned, that the
cause of peace is suspended. Let them, then, be willing to avow
their opinions and to defend them. Neither let them be contented
with words, if more than words, if suffering also, is required.
It is only by the unyielding fidelity of virtue that corruption
can be extirpated. If you believe that Jesus Christ has prohibited
slaughter, let not the opinions or the commands of a world induce
you to join in it. By this 'steady and determinate pursuit of
virtue,' the benediction which attaches to those who hear the
sayings of God, and do them, will rest upon you, and the time will
come when even the world will honor you as contributors to the work
of human reformation."

Musser's work, entitled "Non-resistance Asserted; or, Kingdom of
Christ and Kingdom of this World Separated," was published in 1864.

This book deals with the same question, drawing its illustrations
from the drafting of the United States citizens during the time of
the Civil War. In setting forth the reasons why men should have
the right to decline military service, his arguments are no less
applicable to the present time. In his Introduction the author says:
"It is well known that there are great numbers of people in the
United States who profess to be conscientiously opposed to war. They
are mostly called non-resistants, or defenseless Christians, and
refuse to defend their country, or take up arms at the call of the
government and go forth to battle against its enemies. Hitherto this
conscientious scruple has been respected by the government in this
country; and those claiming it have been relieved or excused from
this service.

"Since the commencement of the present civil war in the United
States the public mind has been unusually agitated on this subject.
It is not unreasonable that such persons as feel it to be their
duty to go forth and endure the hardships of camp life, and imperil
health, life, and limb in defense of their country and government,
should feel some jealousy of those who have, with themselves, long
enjoyed the protection and benefits of the government, and yet, in
the hour of its need, refuse to share the burden of its defense
and protection. Neither is it strange that such a position should
be looked upon as most unreasonable and monstrous, and those who
hold it be regarded with some suspicion. "Many able speakers and
writers," says the author, "have raised their voices and pens
to refute the idea of non-resistance, as both unreasonable and
unscriptural. This is not to be wondered at, seeing that those who
profess the principle and do not possess it, or correctly understand
it, act inconsistently, and thereby bring the profession into
disrepute and contempt. However much misapplication or abuse of a
principle may prejudice the minds of those who are unacquainted with
a subject, it is yet no argument against its truth."

The author at first proves it to be the duty of each Christian to
obey the rule of non-resistance. He says that the rule is perfectly
explicit, and that it has been given by Christ to all Christianity
without any possibility of being misinterpreted. "Judge for
yourselves, whether it is right or wrong to obey man more than you
do the Lord," said both Peter and John; and in exactly the same way
every man who wishes to be a Christian should regard the requirement
of his nation to be a soldier, remembering that Christ has told him,
"Do not resist evil."

This, in the opinion of Musser, decides the question of principle.
Another point, as to the right of declining military duty while
one enjoys the advantages accruing through violence, the author
considers in detail, and arrives at the conclusion that should a
Christian who follows the teaching of Christ refuse to go to the
war, he must also decline to take any position under the government
or any part in the elections, neither must he have recourse to any
officer of the law for his own personal advantage. Our author goes
on to consider the relation between the Old and New Testaments,
and the significance of government for non-Christians; arguments
against the doctrine of non-resistance are enumerated and refuted.
The author closes his book with the following words:--"Christians
need no governments: for they ought not to obey it in those matters
wherein Christ's teaching is set at naught, and still less should
they take an active part in it. Christ has chosen His disciples out
of the world. They have no promise of temporal good or happiness,
but the contrary. Their promise is in the world to come. The spirit
which they possess renders them happy and contented in any sphere of
life. So long as the world tolerates them, they are contented; but
if it will not let them dwell in peace, they flee to another city or
place; and so they are true pilgrims and strangers on earth, having
no certain abiding place.... They are well contented that the dead
may bury their dead, if they are only permitted to follow Christ."

Without deciding upon the merits of this definition of a Christian's
duty in regard to war, which we find set down in these two works, we
cannot fail to see the urgent need for a decision in regard to the
question itself.

There are men--hundreds of thousands of Quakers, Mennonites, our
own Duhobortzi, Molokani, men who belong to no sect whatsoever--who
believe that violence and therefore military service is incompatible
with Christianity; every year, for instance, we see in Russia a
number of men refusing to obey the conscription because of their
religious opinions. And how does the government deal with them?
Does it release them? Oh, no!... Does it use force, and in case
of disobedience punish them? Not exactly.... In 1818, government
managed the affair in this wise.

The following is an extract, hardly known to any one in Russia, from
a letter of Muraviev-Karsky, which was prohibited by the Russian
censor:--

                                "TIFLIS, _October 2d, 1818_.

     "This morning the commander of the fortress told me that five
     peasants belonging to the landowners of the government of Tambov
     had been recently sent into the province of Grusia. These men
     were intended to serve as soldiers, but they refused to obey.
     They were flogged several times and made to run the gantlet,
     but they were ready to give themselves up to the most cruel
     tortures, yea, even to death itself, to escape military service.
     'Let us go our way and harm us not; we do no harm ourselves. All
     men are equal. The sovereign is a man like one of us, why should
     we pay him taxes, and wherefore should we risk our lives to
     kill in battle those who have never done us any harm? Draw and
     quarter us, if you will, and we shall never change our minds; we
     will never wear the uniform, nor mess at the soldier's table.
     Some pitying soul may give us alms but from the government we
     neither have had nor will have anything whatsoever.' Such are
     the words of these peasants, who assure us that there are many
     men in Russia like themselves. Four times they were brought
     before the Committee of Ministers, and it was finally decided
     that a report be made to the Czar, who ordered them to be sent
     to Grusia for discipline, and desired the Commander-in-Chief to
     forward a monthly report of the progress made in bringing these
     peasants to a proper frame of mind."

The final result of this discipline is not known, for the matter was
kept a profound secret, and the episode may never have been made
public.

This was the conduct of the government seventy-five years ago in the
greater number of cases, always carefully hiding the truth from the
people; and it pursues the same policy at the present day, except
in regard to the German Mennonites, who live in the government of
Kherson, and who in lieu of military duty serve a corresponding term
as foresters,--the justice of their refusal to obey the conscription
being recognized.

But they are the sole exception; all others who, from religious
scruples, refuse to perform military duty are treated in the manner
just described.

At first the government employs all the methods of coercion now in
use to discipline and _convert_ the rebels, while at the same time
the most profound secrecy envelops all these proceedings. I know of
a process which was begun in 1884 against a man who had declined to
serve,--a long-drawn-out trial which was guarded by the Ministry as
a great secret.

The first step is usually to send the accused to the priests,
and, be it said to their shame, they always try to win over the
insubordinate. But as the influence exercised in the name of Christ
is generally unsuccessful, the delinquent is sent from the clergy to
the gendarmes, who, finding in him no political offense, send him
back; whereupon he is despatched to the scientists, the doctors, and
thence into the insane hospital. While he is thus sent to and fro,
the delinquent, deprived of his liberty like a condemned convict,
is made to endure every kind of indignity and suffering. Four such
cases have come to my knowledge. The doctors generally release the
man from the insane hospital, and then every underhanded and crafty
device is employed to delay the accused, because his release might
encourage others to follow his example. He is not allowed to remain
among the soldiers lest they discover from him that conscription
is not, as they are taught to believe, in accordance with the law
of God, but opposed to it. The most satisfactory arrangement for a
government would be either to execute the delinquent, or beat him
with rods until he died, as was done in former times. But it is
awkward to condemn a man to public execution because he is true to
the doctrine which we all profess to believe. Nor is it possible to
take no notice of a man when he refuses to obey. So the government
either tortures the man in order to compel him to deny Christ, or
tries to rid itself of him by some means which will hide both the
man and the crime from the eyes of the world, rather than resort to
public execution. All sorts of cunning manœuvers and tricks are
employed to torment the man. He is either banished to some remote
province, or exasperated to disobedience and then imprisoned, or
sent to the reform battalion, where he may be subjected to torture
without publicity or restriction; or he is pronounced insane and
locked up in the insane asylum. For instance, one was exiled to
Tashkent; that is to say, a pretense was made of transferring him
thither. Another was sent to Omsk, a third was court-martialed for
disobedience and imprisoned, and a fourth was put into a house for
the insane. The same thing is repeated on every side. Not only
the government, but the majority of liberal free-thinkers, as
though by preconcerted agreement, carefully avoid alluding to what
has been said, written, or done in this matter of denouncing the
inconsistency of violence, as embodied in its most shocking, crude,
and striking form, in the person of a soldier,--this readiness to
commit murder,--not only with the precepts of Christianity, but with
the dictates of mere humanity, which the world professes to obey.

Hence all the information that I have gathered concerning what
has been accomplished, and what is still going on in this work of
explaining the doctrine of Christ and the light in which it is
regarded by the ruling powers of Europe and America, has confirmed
me in the conviction that a spirit inimical to true Christianity
dwells in these authorities, exhibited chiefly by the conspiracy of
silence with which they enshroud any manifestation of it.

NOTE

     "The publication of this book ('The Net of Faith') was ended
     [completed] by the Academy in the last months of the present
     year (1893)."--_Note received by the Publisher from Count
     Tolstoï while this work was going to press._




