CHAPTER XII

CONCLUSION

"REPENT, FOR THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN IS AT HAND!"

1

     Encounter with a train carrying soldiers to establish order
     among famine-stricken peasants--The cause of the disorder--How
     the mandates of the higher authorities are carried out in case
     of peasants' resistance--The affair at Orel as an example of
     violence and murder committed for the purpose of asserting the
     rights of the rich--All the advantages of the rich are founded
     on like acts of violence.

2

     The Tula train and the behavior of the persons composing it--How
     men can behave as these do--The reasons are neither ignorance,
     nor cruelty, nor cowardice, nor lack of comprehension or of
     moral sense--They do these things because they think them
     necessary to maintain the existing system, to support which
     they believe to be every man's duty--On what the belief of the
     necessity and immutability of the existing order of things is
     founded--For the upper classes it is based on the advantages
     it affords them--But what compels men of the lower classes to
     believe in the immutability of this system, when they derive
     no advantage from it, and maintain it with acts contrary to
     their conscience?--The reason lies in the deceit practised by
     the upper classes upon the lower in regard to the necessity
     of the existing order, and the legitimacy of acts of violence
     for its maintenance--General deception--Special deception--The
     conscription.

3

     How men reconcile the legitimacy of murder with the precepts of
     morality, and how they admit the existence in their midst of a
     military organization for purposes of violence which incessantly
     threatens the safety of society--Admitted only by the powers
     for whom the present organization is advantageous--Violence
     sanctioned by the higher authorities and carried out by the
     lower, notwithstanding the knowledge of its immorality, because,
     owing to the organization of the State, the moral responsibility
     is divided among a large number of participants, each of whom
     considers some other than himself responsible--Moreover, the
     loss of consciousness of moral responsibility is also due to a
     mistaken opinion as to the inequality of men, the consequent
     abuse of power by the authorities, and servility of the lower
     classes--The condition of men who commit acts contrary to their
     conscience is like the condition of a hypnotized person acting
     under the influence of suggestion--In what does submission to
     the suggestion of the State differ from submission to men of a
     higher order of consciousness or to public opinion?--The present
     system, which is the outcome of ancient public opinion, and
     which is already in contradiction to the modern, is maintained
     only through torpor of conscience, induced by auto-suggestion
     among the upper classes, and by the hypnotization of the
     lower--The conscience or intelligent consciousness of these
     men may awaken, and there are instances when it does awaken;
     therefore it cannot be said that any one of them will, or will
     not, do what he sets out to do--Everything depends on the degree
     of comprehension of the illegitimacy of the acts of violence,
     and this consciousness in men may either awaken spontaneously or
     be roused by those already awakened.

4

     Everything depends upon the strength of conviction of each
     individual man in regard to Christian truth--But the advanced
     men of the present day consider it unnecessary to explain
     and profess Christian truth, regarding it sufficient for the
     improvement of human life to change its outward conditions
     within the limits allowed by power--Upon this scientific theory
     of hypocrisy, which has taken the place of the hypocrisy of
     religion, men of the wealthy classes base the justification of
     their position--In consequence of this hypocrisy, maintained by
     violence and falsehood, they can pretend before each other to
     be Christians, and rest content--The same hypocrisy allows men
     who preach the Christian doctrine to take part in a _régime_
     of violence--No external improvements of life can make it
     less miserable; its miseries are caused by disunion; disunion
     springs from following falsehood instead of truth--Union
     is possible only in truth--Hypocrisy forbids such a union,
     for while remaining hypocrites, men conceal from themselves
     and others the truth they know--Hypocrisy changes into evil
     everything destined to ameliorate life--It perverts the
     conception of right and wrong, and therefore is a bar to the
     perfection of men--Acknowledged malefactors and criminals do
     less harm than those who live by legalized violence cloaked by
     hypocrisy--All recognize the iniquity of our life, and would
     long since have modified it, if it were not covered by the cloak
     of hypocrisy--But it seems as if we had reached the limits of
     hypocrisy, and have but to make an effort of consciousness in
     order to awaken--like the man who has nightmare--to a different
     reality.

5

     Can man make this effort?--According to the existing
     hypocritical theory, man is not free to change his life--He
     is not free in his acts, but is always free to acknowledge or
     disregard certain truths already known to him--The recognition
     of truth is the cause of action--The cause of the apparent
     insolvability of the question of man's freedom--It lies only
     in the acknowledgment of the truth revealed unto him--No other
     freedom exists--The acknowledgment of the truth gives freedom,
     and points the way in which a man, willingly or unwillingly,
     must walk--The recognition of truth and of true freedom allows
     man to become a participant of the work of God, to be not the
     slave but a creator of life--Men have but to forego the attempt
     to improve the external conditions of life, and direct all their
     energies toward the recognition and profession of the truth
     that is known to them, and the present painful system of life
     will vanish forthwith, and that portion of the Kingdom of God
     which is accessible to men would be established--One has only to
     cease lying and shamming to accomplish this--But what awaits us
     in the future?--What will happen to mankind when they begin to
     obey the dictates of their conscience, and how will they exist
     without the customary conditions of civilization?--Nothing truly
     good and beneficial can perish because of the realization of the
     truth, but will only increase in strength when freed from the
     admixture of falsehood and hypocrisy.

6

     Our system of life has reached the limit of misery, and cannot
     be ameliorated by any pagan reorganization--All our life, with
     its pagan institutions, is devoid of meaning--Are we obeying
     the will of God in maintaining our present privileges and
     obligations?--We are in this position, not because such is
     the law of the universe, that it is inevitable, but because
     we wish it, because it is advantageous for some of us--All
     our consciousness contradicts this, and our deliverance
     consists in acknowledging the Christian truth, not to do to
     one's neighbor that which one would not have done to one's
     self--As our obligations in regard to ourselves should be
     subordinate to our obligations to others, so in like manner our
     obligations to others should be subordinate to our obligations
     to God--Deliverance from our position consists, if not in
     giving up our position and its rights at once, at least in
     acknowledging our guilt, and neither lying nor trying to justify
     ourselves--The true significance of our life consists in knowing
     and professing the truth, whereas our approval of, and our
     activity in, the service of the State takes all meaning from
     life--God demands that we serve Him, that is, that we seek to
     establish the greatest degree of union among all human beings,
     which union is possible only in truth.


I was just putting the finishing touches to this two years' work
when, on the 9th day of September,[23] I had occasion to go by
rail to visit districts in the governments of Tula and Ryazan,
where certain peasants were suffering from last year's famine, and
others were enduring still greater suffering from the same causes
this year.[24] At one of the stations the train in which I was a
passenger met the express, which carried the Governor and troops
supplied with rods and loaded rifles for torturing and murdering the
famine-stricken peasants.

  [23] 1892.--Tr.

  [24] 1893.

Although corporal punishment was legally abolished in Russia
thirty years ago, the custom of flogging as a means of making the
decisions of authority respected has been revived, and has of late
been frequently employed. I had heard of it, had read in the papers
of the frightful tortures of which the Governor of Nijni-Novgorod,
Baranov, has gone so far as to boast, and of the tortures that have
been inflicted in Tchernigov, Tambov, Saratov, Astrakhan, and Orel,
but I had never yet witnessed, as I did now, how these things were
actually done.

And I myself saw well-meaning Russians, penetrated with the spirit
of Christ, but armed with muskets and carrying rods, on their way to
murder and torture their starving brothers.

The pretext was as follows:--

On the estate of a rich landowner, upon a piece of ground held by
him in common with the peasants, a forest had been allowed to grow.
(When I say that the forest "grew," I mean that the peasants had
not only planted it, but had continued to take care of it.) They
had always had the use of it, and therefore looked upon it as their
own, or at least as common property; but the landowner, confiscating
it entirely to himself, began to cut down the trees. The peasants
lodged a complaint. The judge of the lower court pronounced an
illegal decision (I call it illegal on the authority of the
Procureur[25] and the Governor, who surely ought to understand the
case) in favor of the landowner. The higher courts, as well as the
Senate, although they could see that the case had been unfairly
tried, confirmed the decision, and the wood was awarded to the
landowner, who continued to fell the trees. But the peasants,
believing it impossible that such an injustice could be perpetrated
by the higher magistrates, refused to submit to the decision, and
drove away the workmen sent to cut down the trees, saying that the
forest belonged to them, and that they would appeal to the Czar
himself before they would allow it to be touched.

  [25] Attorney-General.

The case was reported to St. Petersburg, from whence the Governor
received the order to enforce the decision of the courts, and in
order to execute the command, asked for troops.

Hence these soldiers who, armed with bayonets and provided with
cartridges and rods expressly prepared for the occasion and stored
in one of the vans, were on their way to enforce the decision of
the higher authorities. The execution of an order from the ruling
powers can be accomplished either by threats of torture and death,
or by the enforcement of those threats, according to the degree of
resistance on the part of the people.

If, for instance, in Russia (it is practically the same in other
lands where state authority and the rights of ownership exist), the
peasants offer to resist, the result is as follows: The superior
officer makes a speech and orders them to obey. The excited crowd,
accustomed to be duped by those in high places, understands not
a word that the representative of authority is saying in his
official, conventional language, and is by no means pacified.
Whereupon the commanding officer declares that unless they submit
and disperse, he will be forced to have recourse to arms. If the
crowd still refuses to yield and does not disperse, he orders his
men to load the muskets and to fire over their heads, and then, if
the peasants still stand their ground, he orders the soldiers to
aim at the crowds; they fire, and men fall wounded and killed in
the street. The crowd is dispersed, the soldiers, carrying out the
orders of their commanders, having laid hands upon those whom they
suppose to be the chief instigators, and arrested them. The dying,
stained with blood, the wounded, mutilated, and dead, among whom
are often women and children, are picked up. The dead are buried,
the wounded sent to the hospitals. Those who are supposed to be the
ringleaders are taken to the city and court-martialed, and if proved
that they have used violence, they are summarily hung. This has
happened in Russia repeatedly, and similar scenes must take place
wherever the system of government is based upon violence. Such is
the course adopted in cases of revolt.

If, on the other hand, the peasants submit, the scene that ensues
is entirely original and peculiarly Russian. The Governor, on his
arrival at the place, either quarters the soldiers in the different
houses of the village, where their maintenance ruins the peasants,
or, satisfied by threatening the people, he graciously pardons
them and departs. Or, as more frequently happens, he addresses the
multitude, upbraids it for disobedience, and announces that the
ringleaders must be punished; he seizes a certain number of men
considered as such, and without any form of trial causes them to be
beaten with rods in his presence.

In order to give an idea of the manner in which such an affair
is conducted, I will describe an instance of the kind which
happened in Orel, which was approved by the higher authorities.
Like the landowner in Tula, the landed proprietor at Orel chose
to take possession of the peasants' property, and here, too, as
in the former instance, the peasants resisted. In this case, the
landowner, without the consent of the peasants, wished to dam up,
for the benefit of his mill, a flow of water which supplied the
meadows. The peasants resisted this.

The landlord lodged a complaint with the rural commissary, who
illegally (as was afterward admitted by the court) decided the case
in favor of the landowner, giving him leave to divert the water. The
landowner sent workmen to close the channel through which the water
descended. The peasants, excited at this unfair judgment, sent their
women to prevent the landowner's men from damming the channel. The
women proceeded to the dam, upset the carts, and drove the workmen
away. The landowner entered a complaint against them for committing
a lawless act. The rural commissary gave the order to arrest and
lock up in the village jail one woman out of every family,--an order
rather difficult to execute, since each family included several
women; and as it was impossible to tell which of them to arrest, the
police could not fulfil the order. The landowner complained to the
Governor of the laxity of the police. The Governor, without stopping
to consider the case, gave strict orders to the _Ispravnik_ to
carry out at once the orders of the rural commissary. In obedience
to his superior the _Ispravnik_ arrived in the village, and with
that contempt for the individual peculiar to Russian authorities,
ordered the police to seize the first women they could. Disputes
and resistance arose. The _Ispravnik_, paying no attention to
this, persisted in his order that the police should take one
woman, innocent or guilty, from every household, and put her under
arrest. The peasants defended their wives and mothers; they refused
to give them up, and resisted the police and the _Ispravnik_.
Thus another and a greater offense was committed,--resistance to
authority,--which was at once reported in town. Then the Governor,
just as I saw the Governor of Tula, with a battalion of soldiers
supplied with rods and muskets, backed by all due accessories of
telegraph and telephone, accompanied by a learned physician who was
to superintend the flogging from a medical standpoint, started
on an express train for the spot, like the modern Genghis Khan
predicted by Herzen. In the _Volostnoye Pravlenie_[26] were the
soldiers, a detachment of police with their revolvers suspended on
red cords, the principal peasants of the neighborhood, and the men
accused. Around them had collected a crowd of perhaps a thousand.

  [26] House of the rural communal government.

Driving up to the house of the _Volostnoye Pravlenie_, the Governor
alighted from his carriage and delivered an address, which had been
prepared in advance, after which he inquired for the criminals, and
ordered a bench to be brought. No one understood what he meant until
the policeman, who always accompanied the Governor and made all the
arrangements for the punishments which had already been enforced
several times in the government of Orel, explained that the bench
was to be used for flogging. This bench and the rods that had been
brought by the party were both produced. The executioners had been
previously selected from certain horse-thieves taken from the same
village, the military having refused to do the business.

When all was ready the Governor bade the first of the twelve men who
were pointed out to him by the landowner as the ringleaders to step
forward. It so happened that he was the father of a family, a man
forty-five years of age, respected in the community, whose rights he
had manfully defended.

He was led to the bench, stripped, and ordered to lie down.

He would have begged for mercy, but realizing how little it
would avail, he made the sign of the cross and stretched himself
out on the bench. Two policemen held him down, and the learned
doctor stood by, ready in case of need to give his scientific
assistance. The executioners having spat upon their hands, swung
the rods, and the flogging began. The bench, it seemed, was too
narrow, and it was found difficult to keep the writhing victim,
whose muscles twitched convulsively, from falling off. Then the
Governor ordered to be brought another bench, to which a plank
was adjusted in such a way as to support it. The soldiers, ever
ready with their continual salutes and responses of "Yes, your
Excellency," swiftly and obediently executed the orders, while in
the meantime the half-naked, pale, and suffering man, trembling,
with contracted brows and downcast eyes, stood by waiting. When the
bench was readjusted, he was again stretched out upon it, and the
horse-stealers renewed their blows. His back, his legs, and even his
sides were covered with bleeding wounds, and every blow was followed
by the muffled groan which he could no longer repress. In the crowd
that stood by one could hear the sobs of the wife and mother, the
children, and the kinsfolk of the man, as well as of all who had
been called to witness the punishment.

The wretched Governor, intoxicated with power, who had no doubt
convinced himself of the necessity for this performance, counted the
strokes on his fingers, while he smoked cigarette after cigarette,
for the lighting of which several obliging persons hastened to offer
him a burning match.

After fifty blows had been given, the peasant lay motionless,
without uttering a sound, and the doctor, who had been educated in
a government school that he might devote his scientific knowledge
to the service of his country and his sovereign, approached the
tortured man, felt his pulse, listened to the beating of his heart,
and reported to the representative of authority that the victim had
become unconscious, and declared that, from a scientific point of
view, it might prove dangerous to prolong the punishment. But the
unfortunate Governor, utterly intoxicated by the sight of blood,
ordered the flogging to go on until seventy strokes had been given,
the number which he for some reason deemed necessary. After the
seventieth blow the Governor said:--

"That will do! Now bring on the next one!"

They raised the mutilated and unconscious man, with his swollen
back, and carried him away, and the next was brought forward. The
sobs and groans of the crowd increased, but the tortures were
continued.

So it went on until each of the twelve men had received seventy
strokes. They begged for mercy, they groaned and screamed. The
sobs and moans of the women grew louder and more heartrending, and
the faces of the men of the crowd more gloomy. But there stood the
troops, and the torture did not cease until it had seemed sufficient
to the unfortunate, half-intoxicated, erring man called the Governor.

Not only did the magistrates, the officers, and the soldiers
sanction this act by their presence, but they took part in it,
preventing the crowd from interfering with the order of its
execution.

When I asked one of the chief officials why these tortures were
inflicted after the men had already submitted, he replied, with
the significant air of a man who understands all the fine points
of political wisdom, that it was done because it had been proved
by experience that if the peasants are not punished they will
soon begin again to oppose the decrees of authority, and that the
punishment of a few strengthens forever the power of authority.

And now I saw the Governor of Tula, with his clerks, officers, and
soldiers, on his way to perform a similar act. Once more by murder
or torture the sentence of the higher authorities was to be carried
out,--a sentence whose object was to enable a young landowner, the
possessor of a yearly income of 100,000 roubles, to receive 3000
more for a tract of wood of which he had basely defrauded a whole
community of needy and starving peasants, the price of which he
would squander in a few weeks in the restaurants of St. Petersburg,
Moscow, and Paris. Such was the errand of the men I met.

It would seem as if there must be some purpose in this encounter,
when, after two years of incessant contemplation, of continuous
thought in one direction, fate should, for the first time in
my life, bring me face to face with this phenomenon, a living
illustration of the theory I have so long cherished; namely, that
the entire organization of our life rests, not on any principle of
justice, as men who occupy and enjoy advantageous positions under
the existing system like to imagine, but on the rudest and most
barefaced violence, on the murder and torture of human beings.

Those who possess large estates and large capital, or who receive
high salaries collected from the needy working-classes, from the
people who often lack the necessaries of life; merchants, clerks,
doctors, lawyers, artists, scientists, writers, coachmen, cooks, and
valets, who earn their living in the service of rich men,--fondly
believe that the privileges which they enjoy are not the outcome
of violence, but the natural result of a voluntary interchange of
services; that these privileges are by no means the result of the
outrages and floggings endured by their fellow-men, such as took
place last summer, in Russia, in Orel and elsewhere, as the like
took place in many parts of Europe and America. They prefer to
believe that the privileges they enjoy are the spontaneous result
of a mutual agreement among men; that violence is only the natural
result of certain universal and superior laws, judicial, political,
or economic. They try not to see that the privileges they possess
are only held by them in consequence of some circumstance, not
unlike that which compelled the peasants, who had tended the growing
forest and greatly needed it, to surrender it to the rich landowner,
who had taken no pains to preserve it, and who did not require
it for his own use; men who will either be flogged or murdered
if they refuse to surrender it. Now, if it is an undeniable fact
that the mill in Orel was made to yield an increased income to the
proprietor, and that the forest raised by the peasants was given to
the landowner only because of the flogging and the executions either
threatened or actually suffered, then it must be equally evident
that all the other exclusive rights of the rich, which deprive the
poor of the bare necessaries of life, rest on the same basis.

If the peasants who need land in order to support their families
may not cultivate the land around them, and if land sufficient to
feed a thousand families is in the hands of one man, a Russian, an
Englishman, an Austrian, a rich landowner of whatever nationality;
and if the merchant who buys grain from the needy grower keeps
it in his warehouses in the midst of a destitute and famishing
population, or sells it for three times its value to those of whom
he bought it at the lowest price,--it evidently springs from the
same cause.

And if, beyond a certain line called the frontier, one man is not
allowed to purchase certain goods without paying duties to other
men who have nothing to do with their production, and if a man is
obliged to part with his last cow in order to pay taxes which are
distributed by the government among its officials, or used for
the support of soldiers who may kill the taxpayers, it would seem
evident that all this is not the result of certain abstract rights,
but of incidents like those which may even now be going on in the
government of Tula, which in one form or another occur periodically
all the world over, wherever state organization exists, and wherever
there are rich and poor.

Owing to the fact that outrage and murder do not accompany all
social relations founded on violence, those who possess the
exclusive privileges of the governing classes assure themselves and
others that the advantages which they enjoy are not the result of
violence and bloodshed, but derived from certain vague and abstract
rights. Still it ought to be evident that if those men, who realize
the injustice of it all (as is the case with the working-classes at
the present day), continue to surrender the greater part of their
earnings to the capitalist and the landowner, and if they pay taxes,
knowing that such taxes are not put to a good use, they do this, not
because they acknowledge the justice of certain abstract rights,
whose meaning is unknown to them, but only because they know that
they will be whipped and put to death if they refuse to comply.

If it is not always necessary to imprison men, to flog them, or to
put them to death when the landowner collects his rents, if the
needy peasant pays a treble price to the merchant who deceives him,
or the mechanic accepts wages absurdly small in comparison with the
income of his master, or the poor man parts with his last rouble
for duties and taxes, it is because he remembers that men have been
flogged and put to death for trying to avoid compliance with what
was demanded of them. Like a caged tiger, who does not touch the
meat that lies before his eyes, and who when he is ordered to leap
over a stick obeys at once, not because he likes it, but because
he has not forgotten past hunger or the red-hot iron which he felt
every time he refused to obey; so it is with men, who, when they
submit to a law which is not for their advantage, to a law which is
disastrous to their interests, or to one which they firmly believe
to be unjust, do so because they remember what they will have to
suffer if they refuse to comply.

Those who benefit by privileges born of violence long since
perpetrated, often forget, and are very glad to forget, how such
privileges were obtained. And yet one has but to recall the annals
of history,--not the history of the exploits of kings, but genuine
history,--the history of the oppression of the majority by the
minority, in order to acknowledge that the scourge, the prison, and
the gallows have been the original and only sources whence all the
advantages of the rich over the poor have sprung. One has but to
remember the persistent and undying passion for gain among men, the
mainspring of human action in these days, to become convinced that
the advantages of the rich over the poor can be maintained in no
other way.

At rare intervals, oppression, flogging, imprisonment, executions,
the direct object of which is not to promote the welfare of the
rich, may possibly occur, but we can positively declare that in
our community, where for every man who lives at ease there are
ten overworked, hungry, and often cruelly suffering families of
working-men, all the privileges of the rich, all their luxury, all
their superfluities, are acquired and maintained only by tortures,
imprisonments, and executions.

The train that I met on the 9th day of September carrying soldiers,
muskets, ammunition, and rods to the famine-stricken peasants, in
order that the wealthy landowner might possess in peace the tract of
wood he had wrested from the peasants, a necessity of life to them,
to him a mere superfluity, affords a vivid proof of the degree to
which men have unconsciously acquired the habit of committing acts
wholly at variance with their convictions and their conscience.

The express consisted of one first-class carriage for the Governor,
officials, and officers, and several vans crowded with soldiers.
The jaunty young fellows in their fresh new uniforms were crowded
together, either standing, or sitting with their legs dangling
outside the wide open sliding doors of the vans. Some were smoking,
laughing, and jesting, some cracking seeds and spitting out the
shells. A few who jumped down upon the platform to get a drink of
water from the tub, meeting some of the officers, slackened their
pace and made that senseless gesture of lifting one hand to the
forehead; then, with serious faces, as though they had been doing
something not only sensible but actually important, they passed by,
watching the officers as they went. Soon they broke into a run,
evidently in high spirits, stamping on the planks of the platform as
they ran, and chatting, as is but natural for good-natured, healthy
young fellows who are making a journey together. These men, who were
on their way to murder starving fathers and grandfathers, seemed as
unconcerned as though they were off on the pleasantest, or at least
the most everyday, business in the world.

The gaily dressed officers and officials who were scattered about
on the platform and in the first-class waiting-room produced the
same impression. At a table laden with bottles sat the Governor, the
commander of the expedition, attired in his semi-military uniform,
eating his luncheon and quietly discussing the weather with some
friends he had met, as though the business that called him hither
was so simple a matter that it could neither ruffle his equanimity
nor diminish his interest in the change of the weather.

At some distance, but tasting no food, sat the chief of the police
with a mournful countenance, seemingly oppressed with the tiresome
formalities. Officers in gaudy, gold-embroidered uniforms moved
to and fro, talking loudly; one group was seated at a table just
finishing a bottle of wine; an officer at the bar who had eaten a
cake brushed away the crumbs that had fallen on his uniform, and
with a self-sufficient air flung a coin upon the counter; some
walked nonchalantly up and down in front of our train looking at the
faces of the women.

All these men on their way to commit murder, or to torture the
starved and defenseless peasants, by whose toil they were supported,
looked as if engaged upon some important business which they were
really proud to execute.

What did it mean?

These men, who were within half an hour's ride of the spot where,
in order to procure for a rich man an extra 3000 roubles, of which
he had no need whatever, which he was unjustly confiscating from
a community of famished peasants, might be obliged to perform the
most shocking deeds that the imagination can conceive,--to murder
and torture, as they did in Orel, innocent men, their brothers.
These men were now calmly approaching the time and place when these
horrors were to begin.

Since the preparations had been made, it could not very well be
claimed that all these men, officers and privates, did not know what
was before them, and what they were expected to do. The Governor had
given orders for the rods, the officials had purchased the birch
twigs, bargained for them, and noted the purchase in their accounts.
In the military department orders had been given and received
concerning ball cartridges. They all knew that they were on their
way to torture and possibly to put to death their brothers exhausted
by famine, and that perhaps in an hour they might begin the work.

To say, as they themselves would say, that they are acting from
principle, from a conviction that the state system must be
maintained, is untrue. Those men, in the first place, have rarely,
if ever, bestowed a single thought upon political science; and
in the second place, because they could never be convinced that
the business on which they are engaged serves to support rather
than destroy the State; and finally, because, as a matter of fact,
the majority of these men, if not all of them, would not only be
unwilling to sacrifice their peace and comfort to maintain the
State, but would never miss the opportunity to promote their own
interests at the expense of the State,--therefore it is not for the
sake of so vague a principle as that of maintaining the State that
they do this.

What, then, does all this mean?

I know these men. I may not know them as individuals, it is
true, yet I know their dispositions, their past lives, their
modes of thought. They have had mothers, some have wives and
children. Actually, they are, for the most part, kindly, gentle,
tender-hearted men, who abhor any kind of cruelty, to say nothing
of killing or torturing; moreover, every one of them professes
Christianity, and considers violence perpetrated against
the defenseless a contemptible and shameful act. Each taken
individually, in everyday life, is not only incapable, for the sake
of personal advantage, of doing one-hundredth part of what was
done by the Governor at Orel, but any one of them would consider
himself insulted if it were suggested that he could be capable of
doing anything like it in private life. And yet they are within
a half-hour's ride of the spot where they will inevitably find
themselves compelled to do such deeds.

What can it mean, then?

It is not only the men on this train who are ready to commit murder
and violence, but those others with whom the affair originated,
the landowner, the steward, the judge, those in St. Petersburg who
issue orders,--the Minister of State, the Czar, also worthy men and
professors of Christianity,--how can they, knowing the consequences,
conceive such a scheme, and direct its execution?

How can they, even, who take no active part in it,--the spectators,
whose indignation would be aroused by accounts of private violence,
even though it be but the ill-usage of a horse,--how can they allow
this shocking business to go on without rising in wrath to resist
it, crying aloud, "No, we will not allow you to flog or to kill
starving men because they refuse to surrender their last property
villainously attempted to be wrested from them!" And not only are
men found willing to do these deeds, but most of them, even the
chief instigators, like the steward, the landowner, the judge, and
those who take part in originating prosecution and punishment, the
Governor, the Minister of State, the Czar, remain perfectly calm,
and show no sign of remorse over such things. And they who are about
to execute this crime are equally calm.

Even the spectators, who, it would seem, have no personal interest
in the matter, look upon these men who are about to take part in
this dastardly business with sympathy rather than with aversion or
condemnation.

In the same compartment with me sat a merchant who dealt in timber,
a peasant by birth, who in loud and decided tones expressed his
approval of the outrage which the peasants were about to suffer.
"The government must be obeyed; that's what it's for. If we pepper
them well, they will never rebel again. It's no more than they
deserve!" he said.

What did it all mean?

It could not be said that all these men, the instigators, the
participants, the accomplices in this business, were rascals, who,
in defiance of conscience, realizing the utter abomination of the
act, were, either from mercenary motives or from fear of punishment,
determined to commit it. Any man of them would, given the requisite
circumstances, stand up for his convictions. Not one of those
officials would steal a purse, or read another man's letter, or
endure an insult without demanding satisfaction from the offender.
Not one of those officers would cheat at cards, or neglect to pay a
gambling debt, or betray a companion, or flee from the battlefield,
or abandon a flag. Not one of those soldiers would dare to reject
the sacrament, or even taste meat on Good Friday. Each of these men
would choose to endure any kind of privation, suffering, or danger,
rather than consent to do a deed which he considered wrong. Hence
it is evident that they are able to resist whatever is contrary to
their convictions.

Still less true would it be to pronounce these men brutes, to whom
such deeds are congenial rather than repulsive. One needs but to
talk with them to become convinced that all,--landowner, judge,
minister, governor, Czar, officers, and soldiers,--at the bottom of
their hearts not only disapprove of such deeds, but when a sense
of their true significance is borne in upon them, really suffer at
being forced to take part in these scenes. They can only try not to
think of them.

One needs but to speak to those who are actors in this business,
beginning with the landowner and ending with the lowest policeman
or soldier, to discover that at the bottom of their hearts they all
acknowledge the wickedness of the deed, and know that it would be
better to abstain from it; and this knowledge makes them suffer.

A lady of liberal views in our train, seeing the Governor and the
officers in the first-class waiting-room, and learning the object of
their journey, began to talk in an ostensibly loud tone, in order
that they might hear what she said, condemning the present laws and
crying shame upon the men who took part in this business. This made
everybody feel uncomfortable. The men knew not where to look, yet
no one ventured to argue the point. The passengers pretended that
remarks so senseless deserved no reply, but it was evident by the
expression of their faces and their wandering eyes that they felt
ashamed. I noticed the same in regard to the soldiers. They knew
well enough that they were going about an evil business, and they
preferred not to think of what was before them. When the timber
merchant, insincerely, in my opinion, and simply by way of showing
his superior knowledge, began to speak of the necessity of these
measures, the soldiers who heard him turned away frowning, and
pretended not to listen to him.

The landowner, his steward, the minister, the Czar, all who are
parties to this business, those who were traveling by this train,
even those who, taking no part in the affair, were but lookers-on,
all really know it to be wicked. Why, then, do they do these things,
why do they repeat them, why do they permit them to be?

Ask the landowner who started the affair; the judge who rendered a
decision legal in form, but absolutely unjust; and those who, like
the soldiers and the peasants, will, with their own hands, execute
this work of beating and murdering their brothers,--all of them,
instigators, administrators, and executioners, will make essentially
the same reply.

The officials will say that the present system requires to be
supported in this manner, and it is for this reason that they do
these things, because the good of the country, the welfare of
mankind in general, of social life and civilization, demand it.

The soldiers, men of the lower classes, who are forced to execute
this violence with their own hands, will answer that the higher
authorities, who are supposed to know their business, have commanded
it, and that it is for them to obey. It never occurs to them to
question the capacity of those who represent the higher authorities.
If the possibility of error is ever admitted, it is only in the case
of some subordinate authority; the higher power whence all things
emanate is supposed to be absolutely infallible.

Thus, while attributing their actions to various motives, both
principals and subordinates agree that the existing order is the one
best suited to the present time, and that it is the sacred duty of
every man to maintain it.

This assurance of the necessity and immutability of the existing
order is continually advanced by all participators in violence
committed by the State, and that, as the existing order never can be
changed, the refusal of a single individual to perform the duties
imposed on him will make no difference as far as the fundamental
principle is concerned, and will only result in the substitution of
another who may be more cruel and do more harm.

This belief that the existing order is immutable, and that it is
the sacred duty of every man to lend it support, encourages every
man of good moral character to take part, with a conscience more or
less clear, in such affairs as that which occurred in Orel, and the
one in which those in the train for Tula were going to take part.

On what, then, is this belief founded?

It is but natural that it should seem pleasant and desirable to a
landowner to believe that the existing order is indispensable and
immutable, because it secures to him the income from his hundreds
and thousands of _dessiatins_ by which his idle and luxurious
existence is maintained.

It is also natural that the judge should willingly admit the
necessity of a system through which he receives fifty times more
than the most hard-working laboring man. And the same may be said
in regard to the other higher functionaries. It is only while the
present system endures that he, as governor, procureur, senator,
or member of the council, can receive his salary of several
thousands, without which he and his family would certainly perish;
for outside the place which he fills, more or less well according
to his abilities and diligence, he could command only a fraction of
what he receives. The ministers, the head of the State, and every
person in high authority are all alike in this, save that the higher
their rank, the more exclusive their position, the more important
it becomes that they should believe no order possible, except that
which now exists; for were it overthrown, not only would they find
it impossible to gain similar positions, but they would fall lower
in the scale than other men. The man who voluntarily hires himself
out as a policeman for ten roubles a month, a sum which he could
easily earn in any other position, has but little interest in the
preservation of the existing system, and therefore may or may not
believe in its immutability.

But the king or emperor, who receives his millions, who knows that
around him there are thousands of men envious to take his place, who
knows that from no other quarter could he draw such an income or
receive such homage, that, if overthrown, he might be judged for
abuse of power,--there is neither king nor emperor who can help
believing in the immutability and sanctity of the existing order.
The higher the position in which a man is placed, the more unstable
it is; and the more perilous and frightful the possible downfall,
the more firmly will he believe in the immutability of the existing
order; and he is able to do wicked and cruel deeds with a perfectly
peaceful conscience, because he persuades himself that they are
done, not for his own benefit, but for the support of the existing
order.

And so it is with every individual in authority, from obscure
policemen to the man who occupies the most exalted rank,--the
positions they occupy being more advantageous than those which they
might be capable of filling if the present system did not exist. All
these men believe more or less in its immutability, because it is
advantageous to them.

But what influences the peasants, the soldiers, who stand on
the lowest rung of the ladder and who derive no advantage from
the existing system, who are in the most enslaved and degraded
condition; what induces them to believe that the existing order,
which serves to keep them in this inferior position, is the best,
and one which should be maintained; and why are they willing,
in order to promote this end, to violate their consciences by
committing wicked deeds?

What urges them to the false conclusion that the existing order is
immutable and ought therefore to be maintained, when the fact is
that its immutability is due only to their own effort to maintain it?

Why do those men, taken from the plow, whom we see masquerading in
ugly, objectionable uniforms, with blue collars and gold buttons, go
about armed with muskets and sabers to kill their famishing fathers
and brothers? They derive no advantage from their present position;
they would be no losers were they deprived of it, since it is worse
than the one from which they were taken.

Those in authority belonging to the higher classes, the landowners
and merchants, the judges, senators, governors, ministers, and
kings, the officials in general, participate in such actions and
maintain the present system, because such a system is for their
interest. Often enough they are kind-hearted and gentle men. They
play no personal part in these acts; all they do is to institute
inquiries, pronounce judgments, and issue commands. Those in
authority do not themselves execute the deeds which they have
devised and ordered. They but rarely see in what manner these
dreadful deeds are executed. But the unfortunate members of the
lower classes, who receive no benefit from the existing system, who,
on the other hand, find themselves greatly despised because of the
duties which they perform in order that a system which is opposed to
their own interests may be maintained,--they who tear men from the
bosom of their families to send them to the galleys, who bind and
imprison them, who stand on guard over them, who shoot them, why do
they do this? What is it that compels these men to believe that the
existing order is immutable, and that it is their duty to maintain
it? Violence exists only because there are those who with their
own hands maltreat, bind, imprison, and murder. If there were no
policemen, or soldiers, or armed men of any sort ready when bidden
to use violence and to put men to death, not one of those who sign
death-warrants, or sentence for imprisonment for life or hard labor
in the galleys, would ever have sufficient courage himself to hang,
imprison, or torture one thousandth part of those whom now, sitting
in their studies, these men calmly order to be hung or tortured,
because they do not see it done, they do not do it themselves. Their
servants do it for them in some far-away corner.

All these deeds of injustice and cruelty have become an integral
part of the existing system of life, only because there are men ever
ready to execute them. If there were no such men, the multitude of
human beings who are now the victims of violence would be spared,
and furthermore, the magistrates would never dare to issue, nor even
dream of issuing, those commands which they now send forth with
such assurance. If there were no men to obey the will of others
and to execute commands to torture and murder, no one would ever
dare to defend the declaration so confidently made by landowners
and men of leisure; namely, that the land lying on all sides of
the unfortunate peasants, who are perishing for the want of it, is
the property of the man who does not till it, and that reserves
of grain, fraudulently obtained, are to be held intact amidst a
famine-stricken and dying population, because the merchant must
have his profit. If there were no men ready at the bidding of the
authorities to torture and murder, the landowner would never dream
of seizing a forest which had been tended by the peasants; nor would
officials consider themselves entitled to salaries paid to them from
money wrung from the famished people whom they oppress, or which
they derive for the prosecution, imprisonment, and exile of men who
denounce falsehood and preach the truth.

All this is done because those in authority well know that they have
always at hand submissive agents ready to obey their commands to
outrage and to murder.

It is to this crowd of submissive slaves, ready to obey all orders,
that we owe the deeds of the whole series of tyrants, from Napoleon
to the obscure captain who bids his men fire upon the people. It is
through the agency of policemen and soldiers (especially the latter,
since the former can act only when supported by military force)
that these deeds of violence are committed. What, then, has induced
those who are by no means benefited by doing with their hands
these dreadful deeds,--what is it that has led these kindly men
into an error so gross that they actually believe that the present
system, which is so distressing, so baleful, so fatal, is the one
best suited to the times? Who has led them into this extraordinary
aberration?

They can never have persuaded themselves that a course which is not
only painful and opposed to their interests, but which is fatal
to their class, which forms nine-tenths of the entire population,
one which, too, is opposed to their conscience, is right. "What
reason can you give for killing men, when God's commandment says,
'Thou shalt not kill'?" is a question I have often put to different
soldiers. And it always embarrassed them to have a question put
which recalled what they would rather not remember.

They knew that the divine law forbade murder,--_thou shalt not
kill_,--and they had always known of this compulsory military duty,
but had never thought of one as contradictory to the other. The
hesitating replies to my question were usually to the effect that
the act of killing a man in war and the execution of criminals by
order of the government were not included in the general prohibition
against murder. But when I rejoined that no such limitation existed
in the law of God, and cited the Christian doctrine of brotherhood,
the forgiveness of injuries, the injunction to love one's neighbor,
all of which precepts are quite contrary to murder, the men of the
lower class would usually agree with me and ask, "How then can it be
that the government (which they believe cannot err) sends troops to
war and orders the execution of criminals?" When I replied that this
was a mistake on the part of the government, my interlocutors became
still more uncomfortable, and either dropped the conversation or
showed annoyance.

"Probably there is a law for it. I should think the bishops know
more than you do," a Russian soldier once said to me. And he
evidently felt relieved, confident that his superiors had found a
law, one that had authorized his ancestors and their successors,
millions of men like himself, to serve the State, and that the
question I had asked is in the nature of a conundrum.

Every man in Christendom has undoubtedly been taught by tradition,
by revelation, and by the voice of conscience, which can never be
gainsaid, that murder is one of the most heinous crimes men can
commit; it is thus affirmed in the gospel, and they know that this
sin of murder is not altered by conditions--that is to say, if it
is sinful to kill one man, it is sinful to kill another. Any man
knows that, if murder be a sin, it is not changed by the character
or position of the man against whom it is committed, which is the
case also with adultery, theft, and all other sins, and yet men are
accustomed from childhood to see murder, not only acknowledged, but
blessed by those whom they are taught to regard as their spiritual
directors appointed by Christ, and to know that their temporal
leaders, with calm assurance, countenance the custom of murder, and
summon all men, in the name of the law and even the name of God, to
its participation. Men perceive the existence of an inconsistency,
but finding themselves unable to discern its cause, they naturally
attribute the idea to their own ignorance. The obviousness and
crudity of the contradiction confirms them in this belief. They
cannot imagine that their superiors and teachers, even the
scientists, could advocate with so much assurance two principles so
utterly at variance as the command to follow the law of Christ, and
the requirement to commit murder. No pure-minded, innocent child, no
youth, could imagine that men who stand so high in his esteem, whom
he looks upon with such reverence, could for any purpose deceive him
so unscrupulously.

And yet it is this very deception which is constantly practised. In
the first place, to all working-men, who have personally no time to
analyze moral and religious problems, it is taught from childhood,
by example and precept, that tortures and murders are compatible
with Christianity, and in certain cases they should not only be
permitted, but must be employed; in the second place, to certain
among them, engaged in the army either through conscription or
voluntarily, it is conveyed that the accomplishment with their own
hands of torture or homicide is not only their sacred duty, but a
glorious exploit, meriting praise and recompense.

This universal deception is propagated by all catechisms or their
substitutes, those books which at the present time teachers are
compelled to use in the instruction of the young. It is taught that
violence,--outrage, imprisonment, execution,--the murder that takes
place in civil or in foreign war, has for its object the maintenance
and security of the political organization,--whether this be an
absolute or a constitutional monarchy, consulate, republic, or
commune,--that it is perfectly legitimate, and that it is in
contradiction neither to morality nor Christianity.

And men are so firmly convinced of this that they grow up, live, and
die in the belief, never for a moment doubting it.

So much for this universal deception. And now for another, which is
special, and practised upon soldiers and police, the instruments by
whose agency outrages and murders, necessary for the support and
maintenance of the existing order, are accomplished.

The military rules and regulations of every country are practically
the same as those formulated in the Russian military code.

"87. To fulfil exactly, and without comment, the orders of the
superior officers, means--to execute orders with precision, without
considering whether they are good or bad, or whether their execution
be possible. Only the superior is responsible for the consequences
of his order.

"88. The only occasion on which the inferior should not obey the
order of his superior is when he sees plainly that in obeying it
..." (Here one naturally thinks it will surely go on to say when
he plainly sees that in fulfilling the order of his superior he
violates the law of God. Not at all; it goes on to say:) "_sees
plainly that he violates the oath of allegiance and duty to his
sovereign_."

It is stated in the code that a man, in becoming a soldier, can and
must execute _all_ the orders, without exception, which he receives
from his superior; orders which, for a soldier, are for the most
part connected with murder. He may violate every law, human and
divine, as long as he does not violate his oath of allegiance to him
who, at a given time, happens to be in power.

Thus it stands in the Russian military code, and this is the
substance of the military codes of other nations. It could not be
otherwise. The foundations of the power of the State rest upon the
delusion by means of which men are set free from their obligations
to God and to their own consciences, and bound to obey the will of a
casual superior.

This is the basis of the appalling conviction that prevails among
the lower classes, that the existing system, so ruinous to them, is
necessary and justifiable, and that it must be maintained by outrage
and murder.

This is inevitable. In order to force the lower, the more numerous
classes to act as their own oppressors and tormentors, to commit
deeds contrary to their consciences, it is necessary to deceive them.

And this is done.

Not long since I saw again put into practice this shameful
deception, and again wondered to see it effected without opposition
and so audaciously.

In the beginning of November, on my way through Tula, I saw at the
gates of the _Zemskaya Uprava_ the familiar dense crowd of men and
women, from which issued the sounds of drunken voices, blended with
the heartrending sobs of the wives and mothers.

The military conscription was in progress.

As usual, I could not pass by without pausing; the sight attracts me
as by fascination.

Again I mingled with the crowd, and stood looking on, questioning,
and marveling at the facility with which this most terrible of all
offenses is committed in broad daylight, and in the midst of a large
city.

On the first day of November, in every village in Russia, with its
population of one hundred millions, the _starostas_,[27] according
to custom, take the men whose names are entered on the rolls,
frequently their own sons, and carry them to town.

  [27] Elders.

On the way the men drink freely, unchecked by the elder men; they
realize that entering upon this insane business of leaving their
wives and mothers, giving up everything that is sacred to them, only
to become the senseless tools of murder, is too painful if one's
senses are not stupefied with wine.

And thus they journey on, carousing, brawling, singing, and
fighting. The night is spent in a tavern, and on this morning,
having drunk still more, they assemble before the house of the
_Uprava_.

Some in new sheepskin coats, with knit mufflers wound round their
necks, some with their eyes swollen with drinking, some noisy and
boisterous, by way of stimulating their courage, others silent and
woebegone, they were gathered near the gates, surrounded by their
wives and mothers with tear-stained faces, awaiting their turn (I
happened to be there on the day when the recruits were received,
that is to say, the day on which they were examined), while others
were crowding the entry of the office.

Meanwhile they are hurrying on the work within. A door opens and
the guard calls for Piotr Sidorov. Piotr Sidorov makes the sign of
the cross, looks around with a startled gaze, and opening a glass
door, he enters the small room where the recruits take off their
clothes. The man before him, his friend, who has just been enrolled,
has but this moment stepped out of the office stark naked, and
with chattering teeth hastens to put on his clothes. Piotr Sidorov
has heard, and can plainly see by the look on his face, that the
man has been enlisted. He longs to question him, but he is ordered
to undress as quickly as possible. He pulls off his sheepskin
coat, drops his waistcoat and his shirt, and with prominent ribs,
trembling and reeking with the odors of liquor, tobacco, and sweat,
steps barefooted into the office, wondering what he shall do with
his large sinewy hands.

A portrait of the Emperor in uniform, with a ribbon across his
breast, in a large golden frame, hangs in a conspicuous place, while
a small ikon of Christ, clad in a loose garment, with the crown of
thorns on his head, hangs in one corner. In the middle of the room
is a table covered with a green cloth on which papers are lying,
and on which stands a small three-cornered object surmounted by
an eagle and called the mirror of justice. Around the table the
officials sit tranquilly. One smokes, another turns over the papers.
As soon as Sidorov enters a guard comes up and measures him. His
chin is raised and his feet are adjusted. Then a man who is smoking
a cigarette--the doctor--approaches him, and without glancing at
his face, but gazing in another direction, touches his body with an
expression of disgust, measures him, orders the guard to open his
mouth, tells him to breathe, and then proceeds to dictate to another
man who takes down the minutes. Finally, and still without even one
glance at his face, the doctor says: "He will do! The next!" and
with a wearied air he seats himself at the table. Once more the
guard hustles him about, bidding him to make haste. Somehow or other
he pulls on his shirt, fumbling for the sleeves, hastily gets on his
trousers, wraps his feet in the rags he uses for stockings, pulls on
his boots, hunts for his muffler and cap, tucks his sheepskin coat
under his arm, and is escorted to that part of the hall which is
fenced off by a bench, where the recruits who have been admitted are
placed. A young countryman like himself, but from another, far-away
government, who is a soldier already, with a musket to which a
bayonet is attached, guards him, ready to run him through the body
if he should attempt to escape.

Meanwhile the crowd of fathers, mothers, and wives, hustled by
policemen, presses around the gates, trying to find out who has been
taken and who rejected. A man who has been rejected comes out and
tells them that Piotr has been admitted; then is heard the cry of
Piotr's young wife, for whom this word means a four or five years'
separation, and the dissolute life such as a soldier's wife in
domestic service is.

But here comes a man with flowing hair and dressed differently from
the others, who has just arrived; he descends from his droschky and
goes toward the house of the _Zemskaya Uprava_, while the policemen
clear a way for him through the crowd.

"The Father has arrived to swear them in." And this "Father,"
who has always been accustomed to believe himself a special and
privileged servant of Christ, and who is usually quite unconscious
of his false position, enters the room where the recruits who have
been admitted are waiting for him; he puts on, as a vestment, a sort
of brocade curtain, disengages from it his flowing hair, opens the
Bible wherein an oath is forbidden, lifts the cross, that cross on
which Christ was crucified for refusing to do what this person, his
supposed servant, commands men to do, and all these defenseless and
deluded young men repeat after him the lie so familiar to his lips,
which he utters with such assurance. He reads while they repeat:
"I promise and swear to the Lord Almighty, upon His holy Bible,"
etc. ... to defend (that is, to murder all those whom I shall be
ordered to murder) and to do whatever those men, strangers to me,
who regard me only as a necessary tool to be used in perpetrating
the outrages by which they oppress my brethren and preserve their
own positions, command me to do. All the recruits having stupidly
repeated the words, the so-called Father departs, quite sure that
he has performed his duty in the most accurate and conscientious
manner, while the young men deluded by him really believe that by
the absurd, and to them almost unintelligible, words which they have
just uttered, they are released during their term of service from
all obligations to their fellow-men, and are bound by new and more
imperative ties to the duties of a soldier.

And this is done publicly, but not a man comes forward to say to the
deceived and the deceivers, "Come to your senses and go your way;
this is all a base and treacherous lie; it imperils not only your
bodies, but your souls."

No one does this. On the contrary, as if in derision, after they
have all been enrolled and are about to depart, the colonel enters
the hall where these poor, drunken, and deluded creatures are locked
in, and with a solemn air, calls out to them in military fashion:
"Good day, men! I congratulate you upon entering _the Czar's
service_." And they, poor fellows, mumble in their semi-drunken way,
a reply which has already been taught them, to the effect that it
fills their hearts with joy.

The expectant crowd of fathers, mothers, and wives is still standing
at the gates. Women, with tear-worn, wide-open eyes, watch the door.
Suddenly it opens and the men come rolling out, assuming an air of
bravado, the Petruhas, Vanuhas, and Makars, now enrolled, trying
to avoid the eyes of their relatives, pretending not to see them.
At once break out the sobs and cries of the wives and mothers.
Some of the men clasp them in their arms, weeping, some put on a
devil-may-care look, others make an attempt to console them. The
wives, the mothers, realizing that they are now abandoned, without
support, for three or four years, cry and wail bitterly. The fathers
say little; they only sigh and make a clicking sound with their
tongues that indicates their grief; they know that they are about
to lose that help which they have reared and trained their sons to
render; that when their sons return they will no longer be sober and
industrious laborers, but soldiers, weaned from their former life of
simplicity, grown dissolute, and vain of their uniforms.

Now the whole crowd has departed, driving down the street in
sleighs to the taverns and inns, and louder grows the chorus of
mingled sobs, songs, and drunken cries, the moaning and muttering
of the wives and mothers, the sounds of the accordion, the noise of
altercations.

All repair to the eating-houses and taverns, from the traffic of
which part of the revenue of the government is derived, and there
they give themselves up to drink, stupefying their senses so that
they care nothing for the injustice done to them.

Then they spend several weeks at home, drinking nearly all the time.

When the day arrives, they are driven like cattle to the appointed
place, where they are drilled in military exercises by those who a
few years ago, like themselves, were deceived and brutalized. During
the instructions the means employed are lying, blows, and _vodka_.
And before the year is over the good, kindly, and intelligent
fellows will have become as brutal as their teachers.

"Suppose your father were arrested and attempted escape," I once
suggested to a young soldier, "what would you do?"

"It would be my duty to thrust my bayonet through his body," he
replied, in the peculiar, meaningless monotone of the soldier. "And
if he ran I should shoot," he added, taking pride apparently in
thinking what he should do if his father attempted to run.

When a good young fellow is reduced to a condition lower than
that of the brute, he is ready for those who wish to use him as
an instrument of violence. He is ready. The man is lost, and a
new instrument of violence has been created. And all this goes on
throughout Russia in the autumn of every year, in broad daylight, in
the heart of a great city, witnessed by all the inhabitants, and the
stratagem is so skilfully managed, that though men at the bottom of
their hearts realize its infamy, still they have not the power to
throw off the yoke.

After our eyes are once opened, and we view this frightful delusion
in its true light, it is astonishing that preachers of Christianity
and morality, teachers of youth, or even those kindly and sensible
parents who are to be found in every community, can advocate
any principles of morality whatever in the midst of a society
where torture and murder are openly recognized as constituting
indispensable conditions in human life,--openly acknowledged by all
churches and governments,--where certain men among us must be always
ready to murder their brethren, and where any of us may have to do
the same.

Not to speak of Christian doctrine, how are children, how are
youths, how are any to be taught morality, while the principle that
murder is required in order to maintain the general welfare is
taught; when men are made to believe that murder is lawful, that
some men, and any of us may be among them, must kill and torture
their neighbors, and commit every kind of crime at the command of
those in authority? If this principle is right, then there is not,
nor can there be, any doctrine of morality; might is right, and
there is no other law. This principle, which some seek to justify
on the hypothesis of the struggle for existence, in fact dominates
society.

What kind of moral doctrine can that be which permits murder for any
object whatsoever? It is as impossible as a mathematical problem
which would affirm that 2 = 3. It may be admitted that 2 = 3 looks
like mathematics, but it is not mathematics at all. Every code of
morals must be founded first of all upon the acknowledgment that
human life is to be held sacred.

The doctrine of an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, and a life
for a life, has been revoked by Christianity because that doctrine
was but the justification of immorality, a semblance of justice, but
without meaning. Life is a substance which can neither be weighed,
measured, nor compared; hence the taking of one life for another has
no sense. Moreover, the aim of every social law is amelioration of
human life. How, then, can the destruction of certain lives improve
the condition of other lives? The destruction of life is not an act
that tends to improve it; it is suicide.

To destroy human life, and call it justice, may be likened to the
act of a man who, having lost one arm, cuts off the other, by way of
making matters even.

Not to speak of the deceit of presenting the most shocking crimes in
the light of a duty, of the shocking abuse of using Christ's name
and authority in order to confirm acts which he condemned, how can
men, looking at the matter from the standpoint merely of personal
safety, suffer the existence of the shocking, senseless, cruel, and
dangerous force which every organized government, supported by the
army, represents?

The most violent and rapacious band of robbers is less to be
feared than such an organization. Even the authority of the leader
of a band of robbers is more or less limited by the will of each
individual member of the band, who, retaining a certain degree of
independence, has the right to oppose acts with which he does not
agree. But the authority of men who form part of an organized
government, maintained by the army with its present system of
discipline, is unlimited. When their master, be he Boulanger,
Pugatchov, or Napoleon, issues his commands, there is no crime too
hideous for those who form part of the government and the army to
commit.

It must often occur to one who sees conscriptions, drills, and
military manœuvers taking place, who sees police going about with
loaded revolvers, sentinels armed with bayonets,--to one who hears
from morning till night, as I do (in the district of Hamovniky,[28]
where I live), the whirring balls and the concussion as they
strike the target,--to ask why these things are tolerated. And
when one sees in the same city, where every attempt at violence is
at once suppressed, where even the sale of powder or medicines is
prohibited, where a doctor is not allowed to practice without a
diploma, thousands of disciplined men, controlled by one individual,
being trained for murder, one cannot help asking how men who have
any regard for their own safety can calmly endure such a condition
of affairs, and allow it to continue? Leaving aside the question
of the immorality and pernicious influence of it, what could be
more dangerous? What are they thinking of,--I speak not now of
Christians, Christian pastors, philanthropists, or moralists, but
simply those who value their lives, their safety, their welfare?
Granting that power is at present in the hands of a moderate
ruler, it may fall to-morrow into those of a Biron, an Elizabeth,
a Catharine, a Pugatchov, a Napoleon. And even though the ruler be
moderate to-day, he may become a mere savage to-morrow; he may be
succeeded by an insane or half-insane heir, like the King of Bavaria
or the Emperor Paul.

  [28] In Moscow.

It is not only those who fill the highest offices, but all the
lesser authorities scattered over the land--the chiefs of police,
the commanders of companies, even the _stanovoys_[29]--may commit
shocking crimes before they can be dismissed; it is an everyday
occurrence.

  [29] Chiefs of rural police.

Involuntarily one asks: How can men allow these things to go on? How
can they tolerate them with any regard to their own personal safety?

It may be replied that some men do oppose it. (Those who are
deluded and live in subjection have nothing either to tolerate or
interdict.) Those who favor the continuance of the present system
are only those who derive some special advantage from it. They
favor it, and even with the disadvantages of having an insane
or tyrannical man at the head of the government and the army,
the position is less disadvantageous to them than if the present
organization were abolished.

Whether his position be held under a Boulanger, a Republic, a
Pugatchov, or a Catharine,--the judge, the police commissioner, the
governor, the officer, will remain in it. But if the system which
assures their positions were overthrown, they would lose them.
Therefore it is a matter of indifference to these men whether one
man or another be at the head of the organization of violence. What
they do fear is its abolition; so they support it.

One wonders why men of independent means, who are not obliged to
become soldiers, the so-called _élite_ of society, enter military
service in Russia, in England, in Germany, in Austria, and even in
France, and desire the chance of killing? Why do parents, why do
moral men, send their children to military schools? Why do mothers
buy them such toys as helmets, swords, and muskets? (No child of
a peasant ever plays at being a soldier.) Why do kindly men and
women, who can have no manner of interest in war, go into ecstasies
over the exploits of a man like Skobelev? Why do men who are
under no obligation to do it, and who receive no pay for it, like
Marshals of Nobility in Russia, devote months to the service which
demands such unremitting labor, wearying to the minds as well as
to the body,--the enlistment of recruits? Why do all emperors and
kings wear a military dress, why do they have drills and parades
and military rewards? Why are monuments built to generals and
conquerors? Why do wealthy and independent men regard it as an
honor to occupy the position of lackeys to kings, to flatter them
and feign a belief in their special superiority? Why do men who
have long since ceased to believe in the medieval superstitions
of the Church still constantly and solemnly pretend to do so,
and thus support a sacrilegious and demoralizing institution?
Why is the ignorance of the people so zealously preserved, not
only by the government, but by men of the higher classes? Why do
they so energetically denounce every attempt to overthrow popular
superstition and to promote popular education? Why do historians,
novelists, and poets, who can derive no benefit in exchange for
their flattery, paint in such glowing colors the emperors, kings,
and generals of bygone times? Why do the so-called scientists devote
their lives to formulate theories that violence committed on the
people by power is legitimate violence--is right?

One often wonders why an artist or a woman of the world, neither of
whom, it would seem, ordinarily take much interest in sociological
or military questions--why should they condemn strikes among
workmen, or advocate war with such partizan zeal?

But one ceases to feel surprise when one realizes that the members
of the higher classes possess the keenest insight, an intuitive
perception, as it were, concerning those conditions which are
friendly and those which are hostile to the organization upon whose
existence their privileges depend.

It is true that the woman of society does not deliberately argue
thus: "Were there no capitalists, or armies to defend them, my
husband would have no money, and I should have neither _salon_
nor fashionable gowns;" nor does the artist tell himself, in
so many words, that if his pictures are to be sold there must
be capitalists, defended by armies, to buy them; yet instinct,
here doing duty for reason, is their surest guide. This instinct
guides, with rare exceptions, all men who support those political,
religious, and economic institutions which are advantageous to
themselves.

But is it possible that men who belong to the higher classes defend
this organization only because it is for their own advantage? They
surely cannot fail to see that as an organization it is irrational,
incompatible with the present consciousness of men, with public
opinion, and that it is fraught with danger. Good, intelligent,
honest men who belong to the ruling class cannot but suffer from
such contradictions, nor can they close their eyes to the dangers
that menace them.

And is it possible that the millions of men of the lower classes
can go on calmly committing deeds which are so manifestly criminal,
such as are the murders and tortures which they commit, simply from
fear of punishment? Surely these things could not exist were not the
falsehood and brutality of their actions hidden from all classes of
men by the system of the political organization.

When such deeds are committed, there are so many instigators,
participants, and abettors that no single individual feels himself
morally responsible.

Assassins compel all the witnesses of an assassination to strike
the body of the victim, with the intention of dividing the
responsibility among the greatest number possible. And whenever
those crimes by the aid of which the state system is maintained are
to be committed, this same thing is observed. The rulers of State
always endeavor to involve the greatest possible number of citizens
in the participation of the crimes which it is to their interest to
have committed.

In these latter days this is made especially evident by the
drawing of citizens on the jury in courts of law, by drafting them
into the army as soldiers, and into the communal or legislative
administration as electors or elected.

As in a wicker basket all the ends are so carefully interwoven that
they cannot be seen, so is it with the responsibility for crime.
Individual responsibilities are so manipulated that no man perceives
precisely what he is incurring.

In olden times tyrants were responsible for the crimes which were
committed, but in the present age the most frightful crimes are
perpetrated, such as would hardly have been possible in the time of
Nero, and still no one is held responsible.

Some demand the crime, some propose it, some determine it, some
confirm it, some order it, some execute it.

Women and old men are hung, are flogged to death--even quite
innocent people, as was recently the case with us in Russia, in
the affair of the factory at Uzova; or, as is done all over in
Europe and America, in the struggle with anarchists and other
revolutionists, hundreds, thousands of men are shot, are killed;
or, as happens in time of war, millions of men are massacred; or,
as is happening always, the souls of men are destroyed by solitary
confinement, by the debauchery of barrack life--and no one is
responsible.

On the lower scale of the social ladder are posted soldiers armed
with muskets, pistols, swords; they go about doing violence and
killing, and through their doing so force other men to become
soldiers like themselves, and yet they never dream that the
responsibility rests on their shoulders; they shift it on to their
superiors, who give the orders.

The czars, the presidents, the ministers of State, the general
assemblies, order tortures, murders, conscriptions, and as they
enjoy the absolute assurance that they rule by the grace of God
or by the will of the society they govern, and that that society
demands from them what they order, they cannot regard themselves as
responsible.

Between these two classes we find a number of intermediaries, who
take charge of the executions, tortures, conscriptions, and they,
too, wash their hands of all responsibility, alleging on the one
hand the orders of their superiors, and on the other that it is for
such as themselves, who stand lower on the social ladder, to do
these things.

The power that demands and the power that fulfils commands, the two
extremes of governmental organization, unite like the two ends of
a chain, each depending on and supporting the other, and all the
intervening links.

Were it not for the conviction that there are men who assume the
whole responsibility of such deeds, no soldier would lift his hand
to torture or murder his fellow-man. Were it not for the conviction
that the nation demands it, no king, emperor, president, or assembly
would venture to issue commands for murder and torture. Were it
not that he believes that there are men above him who assume the
responsibility of his actions, and others below him whose welfare
requires this treatment, no man of the intermediate class would ever
perform the functions committed to him.

The organization of the State is such that on whatever position of
the social ladder a man may stand, his irresponsibility remains
intact. The higher he stands, the more liable he is to feel the
pressure brought to bear on him from below, urging him to issue
commands, and the less likely he will be to be influenced by orders
from above, and _vice versa_.

But it is not enough that all men bound by the organization of the
State transfer their responsibility from one to the other,--the
peasant, for instance, who becomes a soldier to the merchant who
has become an officer; the officer to the noble who occupies the
position of governor; the governor to the minister of State; the
minister to the sovereign; and the sovereign who in his turn
shifts the responsibility upon all,--officials, nobles, merchants,
peasants. Not only do men in this way merely free themselves from
all sense of responsibility for their actions, but because, as
they adapt themselves to fulfil the requirements of political
organizations, they so constantly, persistently, and strenuously
assure themselves and others that all men are not equal that they
begin to believe it sincerely themselves. Thus we are assured that
some men are superior and must be especially honored and obeyed;
while, on the other hand, we are assured in every way that others
are inferior, and therefore bound to obey without murmur the
commands of their superiors.

It is to this inequality,--the exaltation of some upon the abasement
of others,--that we may chiefly attribute the incapacity which men
display for discerning the folly of the existing system, with the
cruelty and deceptions committed by some, and suffered by others.

There are certain men who have been made to believe that they are
possessed of a peculiar importance and greatness, who have become
so intoxicated by their imaginary superiority that they cease to
realize their responsibility for the actions they commit; others
who, on the contrary, have been told that they are insignificant
beings, and that it is their duty to submit to those above them,
and, as the natural result of this continual state of degradation,
fall into a strange condition of stupefied servility, and in this
state they, too, lose all sense of responsibility for their actions.
And as to the intermediate class, subservient to those above them,
and yet to a certain extent regarding themselves as superiors, they
are apt to be both servile and arrogant, and they also lose the
sense of responsibility.

One needs but to glance at any official of high rank in the act
of reviewing the troops. Accompanied by his staff, mounted on
a magnificently caparisoned charger, equipped in a brilliant
uniform, displaying all his decorations, he rides in front of
the ranks, while the band plays martial music and the soldiers
present arms, standing, as they do, as though verily petrified
with servility,--one has but to see this to understand how in such
moments, under such conditions, both generals and soldiers might
commit deeds which they never would have dreamed of committing.

But the intoxication to which men succumb under conditions like
parades, pageants, religious ceremonies, and coronations, though
acute, is not enduring, while there is another which is chronic,
shared by all who have any authority whatsoever, from the Czar to
the policemen on the street, shared, too, by the masses who submit
to authority in a state of stupefied servility, and who by way of
justifying their submission, after the usual manner of slaves,
ascribe the greatest importance and dignity to those whom they obey.

It is this delusion in regard to human inequality and the consequent
intoxication of power and stupefaction of servility, which makes it
possible for those who are associated in a state organization to
commit crimes and suffer no remorse.

Under the influence of this intoxication,--there is an intoxication
of servility as well as of power,--men seem to others, no less than
to themselves, not the ordinary human beings which they really are,
but specially privileged beings,--nobles, merchants, governors,
judges, officers, kings, statesmen, soldiers, having no longer
ordinary human duties, but only the duties of the class to which
they belong.

Thus the landed proprietor who prosecuted the peasants on account of
the forest did so because he did not regard himself as an ordinary
man, with the same rights as the peasants, his neighbors, but as a
great landowner and a member of the nobility, and, as such, exalted
by the intoxication of authority, felt himself insulted by the
opposition of the peasants. And regardless of the consequences, he
sends in his petition to be reinstated in his pretended rights. The
judges who rendered an unfair decision in his favor, did so because
they fancied themselves different from ordinary men, who are guided
only by truth; under the spell of the intoxication of authority,
they believed themselves the guardians of a justice which cannot
err; and at the same time, under the influence of servility, they
considered themselves obliged to apply certain texts set forth in a
certain book and called the laws; and all the other persons who took
part in this affair, from the representatives of higher authority
down to the last soldier ready to fire upon his brother,--they all
accepted themselves in their conventionally accredited characters.
Not one asked himself if he should take part in an act which his
conscience reprobated, but each accepted himself as one who had
simply to fulfil a certain function; let it be the Czar, anointed
of God, an exceptional being called to look after the welfare of a
hundred million men; let it be the noble; the priest, the recipient
of grace through ordination; the soldier, bound by oath to fulfil
commands without hesitation,--it is the same with all.

All their activity, past, present, and future, is stimulated by a
like intoxicating influence. If they had not the firm conviction
that the title of king, statesman, governor, judge, landowner,
marshal of nobility, officer, or soldier is of serious import and
necessity, not one of them could contemplate without horror and
disgust his own share in the deeds done in these latter days.

Arbitrary distinctions, established hundreds of years ago,
recognized for hundreds of years, described by special names
and distinguished by special dress, sanctioned by all kinds of
solemnities calculated to influence men through their emotions, have
been so thoroughly impressed upon the human imagination that men
have forgotten the common, everyday aspects of life; they look upon
themselves and others from a point of view dependent upon outward
conditions, and regard their own acts and those of their neighbors
accordingly.

Here, for instance, we see a man of advanced years, a man perfectly
in possession of his senses, who, because he has been decorated
with some bauble, and is attired in a ridiculous habit, or because
he is the holder of certain keys, or has received a bit of blue
ribbon fitter for the wear of a coquettish child, when he is called
general, chamberlain, chevalier of the order of St. Andrew, or some
such absurdity, becomes at once proud, arrogant, happy; if, on the
contrary, he fails to get the gewgaw or the nickname he expected, he
becomes unhappy and ill, really to the point of sickness.

Or let us take a still more remarkable case. A man, morally
sane, young, free, and absolutely safe from want, has no sooner
received the name of district-attorney, of _Zemsky Nachalnik_,
than he pounces upon some luckless widow, takes her from her small
children, and throws her into jail, all because the poor woman has
been secretly selling wine, and thus depriving the treasury of 25
roubles' revenue. This man feels no remorse. Another still more
surprising case is that of a man, ordinarily kind and good, who,
because he wears a uniform or carries a medal, and is told that he
is a keeper [_garde-champêtre_] or custom-house officer, considers
himself justified in shooting men down, and no one ever dreams of
blaming him for it, nor does he think himself in the wrong; but
if he failed to fire upon his fellow-men he would then indeed be
culpable. I say nothing of judges and jurymen, who condemn men to
death, nor of troops, who slaughter thousands without a vestige of
remorse, because they are told that they are not in the position of
ordinary men, but are jurymen, judges, generals, soldiers.

This abnormal and surprising state of affairs is formulated in words
like these: "As a man, I sympathize with him, but as a keeper, a
judge, a general, a czar, or a soldier, I must torture or murder
him."

So it is in this present case; men are on the way to slaughter and
torment their famine-stricken brethren, admitting all the while that
in this dispute between the peasants and the landowner the former
are in the right (all the superior officials told me so). They know
that the peasants are miserable, poor, and hungry, and that the
landowner is wealthy and one who inspires no sympathy, and yet these
men are going to kill the peasants in order that this landowner may
gain 3000 roubles; and all because they regard themselves at the
moment not as men, but one as a governor, another as a general of
gendarmerie, another as an officer, or as soldiers, as the case may
be, and bound not by the eternal laws of the human conscience, but
by the accidental, transitory demands of their positions.

However strange it may appear, the only explanation of this
surprising phenomenon is that men are like those under hypnotic
influence, who, as suggested by the hypnotizers, imagine themselves
in certain conditions. Thus, for instance, when it is suggested to
a hypnotized patient that he is lame, he proceeds to limp; that he
is blind, he ceases to see; that he is an animal, and he begins to
bite. And this is the state of all those who put their social and
political duties before, and to the detriment of, their duties as
human beings.

The essential characteristic of this condition is, that men,
influenced by the thought that has been suggested to them, are
unable to weigh their own actions, and simply obey the suggestion
that has been communicated to them.

The difference between men artificially hypnotized and those under
the influence of governmental suggestion consists in this,--that
to the former their imagined environment is suggested suddenly by
one person, and the suggestion operates only for a short time;
whereas to the latter, their imagined position has been the result
of gradual suggestion, going on, not for years, but for generations,
and proceeds not from a single individual, but from their entire
circumstances.

"But," it will be objected, "always, in all societies, the majority
of men, all the children, all the women, absorbed in the duties
and cares of motherhood, all the great mass of workers, who are
completely absorbed by their labor, all those of weak mind, all the
enfeebled, the many who have come under the subjection of nicotine,
alcohol, opium, or what not,--all these are not in a position to
think for themselves, and consequently they submit to those who
stand on a higher intellectual level, or they simply act according
to domestic or social tradition, or in accordance with public
opinion,--and in their acting thus there is nothing abnormal or
contradictory."

Indeed, there is nothing unnatural in it, and the readiness with
which those who reason but little submit to the guidance of men who
stand on a higher plane of consciousness is a universal phenomenon,
and one without which social life could not be. The minority submit
to principles which they have considered for themselves, and in
consequence of the accordance of these principles with their reason;
the rest of men, the majority, submit to the same principles, not
because of personal apprehension of their validity, but because
public opinion demands it.

Such submission to public opinion of men who can think but little
for themselves has nothing abnormal about it so long as public
opinion maintains its unity.

But there is a period when the higher forms of truth, having been
revealed to the few, are in process of transmission to the many;
and when the public opinion which was based on a lower plane of
consciousness has already begun to waver, to give place to the new,
ready to be established. And now men begin to view their own and
other men's actions in the light of their new consciousness, while,
influenced by inertia and tradition, they still continue to apply
principles which were the outcome of the once highest consciousness,
but which are now distinctly opposed to it. Hence it is that men
find themselves in an abnormal position, and that, while realizing
the necessity of conforming to this new public opinion, they lack
courage to abandon conformity to the old one. This is the attitude
which men, not only the men on the train, but the greater part of
mankind, occupy toward Christian truths.

The attitude of those who belong to the upper classes, and who have
all the advantages of high position, is the same as that of the
lower classes who obey implicitly every command that is given to
them.

Men of the ruling classes, who have no reasonable explanation of
their privileges, and who in order to retain them are forced to
repress all their nobler and more humane tendencies, try to persuade
themselves of the necessity of their superior position; while the
lower classes, stultified and oppressed by labor, are kept by the
higher classes in a state of constant subjection.

This is the only possible explanation of the amazing phenomena
which I witnessed on the train on the 9th of September, when men,
naturally kindly and inoffensive, were to be seen going with an easy
conscience to commit the most cruel, contemptible and idiotic of
crimes.

It cannot be said that they are devoid of the conscience which
should forbid them to do these things, as was the case with the men
who, centuries ago, tortured their fellow-men, scourged them to
death, and burned them at the stake;--nay, it does exist in them,
but it is kept dormant; auto-suggestion, as the psychologist calls
it, keeps it thus among the upper classes, while the soldiers, the
executioners, are under the hypnotic influence of the classes above
them.

Conscience may slumber for a time, but it is not dead, and in spite
of suggestion and auto-suggestion, it still whispers; yet a little
while and it will awaken.

One might compare these men to a person under the influence of
hypnotism, to whom it has been suggested that he shall commit some
act contrary to his conception of right and wrong, as, for example,
to murder his mother or his child. He feels himself so far coerced
by the suggestion given him that he cannot refrain; and yet as the
appointed time and place draw near, he seems to hear the stifled
voice of conscience reviving, and he begins to draw back, he tries
to awaken himself. And no one can tell whether or not hypnotic
suggestion will conquer in the end; all depends on the relative
strength of conflicting influences.

So it was with the soldiers on that train, so it is with all men of
our period who take part in state violence and profit by it.

There was a time when, having gone forth to do violence and murder,
to terrify by an example, men did not return until they had
performed their mission, and then they suffered no doubt or remorse;
but having done their fellow-men to death, they placidly returned to
the bosom of their families, caressed their children, and with jest
and laughter gave themselves up to all the pure joys of the hearth.

The men who were then benefited by violence, landed proprietors
and men of wealth, believed their own interests to have a direct
connection with these cruelties. It is different now, when men know,
or at least suspect, the real reason why they do these things. They
may close their eyes and try to silence their consciences, but
neither those who commit such outrages, nor those who order them,
can longer fail to discern the significance of their acts. It may
be that they do not fully appreciate it until they are on the point
of committing the deed, or in some cases not until after the deed
has been done. Those soldiers, for instance, who administered the
tortures during the riot at the Yuzovo factory, at Nijni-Novgorod,
Saratov, and Orel, did not fully apprehend the significance of what
they were doing until it was all over; and now, both they who gave
the orders, and they who executed them, suffer agonies of shame in
the condemnation of public opinion and of their own conscience. I
have talked with some of the soldiers about it; they either tried to
change the subject or spoke of it with horror and repugnance.

There are instances of men coming to their senses, however, just
as they are on the point of committing deeds of the kind. I know
of a sergeant who during the riots was beaten by two peasants;
he reported the fact to the commander of his company, but on the
following day, when he saw the tortures inflicted upon other
peasants, he persuaded his superior officer to destroy his report
and to allow the peasants who had beaten him to depart unpunished.
I know of a case where the soldiers appointed to shoot a prisoner
refused to obey; and of other occasions where the superior officers
have refused to direct tortures and executions.

The men who were in the train on the 9th of September started with
the intention of torturing and murdering their fellow-men, but
whether they would carry out their intention one could not know.
However each one's share in the responsibility of this affair might
be concealed from him, however strong the hypnotic suggestion
among those taking part in it that they did so, not as men, but as
functionaries, and so could violate all human obligations,--in spite
of this,--the nearer they approached their destination, the more
they must have hesitated about it.

It is impossible that the Governor should not pause at the moment of
giving the decisive order to begin to murder and torture. He knows
that the conduct of the Governor at Orel has excited the indignation
of the honorable men, and he himself, influenced by public opinion,
has repeatedly expressed his own disapproval of the affair; he knows
that the lawyer who ought to have accompanied him distinctly refused
to do so, denouncing the whole affair as shameful; he knows that
changes are likely to take place in the government at any moment,
the result of which would be that those who were in favor yesterday
may be in disgrace to-morrow; that if the Russian press remains
silent, the foreign press may give an account of this business that
might cover him with opprobrium. Already he feels the influence of
the new public opinion which is to supersede and destroy the old
one. Moreover, he has no assurance that his subordinates may not at
the last moment refuse to obey him. He hesitates; it is impossible
to divine what he will do.

The functionaries and officers who accompany him feel more or less
as he does. They all know at the bottom of their hearts that they
are engaged in a shameful business, that their share in it stains
and degrades them in the eyes of those persons whose opinion they
value. They know that a man who participates in deeds like these
feels shame in the presence of the woman he loves. And like the
Governor, they, too, feel doubtful whether the soldiers will obey
them at the last moment. What a contrast to the self-assurance of
their bearing on the platform of the station! Not only do they
suffer, but they actually hesitate, and it is partly to hide their
inward agitation that they assume an air of bravado. And this
agitation increases as they draw nearer to their destination.

And, indeed, the entire body of soldiers, although they give no
outward sign, and seem utterly submissive, are really in the same
state of mind.

They are no longer like the soldiers of former days, who gave up the
natural life of labor, and surrendered themselves to debauchery,
rapine, and murder, as the Roman legions did, or the veterans of
the Thirty Years' War, or even those soldiers of more modern times,
whose term of service lasted twenty-five years. Now they are for
the most part men newly taken from their families, with all the
memories of the wholesome, rational life from which they have been
torn still fresh in their minds.

These young men, peasants for the most part, know what they are
going to do; they know that the land-owners generally ill-treat the
peasants, and that this probably is a case in point. Furthermore,
the majority of them can read, and the books they read are
not always in favor of the service; some even demonstrate its
immorality. They find comrades who are independent thinkers,
volunteers and young officers, and the seed of doubt respecting the
merit and rectitude of such deeds as they are about to commit has
already been sown in their minds. True, they have all been subjected
to that ingenious discipline, the work of centuries, which tends to
kill the spirit of independence in every man, and are so accustomed
to automatic obedience that at the words of command, "Fire along the
line!... Fire!" and so forth, their muskets are raised mechanically,
and they perform the customary movements. But now, "Fire!" means
something more than firing at a target; it means the murder of their
abused, downtrodden fathers and brothers, who are grouped yonder in
the street with their wives and children, gesticulating and crying
out one does not know what.

There they are: here a man with thin beard, clad in a patched
_kaftan_, with bast shoes on his feet, just like the father left
behind in the province of Kazan or Ryazan; there another, with gray
beard and bowed shoulders, leaning on a stout staff, just like the
grandfather; and here a youth, with big boots and red shirt, just
like himself a year ago,--the soldier who is about to shoot him. And
there is a woman, with her bast shoes and petticoat, like the mother
he left behind him.

And he must fire upon them!

And God alone knows what each soldier will do at the supreme moment.
The slightest suggestion that they ought not to do it, that they
must not do it,--a single word or hint,--would be enough to make
them pause.

Every one of these men at the moment of action will be like one
hypnotized, to whom it has been suggested to chop a log, who, as
he approaches the object which is told to him is a log, sees as
he raises the ax that it is not a log at all, but his own brother
who lies sleeping there. He may accomplish the act which has been
suggested to him, or he may awake at the moment of committing it.
It is the same with these men. If they do not awaken, then will a
deed be done as shocking as that committed in Orel, and the reign of
official hypnotism will thereby gain new power. If they awaken, then
not only will the deed remain undone, but many of those who hear
of their refusal to do it will free themselves from the suggestion
under whose influence they have hitherto acted, or at least will
think of the possibility of doing so.

If only a few of these men come to their senses, and refuse to do
the deed, and fearlessly express their opinion of the wickedness of
such deeds, even such a few men might enable the rest to throw off
the suggestion under the influence of which they act, and such evil
deeds would not be done.

And another thing: if but a few of those persons who are simply
spectators of the affair would, from their knowledge of other
affairs of the same kind, boldly express their opinion to those
engaged in it, and point out to them their folly, cruelty, and
criminality, even this would not be without a salutary influence.

This is precisely what happened in the case of Tula. Partly because
certain persons expressed reluctance to take a part in the affair;
because a lady passenger and others showed their indignation at a
railway station; because one of the colonels whose regiment was
summoned to reduce the peasants to obedience declared that soldiers
are not executioners,--because of these and other apparently
trifling influences the affair took on a different aspect, and
the troops, on arriving, did not commit outrages, but contented
themselves with cutting down the trees and sending them to the
landowner.

Had it not been that certain of these men conceived a distinct idea
that they were doing wrong, and had not the idea got abroad, the
occurrences at Orel would have been repeated. Had the feeling been
stronger, perhaps the Governor and his troops would not have gone
so far as even to fell the trees and deliver them to the landowner.
Had it been more powerful still, perhaps the Governor would not have
dared even to set out for Tula; its influence might even have gone
so far as to prevent the Minister from framing, and the Emperor from
confirming, such decrees.

All depends, as we come therefore to see, upon the degree of
consciousness that men possess of Christian truth.

Hence, let all men to-day who wish to promote the welfare of mankind
direct their efforts toward the development of this consciousness of
Christian truth.

But, strange to say, those men who nowadays talk most of the
amelioration of human life, and who are the acknowledged leaders
of public opinion, declare this to be precisely the wrong thing
to do, and that there are more effectual expedients for improving
human existence. They insist that any improvement in the conditions
of human life must be accomplished, not through individual
moral effort, nor through the propagation of truth, but through
progressive modifications in the general material conditions of
life. Therefore, they say, individual effort should be devoted to
the gradual reform of the everyday conditions of life; and seeing
that any individual profession of the truth which may happen to
be incompatible with the existing order is harmful, because it
provokes, on the part of the government, an opposition which
prevents the individual from continuing efforts which may be of
utility to society.

According to this theory, all changes in the life of mankind proceed
from the same causes that control the lives of the brute creation.

And all the religious teachers, like Moses and the Prophets,
Confucius, Lao Tze, Buddha, and Christ, preached their doctrines,
and their followers adopted them, not because they divined and loved
the truth, but because the political, social, and, above all, the
economical conditions of the nations in whose midst these doctrines
found expression were favorable to their exposition and development.

Therefore the principal activity of a man who wishes to serve the
world and to improve the condition of his kind should be directed,
according to this theory, not to teaching and profession of the
truth, but to the improvement of the outward, political, social,
and, above all, economic conditions of life. The change in these
conditions may be accomplished by serving the government and
introducing liberal and progressive principles, by contributing to
the development of commerce, by propagating socialistic principles,
but, above all, by promoting the diffusion of science.

According to this doctrine, it is a matter of no consequence whether
one profess the revealed truth or not; there is no obligation to
live in accordance with its precepts, or to refrain from actions
opposed to them,--as, for instance, to serve the government, though
one considers its power detrimental; to profit by the organization
of capital, though one disapproves of it; to subscribe to certain
forms of religion, though one considers them superstitions. Practise
in the courts of law, though one believes them to be corrupt; or
enter the army, or take the oath of allegiance, or indeed lie, or
do anything that is convenient. These things are trivial; for it is
a matter of vital importance, instead of challenging the prevailing
customs of the day, to conform to them, though they be contrary
to one's convictions, satisfied meanwhile to try and liberalize
the existing institutions, by encouraging commerce, propagating
socialistic doctrines, and generally promoting _soi-disant_
science and civilization. According to this convenient theory,
it is possible for a man to remain a landowner, a merchant, a
manufacturer, a judge, a functionary paid by the government, a
soldier, an officer, and at the same time to be humanitarian,
socialist, and revolutionary.

Hypocrisy, formerly growing only out of such religious doctrines as
that of original sin, redemption, the Church, has in these latter
days, by means of the new theory, gained for itself a scientific
basis, and those whose intellectual habit of mind renders the
hypocrisy of the Church unendurable, are yet deceived by this new
hypocrisy with the _cachet_ of science. If in old times a man who
professed the doctrines taught by the Church could with a clear
conscience take part in any political crime, and benefit by so
doing, provided he complied with the external forms of his faith,
men of the present day, who deny Christianity, and view the conduct
of life from a secular and scientific standpoint, are every whit as
sure of their own innocence, even of their lofty morality, when they
participate in and benefit by the evil-doings of government.

It is not alone in Russia, but in France, England, Germany, and
America as well, that we find the wealthy landed proprietor, who,
in return for having allowed the men who live on his estate and who
supply him with the products of the soil, extorts from these men,
who are often poverty-stricken, all that he possibly can. Whenever
these oppressed laborers make an attempt to gain something for
themselves from the lands which the rich man calls his own, without
first asking his consent, troops are called out, who torture and put
to death those who have been bold enough to take such liberties.

By methods like this are claims to the ownership of land made good.
One would hardly imagine that a man who lived in such a wicked and
selfish manner could call himself a Christian, or even liberal.
One would think that if a man cared to seem Christian or liberal,
he would at least cease to plunder and to torment his fellow-men
with the aid of the government, in order to vindicate his claims
to the ownership of land. And such would be the case were it not
for the metaphysical hypocrisy which teaches that from a religious
standpoint it is immaterial whether one owns land or not, and that,
from the scientific point of view, for a single individual to give
up his land would be a useless sacrifice, without any effect on the
well-being of mankind, the amelioration of which can only be brought
about by a progressive modification of outward conditions.

Meanwhile, your modern landowner will, without the least hesitation
or doubt, organize an agricultural exhibition, or a temperance
society, or, through his wife and daughters, distribute warm
underclothing and soup to three old women; and he will hold forth
before the domestic circle, or in society, or as a member of
committees, or in the public press, upon the gospel of love for
mankind in general and the agricultural class in particular, that
class which he never ceases to torment and oppress. And those who
occupy a similar position will believe in him and sing his praises,
and take counsel together upon the best methods of improving the
condition of those very laboring classes they spend their lives
in exploiting; and for this purpose they suggest every possible
expedient, save that which would effect it,--namely, to desist from
robbing the poor of the land necessary for their subsistence.

(A striking example of this hypocrisy was presented by the Russian
landowners during the struggle with the famine of last year,[30]
a famine of which they were themselves the cause, and by which
they profited, not only by selling bread at the highest price, but
even by disposing of the dried potato-plants for five roubles a
_dessiatin_, to be used as fuel by the freezing peasants.)

  [30] 1892.

The business of the merchant, again (as is the case with business of
any kind), is based upon a series of frauds; he takes advantage of
the necessities of men by buying his merchandise below, and selling
it above, its value. One would think that a man, the mainspring
of whose activity is what he himself in his own language calls
shrewdness, ought to feel ashamed of this, and never dream of
calling himself Christian or liberal while he continues a merchant.
But, according to the new metaphysic of hypocrisy, he may pass for
a virtuous man and still pursue his evil career; the religious man
has but to believe, the liberal man but to coöperate, in the reform
of external conditions to promote the general progress of commerce;
the rest does not signify. So this merchant (who, besides, often
sells bad commodities, adulterates, and uses false weights and
measures, or deals exclusively in commodities that imperil human
life, such as alcohol or opium) frankly considers himself, and is
considered by others,--always provided he only does not cheat his
colleagues in business and knavery, his fellow-tradesmen,--a model
of conscientiousness and honesty. And if he spend one per cent of
his stolen money on some public institution, hospital, museum,
or school, men call him the benefactor of the people on whose
exploitation all his welfare depends; and if he gives but the least
part of this money to the Church or to the poor, then is he deemed
an exemplary Christian indeed.

Take again the factory-owner, whose entire income is derived
from reducing the pay of his workmen to its lowest terms, and
whose whole business is carried on by forced and unnatural labor,
endangering the health of generations of men. One would suppose
that if this man professed Christian or liberal principles he would
cease to sacrifice human lives to his interests. But, according
to the existing theory, he encourages industry, and it would be a
positive injury to society if he were to abandon his operations,
even supposing he were willing to do so. And, too, this man, the
cruel slave-driver of thousands of human beings, having built for
those injured in his service minute houses, with gardens six feet
in extent, or established a fund, or a home for the aged, or a
hospital, is perfectly satisfied that he has more than atoned for
the moral and physical jeopardy into which he has plunged so many
lives; and he continues to live calmly, proud of his work.

We find that the functionary, civil, military, or ecclesiastical,
who performs his duties to gratify his selfishness or ambition, or,
as is more usually the case, for the sake of the stipend, collected
in the shape of taxes from an exhausted and crippled people,--if,
by a rare exception, he does not directly steal from the public
treasury,--considers himself, and is considered by his equals, a
most useful and virtuous member of society.

There are judges and other legal functionaries who know that their
decisions have condemned hundreds and thousands of unfortunate men
to be torn from their families and thrown into prison. There these
hapless beings are locked up in solitary confinement, or sent to
the galleys, where they go desperate and put an end to themselves
by starving themselves to death, by swallowing glass, or by some
such means. And who knows what the mothers, wives, and children
of these men suffer by the separation and imprisonment, and the
disgrace of it,--who have vainly begged for pardon for their sons,
husbands, brothers, or that their lot may be a little alleviated.
But the judge or other legal functionary is so primed with the
current hypocrisy that he himself, his colleagues, his wife, and his
friends are all quite sure, despite what he does, that he is a good
and sensible man. According to the current philosophy of hypocrisy,
such a man performs a duty of great importance to the public. And
this man, who has injured hundreds or thousands of human beings, who
owe it to him that they have lost their belief in goodness and their
faith in God, goes to church with a benevolent smile, listens to the
Bible, makes liberal speeches, caresses his children, bestows moral
lessons upon them, for their edification, and grows sentimental over
imaginary suffering.

Not only these men, their wives and children, but the entire
community around them, all the teachers, actors, cooks, jockeys,
live by preying upon the life-blood of the working-people, which
in one way or another they absorb like leeches. Every one of their
days of pleasure costs thousands of days in the lives of the
workers. They see the suffering and privation of these workmen,
of their wives and children, of their aged and feeble. They know
what punishments are visited upon those who attempt to resist
the organized system of pillage, but so far from abandoning or
concealing their luxurious habits, they flaunt them in the faces of
those whom they oppress and by whom they are hated. All the while
they assure themselves and others that they have the welfare of the
working-man greatly at heart. On Sundays, clad in rich garments,
they drive in their carriages to churches where the mockery of
Christianity is preached, and listen there to the words of men who
have learned their falsehoods by heart. Some of these men wear
stoles, some wear white cravats; they all preach the doctrine of
love for one's neighbor, a doctrine belied by their daily lives. And
they have all grown so accustomed to playing this part that they
really believe themselves to be what they pretend.

This universal hypocrisy, which has become to every class of
society at the present day like the air it breathes, is so familiar
that men are no longer exasperated by it. It is very fitting that
hypocrisy should signify acting or playing of a part. It has become
so much a matter of course that it no longer excites surprise when
the representatives of Christ pronounce a blessing over murderers
as they stand in rank holding their guns in the position which
signifies, in military parlance, "for prayers," or when the priests
and pastors of various Christian sects accompany the executioner
to the scaffold, and, by lending the sanction of their presence
to murder, make men believe it compatible with Christianity.
(One minister was present when experiments in "electrocution"
took place in the United States.) At the International Prison
Exposition recently held in St. Petersburg, where instruments of
torture, such as chains, and models of prison-cells for solitary
confinement,--means of torture worse than the knout or the
rod,--were on exhibition, sympathetic ladies and gentlemen went to
see them, and seemed greatly entertained.

No one marvels to find liberal science insisting upon the
equality, fraternity, and liberty of men on the one hand, while
on the other it is striving to prove the necessity of armies,
executions, custom-houses, of censorship of the press, of legalized
prostitution, of the expulsion of foreign labor, of the prohibition
of emigration, and of the necessity and justice of colonization
established by the pillage and extermination of whole races of
so-called savages, etc.

They talk of what will happen when all men shall profess what they
call Christianity (by which they mean the different conflicting
creeds); when every one will be fed and clothed; when men will
communicate with one another all over the world by telegraph and
telephones, and will travel in balloons; when all working-men will
accept the doctrine of socialism; when the trade unions will embrace
many millions of men and possess millions of money; when all men
will be educated, will read the papers, and be familiar with all the
sciences.

But what good will this do if after all these improvements men are
still false to the truth?

The miseries of men are caused by disunion, and disunion arises from
the fact that men follow not truth, but falsehood, of which there is
no end. Truth is the only bond by which men may be united; and the
more sincerely men strive after the truth the nearer they approach
to true unity.

But how are men to be united in the truth, or even approach it,
if they not only fail to proclaim the truth which they possess,
but actually think it useless to do so, and pretend to believe in
something which they know to be a lie? In reality no improvement in
the condition of mankind is possible while men continue to hide the
truth from themselves, nor until they acknowledge that their unity,
and consequently their welfare, can be promoted only by the spirit
of truth; until they admit that to profess, and to act in obedience
to the truth as it has been revealed to them, is more important than
all things else.

Let all the material progress ever dreamt of by religious and
scientific men be made; let all men accept Christianity, and let all
the improvements suggested by the Bellamys and Richets, with every
possible addition and correction, be carried out; and yet if the
hypocrisy of to-day still flourishes, if men do not make known the
truth that is within them, but go on pretending to believe what they
know to be untrue, showing respect where they no longer feel it,
their condition will never improve; on the contrary, it will become
worse. The more men are raised above want, the more telegraphs,
telephones, books, newspapers, and reviews they possess, the more
numerous will be the channels for the diffusion of falsehood
and hypocrisy, and the more at variance and miserable will men
become,--and it is even so at the present time.

Let all those material changes take place, and still the position of
humanity will in no way be improved by them; but let every man, so
far as he is able, begin at once and live up to his highest ideal
of the truth or, at the least, cease to defend a lie, then indeed
should we see even in this year of 1893 such an advance in the
establishment of the truth upon earth, and in the deliverance of
mankind, as could hardly be hoped for in a hundred years.

It was not without reason that the only harsh and denunciatory words
that Christ uttered were addressed to hypocrites. It is neither
theft, nor robbery, nor murder, nor fornication, nor fraud, but
falsehood, that particular hypocritical falsehood, which destroys
in men's conscience the distinction between good and evil, which
corrupts them and takes from them the possibility of avoiding evil
and of seeking good, which deprives them of that which constitutes
the essence of a true human life,--it is this which bars the way
to all improvement. Those men who do evil, knowing not the truth,
inspire in the beholder compassion for their victims and repugnance
for themselves, but they only injure the few whom they molest.
Whereas those men who, knowing the good, yet pursue the evil,
wearing all the while the mantle of hypocrisy, commit a wrong,
not only against themselves and their victims, but also against
thousands of other men who are deceived by the falsehood under which
they conceal the wrong.

Thieves, robbers, murderers, rogues, who commit acts which they
themselves, as well as other men, know to be evil, serve as a
warning to show men what is evil, and make them hate it. Those,
however, who steal, rob, torture, and murder, justifying themselves
by pretended religious, scientific, or other motives, like the
landowners, merchants, factory-owners, and government servants of
the present time, by provoking imitation, injure not only their
victims, but thousands and millions of men who are corrupted
by their influence, and who become so blinded that they cannot
distinguish the difference between good and evil.

One fortune acquired by trading in the necessaries of life or
in articles that tend to demoralize men, or by speculations
in the stock exchange, or by the acquisition of cheap lands
which subsequently rise in value by reason of the increasing
needs of the people, or by the establishment of factories that
endanger human health and human lives, or by rendering civil or
military service to the State, or by any occupation that tends
to the demoralization of mankind,--a fortune acquired in any of
these ways, not only permitted, but approved by the leaders of
society, when, furthermore, it is supported by a show of charity,
surely demoralizes men more than millions of thefts, frauds, or
robberies,--sins committed against the laws of the land and subject
to judicial prosecution.

A single enforcement of capital punishment, ordained by men of
education and wealth, sanctioned by the approval of the Christian
clergy, and declared to be an act of justice essential to the
welfare of the State, tends far more to degrade and brutalize
mankind than hundreds and thousands of murders committed in passion
by the ignorant. A more demoralizing scene than the execution
suggested by Jukovsky, calculated as it is to excite a feeling of
religious exaltation, it would be difficult to conceive.[31]

  [31] See vol. iv. of the works of Jukovsky (a Russian poet).

A war, even of the shortest duration,--with all its customary
consequences, the destruction of harvests, the thefts, the unchecked
debauchery and murders, with the usual explanations of its necessity
and justice, with the accompanying glorification and praise bestowed
upon military exploits, upon patriotism, devotion to the flag, with
the assumption of tenderness and care for the wounded,--will do more
in one year to demoralize men than thousands of robberies, arsons,
and murders committed in the course of centuries by individual men
carried away by passion.

The existence of one household, one not even extravagant beyond
the ordinary limits, esteeming itself virtuous and innocent, which
yet consumes the production of enough to support thousands of the
men who live near in poverty and distress, has a more degrading
influence on mankind than innumerable orgies of gross shopkeepers,
officers, or workmen who are addicted to drink and debauchery, and
who smash mirrors and crockery by way of amusement.

One solemn procession, one religious service, or one sermon from
the pulpit, embodying a falsehood which the preacher himself does
not believe, does infinitely more harm than thousands of frauds,
adulterations of food, etc.

Men talk of the hypocrisy of the Pharisees; but the hypocrisy
of our contemporaries far surpasses the comparatively harmless
sanctimoniousness of the Pharisees. They at least had an outward
religious law, whose fulfilment may perhaps have prevented them from
discerning their duty toward their neighbors; indeed, those duties
had not then been distinctly defined. To-day there is no such law.
(I do not consider such gross and stupid men as even now believe
that sacraments or absolution of the Pope can free them from sins.)
On the contrary, the law of the gospel, which in one form or another
we all profess, makes our duties perfectly plain. Indeed, those
precepts which were but vaguely indicated by certain of the prophets
have since been so clearly formulated, have grown to be such
truisms, that the very school-boys and hack writers repeat them.
Therefore men of our times cannot feign ignorance concerning them.

Those men who enjoy the advantages of the existing system, and who
are always protesting love for their neighbor, without suspicion
that their own lives are an injury to their neighbors, are like
the robber who, caught with an uplifted knife, his victim crying
desperately for help, protests that he did not know that he was
doing anything unpleasant to the man whom he was in the act of
robbing and about to murder. Since the denial of this robber
and murderer would be of no avail, his act being patent to all
observers, it would seem equally futile for our fellow-citizens, who
live by the sufferings of the oppressed, to assure themselves and
others that they desire the welfare of those whom they never cease
to rob, and that they had not realized the nature of the methods by
which their prosperity had been attained.

We can no longer persuade ourselves that we do not know of the
one hundred thousand men in Russia alone who have been shut up
in galleys or in prisons for the purpose of securing to us our
property and our peace; and that we do not know of the existence
of those courts of law at which we preside, to which we bring
our accusations, which sentence those men, who have attacked our
property or our lives, to the galleys, to imprisonment, or to exile,
where human beings, no worse than they who have pronounced judgment
upon them, become degraded and lost; nor that we do not know that
everything that we possess has been won and is preserved at the
expense of murder and violence. We cannot shut our eyes and pretend
that we do not see the policeman, who, armed with a revolver, paces
before our window, protecting us while we are eating our excellent
dinner, or when we are at the theater seeing a new play; nor do
not know of the existence of the soldiers who will appear armed
with guns and cartridges whenever our property is menaced. We know
perfectly well that if we finish our dinner, see the new play to its
end, enjoy a merry-making at Christmas, take a walk, go to a ball, a
race, or a hunt, we owe it to the policeman's revolver or the ball
in the soldier's musket, which will pierce the hungry belly of the
disinherited man who, with watering mouth, peeps round the corner
at our pleasures, and who might interrupt them if the policeman
or the soldiers in the barracks were not ready to appear at our
first call. Hence, as the man who is caught in the act of robbery
in broad daylight cannot deny that he threatened his victim with a
knife for the purpose of stealing his purse, it might be supposed
that we could no longer represent to ourselves and to others that
the soldiers and policemen whom we see around us are here, not for
the purpose of protecting us, but to repulse foreign enemies, to
assure public order, to adorn by their presence public rejoicings
and ceremonies. We cannot pretend we do not know that men are not
fond of starving to death. We know that they do not like to die
of hunger, being deprived of the right to earn their living from
the soil upon which they live, that they are not anxious to work
ten to fourteen hours a day underground, standing in water, or in
over-heated rooms, twelve or fourteen hours a day, or at night,
manufacturing articles which contribute to our pleasures. It would
seem impossible to deny what is so evident, and yet it is what we do
deny.

It cannot be denied that there are people of the wealthy class,
and I am glad to say that I meet them more and more frequently,
particularly in the younger generation and among women, who, on
being reminded by what means and at what a price their pleasures
are obtained, instantly admit the truth of it, and with bowed heads
exclaim: "Ah, do not tell us of it! If it is as you say, one cannot
live!" If, however, there are some who are willing to admit their
sin, though they know not how to escape from it, still, the majority
of men nowadays have become so confirmed in hypocrisy that they
boldly deny facts that are patent to every one who has eyes.

"It is all nonsense," they say. "No one forces the people to work
for the landowners or in the factories. It is a matter of mutual
accommodation. Large properties and capital are indispensable,
because they enable men to organize companies and provide work for
the laboring classes, and the work in mills and factories is by no
means so dreadful as you represent it. When real abuses are found
to exist, the government and society in general take measures to
abolish them and to render the labor of the working-men easier and
more agreeable. The working-classes are used to physical labor,
and are not as yet capable of doing anything else. The poverty
of the people is caused neither by the landowners nor by the
tyranny of the capitalists; it springs from other causes,--from
ignorance, disorder, and intemperance. We, the governing classes,
who counteract this state of poverty by wise administration; and
we, the capitalists, who counteract it by the multiplication of
useful inventions; and we, the liberals, who contribute our share
by instituting trade unions and by diffusing education,--these are
the methods by which we promote the welfare of the people, without
making any radical change in our position. We do not wish all to be
poor like the poor; we wish all to be rich like the rich.

"As to torturing and killing men for the purpose of making them
work for the rich, that is all sophistry; the troops are sent out
to quell disturbances when men, not appreciating their advantages,
rebel and disturb the peace essential for the general welfare. It
is equally necessary to restrain malefactors, for whom prisons,
gallows, and the like are established. We are anxious enough to
abolish them as far as possible ourselves, and are working for that
purpose."

Hypocrisy, which nowadays is supported by two methods, the
quasi-religious and the quasi-scientific, has attained such
proportions, that if we did not live in its atmosphere continually,
it would be impossible to believe that humanity could sink to such
depths of self-deception. Men have reached so surprising a state,
their hearts have become so hardened, that they look and do not see;
listen, and do not hear or understand.

For a long time they have been living a life that is contrary to
their conscience. Were it not for the aid of hypocrisy they would be
unable so to live, for such a life, so opposed to conscience, can
only continue because it is veiled by hypocrisy.

And the greater the difference between the practice and the
conscience of men, the more elastic becomes hypocrisy. Yet even
hypocrisy has its limits, and I believe that we have reached them.

Every man of the present day, with the Christian consciousness that
has involuntarily become his, may be likened to a sleeper who dreams
that he is doing what even in his dream he knows he ought not to do.
In the depths of his dream-consciousness he realizes his conduct,
and yet seems unable to change his course, and to cease doing that
which he is aware he should not do.

Then, in the progress of his dream, his state of mind becoming less
and less endurable, he begins to doubt the reality of what has
seemed so real, and makes a conscious effort to break the spell that
holds him.

The average man of our Christian world is in exactly the same
strait. He feels that everything going on around him is absurd,
senseless, and impossible; that the situation is becoming more and
more painful, that it has indeed reached the crisis.

It is impossible that we of the present age, endowed with the
Christian conscience that has become a part of our very flesh and
blood as it were, who live with a full consciousness of the dignity
of man and the equality of all men, who feel our need for peaceable
relations with each other and for the unity of all nations, should
go on living in such a way. It is impossible that all our pleasures,
all our satisfactions, should be purchased by the sufferings and
the lives of our brethren; impossible that we should be ready at a
moment's notice to rush upon each other like wild beasts, one nation
against another, and relentlessly destroy the lives and labor of
men, only because one foolish diplomatist or ruler says or writes
something foolish to another.

It is impossible; and yet all men of our time see that this is what
does happen every day, and all wait for the catastrophe, while the
situation grows more and more strained and painful.

And as a man in his sleep doubts the reality of his dream and longs
to awaken and return to real life, so the average man of our day
cannot, in the bottom of his heart, believe the terrible situation
in which he finds himself, and which is growing worse and worse,
to be the reality. He longs to attain to a higher reality, the
consciousness of which is already within him.

And like this sleeper, who has but to make the conscious effort
to ask himself whether it be a dream, in order to transform its
seeming hopelessness into a joyous awakening, our average man has
but to make a conscious effort and ask himself, "Is not all this
an illusion?" in order to feel himself forthwith like the awakened
sleeper, transported from an hypocritical and horrible dream-world
into a living, peaceful, and joyous real one.

And for this he has no need of any heroic achievement; he has only
to make the effort prompted by his moral consciousness.

But is man able to make this effort?

According to the existing theory, one indispensable from the point
of view of hypocrisy, man is not free and may not change his life.

"A man cannot change his life, because he is not a free agent. He
is not a free agent, because his acts are the result of preceding
causes. And whatever he may do, certain it is that preceding causes
always determine that a man must act in one way rather than in
another; therefore a man is not free to change his life,"--thus
argue the defenders of the metaphysic of hypocrisy. And they would
be perfectly right if man were an unconscious and stationary being,
incapable of apprehending the truth, and unable to advance to a
higher state by means of it. But man is a conscious being, able to
grow more and more in the knowledge of truth. Therefore if he be
not free in his acts, the causes of these acts, which consist in
the recognition simply of such and such truth, are yet within his
mastery.

So that if a man is not free to do certain acts, he is yet free to
work toward the suppression of the moral causes which prevent their
performance. He may be likened to the engineer of a locomotive, who,
though not at liberty to change the past or present motion of his
engine, is yet free to determine its future progress.

No matter what an intelligent man may do, he adopts a certain course
of action only because he acknowledges to himself that at the moment
that course alone is the right one; or because he has formerly
recognized it as such, and now continues to act as he does through
force of habit, or through mental inertia.

Whether a man eats or abstains from food, whether he works or rests,
whether he avoids danger or seeks it, he acts as he does because he
considers it to be reasonable at the time, or because previously
he saw that the truth consisted in acting in that way and not in
another.

The admission or the denial of a certain truth depends not on
outward causes, but on certain conditions that man finds within
himself. Thus frequently, with all the outward and, as it may seem,
favorable conditions for recognizing the truth, one may reject it,
while another may receive it under the most unfavorable conditions,
and without apparent motives. As it is said in the gospel: "No
man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw
him;"--that is to say, the recognition of truth, which is the cause
of all the manifestations of a man's life, does not depend on
outward conditions, but on certain inherent qualities which escape
recognition.

Therefore a man who is not free in his acts still feels himself
free in regard to the cause of his acts; that is, in regard to the
recognition or non-recognition of truth.

Thus a man who, under the influence of passion, has committed a deed
contrary to the truth he knows, still remains free in recognizing
or denying the truth; in other words, denying the truth, he may
consider his act necessary and justify himself in committing it,
or, accepting the truth, he may acknowledge his deed to be evil and
himself guilty.

Thus a gambler or a drunkard, who has succumbed to his passion, is
free to acknowledge gambling or drunkenness either as evils, or as
amusements without consequence. In the first instance, if he cannot
get rid of his passion at once, he becomes free from it gradually,
according to the depth of his conviction of its evil. In the second
instance, his passion grows and gradually deprives him of all chance
of deliverance.

So, too, with a man who, unable to endure the scorching flames for
the rescue of his friend, himself escapes from a burning house,
while he recognizes the truth that a man should save the life of his
fellow-man at the peril of his own, is yet free to look upon his
act as evil, and therefore to condemn himself for it; or, denying
this truth, to judge his act to be both natural and necessary, and
so justify himself in his own opinion. In the first instance, his
recognition of the truth, even though he has not acted in accordance
with it, helps him to prepare for a series of self-sacrificing
actions that will inevitably follow such recognition. In the second
instance, he prepares for a series of actions just as selfish.

I do not say that a man is always free to recognize or not to
recognize every truth. Certain truths there are, long since
recognized by men, and transmitted by tradition, education, and
mere force of habit until they have become second nature; and there
are other truths which men perceive as but dimly and afar. A man
is not free not to recognize the first of these; he is not free to
recognize the second. But there is a third category of truths, which
have not as yet become unquestioned motors of his activity, but have
revealed themselves to man so unmistakably that he is unable to
disregard them; he must inevitably consider them, and either accept
or reject them. It is by his relation to these truths that a man's
freedom is manifested.

Each man in his perception of truth is like a wayfarer who walks by
the aid of a lantern whose light he casts before him: he does not
see what as yet has not been revealed by its beams, he does not see
the path he has left behind, merged again in the darkness; but at
any given point he sees that which the lantern reveals, and he is
always at liberty to choose one side of the road or the other.

There exist for each man certain concealed truths, as yet unrevealed
to his mental vision; certain others, which he has experienced,
assimilated, and forgotten; and yet others, that rise up before
him demanding immediate recognition from his reason. And it is in
the recognition or the disregard of these truths that what we call
freedom becomes evident.

All the apparent difficulty of the question of man's liberty comes
from the fact that those who seek to solve it represent man as
stationary in the presence of the truth.

Undoubtedly he is not free if we look upon him as a stationary
being; if we forget that the life of all humanity is an eternal
procession from darkness to light, from the lower conception of
truth to a higher one, from truth mingled with error to purer truth.

A man would not be free if he were ignorant of all truth; neither
would he be free, nor even have any conception of liberty, if the
truth were suddenly revealed to him in its entire purity and without
any admixture of error.

But man is not a stationary being. And as he advances in life, every
individual discovers an ever increasing proportion of truth, and
thus becomes less liable to error.

The relations of man to truth are threefold. Some truths are so
familiar to him that they have become the unconscious springs of
action; others have only been dimly revealed to him; again others,
though still unfamiliar, are revealed to him so plainly that they
force themselves upon his attention, and inevitably, in one way or
another, he is obliged to consider them. He cannot ignore them, but
must either recognize or repudiate them.

And it is in the recognition or in the disregard of these truths
that man's free agency is manifested.

A man's freedom does not consist in a faculty of acting
independently of his environment and the various influences it
brings to bear upon his life, but in his power to become, through
recognizing and professing the truth that has been revealed to
him, a free and willing laborer at the eternal and infinite work
performed by God and his universe; or, in shutting his eyes to
truth, to become a slave and be forced against his will into a way
in which he is loath to go.

Not only does truth point out the direction a man's life _should_
take, but it opens the only road he _can_ take. Hence, all men will
invariably, free or not, follow the road of truth;--some willingly,
doing the work they have set themselves to do; others involuntarily,
by submitting in spite of themselves to the law of life. It is in
the power of choice that a man's freedom lies.

Freedom, in limits so narrow as these, appears to men so
insignificant that they fail to perceive it. The believers in
causation prefer to overlook it; the believers in unlimited free
will, keeping in view their own ideal, disdain a freedom to them
so insignificant. Freedom, confined between the limits of entire
ignorance of the truth, or of the knowledge of only a part of it,
does not seem to them to be freedom, the more so that whether a man
is or is not willing to recognize the truth revealed unto him, he
will inevitably be forced to obey it in life.

A horse harnessed to a load in company with other horses is not free
to remain in one place. If he does not pull the load, the load will
strike him and force him to move in the direction it is going, thus
compelling him to advance. Still, in spite of this limitation of
freedom, the horse is still free to pull the load of his own accord,
or be pushed forward by it. The same reasoning can be applied to
human freedom.

Be this freedom great or small as compared with the chimerical
freedom for which we sigh, it is the only true freedom, and through
it alone is to be found all the happiness accessible to man. And not
only does this freedom promote the happiness of men, but it is the
only means through which the work of the world can be accomplished.

According to the doctrine of Christ, a man who limits his
observation of life to the sphere in which there is no freedom--to
the sphere of effects--that is, of acts--does not live a true
life. He only lives a true life who has transferred his life
into the sphere in which freedom lies,--into the domain of first
causes,--that is to say, by the recognition and practice of the
truth revealed to him.

The man who consecrates his life to sensual acts is ever performing
acts that depend on temporary causes beyond his control. Of
himself he does nothing; it only seems to him that he is acting
independently, whereas in reality all that he imagines he is doing
by himself is done through him by a superior force; he is not the
creator of life, but its slave. But the man who devotes his life to
the acknowledgment and practice of the truth revealed to him unites
himself with the source of universal life, and accomplishes, not
personal, individual acts, that depend on the conditions of time and
space, but acts that have no causes, but are in themselves causes of
all else, and have an endless and unlimited significance.

Because of their setting aside the essence of true life, which
consists in the recognition and practice of the truth, and directing
their efforts toward the improvement of the external conditions
of life, men of the pagan life-conception may be likened to
passengers on a steamer, who should, in their anxiety to reach their
destination, extinguish the engine-fires, and instead of making use
of steam and screw, try during a storm to row with oars which cannot
reach the water.

The Kingdom of God is attained by effort, and it is only those who
make the effort that do attain it. It is this effort, which consists
in sacrificing outward conditions for the sake of the truth, by
which the Kingdom of God is attained,--an effort which can and ought
to be made now, in our own epoch.

Men have but to understand this: that they must cease to care for
material and external matters, in which they are not free; let them
apply one hundredth part of the energy now used by them in outward
concerns to those in which they are free,--to the recognition and
profession of the truth that confronts them, to the deliverance of
themselves and others from the falsehood and hypocrisy which conceal
the truth,--and then the false system of life which now torments us,
which threatens us with still greater suffering, will be destroyed
at once without struggle. Then the Kingdom of Heaven, at least in
that first stage for which men through the development of their
consciousness are already prepared, will be established.

As one shake is sufficient to precipitate into crystals a liquid
saturated with salt, so at the present time it may be that only the
least effort is needed in order that the truth, already revealed
to us, should spread among hundreds, thousands, millions of men,
and a public opinion become established in conformity with the
existing consciousness, and the entire social organization become
transformed. It depends upon us to make this effort.

If only each of us would try to understand and recognize the
Christian truth, which in the most varied forms surrounds us on
all sides, pleading to be admitted into our hearts; if we would
cease to lie and pretend that we do not see this truth, or that
we are anxious to fulfil it, excepting in the one thing that it
really demands; if we would only recognize this truth which calls
us, and would fearlessly profess it,--we should find forthwith that
hundreds, thousands, and millions of men are in the same position as
ourselves, fearing like ourselves to stand alone in its recognition,
and waiting only to hear its avowal from others.

If men would only cease to be hypocrites they would perceive at once
that this cruel organization of society, which alone hampers them
and yet appears to them like something immutable, necessary, and
sacred, established by God, is already wavering, and is maintained
only by the hypocrisy and the falsehood of ourselves and our
fellow-men.

But if it be true that it depends only on ourselves to change the
existing order of life, have we the right to do it without knowing
what we shall put in its place? What will become of the world if the
present system be destroyed?

"What is there beyond the walls of the world we leave behind us?

"Fear seizes us,--emptiness, space, freedom....--how is one to go
on, not knowing whither? How is one to lose, without the hope of
gain?...

"Had Columbus reasoned thus he never would have weighed anchor. It
was madness to attempt to cross an unknown ocean, to set sail for a
country whose very existence was doubtful. But he discovered a new
world through this madness. To be sure, if people had only to move
from one furnished house into another and a more commodious one, it
would be an easy matter, but the trouble lies in there being no one
to prepare the new apartments. The future looks more uncertain still
than the ocean,--it promises nothing,--it will only be what men and
circumstances make it.

"If you are content with the old world, try to preserve it; it is
sick, and will not live long. But if you can no longer live in the
eternal conflict between your convictions and life, thinking one way
and acting another, take it upon yourselves to leave the shelter
of the blanched and ruinous arches of the Middle Ages. I am aware
that this is not an easy matter. It is hard to part with all one has
been accustomed to from birth. Men are ready for great sacrifices,
but not those which the new life demands of them. Are they ready
to sacrifice their present civilization, their mode of life,
their religion, their conventional morality? Are they ready to be
deprived of all the results of such prolonged efforts, the results
we have boasted of for three centuries, of all the conveniences and
attractions of our existence, to give the preference to wild youth
rather than to civilized senility, to pull down the palace built
by our fathers simply for the pleasure of laying the foundation
of a new house, which, without doubt, will not be completed till
long after our time."[32] Thus wrote, almost half a century ago, a
Russian author, who, with penetrating vision, clearly discerned even
at that time what is recognized by every man to-day who reflects a
little,--the impossibility of continuing life on the former basis,
and the necessity of establishing some new mode of existence.

  [32] Herzen, vol. v., p. 55.

It is plain from the simplest and most ordinary point of view that
it is folly to remain under a roof that threatens to fall, and
that one must leave it. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine a more
miserable situation than that of the present Christian world,
with its nations arrayed in arms one against the other, with its
ever increasing taxes for the purpose of supporting its growing
armaments, with the burning hatred of the working-classes for the
rich, with war suspended above all like the sword of Damocles ready
to fall, as it may, at any moment.

It is doubtful whether any revolution could be more disastrous than
the present social order, or rather disorder, with its perpetual
victims of overwork, misery, drunkenness, dissipation, with all the
horrors of impending war that in one year will sacrifice more lives
than all the revolutions of the present century.

What will become of mankind if each one fulfils that which God
demands through the conscience that is in him. Shall I be safe if,
under the orders of my master, I accomplish in his great workshop
the tasks he has set me, although, ignorant of his final plans, I
may think it strange? Nor is it alone the question of the future
that troubles men when they hesitate to do the master's bidding.
They are concerned about the question as to how they are to live
without the familiar conditions which we call science, art,
civilization, culture. We feel individually all the burden of our
present way of living; we see that were this order of things to
continue, it would inevitably ruin us; and yet we are anxious to
have these conditions continue, to have our science, our art, our
civilization, and culture remain unchanged. It is as though a man
who dwells in an old house, suffering from cold and discomfort, who
is moreover aware that its walls may tumble at any moment, should
consent to the remodeling of it, only on condition that he may be
allowed to remain there, a condition that is equivalent to a refusal
to have his dwelling rebuilt. "What, if I should leave my house,"
he says, "I should be temporarily deprived of its comforts; the
new house may not be built after all, or it may be constructed on
a new plan, which will lack the conveniences to which I have been
accustomed!" But if the materials and the workmen are ready, it is
probable that the new house will be built, and in a better manner
than the old one; while it is not only probable but certain that
the old house will soon fall into ruins, crushing those who remain
within its walls. In order that the old, everyday conditions of life
may disappear and make room for new and better ones, we must surely
leave behind the old conditions, which are at length become fatal
and impossible, and issue forth to meet the future.

"But science, art, civilization, and culture will cease to be!" But
if all these are only diverse manifestations of truth, the impending
change is to be accomplished for the sake of a further advance
toward truth and its realization. "How, then, can the manifestations
of truth disappear, in consequence of further realization of truth?"
The manifestations of truth will be different, better, loftier, the
error that has been in them will perish, while the verity that is in
them will remain and flourish with renewed vigor.

Return to yourselves, sons of men, and have faith in the gospel, and
in its doctrine of eternal happiness! If you heed not this warning,
you shall all perish like the men slain by Pilate, like those upon
whom the tower of Siloam fell; like millions of other men, who slew
and were slain, who executed and suffered execution, who tortured
and were tortured; as perished the man who so foolishly filled his
granaries, counting on a long life, on the very night when his soul
was required of him. Return, sons of men, and believe in the words
which Christ uttered 1800 years ago, words which He repeats to-day
with greater force, warning us that the evil day He foretold is at
hand, and that our life has reached its last descent of folly and
wickedness.

Now, after so many centuries of futile effort to protect ourselves
by the methods of the pagan system of violence, it should be evident
to every man that all such effort, far from insuring our safety,
tends only to add a new element of danger both to individual and
social existence.

No matter by what names we may be called, nor what garments we may
wear, nor in the presence of what priest we may be anointed, nor
how many millions our subjects may number, nor how many guards
may be posted on our journey, nor how many policemen may protect
our property, nor how many so-called criminals, revolutionists, or
anarchists we may execute; no matter what exploits we may perform,
nor what states we may establish, nor what fortresses and towers
we may erect, from the Tower of Babel to the Eiffel Tower,--we
have before us two ever present and unavoidable conditions, that
deprive our mode of life of all significance: (1) death, that may
overtake each of us at any moment, and (2) the transitory nature
of all our undertakings, that disappear, leaving no trace behind
them. No matter what we may do, found kingdoms, build palaces and
monuments, write poems and songs,--all is but fleeting and leaves no
trace behind. Therefore no matter how much we may attempt to conceal
this from ourselves, we cannot fail to perceive that the true
significance of our life lies neither in our individual, physical
existence, subjected to unavoidable suffering and death, nor in any
institution or social organization.

Whoever you are, you who read these lines, reflect upon your
position and your duties, not upon the position of landowner,
merchant, judge, emperor, president, minister, priest, or
soldier, which you may assume but for a time, not upon the
imaginary duties which these positions impose upon you, but upon
your actual and eternal position as a being, who, after a whole
eternity of non-existence, is called by the will of Some One from
unconsciousness into life, and who may at any moment return whence
he came by the same will. Consider your duties! Not your imaginary
duties of landowner in regard to your estate, nor of merchant to
your capital, nor of emperor, minister, or governor to the State,
but of your real duties, of a being called forth into life and
endowed with love and reason. Do that which He who has sent you
into this world, and to whom you will shortly return, demands of
you. Are you doing what he requires? Are you doing right when, as
landowner or manufacturer, you take the products of the labor of
the poor, and establish your life on this spoliation; or when, as
governor or judge, you do violence in condemning men to death; or
when, as soldier, you prepare for war, for fighting, robbery, and
murder,--are you doing right?

You say that the world is as you find it, that it is inevitable
that it should be as it is, that what you do you are compelled to
do. But can it be that, having so strongly rooted an aversion to
the suffering of men, to violence, to murder; having such a need of
loving your fellow-men, and of being loved by them; seeing clearly,
too, that the greatest good possible to men comes from acknowledging
human brotherhood, from one serving another: can it be that your
heart tells you all this, that you are taught it by your reason,
that science repeats it to you, and yet regardless of it, on the
strength of some mysterious and complicated argument, you are forced
to contradict it all in your daily conduct? Is it possible that,
being a landowner or a capitalist, you should establish your life on
the oppression of the people; that, being an emperor or a president,
you should command armies, and be a leader of murderers; that,
being a functionary of State, you should take from the poor their
hard-earned money for your own benefit, or for the benefit of the
rich; that, being a judge or juror, you should condemn erring men to
torture and death, because the truth has not been revealed to them;
or, above all, is it possible that you, a youth, should enter the
army, doing that upon which all the evil of the world is founded,
that, renouncing your own will, all your human sympathy, you should
engage at the will of others to murder those whom they bid you
murder?

It is impossible!

If you are told that all this is essential for the support of the
existing system of life; that this system, with its pauperism,
famine, prisons, executions, armies, wars, is necessary for society,
and that if it were to be abolished worse evils would follow, you
are told so only by those who benefit by this system; while those
who suffer from it,--and their numbers are ten times greater,--all
think and say the opposite. And at the bottom of your heart you
know that this is false,--that the existing system has had its day,
and must inevitably be remodeled on new foundations; and that there
is no need whatsoever to support it by the sacrifice of human life.

Even supposing that the existing system is necessary, how is it
that you should have to support it by trampling upon all finer
feelings? But who has made you a guardian of this crumbling
structure? Neither has the State, nor society, nor has any one
requested you individually to support it by occupying your position
of landowner, merchant, emperor, priest, or soldier, and you are
well aware that you have accepted and are holding it, not for
purposes of self-denial, for the good of your fellow-men, but for
your own selfish interest; for your greed of gain, vainglory,
ambition, through your indolence or your cowardice. If you do not
desire this position you should not persist in doing what is cruel,
false, and contemptible in order to retain it. If you would once
refrain from these things which you do continually for the purpose
of retaining it, you would lose it at once. If you are a ruler or
an official, make only an attempt to cease polite lying, cease to
take part in violences and executions; if you are a priest, desist
from deceiving; if a soldier, cease killing; if a land-owner or
manufacturer, cease defending your property by roguery and violence;
and forthwith you will lose the position which, as you say, is
forced upon you and seems to you burdensome.

It cannot be that a man should be placed against his will in a
position contrary to conscience.

If you are put in such a position, it is not because it is necessary
for some one to be there, but only because you are willing to accept
it. And therefore, knowing that such a position is directly opposed
to the mandates of your heart, your reason, your faith, and even to
the teaching of that science you believe in, you cannot but pause
to consider, if you wish to keep it, and especially if you try to
justify it, if you are doing what you ought to do.

You might run the risk if you had but the time to see your mistake
and correct it, and if you ran the risk for something worth having.
But when you know for certain that you are liable to die at any
moment, without the slightest possibility either for yourself or for
those whom you have drawn in with you of rectifying your mistake;
and, moreover, since you know that no matter what those about you
may accomplish in the material organization of the world, it will
all very shortly disappear as certainly as you yourself, leaving no
trace behind,--it is surely obvious that you have no inducement to
run the risk of making a mistake so terrible.

This would seem perfectly plain and simple if we did not veil with
hypocrisy the truth that is indubitably revealed to us.

Share what you have with others; do not amass riches; be not vain;
do not rob, torture, or murder men; do not to others what you would
not that others should do to you,--these things have been said
not eighteen hundred but five thousand years ago, and there can
be no doubt of the truth of them. Save for hypocrisy, it would be
impossible, even if one did not obey these rules, not to acknowledge
that they ought to be obeyed, and that those who do not obey them do
wrong.

But you say that there is still the general well-being, for the sake
of which one should deviate from these rules. It is allowable for
the general well-being to kill, torture, and rob. "It is better that
one man should perish than a whole nation," you say, like Caiaphas,
when you are signing death-warrants; or you load your gun to shoot
your fellow-man, who is to perish for the general good; or you
imprison him or take away his goods.

You say that you do these cruel things because you are a part of
society, of the State, and must serve your government and carry out
its laws, as landowner, judge, emperor, or soldier. But if you are
a part of the State and have duties in consequence, you are also a
partaker of the infinite life of God's universe, and have higher
duties in consequence of that.

As your duties to your family or to society are always subject to
the higher duties that depend upon your citizenship in the State, so
your duties of citizenship are subject to the duties arising from
your relations to the life of the universe, from your sonship to
God. And as it would be unwise to cut down telegraph poles in order
to furnish fuel for the benefit of a family or a few people, because
this would be breaking the laws that protect the welfare of the
State; so it is equally unwise, in order to promote the welfare of
the State, to execute or murder a man, because this is breaking the
immutable laws which preserve the welfare of the world.

The obligations of citizenship must be subject to the higher and
eternal obligations on your part in the everlasting life of God, and
must not contradict them. As it was said eighteen hundred years ago
by the disciples of Christ, "Whether it be right in the sight of God
to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye."[33] "We ought to
obey God rather than men."[34]

  [33] Acts iv. 19.

  [34] Acts v. 29.

You are told to believe that in order to maintain an ever changing
system, established but yesterday by a few men in a corner of the
globe, you should commit violent deeds that are against the fixed
and eternal order established by God or reason. Can it be possible?

Do not fail, then, to reflect upon your position of land-owner,
merchant, judge, emperor, president, minister, priest, or
soldier--associated with violence, oppression, deceit, torture, and
murder; refuse to recognize the lawfulness of these crimes. I do
not mean that if you are a landowner you should forthwith give your
land to the poor; or if a capitalist, your money or your factory to
your workmen; or if a czar, a minister, a magistrate, a judge, or a
general, you should forthwith abdicate all your advantages; or if a
soldier, whose occupation in its very nature is based on violence,
you should at once refuse to continue longer a soldier, despite
all the dangers of such a refusal. Should you do this, it will
indeed be an heroic act; but it may happen--and most probably--that
you will not be able to do it. You have connections, a family,
subordinates, chiefs; you may be surrounded by temptations so
strong that you cannot overcome them; but to acknowledge the truth
to be the truth, and not to lie--that you are always able to do.
You can refrain from affirming that you continue to be a landowner
or factory-owner, a merchant, an artist, an author, because you
are thus useful to men; from declaring that you are a governor, an
attorney-general, a czar, not because it is agreeable or you are
accustomed to be such, but for the good of men; from saying that you
remain a soldier, not through fear of punishment, but because you
consider the army indispensable for the protection of men's lives.
To keep from speaking thus falsely before yourself and others--this
you are always able to do, and not only able, but in duty bound to
do, because in this alone--in freeing yourself from falsehood and in
working out the truth--lies the highest duty of your life. And do
but this and it will be sufficient for the situation to change at
once of itself.

One only thing in which you are free and all-powerful has been given
you; all others are beyond you. It is this,--to know the truth and
to profess it. And it is only because of other miserable and erring
men like yourself that you have become a soldier, an emperor, a
landowner, a capitalist, a priest, or a general; that you commit
evil deeds so obviously contrary to the dictates of your heart and
reason; that you torture, rob, and murder men, establishing your
life on their sufferings; and that, above all, instead of performing
your paramount duty of acknowledging and professing the truth which
is known to you, you pretend not to know it, concealing it from
yourself and others, doing the very opposite of what you have been
called to do.

And under what conditions are you doing this? Being liable to die
at any moment, you sign a death-warrant, declare war or take part
in it, pass judgment, torture and rob workmen, live in luxury
surrounded by misery, and teach weak and trusting men that all
this is right and for you is a matter of duty, while all the time
you are in danger of your life being destroyed by a bullet or a
bacillus, and you may be deprived forever of the power to rectify or
counteract the evil you have done to others and to yourself; having
wasted a life given you but once in all eternity, having left undone
in it the one thing for which it was given you.

No matter how trite it may appear to state it, nor how we may
hypocritically deceive ourselves, nothing can destroy the certainty
of the simple and obvious truth that external conditions can
never render safe this life of ours, so fraught with unavoidable
suffering, and ended infallibly by death, that human life can have
no other meaning than the constant fulfilment of that for which the
Almighty Power has sent us here, and for which He has given us one
sure guide in this life, namely, our conscious reason.

This Power does not require from us what is unreasonable and
impossible,--the organization of our temporal, material life,
the life of society, or of the State. He demands of us only what
is reasonable and possible,--to serve the Kingdom of God, which
establishes the unity of mankind, a unity possible only in the
truth; to recognize and profess the truth revealed to us, which it
is always in our power to do.

"Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all
these things shall be added unto you."[35]

  [35] Matt. vi. 33.

The only significance of life consists in helping to establish
the Kingdom of God; and this can be done only by means of the
acknowledgment and profession of the truth by each one of us. "The
kingdom of God cometh not with observation: neither shall they say,
Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold the kingdom of God is within
you."[36]

  [36] Luke xvii. 20, 21.




WHAT IS ART?




TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE


The fundamental thought expressed in this book leads inevitably
to conclusions so new, so unexpected, and so contrary to what is
usually maintained in literary and artistic circles, that although
it is clearly and emphatically expressed (and this I hope has
not been lost in translation), most readers who wish to possess
themselves of it will have to read the work carefully, and to digest
it slowly.

Especially the introductory Chapters II., III., IV., and V.,
need careful perusal by any who, having adopted one or other of
the current theories on beauty and art, may find it difficult to
abandon a preconceived view, and to clear their minds for a fair
appreciation of what is new to them.

The first four chapters raise the problem, and tell us briefly
what has been said by previous writers. Chapter III. gives (in
highly condensed form) the substance of the teaching of some sixty
philosophers on this subject, and since many of them were extremely
confused, the chapter cannot, in the nature of things, be easy
reading.

I should like to remark, in passing, that though Tolstoï in this
chapter (presumably for convenience of verification) refers chiefly
to the compilations of Schasler, Kralik, and Knight, he has gone
behind these authorities to the primary sources. To give a single
instance: in the paragraph on Darwin, the foot-note refers us to
Knight, but the remark that the origin of the art of music may be
traced back to the call of the males to the females in the animal
world will be found in Darwin, but will not be found in Knight.

In Chapter V. we come to Tolstoï's definition of art, which
definition should be kept well in mind while reading the rest of the
book.

No doubt most of those to whom it is an end in itself, who live by
it, or make it their chief occupation, will read this book (or leave
it unread) and go on in their former way, much as Pharaoh, of old,
hardened his heart, and did not sympathize with what Moses had to
say on the labor question. But for those of us who have felt that
art is too valuable a matter to be lost out of our lives, and who,
in their quest for social justice, have met the reproach that they
were sacrificing the pleasures and advantages of art, this book is
of inestimable value, in that it solves a perplexed question of
far-reaching importance to practical life.

To this class of readers neither the masterly elucidation of
the former theories contained in the opening chapters, nor the
explanation of how it has come about that such great importance
is attached to the activity we call art (Chapters VI. and VII.),
nor the explanation and illustrations of the perversion that art
has undergone, nor even the elucidation of the terrible evils this
perversion is producing (XVII.), will equal in significance the
remaining chapters of the book. These show us what to look for
in art, how to distinguish it from counterfeits (XV., XVI., and
XVIII.), treat of the true art of the future (XIX.), and explain how
science and art are linked together in man's life, are directed by
his perception of the meaning of life, and inevitably react on all
he thinks and feels.




THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE


This book of mine, "What is Art?" appears now for the first time
in its true form. More than one edition has already been issued in
Russia, but in each case it has been so mutilated by the "Censor,"
that I request all who are interested in my views on art only to
judge of them by the work in its present shape. The causes which led
to the publication of the book--with my name attached to it--in a
mutilated form were the following: In accordance with a decision I
arrived at long ago,--not to submit my writings to the "Censorship"
(which I consider to be an immoral and irrational institution),
but to print them only in the shape in which they were written,--I
intended not to attempt to print this work in Russia. However, my
good acquaintance, Professor Grote, editor of a Moscow psychological
magazine, having heard of the contents of my work, asked me to
print it in his magazine, and promised me that he would get the
book through the "Censor's" office unmutilated if I would but agree
to a few very unimportant alterations, merely toning down certain
expressions. I was weak enough to agree to this, and it has resulted
in a book appearing under my name, from which not only have some
essential thoughts been excluded, but into which the thoughts of
other men--even thoughts utterly opposed to my own convictions--have
been introduced.

The thing occurred in this way. First, Grote softened my
expressions, and in some cases weakened them. For instance, he
replaced the words: _always_ by _sometimes_, _all_ by _some_,
_Church_ religion by _Roman Catholic_ religion, "_Mother of God_"
by _Madonna_, _patriotism_ by _pseudo-patriotism_, _palaces_
by _palatii_,[37] etc., and I did not consider it necessary
to protest. But when the book was already in type, the Censor
required that whole sentences should be altered, and that instead
of what I said about the evil of landed property, a remark should
be substituted on the evils of a landless proletariate.[38] I
agreed to this also, and to some further alterations. It seemed
not worth while to upset the whole affair for the sake of one
sentence, and when one alteration had been agreed to it seemed not
worth while to protest against a second and a third. So, little by
little, expressions crept into the book which altered the sense
and attributed things to me that I could not have wished to say.
So that by the time the book was printed it had been deprived of
some part of its integrity and sincerity. But there was consolation
in the thought that the book, even in this form, if it contains
something that is good, would be of use to Russian readers whom
it would otherwise not have reached. Things, however, turned out
otherwise. _Nous comptions sans notre hôte._ After the legal term
of four days had already elapsed, the book was seized, and, on
instructions received from Petersburg, it was handed over to the
"Spiritual Censor." Then Grote declined all further participation
in the affair, and the "Spiritual Censor" proceeded to do what he
would with the book. The "Spiritual Censorship" is one of the most
ignorant, venal, stupid, and despotic institutions in Russia. Books
which disagree in any way with the recognized state religion of
Russia, if once it gets hold of them, are almost always totally
suppressed and burnt; which is what happened to all my religious
works when attempts were made to print them in Russia. Probably
a similar fate would have overtaken this work also, had not the
editors of the magazine employed all means to save it. The result
of their efforts was that the "Spiritual Censor," a priest who
probably understands art and is interested in art as much as I
understand or am interested in church services, but who gets a good
salary for destroying whatever is likely to displease his superiors,
struck out all that seemed to him to endanger his position, and
substituted his thoughts for mine wherever he considered it
necessary to do so. For instance, where I speak of Christ going
to the Cross for the sake of the truth He professed, the "Censor"
substituted a statement that Christ died for mankind, _i.e_. he
attributed to me an assertion of the dogma of the Redemption, which
I consider to be one of the most untrue and harmful of Church
dogmas. After correcting the book in this way, the "Spiritual
Censor" allowed it to be printed.

  [37] Tolstoï's remarks on Church religion were re-worded so as to
  seem to relate only to the Western Church, and his disapproval of
  luxurious life was made to apply, not, say, to Queen Victoria or
  Nicholas II., but to the Cæsars or the Pharaohs.--TR.

  [38] The Russian peasant is usually a member of a village commune,
  and has therefore a right to a share in the land belonging to the
  village. Tolstoï disapproves of the order of society which allows
  less land for the support of a village full of people than is
  sometimes owned by a single landed proprietor. The "Censor" will not
  allow disapproval of this state of things to be expressed, but is
  prepared to admit that the laws and customs, say, of England--where
  a yet more extreme form of landed property exists, and the men who
  actually labor on the land usually possess none of it--deserve
  criticism.--TR.

To protest in Russia is impossible--no newspaper would publish such
a protest; and to withdraw my book from the magazine, and place the
editor in an awkward position with the public, was also not possible.

So the matter has remained. A book has appeared under my name
containing thoughts attributed to me which are not mine.

I was persuaded to give my article to a Russian magazine in order
that my thoughts, which may be useful, should become the possession
of Russian readers; and the result has been that my name is affixed
to a work from which it might be assumed that I quite arbitrarily
assert things contrary to the general opinion, without adducing my
reasons; that I only consider false patriotism bad, but patriotism
in general a very good feeling; that I merely deny the absurdities
of the Roman Catholic Church and disbelieve in the Madonna, but
that I believe in the Orthodox Eastern faith and in the "Mother of
God"; that I consider all the writings collected in the Bible to be
holy books, and see the chief importance of Christ's life in the
Redemption of mankind by His death.

I have narrated all this in such detail because it strikingly
illustrates the indubitable truth that all compromise with
institutions of which your conscience disapproves,--compromises
which are usually made for the sake of the general good,--instead
of producing the good you expected, inevitably lead you, not only
to acknowledge the institution you disapprove of, but also to
participate in the evil that institution produces.

I am glad to be able by this statement at least to do something to
correct the error into which I was led by my compromise.

I have also to mention that besides reinstating the parts excluded
by the Censor from the Russian editions, other corrections and
additions of importance have been made in this edition.

  _29th March, 1898._




WHAT IS ART?




