CHAPTER V

CONTRADICTION OF OUR LIFE AND CHRISTIAN CONSCIOUSNESS

     Men consider that they may accept Christianity without changing
     their life--The pagan life-conception no longer corresponds to
     the present age of humanity, which the Christian life-conception
     alone can satisfy--The Christian life-conception is still
     misunderstood by men, but our life itself necessitates its
     acceptance--The requirements of a new life-conception always
     seem unintelligible, mystical, and supernatural--Such, for
     the majority of men, seem the requirements of the Christian
     life-conception--The acceptance of a Christian life-conception
     will inevitably be accomplished both through spiritual and
     material agencies--The fact that men, conscious of a higher
     life-conception, continue to entertain the lower forms of
     life, causes contradiction and suffering, which embitter life
     and require its alteration--Contradictions of our life--The
     economical contradiction, and the suffering it causes to the
     working-men and to the rich--The contradiction of State, and
     the sufferings that arise from obedience to State laws--The
     international contradiction, and its acknowledgment by
     contemporary writers: Komarvosky, Ferri, Booth, Passy, Lawson,
     Wilson, Bartlett, Defourny, Moneta--The military contradiction
     the extreme.


Many causes have contributed toward the misunderstanding of the
teaching of Christ. One of these is that men assumed to understand
the doctrine, when, like the faithful of the Church, they accepted
the statement that it had been transmitted in a supernatural
manner; or, like the scientists, after having investigated certain
of its outward manifestations. Another reason may be found in the
conviction that it is impracticable, and that it may be replaced by
the doctrine of love of humanity. But the principal reason of all
such misconceptions is that men look upon the doctrine of Christ as
one that may be accepted or rejected without any special change in
one's life.

Men, attached by habit to the existing order, shrink from
attempting to change it, hence they agree to consider this doctrine
as a mass of revelations and laws that may be accepted without
making any change in one's life: whereas the doctrine of Christ
is not a doctrine of rules for man to obey, but unfolds a new
life-conception, meant as a guide for men who are now entering upon
a new period, one entirely different from the past.

The life of humanity continues its course and has its stages, like
the life of an individual; each age has its own life-conception,
which a man must adopt whether he will or no. Those who do not adopt
it consciously, adopt it unconsciously. The same change that takes
place in the views of the individual, as life goes on, occurs also
in the existence of nations and of humanity in general.

If a father were to conduct his affairs like a child, his life would
certainly become so unbearable that he would cast about for a
different plan of life, and would eagerly grasp at one better suited
to his years.

And the human race is at the present time passing through a
similar experience, in its transition from a pagan to a Christian
life-conception. A man of the society of the present day finds that
the pagan life-conception is no longer suited to the times, hence he
is induced to submit to the requirements of the Christian religion,
whose truths, however misunderstood and falsely interpreted they
may be, are yet familiar to his ears, and seem to offer the only
practical solution of the contradictions that beset his path. If the
demands of the Christian doctrine seem unintelligible, peculiar, and
dangerous to a man who has hitherto held the social life-conception,
the demands of the latter seemed none the less so to a savage of a
previous age, who neither fully apprehended them, nor was able to
foresee their consequences.

The savage reasoned thus: "It would be folly for me to sacrifice
my peace or my life to defend an incomprehensible, intangible, and
uncertain ideal, family, race, country, and, above all, it would be
dangerous to deliver myself into the hands of an unknown power." But
there came a time in the life of the savage when, on the one hand,
he had begun, although vaguely, to understand the meaning of social
life, as well as that of its chief incentive,--social approval or
condemnation: glory,--while, on the other hand, the sufferings
of his personal life had become so severe that it was no longer
possible for him to go on believing in the truth of his former
life-conception; whereupon he accepted the social and State doctrine
and submitted to its laws.

And he who holds the social life-conception is now undergoing a
similar experience.

"It is madness"--thus reasons the man holding such views--"to
sacrifice one's interests or those of one's family and of one's
country, in order to fulfil the requirements of a law that would
compel one to renounce the most natural and praiseworthy feelings
toward one's self, one's family, and one's country, and, above all,
the guarantee of protection afforded by the State."

But there comes a time when, on the one hand, a vague awakening
consciousness stirs the soul, the consciousness of the higher law,
love of God and one's neighbor, and the sufferings a man endures
from the contradictions of life, compel him to renounce the social
life-conception and to adopt the new Christian life-conception which
is offered him. And this time has now arrived.

To us, who underwent the transition from the individual to the
social life-conception thousands of years ago, this transition
appears to have been both natural and inevitable, just as the
present transition, through which we have been passing these last
1800 years, seems arbitrary, unnatural, and overwhelming. But it
seems so for the simple reason that the former change is a thing
of the past, and has fixed in us certain habits, whereas we are
still practically accomplishing the present transition, and have to
accomplish it consciously.

It was centuries, indeed thousands of years, before the social
life-conception was adopted by all mankind; it passed through
various phases, and we ourselves possess it through heredity,
education, and unconscious habit; hence it seems natural to us. But
5000 years ago it seemed as strange and unnatural to men as the
Christian doctrine in its true meaning seems to them now.

The universal brotherhood of man, the equality of races, the
abolition of property, the anomalous doctrine of non-resistance,
all these requirements of the Christian religion seem to us
impossibilities. But in olden times, thousands of years ago, not
only the requirements of the State, but even those of the family,
as, for instance, the obligation of parents to feed their children,
of children to support their aged parents, and that of conjugal
fidelity, seemed equally impossible. And still more unreasonable
seemed the demands of the State, requiring citizens to submit
to established authority, to pay taxes, to perform military
duty in defense of their country, etc. We find no difficulty in
comprehending these requirements now; they seem perfectly simple
and natural, with nothing mystical or alarming in their aspect;
but five or even three thousand years ago, such demands seemed
intolerable.

Thus the social life-conception served as a foundation for religion,
for at the time when it was first manifested to men it seemed to
them to be utterly incomprehensible, mystical, and supernatural. Now
that we have passed that phase of human life, we can understand the
reasons for the aggregation of men into families, communities, and
states. But in the early ages the demand for these aggregations was
made in the name of the supernatural, and its fulfilment assured by
the same authority.

The patriarchal religion deified the family, the race, the people.
State religions deified the sovereigns and the State. Even at
the present day the uneducated masses, the Russian peasants, for
instance, who call the Czar a God upon earth, obey the laws from
religious instinct, not because their reason counsels them to do so,
nor because they have the least idea of a State.

And to those men of our own times who hold the social
life-conception, the Christian doctrine seems to be a supernatural
religion, whereas in reality there is nothing mystical or
supernatural about it; it is only a doctrine concerning human life,
corresponding with the degree of development which man has attained,
and one which he cannot refuse to accept.

The time will come, and it is already near at hand, when the
Christian foundations of life--equality, brotherly love, community
of goods, non-resistance of evil by violence--will seem as natural
and simple as the foundations of family, social, and State life
appear to us at the present time.

There can be no retrogression for humanity. Men have outgrown the
lower life-conception of the family and the State, and must press
forward to embrace the next higher conception, as they have already
begun to do.

This movement is accomplished in two ways: consciously, by moral
causes; unconsciously, by material ones. It rarely happens that a
man changes his mode of life at the dictates of reason; however
conscious he may be of the new design and purpose revealed to him by
his reason, he goes on in the old fashion until his life has become
intolerably inconsistent, and therefore distressing. Likewise, the
larger portion of mankind, after learning through its religious
teachers a new conception of life and its objects, to which it has
yet to adjust itself, will for a long time pursue its wonted course,
and only make the change in the end because its former life has
become impossible.

In spite of the necessity for a change of life, acknowledged and
proclaimed by our religious guides and admitted by the wisest men,
in spite of the religious respect entertained for these guides, the
majority of men continue to be influenced in life, now additionally
complicated, by their former views. It is as if the father of a
family, knowing well enough how to conduct himself properly, should
through force of habit or thoughtlessness continue to live as if he
were still a child.

At this very moment we are experiencing one of these transitions.
Humanity has outgrown its social, its civic age, and has entered
upon a new epoch. It knows the doctrine that must underlie the
foundations of life in this new epoch; but, yielding to inertia,
it still clings to its former habits. From this inconsistency
between the theory of life and its practice follow a series of
contradictions and sufferings that embitter man's life and compel
him to make a change.

One needs but to compare the practice of life with its theory to be
horrified at the extraordinary contradictions between the conditions
of life and our inner consciousness.

Man's whole life is a continual contradiction of what he knows to
be his duty. This contradiction prevails in every department of
life, in the economical, the political, and the international. As
though his intelligence were forgotten and his faith temporarily
eclipsed,--for he must have faith, else would his life have no
permanence,--he acts in direct opposition to the dictates of his
conscience and his common sense.

In our economical and international relations we are guided by
the fundamental principles of bygone ages,--principles quite
contradictory to our mental attitude and the conditions of our
present life.

It was right for a man who believed in the divine origin of
slavery, and in its necessity, to live in the relation of a master
to his slaves. But is such a life possible in these days? A man
of antiquity might believe himself justified in taking advantage
of his fellow-man, oppressing him for generations, merely because
he believed in diversity of origin, noble or base, descent from
Ham or Japheth. Not only have the greatest philosophers of ancient
times, the teachers of mankind, Plato and Aristotle, justified the
existence of slavery and adduced proofs of its legality, but no
longer than three centuries ago those who described an ideal state
of society could not picture it without slaves.

In ancient times, and even in the Middle Ages, it was honestly
thought that men were not born equal, that the men worthy of respect
were only Persians, only Greeks, only Romans, or only Frenchmen;
but no one believes it now. And the enthusiastic advocates of the
principles of aristocracy and patriotism at this present day cannot
believe in their own statements.

We all know, and cannot help knowing, even if we had never heard
it defined and never attempted to define it ourselves, that we all
possess an inherent conviction deep in our hearts of the truth of
that fundamental doctrine of Christianity, that we are all children
of one Father, yea, every one of us, wheresoever we may live,
whatsoever language we may speak; that we are all brothers, subject
only to the law of love implanted in our hearts by our common Father.

Whatever may be the habits of thought or the degree of education of
a man of our time, whether he be an educated liberal, whatsoever
his shade of opinion, a philosopher, whatsoever may be his system,
a scientist, an economist of any of the various schools, an
uneducated adherent of any religious faith,--every man in these
days knows that in the matter of life and worldly goods all men
have equal rights; that no man is either better or worse than his
fellow-men, but that all men are born free and equal. Every man
has an instinctive assurance of this fact, and yet he sees his
fellow-beings divided into two classes, the one in poverty and
distress, which labors and is oppressed, the other idle, tyrannical,
luxurious; and not only does he see all this, but, whether
voluntarily or otherwise, he falls in line with one or the other of
these divisions,--a course repugnant to his reason. Hence he must
suffer both from his sense of the incongruity and his own share in
it.

Whether he be master or slave, a man in these days is forever
haunted by this distressing inconsistency between his ideal and the
actual fact, nor can he fail to perceive the suffering that springs
therefrom.

The masses--that is to say, the majority of mankind, who suffer
and toil, their lives dull and uninteresting, never enlivened by a
ray of brightness, enduring numberless privations--are those who
recognize most clearly the sharp contrasts between what is and what
ought to be, between the professions of mankind and their actions.

They know that they work like slaves, that they are perishing in
want and in darkness, that they may minister to the pleasures of
the minority. And it is this very consciousness that enhances its
bitterness; indeed, it constitutes the essence of their suffering.

A slave in old times knew that he was a slave by birth, whereas the
working-man of our day, while he feels himself to be a slave, knows
that he ought not to be one, and suffers the tortures of Tantalus
from his unsatisfied yearning for that which not only could be
granted him, but which is really his due. The sufferings of the
working-classes that spring from the contradictions of their fate
are magnified tenfold by the envy and hatred which are the natural
fruits of the sense of these contradictions.

A working-man in our period, even though his work may be less
fatiguing than the labor of the ancient slave, and even were he to
succeed in obtaining the eight-hour system and twelve-and-sixpence
a day, still has the worst of it, because he manufactures objects
which he will never use or enjoy;--he is not working for himself;
he works in order to gratify the luxurious and idle, to increase
the wealth of the capitalist, the mill-owner, or manufacturer. He
knows that all this goes on in a world where men acknowledge certain
propositions such as the economic principle that labor is wealth,
that it is an act of injustice to employ another man's labor for
one's own benefit, that an illegal act is punishable by law, in a
world, moreover, where the doctrine of Christ is professed,--that
doctrine which teaches us that all men are brothers, and that it
is the duty of a man to serve his neighbor and to take no unfair
advantage of him.

He realizes all this, and must suffer keenly from the shocking
contradiction between the world as it should be and the world as
it is. "According to what I am told and what I hear men profess,"
says a working-man to himself, "I ought to be a free man equal to
any other man, and loved; I am a slave, hated and despised." Then
he in his turn is filled with hatred, and seeks to escape from his
position, to overthrow the enemy that oppresses him, and to get the
upper hand himself.

They say: "It is wrong for a workman to wish himself in the place
of a capitalist, or for a poor man to envy the rich." But this is
false. If this were a world where God had ordained masters and
slaves, rich and poor, it would be wrong for the working-man or the
poor man to wish himself in the place of the rich: but this is not
so; he wishes it in a world which professes the doctrine of the
gospel, whose first principle is embodied in the relation of the
son to the Father, and consequently of fraternity and equality.
And however reluctant men may be to acknowledge it, they cannot
deny that one of the first conditions of Christian life is love,
expressed, not in words, but in deeds.

The man of education suffers even more from these inconsistencies. If
he has any faith whatever he believes, perhaps, in fraternity,--at
least in the sentiment humanity; and if not in the sentiment
humanity, then in justice; and if not in justice, then surely
in science; and he cannot help knowing all the while that
the conditions of his life are opposed to every principle of
Christianity, humanity, justice, and science.

He knows that the habits of life in which he has been bred, and
whose abandonment would cause him much discomfort, can only be
supported by the weary and often suicidal labor of the down-trodden
working-class--that is, by the open infraction of those principles
of Christianity, humanity, justice, and even of science (political
science), in which he professes to believe. He affirms his faith
in the principles of fraternity, humanity, justice, and political
science, and yet the oppression of the working-class is an
indispensable factor in his daily life, and he constantly employs it
to attain his own ends in spite of his principles; and he not only
lives in this manner, but he devotes all his energies to maintain a
system which is directly opposed to all his beliefs.

We are brothers: but every morning my brother or my sister performs
for me the most menial offices. We are brothers: but I must have
my morning cigar, my sugar, my mirror, or what not,--objects whose
manufacture has often cost my brothers and sisters their health,
yet I do not for that reason forbear to use these things; on the
contrary, I even demand them. We are brothers: and yet I support
myself by working in some bank, commercial house, or shop, and am
always trying to raise the price of the necessities of life for
my brothers and sisters. We are brothers: I receive a salary for
judging, convicting, and punishing the thief or the prostitute,
whose existence is the natural outcome of my own system of life, and
I fully realize that I should neither condemn nor punish. We are all
brothers: yet I make my living by collecting taxes from the poor,
that the rich may live in luxury and idleness. We are brothers:
and yet I receive a salary for preaching a pseudo-Christian
doctrine, in which I do not myself believe, thus hindering men from
discovering the true one; I receive a salary as priest or bishop for
deceiving people in a matter which is of vital importance to them.
We are brothers: but I make my brother pay for all my services,
whether I write books for him, educate him, or prescribe for him
as a physician. We are all brothers: but I receive a salary for
fitting myself to be a murderer, for learning the art of war, or for
manufacturing arms and ammunition and building fortresses.

The whole existence of our upper classes is utterly contradictory,
and the more sensitive a man's nature the more painful is the
incongruity.

A man with a sensitive conscience can enjoy no peace of mind in such
a life. Even supposing that he succeeds in stifling the reproaches
of his conscience, he is still unable to conquer his fears.

Those men and women of the dominant classes who have hardened
themselves, and have succeeded in stifling their consciences,
must still suffer through their fear of the hatred they inspire.
They are quite well aware of its existence among the laboring
classes; they know that it can never die; they know, too, that
the working-men realize the deceits practised upon them, and the
abuses that they endure; that they have started organizations to
throw off the yoke, and to take vengeance on their oppressors. The
happiness of the upper classes is poisoned by fear of the impending
calamity, foreshadowed by the unions, the strikes, and First of
May demonstrations. Recognizing the calamity that threatens them,
their fear turns to defiance and hatred. They know that if they
relax for one moment in this conflict with the oppressed, they are
lost, because their slaves, already embittered, grow more and more
so with every day's oppression. The oppressors, though they may
see it, cannot cease to oppress. They realize that they themselves
are doomed from the moment they abate one jot of their severity.
So they go on in their career of oppression, notwithstanding their
affectation of interest in the welfare of the working-men, the
eight-hour system, the laws restricting the labor of women and
children, the pensions, and the rewards. All this is mere pretense,
or at best the natural anxiety of the master to keep his slave in
good condition; but the slave remains a slave all the while, and the
master, who cannot live without the slave, is less willing than ever
to set him free. The governing classes find themselves in regard to
the working-men very much in the position of one who has overthrown
his opponent, and who holds him down, not so much because he does
not choose to let him escape, but because he knows that should he
for one moment lose his hold on him, he would lose his own life, for
the vanquished man is infuriated, and holds a knife in his hand.

Hence our wealthy classes, whether their consciences be tender or
hardened, cannot enjoy the advantages they have wrung from the poor,
as did the ancients, who were convinced of the justice of their
position. All the pleasures of life are poisoned either by remorse
or fear.

Such is the economic inconsistency. Still more striking is that of
the civil power.

A man is trained first of all in habits of obedience to state laws.
At the present time every act of our lives is under the supervision
of the State, and in accordance with its dictates a man marries and
is divorced, rears his children, and in some countries accepts the
religion it prescribes. What is this law, then, that determines the
life of mankind? Do men believe in it? Do they consider it true? Not
at all. In most cases they recognize its injustice, they despise
it, and yet they obey it. It was fit that the ancients should obey
their law. It was chiefly religious, and they sincerely believed
it to be the only true law, to which all men owed obedience. Is
that the case with us? We cannot refuse to acknowledge that the
law of our State is not the eternal law, but only one of the many
laws of many states, all equally imperfect, and frequently wholly
false and unjust,--a law that has been openly discussed in all its
aspects by the public press. It was fit that the Hebrew should obey
his laws, since he never doubted that the finger of God Himself
had traced them; or for the Roman, who believed that he received
them from the nymph Egeria; or even for those peoples who believed
that the rulers who made the laws were anointed of God, or that
legislative assemblies have both the will and the ability to devise
laws as good as possible. But we know that laws are the offspring
of party conflicts, false dealing, and the greed of gain, that they
are not, and can never be, the depository of true justice; and
therefore it is impossible for people of the present day to believe
that obedience to civil or state laws can ever satisfy the rational
demands of human nature. Men have long since realized that there
is no sense in obeying a law whose honesty is more than doubtful,
and therefore they must suffer when, though privately denying its
prerogative, they still conform to it. When a man's whole life is
held in bondage by laws whose injustice, cruelty, and artificiality
he plainly discerns, and yet is compelled to obey these laws under
penalty of punishment, he must suffer; it cannot be otherwise.

We recognize the disadvantages of custom-houses and import duties,
but we are yet obliged to pay them; we see the folly of supporting
the court and its numerous officials, we admit the harmful influence
of church preaching, and still we are compelled to support both; we
also admit the cruel and iniquitous punishments inflicted by the
courts, and yet we play our part in them; we acknowledge that the
distribution of land is wrong and immoral, but we have to submit to
it; and despite the fact that we deny the necessity for armies or
warfare, we are made to bear the heavy burden of supporting armies
and waging war.

These contradictions, however, are but trifling in comparison with
the one which confronts us in the problem of our international
relations, and which cries aloud for solution, since both human
reason and human life are at stake, and this is the antagonism
between the Christian faith and war.

We, Christian nations, whose spiritual life is one and the same,
who welcome the birth of every wholesome and profitable thought
with joy and pride, from whatsoever quarter of the globe it may
spring, regardless of race or creed; we, who love not only the
philanthropists, the poets, the philosophers, and the scientists
of other lands; we, who take as much pride in the heroism of a
Father Damien as if it was our own; we, who love the French, the
Germans, the Americans, and the English, not only esteeming their
qualities, but ready to meet them with cordial friendship; we, who
not only would be shocked to consider war with them in the light of
an exploit,--when we picture to ourselves the possibility that at
some future day a difference may arise between us that can only be
reconciled by murder, and that any one of us may be called upon to
play his part in an inevitable tragedy,--we shudder at the thought.

It was well enough for a Hebrew, a Greek, or a Roman to maintain
the independence of his country by murder, and even to subdue other
nations by the same means, because he firmly believed himself a
member of the one favored people beloved by God, and that all the
others were Philistines and barbarians. Also, in the times of the
Middle Ages men might well have held these opinions, and even they
who lived toward the end of the last century and at the beginning
of this. But we, whatever provocation may be offered us, we cannot
possibly believe as they did; and this difficulty is so painful for
us in these times that it has become impossible to live without
trying to solve it.

"We live in a time replete with contradictions," writes Count
Komarovsky, the Professor of International Law, in his learned
treatise. "Everywhere the tone of the public press seems to indicate
a general desire for peace, and shows the need of it for all
nations. And the representatives of the government, in their private
as well as in their public capacity, in parliamentary speeches and
diplomatic negotiations, express themselves in the same temper.
Nevertheless, the governments increase the military force year after
year, impose new taxes, negotiate loans, and will leave as a legacy
to future generations the responsibilities of the present mistaken
policy. How are the word and the deed at variance!

"By way of justification the governments claim that all their
armaments and the consequent outlay are simply defensive in their
character, but to the uninitiated the question naturally suggests
itself: Whence is to come the attack if all the great powers are
devoting themselves _to a defensive policy_? It certainly looks as
if each one of them lived in hourly expectation of attack from his
neighbor, and the consequence is a strife between the different
governments to surpass each other in strength. The very existence of
this spirit of rivalry favors the chances of war: the nations, no
longer able to support the increased armament, will sooner or later
prefer open war to the tension in which they live and the ruin which
menaces them, so that the slightest pretext will avail to kindle
in Europe the conflagration of a general war. It is a mistake to
suppose that such a crisis will heal the political and economic ills
under which we groan. The experience of late wars shows us that each
one served only to exacerbate the animosity of the nations against
each other, to increase the unbearable burden of military despotism,
and has involved the political and economic situation of Europe in a
more melancholy and pitiable plight than ever."

"Contemporary Europe keeps under arms nine millions of men," says
Enrico Ferri, "and a reserve force of fifteen millions, at a cost
of four milliards of francs a year. By increasing its armament
it paralyzes more and more the springs of social and individual
welfare, and may be compared to a man who, in order to obtain
weapons, condemns himself to anæmia, thereby depriving himself of
the strength to use the weapons he is accumulating, whose weight
will eventually overpower him."

The same idea has been expressed by Charles Booth, in his address
delivered in London, July 26, 1887, before the Association for the
Reform and Codification of National Laws. Having mentioned the same
numbers,--over nine millions in active service and fifteen millions
in reserve, and the enormous sums required to support these armies
and armaments,--he says, in substance: "These numbers represent
but a small part of the actual expenditure, because outside of the
expenses enumerated in the budgets of the nations we must take
into consideration the great losses to society from the removal
of so many able-bodied men, lost to industry in all its branches,
and moreover, the interest on the enormous sums spent in military
preparations, which yield no returns. As might be expected, the
constantly increasing national debts are the inevitable result of
these outlays in preparation for war. By far the greater proportion
of the debt of Europe has been contracted for munitions of war.
The sum total is four milliards of pounds, or forty milliards of
roubles, and these debts are increasing every year."

Komarovsky, whom we lately quoted, says elsewhere: "We are living
in hard times. Everywhere we hear complaints of the stagnation of
commerce and industry, and of the wretched economical situation.
They tell us of the hard conditions of life among the laboring
classes and the general impoverishment of the people. But regardless
of this, governments, determined to maintain their independence, go
to the utmost limits of folly. Additional taxes are levied on every
side, and the financial oppression of the people knows no bounds.
If we glance at the budgets of European states for the last hundred
years, we shall be struck with their constantly increasing figures.
How can we explain this abnormal condition that sooner or later
threatens to overwhelm us with inevitable bankruptcy?

"Most assuredly it is caused by the expense of maintaining armies,
which absorbs one-third, or even one-half, of the budget of all
European nations. The saddest part of it, however, is that there is
no end to this increase of budgets and consequent impoverishment of
the masses. What is socialism but a protest against the abnormal
situation in which the majority of mankind of our continent finds
itself?"

"We are being ruined," says Frédéric Passy, in a paper read before
the last Peace Congress in London (1890), "to enable us to take part
in the senseless wars of the future, or to pay the interest of debts
left us by the criminal and insane wars and contests of the past. We
shall perish with hunger, to have success in murder."

Going on to speak of the opinion of France in regard to this
matter, he says: "We believe that now, a hundred years after the
proclamation formulating the belief in the rights of men and
citizens, the time has come to declare the rights of nations and
to repudiate once and for all time those undertakings of fraud and
violence, which, under the name of conquests, are actually crimes
against humanity, and which, however much the pride of nations or
the ambition of monarchs may seek to justify them, serve only to
enervate the conquerors."

"I am always very much surprised at the way religion is carried on
in this country," says Sir Wilfred Lawson before the same Congress.
"You send a boy to the Sunday-school, and you tell him: 'My dear
boy, you must love your enemies; if any boy strikes you, don't
strike him again; try to reform him by loving him.' Well, the boy
goes to the Sunday-school till he is fourteen or fifteen years of
age, and then his friends say, 'Put him in the army.' What has he to
do in the army? Why, not love his enemies, but whenever he sees an
enemy, to run him through the body with a bayonet is the nature of
all religious teaching in this country. I do not think that that is
a very good way of carrying out the precepts of religion. I think if
it is a good thing for the boy to love his enemy, it is a good thing
for the man to love his enemy."...

And later!

"In Europe great Christian nations keep among them 28,000,000 of
armed men to settle quarrels by killing one another, instead of
by arguing. This is what the Christian nations of the world are
doing at this moment. It is a very expensive way also; for in a
publication which I saw--I believe it was correct--it was made
out that since the year 1812 these nations had spent the almost
incredible amount of 1,500,000,000 of money in preparing and
settling their quarrels by killing one another. Now it seems to
me that with that state of things one of two positions must be
accepted,--either that Christianity is a failure, or that those
who profess to expound Christianity have failed in expounding it
properly."

"So long as our men-of-war are not disarmed and our army not
disbanded, we have no right to be called a Christian nation," said
Mr. F. L. Wilson.

In a conversation in regard to the duty of Christian ministers in
the matter of preaching against war, Mr. G. D. Bartlett remarked,
among other things:--

"If I understand the Scriptures, I say that men are only playing
with Christianity when they ignore this question.... I have lived
a long life, I have heard many sermons, and I can say without any
exaggeration that I never heard universal peace recommended from
the pulpit half a dozen times in my life.... Some twenty years
ago I happened to stand in a drawing-room where there were forty
or fifty people, and I dared to make the proposition that war was
incompatible with Christianity. They looked upon me as an arrant
fanatic. The idea that we could get on without war was regarded as
unmitigated weakness and folly."

A Catholic priest, the Abbé Defourny, has spoken in a similar
spirit. "One of the first commandments of the eternal law, engraved
in every man's conscience," says the Abbé Defourny, "forbids a man
to take his neighbor's life or shed his blood" (without sufficient
cause, being forced to it by stress of circumstance). "This is a
commandment more deeply engraved in the human heart than all the
others.... But as soon as it becomes a question of war, that is,
a question of the wholesale shedding of human blood, men in these
days do not wait for a sufficient cause. Those who are active in
war forget to ask themselves if there is any justification for the
numerous manslaughters that take place, whether they are just or
unjust, legal or illegal, innocent or criminal, or whether they
break the principal law that forbids us to commit murder" (without
just cause). "Their conscience is silent.... War has ceased to be a
matter connected with morality. The soldier, amid all the fatigues
and dangers he undergoes, knows no joy but conquest, no sorrow but
defeat. Don't tell me that they serve the country. A great genius
has long ago answered this statement in words that have since become
a proverb: 'Take away justice, and what is then a nation but a great
band of robbers? And is not a band of robbers in itself a small
state? They, too, have their laws. They, too, fight for booty, and
even honor.'

"The aim of this organization" (it was a question of establishing
international tribunals) "is to influence the European nations until
they cease to be nations of thieves, and their armies bands of
robbers. Yes, our armies are nothing less than a rabble of slaves
belonging to one or two monarchs and their ministers, who, as we all
know, rule them tyrannically and without any responsibility other
than nominal, as we know.

"It is the characteristic of a slave that he is a tool in the hands
of his master. Such are the soldiers, officers, and generals, who
at the beck of their sovereign go forth to slay or to be slain.
There is a military slavery, and it is the worst of all slaveries,
particularly now, when by means of conscription it forges chains for
the necks of all the free and strong men of the nation, in order to
use them as instruments of murder, to make them executioners and
butchers of human flesh, since that is the sole reason why they are
drafted and drilled....

"Two or three potentates in their cabinets make treaties, without
protocols, without publicity, and therefore without responsibility,
sending men to the slaughter.

"'Protests against increased armaments began before our time,' said
Signor E. G. Moneta. Listen to Montesquieu: 'France' (for France we
might now substitute Europe) 'is perishing from an overgrown army. A
new disease is spreading throughout Europe. It has affected kings,
and obliges them to maintain an incredible number of troops. It is
like a rash, and therefore contagious; for no sooner does one nation
increase its troops than all the others follow suit. Nothing can
result from this condition of affairs but general calamity.

"'Each government maintains as many troops as it would require if
its people were threatened with destruction, and this state of
tension is called peace. Europe is in truth ruined. If private
individuals were reduced to such straits as these, the richest man
among them would be practically destitute. The wealth of the world
and its commerce are in our hands, and yet we are poor.'

"This was written almost 150 years ago. It seems like a picture of
the present. One thing alone has changed--the form of government.
In the time of Montesquieu it was said that the reason for the
maintenance of large armies might be found in the unlimited power of
kings, who carried on war in the hope of increasing their private
property and their glory.

"Then it was said: 'Ah! if the people could but choose
representatives who would have a right to refuse the governments
when they called for soldiers and money--there would be an end of
a military policy.' Now, almost everywhere in Europe there are
representative governments, and still the military expenditure in
preparation for war has increased in frightful proportion.

"It looks as though the folly of the rulers had passed into the
ruling classes. Now they no longer fight because one king has
been rude to another king's mistress, as in the time of Louis
XIV., but by exaggerating the importance of national dignity
and patriotism,--emotions which are natural and honorable in
themselves,--and exciting the public opinion of one country against
the other, until they have arrived at such a pitch of sensitiveness
that it is enough to say, for instance (even were the report to
prove false), one country has refused to receive the ambassador
of another, to precipitate the most frightful and disastrous war.
Europe maintains under arms at the present time more soldiers than
were in the field during the great wars of Napoleon. Every citizen
on our continent, with a few exceptions, is forced to spend several
years in the barracks. Fortresses, arsenals, men-of-war are built,
new firearms are invented, which in a short time are replaced by
others, because science, which should always be devoted to the
promotion of human welfare, contributes, it must be regretfully
acknowledged, to human destruction, inventing ever new means of
killing greater numbers of men in the shortest possible time.

"In these stupendous preparations for slaughter, and in the
maintenance of these vast numbers of troops, hundreds of millions
are yearly expended--sums that would suffice to educate the masses,
and to carry on the most important works of public improvement,
thereby contributing toward a perfect solution of the social problem.

"Therefore, notwithstanding all our scientific victories, Europe
finds herself in this respect not one whit better off than she was
in the most barbarous times of the Middle Ages. Every one laments
a state of things which is neither war nor peace, and longs to be
delivered from it. The heads of governments emphatically affirm
that they desire peace, and eagerly emulate each other in their
pacific utterances, but almost immediately thereafter they propose
to the legislative assemblies measures for increasing the armament,
asserting that they take these precautions for the preservation of
peace.

"But this is not the sort of peace we care for, and the nations
are not deceived by it. True peace has for its foundation mutual
confidence, whereas these appalling armaments show, if not a
declared hostility, at least a secret distrust among the different
nations. What should we say of a man who, wishing to show his
friendly feelings to his neighbor, should invite him to consider a
certain scheme, holding a loaded pistol while he unfolds it before
him?

"It is this monstrous contradiction between the assurances of peace
and the military policy of the governments, that good citizens wish
to put an end to, at any cost."

One is amazed to learn that there are 60,000 suicides reported in
Europe, not including Turkey and Russia, every year, and these are
all well-substantiated cases; but it would be far more remarkable
if the number were less. Any man in these times who investigates the
antagonism between his convictions and his actions, finds himself
in a desperate plight. Setting aside the many other contradictions
between actual life and conviction which abound in the life of a
man of the present day, to view the military situation in Europe in
the light of its profession of Christianity is enough to make a man
doubt the existence of human reason, and drive him to escape from a
barbarous and insane world by putting an end to his own life. This
inconsistency, which is the very quintessence of all the others, is
so shocking, that one can only go on living and taking any part in
it, by dint of trying not to think about it,--to forget it all.

What can it mean? We are Christians, who not only profess to love
one another, but are actually leading one common life; our pulses
beat in harmony; we meet each other in love and sympathy, deriving
support and counsel from our mutual intercourse. Were it not for
this sympathy life would have no meaning. But at any moment some
demented ruler may utter a few rash words, to which another gives
reply, and lo! I am ordered to march at the risk of my life, to slay
those who have never injured me, whom I really love. And it is no
remote contingency, but an inevitable climax for which we are all
preparing ourselves.

Fully to realize this is enough to drive one to madness and to
suicide, and this is but too common an occurrence, especially among
soldiers.

A moment's reflection shows us why this seems an inevitable
conclusion.

It explains the frightful intensity with which men plunge into all
kinds of dissipation,--wine, tobacco, cards, newspaper reading,
travel, all manner of shows and pleasures. They pursue all these
amusements in deadly earnest, as if they were serious avocations,
as indeed they are. If men possessed none of these distractions,
half of them would kill themselves out of hand, for to live a life
that is made up of contradictions is simply unbearable, and such is
the life that most of us lead at the present day. We are living in
direct contradiction to our inmost convictions. This contradiction
is evident both in economic and in political relations; it
is manifested most unmistakably in the inconsistency of the
acknowledgment of the Christian law of brotherly love and military
conscription, which obliges men to hold themselves in readiness
to take each other's lives,--in short, every man to be at once a
Christian and a gladiator.




