CHAPTER III


I begin with the founder of æsthetics, Baumgarten (1714-1762).

According to Baumgarten,[45] the object of logical knowledge is
Truth, the object of æsthetic (_i.e._ sensuous) knowledge is Beauty.
Beauty is the Perfect (the Absolute) recognized through the senses;
Truth is the Perfect perceived through reason; Goodness is the
Perfect reached by moral will.

  [45] Schasler, p. 361.

Beauty is defined by Baumgarten as a correspondence, _i.e._ an order
of the parts in their mutual relations to each other and in their
relation to the whole. The aim of beauty itself is to please and
excite a desire, "_Wohlgefallen und Erregung eines Verlangens_." (A
position precisely the opposite of Kant's definition of the nature
and sign of beauty.)

With reference to the manifestations of beauty, Baumgarten considers
that the highest embodiment of beauty is seen by us in nature, and
he therefore thinks that the highest aim of art is to copy nature.
(This position also is directly contradicted by the conclusions of
the latest æstheticians.)

Passing over the unimportant followers of Baumgarten,--Maier,
Eschenburg, and Eberhard,--who only slightly modified the doctrine
of their teacher by dividing the pleasant from the beautiful, I will
quote the definitions given by writers who came immediately after
Baumgarten, and defined beauty quite in another way. These writers
were Sulzer, Mendelssohn, and Moritz. They, in contradiction to
Baumgarten's main position, recognize as the aim of art, not beauty,
but goodness. Thus Sulzer (1720-1777) says that only that can be
considered beautiful which contains goodness. According to his
theory, the aim of the whole life of humanity is welfare in social
life. This is attained by the education of the moral feelings, to
which end art should be subservient. Beauty is that which evokes and
educates this feeling.

Beauty is understood almost in the same way by Mendelssohn
(1729-1786). According to him, art is the carrying forward of the
beautiful, obscurely recognized by feeling, till it becomes the true
and good. The aim of art is moral perfection.[46]

  [46] Schasler, p. 369.

For the æstheticians of this school, the ideal of beauty is a
beautiful soul in a beautiful body. So that these æstheticians
completely wipe out Baumgarten's division of the Perfect (the
Absolute), into the three forms of Truth, Goodness, and Beauty; and
Beauty is again united with the Good and the True.

But this conception is not only not maintained by the later
æstheticians, but the æsthetic doctrine of Winckelmann arises, again
in complete opposition. This divides the mission of art from the aim
of goodness in the sharpest and most positive manner, makes external
beauty the aim of art, and even limits it to visible beauty.

According to the celebrated work of Winckelmann (1717-1767), the law
and aim of all art is beauty only, beauty quite separated from and
independent of goodness. There are three kinds of beauty: (1) beauty
of form, (2) beauty of idea, expressing itself in the position of
the figure (in plastic art), (3) beauty of expression, attainable
only when the two first conditions are present. This beauty of
expression is the highest aim of art, and is attained in antique
art; modern art should therefore aim at imitating ancient art.[47]

  [47] Schasler, pp. 388-390.

Art is similarly understood by Lessing, Herder, and afterwards by
Goethe and by all the distinguished æstheticians of Germany till
Kant, from whose day, again, a different conception of art commences.

Native æsthetic theories arose during this period in England,
France, Italy, and Holland, and they, though not taken from the
German, were equally cloudy and contradictory. And all these
writers, just like the German æstheticians, founded their theories
on a conception of the Beautiful, understanding beauty in the sense
of a something existing absolutely, and more or less intermingled
with Goodness or having one and the same root. In England, almost
simultaneously with Baumgarten, even a little earlier, Shaftesbury,
Hutcheson, Home, Burke, Hogarth, and others, wrote on art.

According to Shaftesbury (1670-1713), "That which is beautiful
is harmonious and proportionable, what is harmonious and
proportionable is true, and what is at once both beautiful and true
is of consequence agreeable and good."[48] Beauty, he taught, is
recognized by the mind only. God is fundamental beauty; beauty and
goodness proceed from the same fount.

  [48] Knight, "Philosophy of the Beautiful," i., pp. 165, 166.

So that, although Shaftesbury regards beauty as being something
separate from goodness, they again merge into something inseparable.

According to Hutcheson (1694-1747--"Inquiry into the Original of our
Ideas of Beauty and Virtue"), the aim of art is beauty, the essence
of which consists in evoking in us the perception of uniformity amid
variety. In the recognition of what is art we are guided by "an
internal sense." This internal sense may be in contradiction to the
ethical one. So that, according to Hutcheson, beauty does not always
correspond with goodness, but separates from it and is sometimes
contrary to it.[49]

  [49] Schasler, p. 289. Knight, pp. 168, 169.

According to Home, Lord Kames (1696-1782), beauty is that which is
pleasant. Therefore beauty is defined by taste alone. The standard
of true taste is that the maximum of richness, fullness, strength,
and variety of impression should be contained in the narrowest
limits. That is the ideal of a perfect work of art.

According to Burke (1729-1797--"Philosophical Inquiry into the
Origin of our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful"), the sublime
and beautiful, which are the aim of art, have their origin in the
promptings of self-preservation and of society. These feelings,
examined in their source, are means for the maintenance of the race
through the individual. The first (self-preservation) is attained by
nourishment, defense, and war; the second (society) by intercourse
and propagation. Therefore self-defense, and war, which is bound
up with it, is the source of the sublime; sociability, and the
sex-instinct, which is bound up with it, is the source of beauty.[50]

  [50] R. Kralik, "Weltschönheit, Versuch einer allgemeinen Æsthetik,"
  pp. 304-306.

Such were the chief English definitions of art and beauty in the
eighteenth century.

During that period, in France, the writers on art were Père André
and Batteux, with Diderot, D'Alembert, and, to some extent,
Voltaire, following later.

According to Père André ("Essai sur le Beau," 1741), there are three
kinds of beauty,--divine beauty, natural beauty, and artificial
beauty.[51]

  [51] Knight, p. 101.

According to Batteux (1713-1780), art consists in imitating the
beauty of nature, its aim being enjoyment.[52] Such is also
Diderot's definition of art.

  [52] Schasler, p. 316.

The French writers, like the English, consider that it is taste that
decides what is beautiful. And the laws of taste are not only not
laid down, but it is granted that they cannot be settled. The same
view was held by D'Alembert and Voltaire.[53]

  [53] Knight, pp. 102-104.

According to the Italian æsthetician of that period, Pagano, art
consists in uniting the beauties dispersed in nature. The capacity
to perceive these beauties is taste, the capacity to bring them
into one whole is artistic genius. Beauty commingles with goodness,
so that beauty is goodness made visible, and goodness is inner
beauty.[54]

  [54] R. Kralik, p. 124.

According to the opinion of other Italians: Muratori
(1672-1750),--"_Riflessioni sopra il buon gusto intorno le science
e le arti_,"--and especially Spaletti,[55]--"_Saggio sopra la
bellezza_" (1765),--art amounts to an egotistical sensation, founded
(as with Burke) on the desire for self-preservation and society.

  [55] Spaletti, Schasler, p. 328.

Among Dutch writers, Hemsterhuis (1720-1790), who had an influence
on the German æstheticians and on Goethe, is remarkable. According
to him, beauty is that which gives most pleasure, and that gives
most pleasure which gives us the greatest number of ideas in the
shortest time. Enjoyment of the beautiful, because it gives the
greatest quantity of perceptions in the shortest time, is the
highest notion to which man can attain.[56]

  [56] Schasler, pp. 331-333.

Such were the æsthetic theories outside Germany during the last
century. In Germany, after Winckelmann, there again arose a
completely new æsthetic theory, that of Kant (1724-1804), which,
more than all others, clears up what this conception of beauty, and
consequently of art, really amounts to.

The æsthetic teaching of Kant is founded as follows: Man has a
knowledge of nature outside him and of himself in nature. In
nature, outside himself, he seeks for truth; in himself, he seeks
for goodness. The first is an affair of pure reason, the other of
practical reason (free will). Besides these two means of perception,
there is yet the judging capacity (_Urteilskraft_), which forms
judgments without reasonings and produces pleasure without desire
(_Urtheil ohne Begriff und Vergnügen ohne Begehren_). This capacity
is the basis of æsthetic feeling. Beauty, according to Kant, in
its subjective meaning is that which, in general and necessarily,
without reasonings and without practical advantage, pleases. In its
objective meaning it is the form of a suitable object, in so far as
that object is perceived without any conception of its utility.[57]

  [57] Schasler, pp. 525-528.

Beauty is defined in the same way by the followers of Kant, among
whom was Schiller (1759-1805). According to Schiller, who wrote much
on æsthetics, the aim of art is, as with Kant, beauty, the source of
which is pleasure without practical advantage. So that art may be
called a game, not in the sense of an unimportant occupation, but in
the sense of a manifestation of the beauties of life itself without
other aim than that of beauty.[58]

  [58] Knight, pp. 61-63.

Besides Schiller, the most remarkable of Kant's followers in the
sphere of æsthetics was Wilhelm Humboldt, who, though he added
nothing to the definition of beauty, explained various forms of
it,--the drama, music, the comic, etc.[59]

  [59] Schasler, pp. 740-743.

After Kant, besides the second-rate philosophers, the writers on
æsthetics were Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, and their followers.
Fichte (1762-1814) says that perception of the beautiful proceeds
from this: the world--_i.e._ nature--has two sides: it is the
sum of our limitations, and it is the sum of our free idealistic
activity. In the first aspect the world is limited, in the second
aspect it is free. In the first aspect every object is limited,
distorted, compressed, confined--and we see deformity; in the second
we perceive its inner completeness, vitality, regeneration--and
we see beauty. So that the deformity or beauty of an object,
according to Fichte, depends on the point of view of the observer.
Beauty therefore exists, not in the world, but in the beautiful
soul (_schöner Geist_). Art is the manifestation of this beautiful
soul, and its aim is the education, not only of the mind--that is
the business of the _savant_, not only of the heart--that is the
affair of the moral preacher, but of the whole man. And so the
characteristic of beauty lies, not in anything external, but in the
presence of a beautiful soul in the artist.[60]

  [60] Schasler, pp, 769-771.

Following Fichte, and in the same direction, Friedrich Schlegel and
Adam Müller also defined beauty. According to Schlegel (1772-1829),
beauty in art is understood too incompletely, one-sidedly, and
disconnectedly. Beauty exists, not only in art, but also in nature
and in love; so that the truly beautiful is expressed by the union
of art, nature, and love. Therefore, as inseparably one with
æsthetic art, Schlegel acknowledges moral and philosophic art.[61]

  [61] Schasler, pp. 786, 787.

According to Adam Müller (1779-1829), there are two kinds of beauty:
the one, general beauty, which attracts people as the sun attracts
the planet--this is found chiefly in antique art; and the other,
individual beauty, which results from the observer himself becoming
a sun, attracting beauty--this is the beauty of modern art. A world
in which all contradictions are harmonized is the highest beauty.
Every work of art is a reproduction of this universal harmony.[62]
The highest art is the art of life.[63]

  [62] Kralik, p. 148.

  [63] Kralik, p. 820.

Next after Fichte and his followers came a contemporary of his, the
philosopher Schelling (1775-1854), who has had a great influence
on the æsthetic conceptions of our times. According to Schelling's
philosophy, art is the production or result of that conception of
things by which the subject becomes its own object, or the object
its own subject. Beauty is the perception of the infinite in the
finite. And the chief characteristic of works of art is unconscious
infinity. Art is the uniting of the subjective with the objective,
of nature with reason, of the unconscious with the conscious, and
therefore art is the highest means of knowledge. Beauty is the
contemplation of things in themselves as they exist in the prototype
(_In den Urbildern_). It is not the artist who by his knowledge or
skill produces the beautiful, but the idea of beauty in him itself
produces it.[64]

  [64] Schasler, pp. 828, 829, 834-841.

Of Schelling's followers the most noticeable was Solger
(1780-1819--"Vorlesungen über Æsthetik"). According to him, the idea
of beauty is the fundamental idea of everything. In the world we see
only distortions of the fundamental idea, but art, by imagination,
may lift itself to the height of this idea. Art is therefore akin to
creation.[65]

  [65] Schasler, p. 891.

According to another follower of Schelling, Krause (1781-1832),
true, positive beauty is the manifestation of the Idea in an
individual form; art is the actualization of the beauty existing in
the sphere of man's free spirit. The highest stage of art is the art
of life, which directs its activity toward the adornment of life so
that it may be a beautiful abode for a beautiful man.[66]

  [66] Schasler, p. 917.

After Schelling and his followers came the new æsthetic doctrine
of Hegel, which is held to this day, consciously by many, but by
the majority unconsciously. This teaching is not only no clearer or
better defined than the preceding ones, but is, if possible, even
more cloudy and mystical.

According to Hegel (1770-1831), God manifests himself in nature
and in art in the form of beauty. God expresses himself in two
ways: in the object and in the subject, in nature and in spirit.
Beauty is the shining of the Idea through matter. Only the soul,
and what pertains to it, is truly beautiful; and therefore the
beauty of nature is only the reflection of the natural beauty of
the spirit--the beautiful has only a spiritual content. But the
spiritual must appear in sensuous form. The sensuous manifestation
of spirit is only appearance (_schein_), and this appearance is
the only reality of the beautiful. Art is thus the production of
this appearance of the Idea, and is a means, together with religion
and philosophy, of bringing to consciousness and of expressing the
deepest problems of humanity and the highest truths of the spirit.

Truth and beauty, according to Hegel, are one and the same thing;
the difference being only that truth is the Idea itself as it exists
in itself, and is thinkable. The Idea, manifested externally,
becomes to the apprehension not only true but beautiful. The
beautiful is the manifestation of the Idea.[67]

  [67] Schasler, pp. 946, 1085, 984, 985, 990.

Following Hegel came his many adherents, Weisse, Arnold Ruge,
Rosenkrantz, Theodor Vischer, and others.

According to Weisse (1801-1867), art is the introduction
(_Einbildung_) of the absolute spiritual reality of beauty into
external, dead, indifferent matter, the perception of which latter,
apart from the beauty brought into it, presents the negation of all
existence in itself (_Negation alles Fürsichseins_).

In the idea of truth, Weisse explains, lies a contradiction between
the subjective and the objective sides of knowledge, in that an
individual _I_ discerns the Universal. This contradiction can be
removed by a conception that should unite into one the universal and
the individual, which fall asunder in our conceptions of truth. Such
a conception would be reconciled (_aufgehoben_) truth. Beauty is
such a reconciled truth.[68]

  [68] Schasler, pp. 966, 655, 956.

According to Ruge (1802-1880), a strict follower of Hegel, beauty is
the Idea expressing itself. The spirit, contemplating itself, either
finds itself expressed completely, and then that full expression
of itself is beauty; or incompletely, and then it feels the need
to alter this imperfect expression of itself, and becomes creative
art.[69]

  [69] Schasler, p. 1017.

According to Vischer (1807-1887), beauty is the Idea in the form
of a finite phenomenon. The Idea itself is not indivisible, but
forms a system of ideas, which may be represented by ascending and
descending lines. The higher the idea, the more beauty it contains;
but even the lowest contains beauty, because it forms an essential
link of the system. The highest form of the Idea is personality, and
therefore the highest art is that which has for its subject-matter
the highest personality.[70]

  [70] Schasler, pp. 1065, 1066.

Such were the theories of the German æstheticians in the Hegelian
direction, but they did not monopolize æsthetic dissertations. In
Germany, side by side and simultaneously with the Hegelian theories,
there appeared theories of beauty not only independent of Hegel's
position (that beauty is the manifestation of the Idea), but
directly contrary to this view, denying and ridiculing it. Such was
the line taken by Herbart and, more particularly, by Schopenhauer.

According to Herbart (1776-1841), there is not, and cannot be, any
such thing as beauty existing in itself. What does exist is only
our opinion, and it is necessary to find the base of this opinion
(_Ästhetisches Elementarurtheil_). Such bases are connected with our
impressions. There are certain relations which we term beautiful;
and art consists in finding these relations, which are simultaneous
in painting, the plastic art, and architecture, successive and
simultaneous in music, and purely successive in poetry. In
contradiction to the former æstheticians, Herbart holds that objects
are often beautiful which express nothing at all, as, for instance,
the rainbow, which is beautiful for its lines and colors, and not
for its mythological connection with Iris or Noah's rainbow.[71]

  [71] Schasler, pp. 1097-1100.

Another opponent of Hegel was Schopenhauer, who denied Hegel's whole
system, his æsthetics included.

According to Schopenhauer (1788-1860), Will objectivizes itself
in the world on various planes; and although the higher the plane
on which it is objectivized the more beautiful it is, yet each
plane has its own beauty. Renunciation of one's individuality and
contemplation of one of these planes of manifestation of Will gives
us a perception of beauty. All men, says Schopenhauer, possess the
capacity to objectivize the Idea on different planes. The genius of
the artist has this capacity in a higher degree, and therefore makes
a higher beauty manifest.[72]

  [72] Schasler, pp. 1124, 1107.

After these more eminent writers there followed, in Germany, less
original and less influential ones, such as Hartmann, Kirkmann,
Schnasse, and, to some extent, Helmholtz (as an æsthetician),
Bergmann, Jungmann, and an innumerable host of others.

According to Hartmann (1842), beauty lies, not in the external
world, nor in "the thing in itself," neither does it reside in the
soul of man, but it lies in the "seeming" (_Schein_) produced by the
artist. The thing in itself is not beautiful, but is transformed
into beauty by the artist.[73]

  [73] Knight, pp. 81, 82.

According to Schnasse (1798-1875), there is no perfect beauty in the
world. In nature there is only an approach toward it. Art gives what
nature cannot give. In the energy of the free _ego_, conscious of
harmony not found in nature, beauty is disclosed.[74]

  [74] Knight, p. 83.

Kirkmann wrote on experimental æsthetics. All aspects of history
in his system are joined by pure chance. Thus, according to
Kirkmann (1802-1884), there are six realms of history: The realm of
Knowledge, of Wealth, of Morality, of Faith, of Politics, and of
Beauty; and activity in the last-named realm is art.[75]

  [75] Schasler, p. 1121.

According to Helmholtz (1821), who wrote on beauty as it relates to
music, beauty in musical productions is attained only by following
unalterable laws. These laws are not known to the artist; so that
beauty is manifested by the artist unconsciously, and cannot be
subjected to analysis.[76]

  [76] Knight, pp. 85, 86.

According to Bergmann (1840) ("Ueber das Schöne," 1887), to
define beauty objectively is impossible. Beauty is only perceived
subjectively, and therefore the problem of æsthetics is to define
what pleases whom.[77]

  [77] Knight, p. 88.

According to Jungmann (d. 1885), firstly, beauty is a suprasensible
quality of things; secondly, beauty produces in us pleasure by
merely being contemplated; and, thirdly, beauty is the foundation of
love.[78]

  [78] Knight, p. 88.

The æsthetic theories of the chief representatives of France,
England, and other nations in recent times have been the following:--

In France, during this period, the prominent writers on æsthetics
were Cousin, Jouffroy, Pictet, Ravaisson, Lévêque.

Cousin (1792-1867) was an eclectic, and a follower of the German
idealists. According to his theory, beauty always has a moral
foundation. He disputes the doctrine that art is imitation and
that the beautiful is what pleases. He affirms that beauty may be
defined objectively, and that it essentially consists in variety in
unity.[79]

  [79] Knight, p. 112.

After Cousin came Jouffroy (1796-1842), who was a pupil of Cousin's
and also a follower of the German æstheticians. According to his
definition, beauty is the expression of the invisible by those
natural signs which manifest it. The visible world is the garment by
means of which we see beauty.[80]

  [80] Knight, p. 116.

The Swiss writer Pictet repeated Hegel and Plato, supposing beauty
to exist in the direct and free manifestation of the divine Idea
revealing itself in sense forms.[81]

  [81] Knight, pp. 118, 119.

Lévêque was a follower of Schelling and Hegel. He holds that beauty
is something invisible behind nature--a force or spirit revealing
itself in ordered energy.[82]

  [82] Knight, pp. 123, 124.

Similar vague opinions about the nature of beauty were expressed by
the French metaphysician Ravaisson, who considered beauty to be the
ultimate aim and purpose of the world. "_La beauté la plus divine et
principalement la plus parfaite contient le secret du monde._"[83]
And again, "_Le monde entier est l'œuvre d'une beauté absolue, qui
n'est la cause des choses que par l'amour qu'elle met en elles._"

  [83] "La Philosophie en France," p. 232.

I purposely abstain from translating these metaphysical expressions,
because, however cloudy the Germans may be, the French, once
they absorb the theories of the Germans and take to imitating
them, far surpass them in uniting heterogeneous conceptions
into one expression, and putting forward one meaning or another
indiscriminately. For instance, the French philosopher Renouvier,
when discussing beauty, says, "_Ne craignons pas de dire qu'une
vérité qui ne serait pas belle, ne serait qu'un jeu logique de notre
esprit et que la seule vérité solide et digne de ce nom c'est la
beauté._"[84]

  [84] "Du Fondement de l'Induction."

Besides the æsthetic idealists who wrote and still write under the
influence of German philosophy, the following recent writers have
also influenced the comprehension of art and beauty in France:
Taine, Guyau, Cherbuliez, Coster, and Véron.

According to Taine (1828-1893), beauty is the manifestation of the
essential characteristic of any important idea more completely than
it is expressed in reality.[85]

  [85] "Philosophie de l'Art," vol. i., 1893, p. 47.

Guyau (1854-1888) taught that beauty is not something exterior
to the object itself,--is not, as it were, a parasitic growth on
it,--but is itself the very blossoming forth of that on which it
appears. Art is the expression of reasonable and conscious life,
evoking in us both the deepest consciousness of existence and
the highest feelings and loftiest thoughts. Art lifts man from
his personal life into the universal life by means, not only of
participation in the same ideas and beliefs, but also by means of
similarity in feeling.[86]

  [86] Knight, pp. 139-141.

According to Cherbuliez, art is an activity, (1) satisfying our
innate love of forms (_apparences_), (2) endowing these forms with
ideas, (3) affording pleasure alike to our senses, heart, and
reason. Beauty is not inherent in objects, but is an act of our
souls. Beauty is an illusion; there is no absolute beauty. But what
we consider characteristic and harmonious appears beautiful to us.

Coster held that the ideas of the beautiful, the good, and the true
are innate. These ideas illuminate our minds and are identical with
God, who is Goodness, Truth, and Beauty. The idea of Beauty includes
unity of essence, variety of constitutive elements, and order, which
brings unity into the various manifestations of life.[87]

  [87] Knight, p. 134.

For the sake of completeness, I will further cite some of the very
latest writings upon art.

"La Psychologie du Beau et de l'Art, par Mario Pilo" (1895), says
that beauty is a product of our physical feelings. The aim of art
is pleasure, but this pleasure (for some reason) he considers to be
necessarily highly moral.

The "Essai sur l'Art Contemporain, par Fierens Gevaert" (1897), says
that art rests on its connection with the past, and on the religious
ideal of the present which the artist holds when giving to his work
the form of his individuality.

Then again, Sar Peladan's "L'Art Idealiste et Mystique" (1894),
says that beauty is one of the manifestations of God. "_Il n'y
a pas d'autre Réalité que Dieu, il n'y a pas d'autre Vérité que
Dieu, il n'y a pas d'autre Beauté que Dieu_" (p. 33). This book
is very fantastic and very illiterate, but is characteristic in
the positions it takes up, and noticeable on account of a certain
success it is having with the younger generation in France.

All the æsthetics diffused in France up to the present time are
similar in kind, but among them Véron's "L'Esthétique" (1878) forms
an exception, being reasonable and clear. That work, though it does
not give an exact definition of art, at least rids æsthetics of the
cloudy conception of an absolute beauty.

According to Véron (1825-1889), art is the manifestation of emotion
transmitted externally by a combination of lines, forms, colors, or
by a succession of movements, sounds, or words subjected to certain
rhythms.[88]

  [88] "L'Esthétique," p. 106.

In England, during this period, the writers on æsthetics define
beauty more and more frequently, not by its own qualities, but by
taste; and the discussion about beauty is superseded by a discussion
on taste.

After Reid (1704-1796), who acknowledged beauty as being entirely
dependent on the spectator, Alison, in his "Essay on the Nature and
Principles of Taste" (1790), proved the same thing. From another
side this was also asserted by Erasmus Darwin (1731-1802), the
grandfather of the celebrated Charles Darwin.

He says that we consider beautiful that which is connected in our
conception with what we love. Richard Knight's work, "An Analytical
Inquiry into the Principles of Taste," also tends in the same
direction.

Most of the English theories of æsthetics are on the same lines. The
prominent writers on æsthetics in England during the present century
have been Charles Darwin (to some extent), Herbert Spencer, Grant
Allen, Ker, and Knight.

According to Charles Darwin (1809-1882--"Descent of Man," 1871),
beauty is a feeling natural not only to man, but also to animals,
and consequently to the ancestors of man. Birds adorn their
nests and esteem beauty in their mates. Beauty has an influence
on marriages. Beauty includes a variety of diverse conceptions.
The origin of the art of music is the call of the males to the
females.[89]

  [89] Knight, p. 238.

According to Herbert Spencer (b. 1820), the origin of art is
play, a thought previously expressed by Schiller. In the lower
animals all the energy of life is expended in life-maintenance
and race-maintenance; in man, however, there remains, after these
needs are satisfied, some superfluous strength. This excess is
used in play, which passes over into art. Play is an imitation
of real activity; so is art. The sources of æsthetic pleasure are
threefold: (1) That "which exercises the faculties affected in the
most complete ways, with the fewest drawbacks from exercise," (2)
"the difference of a stimulus in large amount, which awakens a glow
of agreeable feeling," (3) the partial revival of the same, with
special combinations.[90]

  [90] Knight, pp. 239, 240.

In Todhunter's "Theory of the Beautiful" (1872), beauty is
infinite loveliness, which we apprehend both by reason and by the
enthusiasm of love. The recognition of beauty as being such depends
on taste; there can be no criterion for it. The only approach
to a definition is found in culture. (What culture is, is not
defined.) Intrinsically, art--that which affects us through lines,
colors, sounds, or words--is not the product of blind forces, but
of reasonable ones, working, with mutual helpfulness toward a
reasonable aim. Beauty is the reconciliation of contradictions.[91]

  [91] Knight, pp. 240-243.

Grant Allen is a follower of Spencer, and in his "Physiological
Æsthetics" (1877) he says that beauty has a physical origin.
Æsthetic pleasures come from the contemplation of the beautiful, but
the conception of beauty is obtained by a physiological process.
The origin of art is play; when there is a superfluity of physical
strength man gives himself to play; when there is a superfluity
of receptive power man gives himself to art. The beautiful is
that which affords the maximum of stimulation with the minimum of
waste. Differences in the estimation of beauty proceed from taste.
Taste can be educated. We must have faith in the judgments "of the
finest-nurtured and most discriminative" men. These people form the
taste of the next generation.[92]

  [92] Knight, pp. 250-252.

According to Ker's "Essay on the Philosophy of Art" (1883), beauty
enables us to make part of the objective world intelligible to
ourselves without being troubled by reference to other parts
of it, as is inevitable for science. So that art destroys the
opposition between the one and the many, between the law and its
manifestation, between the subject and its object, by uniting them.
Art is the revelation and vindication of freedom, because it is free
from the darkness and incomprehensibility of finite things.[93]

  [93] Knight, pp. 258, 259.

According to Knight's "Philosophy of the Beautiful," Part II.
(1893), beauty is (as with Schelling) the union of object and
subject, the drawing forth from nature of that which is cognate to
man, and the recognition in oneself of that which is common to all
nature.

The opinions on beauty and on art here mentioned are far from
exhausting what has been written on the subject. And every day fresh
writers on æsthetics arise, in whose disquisitions appear the same
enchanted confusion and contradictoriness in defining beauty. Some,
by inertia, continue the mystical æsthetics of Baumgarten and Hegel
with sundry variations; others transfer the question to the region
of subjectivity, and seek for the foundation of the beautiful in
questions of taste; others--the æstheticians of the very latest
formation--seek the origin of beauty in the laws of physiology; and
finally, others again investigate the question quite independently
of the conception of beauty. Thus Sully, in his "Sensation and
Intuition: Studies in Psychology and Æsthetics" (1874), dismisses
the conception of beauty altogether, art, by his definition, being
the production of some permanent object or passing action fitted
to supply active enjoyment to the producer, and a pleasurable
impression to a number of spectators or listeners, quite apart from
any personal advantage derived from it.[94]

  [94] Knight, p. 243.




