CHAPTER XI

CHRISTIAN PUBLIC OPINION ALREADY ARISES IN OUR SOCIETY, AND WILL
INEVITABLY DESTROY THE SYSTEM OF VIOLENCE OF OUR LIFE. WHEN THIS
WILL COME ABOUT

     The condition and organization of our society is shocking; it
     is upheld by public opinion, but can be abolished by it--Men's
     views in regard to violence have already changed; the number of
     men ready to serve the governments decreases, and functionaries
     of government themselves begin to be ashamed of their position,
     to the point of often not fulfilling their duties--These facts,
     signs of the birth of a public opinion, which, in becoming
     more and more general, will lead finally to the impossibility
     of finding men willing to serve governments--It becomes more
     and more clear that such positions are no longer needed--Men
     begin to realize the uselessness of all the institutions of
     violence; and if this is realized by a few men, it will later
     be understood by all--The time when the deliverance will be
     accomplished is unknown, but it depends on men themselves; it
     depends on how much each man is willing to live by the light
     that is within him.


The position of the Christian nations, with their prisons, their
gallows, their factories, their accumulations of capital, taxes,
churches, taverns, and public brothels, their increasing armaments,
and their millions of besotted men, ready, like dogs, to spring
at a word from the master, would be shocking indeed if it were the
result of violence; but such a state of things is, before all, the
result of public opinion; and what has been established by public
opinion not only may be, but will be, overthrown by it.

Millions and millions of money, tens of millions of disciplined
soldiers, marvelous weapons of destruction, an infinitely perfected
organization, legions of men charged to delude and hypnotize the
people,--this is all under the control of men who believe that this
organization is advantageous for them, who know that without it they
would disappear, and who therefore devote all their energy to its
maintenance. What an indomitable array of power it seems! And yet
we have but to realize whither we are fatally tending, for men to
become as much ashamed of acts of violence, and to profit by them,
as they are ashamed now of dishonesty, theft, beggary, cowardice;
and the whole complicated and apparently omnipotent system will die
at once without any struggle. To accomplish this transformation it
is not necessary that any new ideas should find their way into the
human consciousness, but only that the mist which now veils the true
significance of violence should lift, in order that the growing
Christian public opinion and methods may conquer the methods of the
pagan world. And this is gradually coming to pass. We do not observe
it, as we do not observe the movement of things when we are turning,
and everything around us is turning as well.

It is true that the social organization seems for the most part as
much under the influence of violence as it seemed a thousand years
ago, and in respect of armaments and war seems even more; but the
Christian view of life is already having its effect. The withered
tree, to all appearance, stands as firmly as ever; it seems even
firmer, because it has grown harder, but it is already rotten at the
heart and preparing to fall. It is the same with the present mode
of life based upon violence. The outward position of man appears
the same. There are the same oppressors, the same oppressed, but
the feeling of both classes in regard to their respective positions
has undergone a change. The oppressors, that is, those who take
part in the government, and those who are benefited by oppression,
the wealthy classes, do not constitute, as formerly, the _élite_
of society, nor does their condition suggest that ideal of human
prosperity and greatness to which formerly all the oppressed
aspired. Now, it often happens that the oppressors renounce of their
own accord the advantages of their position, choosing the position
of the oppressed, and endeavor, by the simplicity of their mode of
life, to resemble them.

Not to speak of those offices and positions generally considered
contemptible, such as that of the spy, the detective, the usurer,
or the keeper of a tavern, a great many of the positions held by
the oppressors, and formerly considered honorable, such as those of
police officers, courtiers, judges, administrative functionaries,
ecclesiastical or military, masters on a large scale, and bankers,
are not only considered little enviable, but are already avoided
by estimable men. Already there are men who choose to renounce
such once envied positions, preferring others which, although less
advantageous, are not associated with violence.

It is not merely such as these who renounce their privileges; men
influenced, not by religious motives, as was the case in former
ages, but by growing public opinion, refuse to accept fortunes
fallen to them by inheritance, because they believe that a man ought
to possess only the fruits of his own labor.

High-minded youths, not as yet depraved by life, when about to
choose a career, prefer the professions of doctors, engineers,
teachers, artists, writers, or even of farmers, who live by their
daily toil, to the positions of judges, administrators, priests,
soldiers in the pay of government; they decline even the position of
living on their income.

Most of the monuments at the present day are no longer erected in
honor of statesmen or generals, still less of men of wealth, but to
scientists, artists, and inventors, to men who not only had nothing
in common with government or authority, but who frequently opposed
it. It is to their memory that the arts are thus consecrated.

The class of men who will govern, and of rich men, tends every day
to grow less numerous, and so far as intellect, education, and
especially morality, are concerned, rich men and men in power are
not the most distinguished members of society, as was the case
in olden times. In Russia and Turkey, as in France and America,
notwithstanding the frequent changes of officials, the greater
number are often covetous and venal, and so little to be commended
from the point of view of morality that they do not satisfy even the
elementary exigencies of honesty demanded in government posts. Thus
one hears often the ingenuous complaints of those in government that
the best men among us, strangely enough as it seems to them, are
always found among those opposed to them. It is as if one complained
that it is not the nice, good people who become hangmen.

Rich men of the present day, as a general thing, are mere vulgar
amassers of wealth, for the most part having but little care beyond
that of increasing their capital, and that most often by impure
means; or are the degenerate inheritors, who, far from playing an
important part in society, often incur general contempt.

Many positions have lost their ancient importance. Kings and
emperors now hardly direct at all; they seldom effect internal
changes or modify external policy, leaving the decision of such
questions to the departments of State, or to public opinion. Their
function is reduced to being the representatives of state unity and
power. But even this duty they begin to neglect. Most of them not
only fail to maintain themselves in their former unapproachable
majesty, but they grow more and more democratic, they prefer even to
be bourgeois; they lay down thus their last distinction, destroying
precisely what they are expected to maintain.

The same may be said of the army. The high officers, instead of
encouraging the roughness and cruelty of the soldiers, which befit
their occupation, promote the diffusion of education among them,
preach humanity, often sympathize with the socialistic ideas of
the masses, and deny the utility of war. In the late conspiracies
against the Russian government many of those concerned were military
men. It often happens, as it did recently, that the troops, when
called upon to establish order, refuse to fire on the people.
The barrack code of ideas is frankly deprecated by military men
themselves, who often enough make it the subject of derision.

The same may be said of judges and lawyers. Judges, whose duty it
is to judge and condemn criminals, conduct their trials in such a
fashion as to prove them innocent; thus the Russian government,
when it desires the condemnation of those it wishes to punish,
never confides them to the ordinary tribunals; it tries them by
court-martial, which is but a parody of justice. The same may be
said of lawyers, who often refuse to accuse, and, twisting round
the law, defend those they should accuse. Learned jurists, whose
duty it is to justify the violence of authority, deny more and more
frequently the right of punishment, and in its place introduce
theories of irresponsibility, often prescribing, not punishment, but
medical treatment for so-called criminals.

Jailers and turnkeys in convict prisons often become the protectors
of those it is a part of their business to torture. Policemen
and detectives are constantly saving those they ought to arrest.
Ecclesiastics preach tolerance; they often deny the right of
violence, and the more educated among them attempt in their sermons
to avoid the deception which constitutes all the meaning of their
position, and which they are expected to preach. Executioners
refuse to perform their duty; the result is that often in Russia
death-warrants cannot be carried out for lack of executioners,
for, notwithstanding all the advantages of the position, the
candidates, who are chosen from convicts, diminish in number every
year. Governors, commissioners, and tax-collectors, pitying the
people, often try to find pretexts for remitting the taxes. Rich
men no longer dare to use their wealth for themselves alone, but
sacrifice a part of it to social charities. Landowners establish
hospitals and schools on their estates, and some even renounce their
estates and bestow them on the cultivators of the soil, or establish
agricultural colonies upon them. Manufacturers and mill-owners found
schools, hospitals, and savings-banks, institute pensions, and build
houses for the workmen; some start associations of which the profits
are equally divided among all. Capitalists expend a portion of their
wealth on educational, artistic, and philanthropic institutions for
the public benefit. Many men who are unwilling to part with their
riches during their lifetime bequeath them to public institutions.

These facts might be deemed the result of chance were it not that
they all originate from one source, as, when certain trees begin
to bud in the spring of the year, we might believe it accidental,
only we know the cause; and that if on some trees the buds begin to
swell, we know that the same thing will happen to all of them.

Even so is it in regard to Christian public opinion and its
manifestations. If this public opinion already influences some of
the more sensitive men, and makes each one in his own sphere decline
the advantages obtained by violence or its use, it will continue to
influence men more and more, until it brings about a change in their
mode of life and reconciles it with that Christian consciousness
already possessed by the most advanced.

And if there are already rulers who do not venture on any
undertaking on their own responsibility, and who try to be like
ordinary men rather than monarchs, who declare themselves ready to
give up their prerogatives and become the first citizens of their
country, and soldiers who, realizing all the sin and evil of war,
do not wish to kill either foreigners or their fellow-countrymen,
judges and lawyers who do not wish to accuse and condemn criminals,
priests who evade preaching lies, tax-gatherers who endeavor to
fulfil as gently as possible what they are called upon to do, and
rich men who give up their wealth, then surely it will ultimately
come to pass that other rulers, soldiers, priests, and rich men will
follow their example. And when there are no more men ready to occupy
positions supported by violence, the positions themselves will cease
to exist.

But this is not the only way by which public opinion leads toward
the abolition of the existing system, and the substitution of a new
one. As the positions supported by violence become by degrees less
and less attractive, and there are fewer and fewer applicants to
fill them, their uselessness becomes more and more apparent.

We have to-day the same rulers and governments, the same armies,
courts of law, tax-gatherers, priests, wealthy landowners,
manufacturers, and capitalists as formerly, but their relative
positions are changed.

The same rulers go about to their various interviews, they have the
same meetings, hunts, festivities, balls, and uniforms; the same
diplomatists have the same conversations about alliances and armies;
the same parliaments, in which Eastern and African questions are
discussed, and questions in regard to alliances, ruptures, "Home
Rule," the eight-hour day. Changes of ministry take place just as of
old, accompanied by the same speeches and incidents. But to those
who know how an article in a newspaper changes perhaps the position
of affairs more than dozens of royal interviews and parliamentary
sessions, it becomes more and more evident that it is not these
meetings, interviews, and parliamentary discussions that control
affairs, but something independent of all this, something which has
no local habitation.

The same generals, officers, soldiers, cannon, fortresses, parades,
and evolutions. But one year elapses, ten, twenty years elapse, and
there is no war. And troops are less and less to be relied on to
suppress insurrection, and it becomes more and more evident that
generals, officers, and soldiers are only figure-heads in triumphal
processions, the plaything of a sovereign, a sort of unwieldy and
expensive _corps-de-ballet_.

The same lawyers and judges, and the same sessions, but it becomes
more and more evident that as civil courts make decisions in a great
variety of causes without anxiety about purely legal justice, and
that criminal courts are useless, because the punishment does not
produce the desired result, therefore these institutions have no
other object than the maintenance of men incapable of doing other
things more useful.

The same priests, bishops, churches, and synods, but it becomes more
and more evident to all that these men themselves have long since
ceased to believe what they preach, and are therefore unable to
persuade any one of the necessity of believing what they no longer
believe themselves.

The same tax-gatherers, but more and more incapable of extorting
money from the people by force, and it becomes more and more evident
that, without such collectors, it would be possible to obtain by
voluntary contribution all that is required for social needs.

The same rich men, and yet it becomes more and more evident
that they can be useful only when they cease to be personal
administrators of their possessions, and surrender to society their
wealth in whole or part.

When this becomes as plain to all men as it now is to a few, the
question will naturally arise: Why should we feed and support all
those emperors, kings, presidents, members of departments, and
ministers, if all their interviews and conversations amount to
nothing? Would it not be better, as some wit expressed it, to set up
an india-rubber queen?

And of what use to us are armies, with their generals, their
musicians, their horses, and drums? Of what use are they when there
is no war, when no one wishes to conquer anybody else? And even if
there were a war, other nations would prevent us from reaping its
advantages; while upon their compatriots the troops would refuse to
fire.

And what is the use of judges and attorneys whose decisions in
civil cases are not according to the law, and who, in criminal ones,
are aware that punishments are of no avail?

And of what use are tax-gatherers who are reluctant to collect the
taxes, when all that is needed could be contributed without their
assistance?

And where is the use of a clergy which has long ceased to believe
what it preaches?

And of what use is capital in the hands of private individuals
when it can be beneficial only when it becomes public property?
Having once asked all these questions, men cannot but arrive at the
conclusion that institutions which have lost their usefulness should
no longer be supported.

And furthermore, men who themselves occupy positions of privilege
come to see the necessity of abandoning them.

One day, in Moscow, I was present at a religious discussion which
is usually held during St. Thomas's week, near the church in the
Okhotny Ryad. A group of perhaps twenty men had gathered on the
pavement, and a serious discussion concerning religion was in
progress. Meanwhile, in the nobles' club near at hand, a concert
was taking place, and a police-officer, having noticed the group of
people gathered near the church, sent a mounted policeman to order
them to disperse,--not that the police-officer cared in the least
whether the group stayed where it was or dispersed. The twenty
men who had gathered inconvenienced no one, but the officer had
been on duty all the morning and felt obliged to do something. The
young policeman, a smart-looking fellow, with his right arm akimbo
and a clanking sword, rode up to us, calling out in an imperative
tone: "Disperse, you fellows! What business have you to gather
there?" Every one turned to look at him, while one of the speakers,
a modest-looking man in a peasant's coat, replied calmly and
pleasantly: "We are talking about business, and there is no reason
why we should disperse; it might be better for you, my young friend,
if you were to jump off from your horse and to listen to us. Very
likely it would do you good;" and turning away he continued the
conversation. The policeman turned his horse without a word and rode
away.

Such scenes as this must be of frequent occurrence in countries
where violence is employed. The officer was bored; he had nothing
to do, and the poor fellow was placed in a position where he felt
in duty bound to give orders. He was deprived of a rational human
existence; he could do nothing but look on and give orders, give
orders and look on, although both were works of supererogation. It
will not be long before all those unfortunate rulers, ministers,
members of parliaments, governors, generals, officers, bishops,
priests, and even rich men, will find themselves--indeed they
have already done so--in precisely the same position. Their
sole occupation consists in issuing orders; they send out their
subordinates, like the officer who sent the policeman to interfere
with the people; and as the people with whom they interfere ask not
to be interfered with, this seems to their official intelligence
only to prove that they are very necessary.

But the time will surely come when it will be perfectly evident to
every one that they are not only useless, but an actual impediment,
and those whose course they obstruct will say gently and pleasantly,
like the man in the peasant's coat: "We beg that you will let us
alone." Then the subordinates as well as their instructors will find
themselves compelled to take the good advice that is offered them,
cease to prance about among men with their arms akimbo, and having
discarded their glittering livery, listen to what is said among men,
and unite with them to help to promote the serious work of the world.

Sooner or later the time will surely come when all the present
institutions supported by violence will cease to be; their too
evident uselessness, absurdity, and even unseemliness, will finally
destroy them.

There must come a time when the same thing that happened to the king
in Andersen's fairy tale, "The King's New Clothes," will happen to
men occupying positions created by violence.

The tale tells of a king who cared enormously for new clothes, and
to whom one day came two tailors who agreed to make him a suit woven
from a wonderful stuff. The king engaged them and they set to work,
saying that the stuff possessed the remarkable quality of becoming
invisible to any one unfit for the office he holds. The courtiers
came to inspect the work of the tailors, but could see nothing,
because these men were drawing their needles through empty space.
However, remembering the consequences, they all pretended to see the
cloth and to be very much pleased with it. Even the king himself
praised it. The hour appointed for the procession when he was to
walk wearing his new garment arrived. The king took off his clothes
and put on the new ones--that is, he remained naked all the while,
and thus he went in procession. But remembering the consequences, no
one had the courage to say that he was not dressed, until a little
child, catching sight of the naked king, innocently exclaimed, "But
he has nothing on!" Whereupon all the others who had known this
before, but had not acknowledged it, could no longer conceal the
fact.

Thus will it be with those who, through inertia, continue to
fill offices that have long ceased to be of any consequence,
until some chance observer, who happens not to be engaged, as the
Russian proverb has it, in "washing one hand with the other," will
ingenuously exclaim, "It is a long time since these men were good
for anything!"

The position of the Christian world, with its fortresses, cannon,
dynamite, guns, torpedoes, prisons, gallows, churches, factories,
custom-houses, and palaces is monstrous. But neither fortresses nor
cannon nor guns by themselves can make war, nor can the prisons lock
their gates, nor the gallows hang, nor the churches themselves lead
men astray, nor the custom-houses claim their dues, nor palaces and
factories build and support themselves; all these operations are
performed by men. And when men understand that they need not make
them, then these things will cease to be.

And already men are beginning to understand this. If not yet
understood by all, it is already understood by those whom the rest
of the world eventually follows. And it is impossible to cease to
understand what once has been understood, and the masses not only
can, but inevitably must, follow where those who have understood
have already led the way.

Hence the prophecy: that a time will come when all men will hearken
unto the word of God, will forget the arts of war, will melt their
swords into plowshares and their lances into reaping-hooks;--which,
being translated, means when all the prisons, the fortresses, the
barracks, the palaces, and the churches will remain empty, the
gallows and the cannon will be useless. This is no longer a mere
Utopia, but a new and definite system of life, toward which mankind
is progressing with ever increasing rapidity.

But when will it come?

Eighteen hundred years ago Christ, in answer to this question,
replied that the end of the present world--that is, of the pagan
system--would come when the miseries of man had increased to their
utmost limit; and when, at the same time, the good news of the
Kingdom of Heaven--that is, of the possibility of a new system,
one not founded upon violence--should be proclaimed throughout the
earth.[20]

  [20] Matt. xxiv. 3-28.

"But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of
heaven, but my Father only,"[21] said Christ. "Watch therefore: for
ye know not what hour your Lord doth come."

  [21] Matt. xxiv. 36.

When will the hour arrive? Christ said that we cannot know. And for
that very reason we should hold ourselves in readiness to meet it,
as the goodman should watch his house against thieves, or like the
virgins who await with their lamps the coming of the bridegroom;
and, moreover, we should work with all our might to hasten the
coming of that hour, as the servants should use the talents they
have received that they may increase.[22]

  [22] Matt. xxiv. 43; xxv. 1--13, 14-30.

And there can be no other answer. The day and the hour of the advent
of the Kingdom of God men cannot know, since the coming of that hour
depends only on men themselves.

The reply is like that of the wise man who, when the traveler asked
him how far he was from the city, answered, "Go on!"

How can we know if it is still far to the goal toward which humanity
is aiming, when we do not know how it will move toward it; that it
depends on humanity whether it moves steadily onward or pauses,
whether it accelerates or retards its pace.

All that we can know is what we who form humanity should or should
not do in order to bring about this Kingdom of God. And that we all
know; for each one has but to begin to do his duty, each one has but
to live according to the light that is within him, to bring about
the immediate advent of the promised Kingdom of God, for which the
heart of every man yearns.




