CHAPTER VII


From the time that people of the upper classes lost faith in Church
Christianity, beauty (_i.e._ the pleasure received from art) became
their standard of good and bad art. And, in accordance with that
view, an æsthetic theory naturally sprang up among those upper
classes justifying such a conception,--a theory according to which
the aim of art is to exhibit beauty. The partizans of this æsthetic
theory, in confirmation of its truth, affirmed that it was no
invention of their own, but that it existed in the nature of things,
and was recognized even by the ancient Greeks. But this assertion
was quite arbitrary, and has no foundation other than the fact that
among the ancient Greeks, in consequence of the low grade of their
moral ideal (as compared with the Christian), their conception of
the good, τὸ ἀγαθόν, was not yet sharply divided from their
conception of the beautiful, τὸ καλόν.

That highest perfection of goodness (not only not identical with
beauty, but, for the most part, contrasting with it) which was
discerned by the Jews even in the times of Isaiah, and fully
expressed by Christianity, was quite unknown to the Greeks. They
supposed that the beautiful must necessarily also be the good. It is
true that their foremost thinkers--Socrates, Plato, Aristotle--felt
that goodness may happen not to coincide with beauty. Socrates
expressly subordinated beauty to goodness; Plato, to unite the two
conceptions, spoke of spiritual beauty; while Aristotle demanded
from art that it should have a moral influence on people κάθαρσις).
But, notwithstanding all this, they could not quite dismiss the
notion that beauty and goodness coincide.

And consequently, in the language of that period, a compound word
(καλο-κἀγαθία, beauty-goodness) came into use to express that notion.

Evidently the Greek sages began to draw near to that perception of
goodness which is expressed in Buddhism and in Christianity, and
they got entangled in defining the relation between goodness and
beauty. Plato's reasonings about beauty and goodness are full of
contradictions. And it was just this confusion of ideas that those
Europeans of a later age, who had lost all faith, tried to elevate
into a law. They tried to prove that this union of beauty and
goodness is inherent in the very essence of things; that beauty and
goodness must coincide; and that the word and conception καλο-κἀγαθία
(which had a meaning for Greeks, but has none at all for Christians)
represents the highest ideal of humanity. On this misunderstanding
the new science of æsthetics was built up. And, to justify its
existence, the teachings of the ancients on art were so twisted as
to make it appear that this invented science of æsthetics had
existed among the Greeks.

In reality, the reasoning of the ancients on art was quite unlike
ours. As Benard, in his book on the æsthetics of Aristotle, quite
justly remarks, "_Pour qui veut y regarder de près, la théorie du
beau et celle de l'art sont tout à fait séparées dans Aristote,
comme elles le sont dans Platon et chez tous leurs successeurs_"
("L'Esthétique d'Aristote et de ses Successeurs," Paris, 1889, p.
28).[98] And indeed the reasoning of the ancients on art not only
does not confirm our science of æsthetics, but rather contradicts
its doctrine of beauty. But nevertheless all the æsthetic
guides, from Schasler to Knight, declare that the science of the
beautiful--æsthetic science--was commenced by the ancients, by
Socrates, Plato, Aristotle; and was continued, they say, partially
by the Epicureans and Stoics: by Seneca and Plutarch, down to
Plotinus. But it is supposed that this science, by some unfortunate
accident, suddenly vanished in the fourth century, and stayed away
for about 1500 years, and only after these 1500 years had passed did
it revive in Germany, 1750 A.D., in Baumgarten's doctrine.

  [98] Any one examining closely may see that the theory of beauty and
  that of art are quite separated in Aristotle as they are in Plato
  and in all their successors.

After Plotinus, says Schasler, fifteen centuries passed away during
which there was not the slightest scientific interest felt for the
world of beauty and art. These one and a half thousand years, says
he, have been lost to æsthetics, and have contributed nothing toward
the erection of the learned edifice of this science.[99]

  [99] Die Lücke von fünf Jahrhunderten, welche zwischen den
  Kunst-philosophischen Betrachtungen des Plato und Aristoteles und
  die des Plotins fällt, kann zwar auffällig erscheinen; dennoch kann
  man eigentlich nicht sagen, dass in dieser Zwischenzeit überhaupt
  von ästhetischen Dingen nicht die Rede gewesen; oder dass gar ein
  völliger Mangel an Zusammenhang zwischen den Kunst-anschauungen
  des letztgenannten Philosophen und denen der ersteren existire.
  Freilich wurde die von Aristoteles begründete Wissenschaft in Nichts
  dadurch gefördert; immerhin aber zeigt sich in jener Zwischenzeit
  noch ein gewisses Interesse für ästhetische Fragen. Nach Plotin
  aber, die wenigen, ihm in der Zeit nahestehenden Philosophen,
  wie Longin, Augustin, u. s. f. kommen, wie wir gesehen, kaum in
  Betracht und schliessen sich übrigens in ihrer Anschauungsweise an
  ihn an,--vergehen nicht fünf, sondern _fünfzehn Jahrhunderte_, in
  denen von irgend einer wissenschaftlichen Interesse für die Welt des
  Schönen und der Kunst nichts zu spüren ist.

  Diese anderthalbtausend Jahre, innerhalb deren der Weltgeist durch
  die mannigfachsten Kämpfe hindurch zu einer völlig neuen Gestaltung
  des Lebens sich durcharbeitete, sind für die Aesthetik, hinsichtlich
  des weiteren Ausbaus dieser Wissenschaft verloren.--MAX SCHASLER.

In reality nothing of the kind happened. The science of æsthetics,
the science of the beautiful, neither did nor could vanish, because
it never existed. Simply, the Greeks (just like everybody else,
always and everywhere) considered art (like everything else) good
only when it served goodness (as they understood goodness), and
bad when it was in opposition to that goodness. And the Greeks
themselves were so little developed morally, that goodness and
beauty seemed to them to coincide. On that obsolete Greek view
of life was erected the science of æsthetics, invented by men
of the eighteenth century, and especially shaped and mounted in
Baumgarten's theory. The Greeks (as any one may see who will read
Benard's admirable book on Aristotle and his successors and Walter's
work on Plato) never had a science of æsthetics.

Æsthetic theories arose about one hundred and fifty years ago among
the wealthy classes of the Christian European world, and arose
simultaneously among different nations,--German, Italian, Dutch,
French, and English. The founder and organizer of it, who gave it a
scientific, theoretic form, was Baumgarten.

With a characteristically German, external exactitude, pedantry,
and symmetry, he devised and expounded this extraordinary theory.
And, notwithstanding its obvious insolidity, nobody else's theory
so pleased the cultured crowd, or was accepted so readily and with
such an absence of criticism. It so suited the people of the upper
classes, that to this day, notwithstanding its entirely fantastic
character and the arbitrary nature of its assertions, it is repeated
by learned and unlearned as though it were something indubitable and
self-evident.

_Habent sua fata libelli pro capite lectoris_, and so, or even
more so, theories _habent sua fata_ according to the condition of
error in which that society is living, among whom and for whom the
theories are invented. If a theory justifies the false position
in which a certain part of a society is living, then, however
unfounded or even obviously false the theory may be, it is accepted,
and becomes an article of faith to that section of society. Such,
for instance, was the celebrated and unfounded theory, expounded
by Malthus, of the tendency of that population of the world to
increase in geometrical progression, but of the means of sustenance
to increase only in arithmetical progression, and of the consequent
over-population of the world; such, also, was the theory (an
outgrowth of the Malthusian) of selection and struggle for existence
as the basis of human progress. Such, again, is Marx's theory, which
regards the gradual destruction of small private production by large
capitalistic production, now going on around us, as an inevitable
decree of fate. However unfounded such theories are, however
contrary to all that is known and confessed by humanity, and however
obviously immoral they may be, they are accepted with credulity,
pass uncriticized, and are preached, perchance for centuries, until
the conditions are destroyed which they served to justify, or until
their absurdity has become too evident. To this class belongs this
astonishing theory of the Baumgartenian Trinity,--Goodness, Beauty,
and Truth,--according to which it appears that the very best that
can be done by the art of nations after 1900 years of Christian
teaching, is to choose as the ideal of their life the ideal that
was held by a small, semi-savage, slave-holding people who lived
2000 years ago, who imitated the nude human body extremely well, and
erected buildings pleasant to look at. All these incompatibilities
pass completely unnoticed. Learned people write long, cloudy
treatises on beauty as a member of the æsthetic trinity of Beauty,
Truth, and Goodness: _das Schöne_, _das Wahre_, _das Gute_; _le
Beau_, _le Vrai_, _le Bon_, are repeated, with capital letters, by
philosophers, æstheticians, and artists, by private individuals,
by novelists, and by _feuilletonistes_, and they all think, when
pronouncing these sacrosanct words, that they speak of something
quite definite and solid--something on which they can base their
opinions. In reality, these words not only have no definite meaning,
but they hinder us in attaching any definite meaning to existing
art; they are wanted only for the purpose of justifying the false
importance we attribute to an art that transmits every kind of
feeling, if only those feelings afford us pleasure.




