CHAPTER VIII

CERTAINTY OF THE ACCEPTANCE OF THE CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE OF
NON-RESISTANCE TO EVIL BY VIOLENCE BY THE MEN OF OUR WORLD

     Christianity is not a legislation but a new life-conception;
     hence it was not obligatory, nor has it been accepted by all men
     in its full meaning, but only by a few; the rest have accepted
     it in a corrupted form--Moreover, Christianity is a prophecy
     of the disappearance of the pagan life, and therefore of the
     necessity of accepting the Christian doctrine--Non-resistance
     of evil by violence is one of the principles of the Christian
     doctrine which must inevitably be accepted by men at the present
     day--Two methods of solving every struggle--The first method
     consists in believing the general definitions of evil to be
     binding upon all, and to resist this evil by violence--The
     second, the Christian method, consists in not resisting evil
     by violence--Although the failure of the first method was
     recognized in the first centuries of Christianity, it is still
     employed; but as humanity advanced it has become more evident
     that there is not, nor can there be, a general definition of
     evil--Now this has become evident to all, and if the violence
     which is destined to combat evil exists, it is not because it
     is considered necessary, but because men do not know how to
     dispense with it--The difficulty of dispensing with it is due
     to the skilfulness and complexity of political violence--This
     violence is supported by four methods: by threats, bribes,
     hypnotism, and the employment of military force--Deliverance
     from State violence cannot be accomplished by overthrowing
     the State--Through experience of the misery of pagan life men
     are compelled to acknowledge the doctrine of Christ, with its
     non-resistance to evil,--a doctrine which they have hitherto
     ignored--To this same necessity of acknowledging the Christian
     doctrine we are brought by the consciousness of its truth--This
     consciousness is in utter contradiction to our life, and is
     especially evident in regard to general military conscription;
     but, in consequence of habit and the four methods of State
     violence, men do not see this inconsistency of Christianity
     with the duties of a soldier--Men do not see it even when the
     authorities themselves show them plainly all the immorality of
     the duties of a soldier--The call of the general conscription is
     the extreme trial for every man,--the command to choose between
     the Christian doctrine of non-resistance or servile submission
     to the existing organization of the State--Men generally submit
     to the demands of the State organization, renouncing all that
     is sacred, as though there were no other issue--For men of the
     pagan life-conception, indeed, no other issue does exist; they
     are compelled to acknowledge it, regardless of all the dreadful
     calamities of war--Society composed of such men must inevitably
     perish, and no social changes can save it--The pagan life has
     reached its last limits; it works its own destruction.


It is frequently said that if Christianity be a truth, it would
have been accepted by all men on its first appearance, and would
straightway have changed and improved the lives of men. One might
as well say that if the seed is alive it must instantly sprout and
produce its flower or its fruit.

The Christian doctrine is not a law which, being introduced by
violence, can forthwith change the life of mankind. Christianity
is a life-conception more lofty and excellent than the ancient;
and such a new conception of life cannot be enforced; it must be
adopted voluntarily, and by two processes, the spiritual or interior
process, and the experimental or external process.

Some men there are--but the smaller proportion--who instantly,
and as though by prophetic intuition, divine the truth, surrender
themselves to its influence, and live up to its precepts;
others--and they are the majority--are brought to the knowledge of
the truth, and the necessity for its adoption, by a long series of
errors, by experience and suffering.

It is to this necessity of adopting the doctrine by the external
process of experience that Christendom has at last arrived.

Now and then one wonders why the mistaken presentment of
Christianity, which even at the present time prevents men from
accepting it in its true significance, could have been necessary.
And yet the very errors, having brought men to their present
position, have been the medium through which it has become possible
for the majority to accept Christianity in its true meaning.

If instead of that corrupted form of Christianity which was given
to the people, it had been offered to them in its purity, the
greater portion of mankind would have refused it, like the Asiatic
peoples to whom it is yet unknown. But having once accepted it in
its corrupted form, the nations embracing it were subjected to its
slow but sure influence, and by a long succession of errors, and
the suffering that ensued therefrom, have now been brought to the
necessity of adopting it in its true meaning.

The erroneous presentation of Christianity, and its acceptance by
the majority of mankind, with all its errors, was then a necessity,
just as the seed, if it is to sprout, must for a time be buried in
the soil.

The Christian doctrine is the doctrine of truth as well as of
prophecy.

Eighteen hundred years ago the Christian doctrine revealed to men
the true conduct of life, and at the same time foretold the result
of disobeying its injunctions and of continuing to pursue their
former course, guided only by the precepts which were taught before
the dawn of Christianity; and it also showed them what life may
become if they accept the Christian doctrine and obey its dictates.

Having taught in the Sermon on the Mount those precepts by which men
should order their daily lives, Christ said: "Therefore whosoever
heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him
unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock: and the rain
descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon
that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock. And
every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not,
shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the
sand: and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds
blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall
of it" (Matthew vii. 24-27).

And thus, after eighteen centuries, the prophecy has been fulfilled.
As the result of the abandonment of Christ's teachings, having
disregarded the principle of non-resistance to evil, men have
unwittingly fallen into the condition of imminent peril foretold by
Christ to those who refused to follow His precepts.

Men often think that the question of resistance or non-resistance to
evil by violence is an artificial question, which may be evaded. And
yet this is the question that life presents to mankind in general,
and to each thinking man in particular, and it is one that must be
solved. In social life, ever since Christianity was first preached,
this question has been like the doubt that confronts the traveler
when he comes to a place where the road which he has followed
divides, and he knows not which branch to choose. He must pursue
his way, and he can no longer go on without pausing to deliberate,
because there are now two roads from which to choose, whereas before
there was but one; he must make up his mind which he will take.

In like manner, since the doctrine of Christ has been made known to
men, they can no longer say, I will go on living as I did before,
without deciding the question of resistance or non-resistance to
evil by violence. One must decide at the beginning of every fresh
struggle whether one ought or ought not to resist by violence that
which one believes to be evil.

The question of resistance or non-resistance of evil by violence
arose with the first contest among men, for every contest is simply
the resistance by violence of something which each combatant
believes to be an evil. But before the time of Christ men did not
understand that resistance by violence of whatever the individual
believed to be evil--only the same action which seems evil to one
man may seem good to another--is simply one mode of settling the
difficulty, and that the other method consists in not resisting evil
by violence.

Before the appearance of the doctrine of Christ men believed
that there could be but one way of deciding the contest, that of
resisting evil by violence, and acted accordingly, while each
combatant strove to persuade himself and others that what he
regarded as evil was in fact the actual and absolute evil. For this
purpose, dating from the oldest times, men began to invent certain
definitions of evil which should be obligatory for all, and for the
purpose of establishing definitions which should be thus binding,
were issued, either certain laws supposed to have been received in a
supernatural manner, or commands of individuals or of bodies of men
to whom an infallible wisdom was ascribed. Men used violence against
their fellow-men and assured themselves and others that they were
but using such violence against an evil acknowledged by all.

This was the custom from the most ancient times, particularly among
men who had usurped authority, and men have been long in seeing its
baselessness.

But the longer mankind existed the more complex grew its mutual
relations, and the more evident it became that to resist by violence
everything that is considered evil is unwise; that the struggle is
not diminished thereby, and that no human wisdom can ever define an
infallible standard of evil.

When Christianity first appeared in the Roman Empire it had already
become evident to most men that whatever Nero or Caligula called
evil, and sought to overcome by violence, was not necessarily an
evil for the rest of mankind. Even then men had already begun to
realize that the human laws for which a divine origin was claimed
were really written by men; that men cannot be infallible, no
matter with what external authority they may be invested; and that
fallible men will not become infallible because they meet together
and call themselves a Senate, or any other similar name. Even then
this had been perceived and understood by many. And it was then
that Christ preached His doctrine, which not only embodied the
principle of non-resistance, but which revealed a new conception
of life, of which the application to social life would lead to the
suppression of strife among men, not by obliging one class to yield
to whatsoever authority shall ordain, but by forbidding all men, and
especially those in power, to employ violence against others.

The doctrine was at that time embraced by a very limited number
of disciples, while the majority of men, particularly those who
were in authority, although they nominally accepted Christianity,
continued to follow the practice of resisting by violence whatever
they regarded as evil. So it was during the times of the Roman and
Byzantine emperors, and so it went on in later times.

The inconsistency of an authoritative definition of evil and its
resistance by violence, already apparent in the first centuries
of Christianity, had grown still more evident at the time of the
dissolution of the Roman Empire and its subdivision into numerous
independent states hostile to one another and torn by internal
dissensions.

But men were not yet ready to accept the law of Christ, and
the former method of defining an evil to be resisted by the
establishment of laws, enforced by coercion and binding upon all
men, continued to be employed. The arbiter, whose office it was
to decide upon the nature of the evil to be resisted by violence,
was alternately the Emperor, the Pope, the elected body, or the
nation at large. But both within and without the State men were
always to be found who refused to hold themselves bound, either by
those laws which were supposed to be the expression of the divine
will, or by the human laws which claimed to manifest the will of
the people;--men whose views on the subject of evil were quite at
variance with those of the existing authorities, men who resisted
the authorities, employing the same methods of violence that had
been directed against themselves.

Men invested with religious authority would condemn as evil a
matter which to men and institutions invested with a temporal
authority commended itself as desirable, and _vice versa_, and more
and more furious grew the struggle. And the oftener men had recourse
to violence in settling the difficulty, the more evident it became
that it was ill chosen, because there is not, nor can there ever be,
a standard authority of evil to which all mankind would agree.

Thus matters went on for eighteen centuries, and at last arrived at
their present condition, which is, that no man can dispute the fact
that an infallible definition of evil will never be made. We have
reached the point when men have ceased not only to believe in the
possibility of finding a universal definition which all men will
admit, but they have even ceased to believe in the necessity of
such a definition. We have reached the point when men in authority
no longer seek to prove that that which they consider evil is evil,
but candidly acknowledge that they consider that to be evil which
does not please them, and those who are subject to authority obey,
not because they believe that the definitions of evil made by
authority are just, but only because they have no power to resist.
The annexation of Nice to France, Lorraine to Germany, the Czechs
to Austria, the partition of Poland, the subjection of Ireland and
India to the English rule, the waging of war against China, the
slaughter of Africans, the expulsion of the Chinese, the persecution
of the Jews in Russia, or the derivation of profits by landowners
from land which they do not cultivate, and by capitalists from the
results of labor performed by others,--none of all this is done
because it is virtuous, or because it will benefit mankind and is
essentially opposed to evil, but because those who hold authority
will have it so. The result at the present time is this: certain
men use violence, no longer in the name of resistance to evil, but
from caprice, or because it is for their advantage; while certain
other men submit to violence, not because they believe, like those
of former ages, that violence is used to defend them from evil, but
simply because they cannot escape it.

If a Roman, or a man of the Middle Ages, or a Russian, such
a man as I can remember fifty years ago, believed implicitly
that the existing violence of authority was needed to save him
from evil,--that taxes, duties, serfdom, prisons, the lash, the
knout, galleys, executions, military conscription, and wars were
unavoidable,--it would be difficult to find a man at the present
time who believes that all the violences committed saves a single
man from evil; on the contrary, not one could be found who had not
a distinct assurance that most of the violations to which he is
subjected, and in which he himself participates, are in themselves a
great and unprofitable calamity.

There is hardly a man to be found at the present time who fails
to realize all the uselessness and absurdity of collecting taxes
from the laboring classes for the purpose of enriching idle
officials; or the folly of punishing weak and immoral men by exile
or imprisonment, where, supported as they are, and living in
idleness, they become still weaker and more depraved; or, again, the
unspeakable folly and cruelty of those preparations for war, which
can neither be explained nor justified, and which ruin and imperil
the safety of nations. Nevertheless these violations continue, and
the very men who realize and even suffer from their uselessness,
absurdity, and cruelty, contribute to their encouragement.

If fifty years ago it was possible that the wealthy man of leisure
and the illiterate laborer should both believe that their positions,
the one a continual holiday, the other a life of incessant labor,
were ordained by God--in these days, not only throughout Europe, and
even in Russia, owing to the activity of the people, the growth of
education, and the art of printing, it is hardly possible to find
a man, either rich or poor, who in one way or another would not
question the justice of such an order of things. Not only do the
rich realize that the possession of wealth is in itself a fault,
for which they strive to atone by donations to science and art,
as formerly they redeemed their sins by endowing churches; but
even the majority of the laboring class now understand that the
existing order is false, and should be altered, if not abolished.
Men who profess religion, of whom we have millions in Russia, the
so-called sectarians, acknowledge, because they interpret the gospel
doctrine correctly, that this order of things is false and should
be destroyed. The working-men consider it false because of the
socialistic, communistic, or anarchical theories that have already
found way into their ranks. In these days the principle of violence
is maintained, not because it is considered necessary, but simply
because it has been so long in existence, and is so thoroughly
organized by those who profit by it--that is to say, by the
governments and ruling classes--that those who are in their power
find it impossible to escape.

Nowadays every government, the despotic as well as the most
liberal, has become what Herzen has so cleverly termed a Genghis
Khan with a telegraphic equipment, that is, with an organization
of violence, having for basis nothing less than the most brutal
tyranny, and converting all the means invented by science for the
inter-communication and peaceful activities of free and equal men to
its own tyrannous and oppressive ends.

The existing governments and the ruling classes no longer care
to present even the semblance of justice, but rely, thanks to
scientific progress, on an organization so ingenious that it is able
to inclose all men within a circle of violence through which it is
impossible to break. This circle is made up of four expedients, each
connected with and supporting the other like the rings of a chain.

The first and the oldest expedient is intimidation. It consists
in representing the actual organization of the State, whether it
be that of a liberal republic or of an arbitrary despotism, as
something sacred and immutable, which therefore punishes by the most
cruel penalties any attempt at revolution. This expedient has been
put into practice recently wherever a government exists: in Russia
against the so-called nihilists, in America against the anarchists,
in France against the imperialists, monarchists, communists, and
anarchists. Railroads, telegraphs, telephones, photography, the
improved method of disposing of criminals by imprisoning them in
solitary confinement for the remainder of their lives in cells,
where, hidden from human view, they die forgotten, as well as
numerous other modern inventions upon which governments have the
prior claim, give them such power, that if once the authority
fell into certain hands, and the regular and secret police,
administrative officials, and all kinds of procureurs, jailers, and
executioners labored zealously to support it, there would be no
possibility whatsoever of overthrowing the government, however cruel
or senseless it might be.

The second expedient is bribery. This consists in taking the
property of the laboring classes by means of taxation and
distributing it among the officials, who, in consideration of this,
are bound to maintain and increase the bondage of the people. The
bribed officials, from the prime ministers to the lowest scribes,
form one unbroken chain of individuals, united by a common interest,
supported by the labor of the people, fulfilling the will of the
government with a submission proportionate to their gains, never
hesitating to use any means in any department of business to promote
the action of that governmental violence on which their well-being
rests.

The third expedient I can call by no other name than hypnotism.
It consists in retarding the spiritual development of men, and,
by means of various suggestions, influencing them to cling to the
theory of life which mankind has already left behind, and upon
which rests the foundation of governmental authority. We have at
the present time a hypnotizing system, organized in a most complex
manner, beginning in childhood and continued until the hour of
death. This hypnotism begins during the early years of a man's life
in a system of compulsory education. Children receive in school
the same ideas in regard to the universe which their ancestors
entertained, and which are in direct contradiction to contemporary
knowledge. In countries where a State religion exists, children
are taught the senseless and sacrilegious utterances of church
catechisms, with the duty of obedience to authorities; in the
republics they are taught the absurd superstition of patriotism,
and the same obligation of obedience to the government. In maturer
years this hypnotizing process is continued by the encouragement
of religious and patriotic superstition. Religious superstition is
encouraged by the erection of churches built from money collected
from the people, by holidays, processions, painting, architecture,
music, by incense that stupefies the brain, and, above all, by
the maintenance of the so-called clergy, whose duty consists in
befogging the minds of men and keeping them in a continual state
of imbecility, what with the solemnity of their services, their
sermons, their intervention with the private lives of men in time
of marriage, birth, and death. The patriotic superstition is
encouraged by the governments and the ruling classes by instituting
national festivals, spectacles, and holidays, by erecting monuments
with money collected from the people, which will influence men to
believe in the exclusive importance and greatness of their own State
or country and its rulers, and encourage a feeling of hostility
and even of hatred toward other nations. Furthermore, autocratic
governments directly forbid the printing and circulation of books
and the delivery of speeches that might enlighten men; and those
teachers who have the power to rouse the people from its torpor
are either banished or imprisoned. And every government, without
exception, conceals from the masses all that would tend to set them
free, and encourages all that would demoralize them,--all those
writings, for instance, that tend to confirm them in the crudeness
of their religious and patriotic superstition; all kinds of sensual
pleasures, shows, circuses, theaters; and all means for producing
physical stupor, especially those, like tobacco or brandy, which are
among the principal sources of national income. Even prostitution is
encouraged; it is not only recognized, but organized by the majority
of governments. Such is the third expedient.

The fourth expedient consists in this: certain individuals are
selected from among the mass of enslaved and stupefied beings,
and these, after having been subjected to a still more vigorous
process of brutalization, are made the passive instruments of the
cruelties and brutalities indispensable to the government. This
state of brutality and imbecility is produced by taking men in their
youth, before they have yet had time to gain any clear conception
of morality; and then, having removed them from all the natural
conditions of human life, from home, family, birthplace, and the
possibility of intelligent labor, by shutting them up together in
barracks, where, dressed in a peculiar uniform, to the accompaniment
of shouts, drums, music, and the display of glittering gewgaws, they
are daily forced to perform certain prescribed evolutions. By these
methods they are reduced to that hypnotic condition when they cease
to be men and become imbecile and docile machines in the hands of
the hypnotizer. These physically strong young men thus hypnotized
(and at the present time, with the general conscription system,
all young men answer to this description), supplied with murderous
weapons, ever obedient to the authority of the government, and ready
at its command to commit any violence whatsoever, constitute the
fourth and the principal means for subjugating men. So the circle of
violence is completed.

Intimidation, bribery, and hypnotism force men to become soldiers;
soldiers give power and make it possible to execute and to rob
mankind (with the aid of bribed officials), as well as to hypnotize
and to recruit men who are in their turn to become soldiers.

The circle is complete, and there is no possibility of escape from
it.

If some men believe that deliverance from violence, or even a
certain abatement of its energy, may be the result of its overthrow
by the oppressed, who will then replace it by a system which will
require no such violence and subjugation, and if, so believing,
they attempt to bring this about, they only deceive themselves and
others. So far from improving the position, these attempts will only
render things worse.

The activity of such men only strengthens the despotism of
governments by giving the latter a convenient pretext for increasing
their defenses. For even when, following a train of circumstances
highly demoralizing to the government,--take the case of France
in 1870, for example,--a government is overthrown by violence
and the authority passes into other hands, this new authority
is by no means likely to be less oppressive than the former. On
the contrary, obliged to defend itself from its exasperated and
overthrown enemies, it will be even more cruel and despotic than its
predecessor, as has ever been the case in periods of revolution.

If socialists and communists believe that the possession of
individual capital is a pernicious influence in society, and
anarchists regard government itself as an evil, there are, on the
other hand, monarchists, conservatives, and capitalists who look
upon the social and communal state as an evil order of society,
no less than anarchy itself; and all these parties have nothing
better to offer by way of reconciling mankind than violence. Thus,
whichever party gains the upper hand, it will be forced, in order
to introduce and maintain its own system, not only to avail itself
of all former methods of violence, but to invent new ones as well.
It simply means a change of slavery with new victims and a new
organization; but the violence will remain,--nay, increase,--because
human hatred, intensified by the struggle, will devise new means
for reducing the conquered to subjection. This has always been the
result of every revolution and violent overthrow of government. Each
struggle serves but to increase the power of those in authority at
the time to enslave their fellow-men.

One domain of human activity, and only one, has hitherto escaped
the encroachments of the governments--the domain of the family,
the economical domain of private life and domestic labor. But now
even this domain, in consequence of the struggle of socialists and
communists, is gradually passing into the hands of the governments,
so that labor and recreation, the dwellings, clothes, and food of
the people will by degrees, if the desires of the reformers are
accomplished, be determined and regulated by the government.

The long experiment of Christian life by nation after nation, during
eighteen centuries, has inevitably brought men to the necessity
of deciding whether the doctrine of Christ is to be accepted or
refused, and of deciding, too, the question of social life dependent
thereupon,--the resistance or non-resistance of evil by violence.
But there is this difference,--that formerly men could either accept
or reject the decision given by Christianity, whereas now it has
become imperative, because it affords the sole means of deliverance
from that condition of slavery in which, as in a net, men find
themselves entangled.

Nor is it alone this sad plight that brings them to this necessity.

Parallel with the negative proof of the falsehood of the pagan
order of things there has been positive proof of the truth of the
Christian doctrine.

Indeed, in the course of the eighteen centuries, the best men in all
Christendom, through an inner spiritual medium, having recognized
the truths of the doctrine, have borne witness of it, regardless of
threats, privations, miseries, and torture. These nobler men, by
their martyrdom, have sealed the truth of the doctrine.

Christianity penetrated into human consciousness, not alone by the
method of negative proof, that, namely, it had become impossible to
go on with the pagan life; but by its simplifying process, by its
explanation of, and its deliverance from, superstition, and by its
consequent spread among all classes of society.

Eighteen centuries of the profession of Christianity have not
passed in vain for those who accepted it, even if it were but in
outward form. These eighteen centuries have made men realize all
the miseries of the pagan state, even though they have continued
to lead a pagan existence, out of harmony with an age of humanity;
and at the bottom of their hearts they believe now (and herein
lies the only reason for living at all) that salvation from such
an existence can be found in the fulfilment of the Christian
doctrine in its true sense. As to when and where this salvation is
to be accomplished, opinions differ, according to the intellectual
development of men and the prejudices among which they live; but
every educated man recognizes that our salvation is to be found
in the fulfilment of the Christian doctrine. Certain believers,
those who consider the Christian doctrine divine, affirm that this
salvation will be accomplished when all men believe in Christ and
the time of the second advent approaches; others, who also have
faith in the divinity of Christ's doctrine, believe that this
salvation will come through the churches, which, having got all
men within the fold, will implant in their hearts those Christian
virtues which will transform their lives. Others, again, who do
not accept the divinity of Christ, believe that the salvation of
men will be accomplished by means of a slow, continuous progress,
during which the groundwork of pagan life will be gradually replaced
by the groundwork of liberty, equality, and fraternity--that is,
by the basis of Christianity. Still others there are who preach a
new social organization, and who believe that this salvation will
be brought about when, by means of a violent revolution, men are
forced to a community of goods, to the abolition of governments, to
collective rather than individual labor--that is, by the realization
of one of the aspects of Christianity. Thus, after one fashion
or another, all men of our epoch not only renounce the existing
order of life as no longer suited to the times, but acknowledge,
often without realizing it, and regarding themselves as enemies of
Christianity, that our salvation lies only in the adaptation to life
of a whole or a part of the Christian doctrine in its true sense.

For the majority of men Christianity, as its Teacher has expressed
it, could not be comprehended at once, but was to grow, like unto a
huge tree, from the tiniest seed. "The kingdom of heaven is like to
a grain of mustard seed, ... which indeed is the least of all seeds:
but when it is grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and becometh
a tree." And thus it has grown and continues to grow, if not in
manifestation, then in human consciousness.

It is no longer reserved for the minority of men, who have
always understood Christianity by its veritable truth; but it is
acknowledged by the great majority, who, if we are to judge by their
social life, are far removed from it.

Look at the private life of individuals, listen to their estimation
of human actions as they pronounce judgment on each other; listen
not only to public sermons and orations, but to the precepts which
parents and teachers offer to their charges, and you will see that,
however far removed from the practice of Christian truths may be the
political or social existence of men who are in bonds to violence,
yet Christian virtues are admired and exalted by all; while, on the
contrary, the anti-Christian vices are unhesitatingly condemned
as harmful to all mankind. Those who sacrifice their lives in the
service of humanity are looked upon as the better men; while those
who take advantage of the misfortune of their neighbors to further
their own selfish interests are universally condemned.

There may still be men who, insensible to Christian ideals, have set
up for themselves other ideals, such as power, courage, or wealth;
but these ideals are passing away; they are not accepted by all, nor
by the men of the better class. Indeed, the Christian ideals are the
only ones which are recognized as obligatory for all.

The position of our Christian world, looked at from without, with
its cruelty and slavery, is indeed appalling. But if we consider
it from the standpoint of human consciousness, it presents a very
different aspect. All the evil of our life seems to exist only
because it always has existed from all ages, and the men whose
actions are evil have had neither the time nor the experience to
overcome their evil habits, although all are willing to abandon
them. Evil seems to exist by reason of some cause apparently
independent of the consciousness of men.

Strange and contradictory as it may seem, modern men hate the very
order of things which they themselves support.

I believe it is Max Müller who describes the astonishment of an
Indian converted to Christianity, who, having apprehended the
essence of the Christian doctrine, came to Europe and beheld the
life of Christians. He could not recover from his astonishment in
the presence of the reality, so different from the state of things
he had expected to find among Christian nations.

If we are not surprised at the contradiction between our convictions
and our actions, it is only because the influences which obscure
this contradiction act upon us. We have but to look at our life
from the standpoint of the Indian, who understood Christianity in
its true significance, without any concessions or adaptations, and
to behold the barbarous cruelties with which our life is filled, in
order to be horrified at the contradictions in the midst of which we
live, without noticing them.

One has but to remember the preparations for war, the
cartridge-boxes, the silver-plated bullets, the torpedoes, and--the
Red Cross; the establishment of prisons for solitary confinement,
experiments with _electrocution_, and--the care for the welfare of
the prisoners; the philanthropic activity of the rich, and--their
daily life, which brings about the existence of the poor, whom they
seek to benefit. And these contradictions arise, not, as it might
seem, because men pretend to be Christians while they are actually
heathens, but because they lack something, or because there is some
power which prevents them from being what they really desire to
be, and what they even conscientiously believe themselves to be.
It is not that modern men merely pretend to hate oppression, the
inequality of class distinctions, and all kinds of cruelty, whether
practised against their fellow-men or against animals. They _are_
sincere in their hatred of these abuses; but they do not know how
to abolish them, or they lack the courage to alter their own mode
of life, which depends upon all this, and which seems to them so
important.

Ask, indeed, any individual if he considers it praiseworthy or
even honorable for a man to fill a position for which he receives
a salary so high as to be out of all proportion to the amount of
his labor, as, for instance, that of collecting from the people,
often from beggars, taxes which are to be devoted to the purchase
of cannon, torpedoes, and other instruments for murdering the men
with whom we wish to live in peace, and who wish to live in peace
with us; or, to receive a salary for spending his life either
in perfecting these instruments of murder, or in the military
exercises by which men are trained for slaughter? Ask whether it
be praiseworthy or compatible with the dignity of man, or becoming
to a Christian, to undertake, also for money, to arrest some
unfortunate man, some illiterate drunkard, for some petty theft not
to be compared with the magnitude of our own appropriation, or for
manslaughter not conducted by our advanced methods; and for such
offenses to throw people into prison, or put them to death? Ask
whether it be laudable and becoming in a man and a Christian, also
for money, to teach the people foolish and injurious superstitions
instead of the doctrine of Christ? Whether, again, it be laudable
and worthy of a man to wrench from his neighbor, in order to
gratify his own caprice, the very necessaries of life, as the great
landowners do; or to exact from his fellow-man an excessive and
exhausting toil for the purpose of increasing his own wealth, as
the mill-owners and manufacturers do; or to take advantage of human
necessities to build up colossal fortunes, as the merchants do?

Every individual would reply not, especially if the question
regarded his neighbor. And at the same time the very man who
acknowledges all the ignominy of such deeds, when the case is
presented to him, will often, of his own accord, and for no
advantage of a salary, but moved by childish vanity, the desire to
possess a trinket of enamel, a decoration, a stripe, voluntarily
enter the military service, or become an examining magistrate, a
justice of the peace, a minister of state, an _uriadnik_, a bishop,
accepting an office whose duties will oblige him to do things, the
shame and ignominy of which he cannot help realizing.

Many of these men will, I am sure, defend themselves on the ground
of the lawfulness and necessity of their position; they will argue
that the authorities are of God, that the functions of State are
indispensable for the good of mankind, that Christianity is not
opposed to wealth, that the rich youth was bidden to give up his
goods only if he wished to be perfect, that the present distribution
of wealth and commerce is beneficial to all men, and that it
is right and lawful. But however much they may try to deceive
themselves and others, they all know that what they do is opposed to
the highest interests of life, and at the bottom of their hearts,
when they listen only to their consciences, they are ashamed and
pained to think of what they are doing, especially when the baseness
of their deeds has been pointed out to them. A man in modern life,
whether he does or does not profess to believe in the divinity
of Christ, must know that to be instrumental either as a czar,
minister, governor, or policeman, as in selling a poor family's last
cow to pay taxes to the treasury, the money of which is devoted to
the purchase of cannon or to pay the salaries or pensions of idle
and luxurious officials, is to do more harm than good; or to be
a party to the imprisonment of the father of a family, for whose
demoralization we are ourselves responsible, and to bring his family
to beggary; or to take part in piratical and murderous warfare;
or to teach absurd superstitions of idol-worship instead of the
doctrine of Christ; or to impound a stray cow belonging to a man
who has no land; or to deduct the value of an accidentally injured
article from the wages of a mechanic; or to sell something to a poor
man for double its value, only because he is in dire necessity;--the
men of our modern life cannot but know that all such deeds are
wrong, shameful, and that they ought not to commit them. They do all
know it. They know that they are doing wrong, and would abstain from
it, had they but the strength to oppose those forces which blind
them to the criminality of their actions while drawing them on to do
wrong.

But there is nothing that demonstrates so vividly the degree of
contradiction to which human life has attained as the system that
embodies both the method and the expression of violence,--the
general conscription system. It is only because a general armament
and military conscription have come imperceptibly and by slow
degrees, and that governments employ for their support all the means
of intimidation at their disposal,--bribery, bewilderment, and
violence,--that we do not realize the glaring contradiction between
this state of affairs and those Christian feelings and ideas with
which all modern men are penetrated.

This contradiction has become so common that we fail to see the
shocking imbecility and immorality of the actions, not only of
those men who, of their own accord, choose the profession of murder
as something honorable, but of those unfortunates who consent to
serve in the army, and of those who, in countries where military
conscription has not yet been introduced, give of their own free
will the fruits of their labor to be used for the payment of
mercenaries and for the organization for murder. All these men are
either Christians or men professing humanitarianism and liberalism,
who know that they participate in the most imbecile, aimless, and
cruel murders; yet still they go on committing them. But this
is not all. In Germany, where the system of general military
conscription originated, Caprivi has revealed something that has
always been carefully hidden: that the men who run the risk of
being killed are not only foreigners, but are quite as likely to
be fellow-countrymen,--working-men,--from which class most of the
soldiers are obtained. Nevertheless, this admission neither opened
men's eyes nor shocked their sensibilities. They continue just as
they did before, to go like sheep, and submit to anything that
is demanded of them. And this is not all. The German Emperor has
recently explained with minute precision the character and vocation
of a soldier, having distinguished, thanked, and rewarded a private
for killing a defenseless prisoner who attempted to escape. In
thanking and rewarding a man for an act which is looked upon even
by men of the lowest type of morality as base and cowardly, Wilhelm
pointed out that the principal duty of a soldier, and one most
highly prized by the authorities, is that of an executioner,--not
like the professional executioners who put to death condemned
prisoners only, but an executioner of the innocent men whom his
superiors order him to kill.

Yet more. In 1891 this same Wilhelm, the _enfant terrible_ of State
authority, who expresses what other men only venture to think, in a
talk with certain soldiers, uttered publicly the following words,
which were repeated the next day in thousands of papers:--

"Recruits! You have given _me_ the oath of allegiance before the
altar and the servant of the Lord. You are still too young to
comprehend the true meaning of what has been said here, but first of
all take care ever to follow the orders and instructions that are
given to you. You have taken the oath of allegiance to _me_; this
means, children of my guards, that you are now _my_ soldiers, that
you have given yourselves up to me, body and soul.

"But one enemy exists for you--_my_ enemy. With the present
socialistic intrigues _it may happen that I shall command you to
shoot your own relatives, your brothers, even your parents_ (from
which may God preserve us!), _and then you are in duty bound to obey
my orders unhesitatingly_."

This man expresses what is known, but carefully concealed, by all
wise rulers. He says outright that the men who serve in the army
serve _him_and _his_ advantage, and should be ready for that purpose
to kill their brothers and fathers.

Roughly but distinctly he lays bare all the horror of the crime
for which men who become soldiers prepare themselves,--all that
abyss of self-abasement into which they fling themselves when they
promise obedience. Like a bold hypnotizer, he tests the depth of the
slumber; he applies red-hot iron to the sleeper's body; it smokes
and shrivels, but the sleeper does not awaken.

Poor, sick, miserable man, intoxicated with power, who by these
words insults all that is sacred to men of modern civilization!
And we, Christians, liberals, men of culture, so far from feeling
indignant at this insult, pass it over in silence. Men are put to
the final test in its rudest form; but they hardly observe that a
test is in question, that a choice is put before them. It seems
to them as if there were no choice, but only the one necessity
of slavish submission. It would seem as if these insane words,
offensive to all that a civilized human being holds sacred, ought
to rouse indignation,--but nothing of the kind happens. Year after
year every young man in Europe is subjected to the same test, and
with very few exceptions they all forswear what is and should be
sacred to every man; all manifest a readiness to kill their brothers
and even their fathers, at the order of the first misguided man who
wears a red and gold livery, asking only when and whom they are to
be ordered to kill--for they are ready to do it.

Even by savages certain objects are held sacred, for whose sake
they are ready to suffer rather than submit. But what is sacred for
the man of the modern world? He is told: Be my slave, in a bondage
where you may have to murder your own father; and he, oftentimes a
man of learning, who has studied all the sciences in the university,
submissively offers his neck to the halter. He is dressed in a
clown's garments, ordered to leap, to make contortions, to salute,
to kill--and he submissively obeys; and when at last allowed to
return to his former life, he continues to hold forth on the dignity
of man, freedom, equality, and brotherhood.

"But what is to be done?" we often hear men ask in perplexity. "If
every man were to refuse, it would be a different matter; but, as it
is, I should suffer alone without benefiting any one." And they are
right; for a man who holds the social life-conception cannot refuse.
Life has no significance for him except as it concerns his personal
welfare; it is for his advantage to submit, therefore he does so.

To whatever torture or injury he may be subjected he will submit,
because he can do nothing alone; he lacks the foundation which
alone would enable him to resist violence, and those who are in
authority over him will never give him the chance of uniting with
others.

It has often been said that the invention of the terrible military
instruments of murder will put an end to war, and that war will
exhaust itself. This is not true. As it is possible to increase the
means for killing men, so it is possible to increase the means for
subjecting those who hold the social life-conception. Let them be
exterminated by thousands and millions, let them be torn to pieces,
men will still continue like stupid cattle to go to the slaughter,
some because they are driven thither under the lash, others that
they may win the decorations and ribbons which fill their hearts
with pride.

And it is with material like this that the public
leaders--conservatives, liberals, socialists, anarchists--discuss
the ways and means of organizing an intelligent and moral society,
with men who have been so thoroughly confused and bewildered
that they will promise to murder their own parents. What kind of
intelligence and morality can there be in a society organized from
material like this? Just as it is impossible to build a house
from bent and rotten timber, however manipulated, so also is it
impossible with such materials to organize an intelligent and moral
society. They can only be governed like a drove of cattle, by the
shouts and lash of the herdsman. And so, indeed, they are governed.

Again, while on the one hand we find men, Christians in name,
professing the principles of liberty, equality, and fraternity, on
the other hand we see these same men ready, in the name of liberty,
to yield the most abject and slavish obedience; in the name of
equality, to approve of the most rigid and senseless subdivision of
men into classes; and in the name of fraternity, ready to slay their
own brothers.[14]

  [14] The fact that some nations, like the English and American, have
  no general conscription system (although one hears already voices in
  its favor), but a system of recruiting and hiring soldiers, nowise
  alters the case as regards the slavery of the citizens under the
  government. In the former system every man must go himself to kill
  or be killed; in the latter, he must give the proceeds of his labor
  to employ and drill murderers.

The contradiction of the moral consciousness, and hence the misery
of life, has reached its utmost limit, beyond which it can go no
further. Life, based on principles of violence, has culminated in
the negation of the basis on which it was founded. The organization,
on principles of violence, of a society whose object was to insure
the happiness of the individual and the family, and the social
welfare of humanity, has brought men to such a pass that these
benefits are practically annulled.

The first part of the prophecy in regard to those men and their
descendants who adopted this doctrine has been fulfilled, and now
their descendants are forced to realize the justice of its second
part.




