CHAPTER XV


Art, in our society, has been so perverted that not only has bad art
come to be considered good, but even the very perception of what
art really is has been lost. In order to be able to speak about the
art of our society, it is, therefore, first of all necessary to
distinguish art from counterfeit art.

There is one indubitable indication distinguishing real art from
its counterfeit, namely, the infectiousness of art. If a man,
without exercising effort and without altering his standpoint,
on reading, hearing, or seeing another man's work, experiences a
mental condition which unites him with that man and with other
people who also partake of that work of art, then the object evoking
that condition is a work of art. And however poetical, realistic,
effectful, or interesting a work may be, it is not a work of art
if it does not evoke that feeling (quite distinct from all other
feelings) of joy, and of spiritual union with another (the author)
and with others (those who are also infected by it).

It is true that this indication is an _internal_ one, and that there
are people who have forgotten what the action of real art is, who
expect something else from art (in our society the great majority
are in this state), and that therefore such people may mistake for
this æsthetic feeling the feeling of divertisement and a certain
excitement which they receive from counterfeits of art. But though
it is impossible to undeceive these people, just as it is impossible
to convince a man suffering from "Daltonism" that green is not red,
yet, for all that, this indication remains perfectly definite to
those whose feeling for art is neither perverted nor atrophied, and
it clearly distinguishes the feeling produced by art from all other
feelings.

The chief peculiarity of this feeling is that the receiver of a
true artistic impression is so united to the artist that he feels
as if the work were his own and not some one else's,--as if what
it expresses were just what he had long been wishing to express. A
real work of art destroys, in the consciousness of the receiver, the
separation between himself and the artist; nor that alone, but also
between himself and all whose minds receive this work of art. In
this freeing of our personality from its separation and isolation,
in this uniting of it with others, lies the chief characteristic and
the great attractive force of art.

If a man is infected by the author's condition of soul, if he feels
this emotion and this union with others, then the object which has
effected this is art; but if there be no such infection, if there be
not this union with the author and with others who are moved by the
same work--then it is not art. And not only is infection a sure sign
of art, but the degree of infectiousness is also the sole measure of
excellence in art.

_The stronger the infection the better is the art; as art_, speaking
now apart from its subject-matter, _i.e._ not considering the
quality of the feelings it transmits.

And the degree of the infectiousness of art depends on three
conditions:--

(1) On the greater or lesser individuality of the feeling
transmitted; (2) on the greater or lesser clearness with which the
feeling is transmitted; (3) on the sincerity of the artist, _i.e._
on the greater or lesser force with which the artist himself feels
the emotion he transmits.

The more individual the feeling transmitted the more strongly does
it act on the receiver; the more individual the state of soul into
which he is transferred the more pleasure does the receiver obtain,
and therefore the more readily and strongly does he join in it.

The clearness of expression assists infection, because the receiver,
who mingles in consciousness with the author, is the better
satisfied the more clearly the feeling is transmitted, which, as it
seems to him, he has long known and felt, and for which he has only
now found expression.

But most of all is the degree of infectiousness of art increased by
the degree of sincerity in the artist. As soon as the spectator,
hearer, or reader feels that the artist is infected by his own
production, and writes, sings, or plays for himself, and not merely
to act on others, this mental condition of the artist infects the
receiver; and, contrariwise, as soon as the spectator, reader, or
hearer feels that the author is not writing, singing, or playing
for his own satisfaction,--does not himself feel what he wishes
to express,--but is doing it for him, the receiver, a resistance
immediately springs up, and the most individual and the newest
feelings and the cleverest technique not only fail to produce any
infection, but actually repel.

I have mentioned three conditions of contagiousness in art, but they
may be all summed up into one, the last, sincerity, _i.e._ that the
artist should be impelled by an inner need to express his feeling.
That condition includes the first; for if the artist is sincere he
will express the feeling as he experienced it. And as each man is
different from every one else, his feeling will be individual for
every one else; and the more individual it is,--the more the artist
has drawn it from the depths of his nature,--the more sympathetic
and sincere will it be. And this same sincerity will impel the
artist to find a clear expression of the feeling which he wishes to
transmit.

Therefore this third condition--sincerity--is the most important
of the three. It is always complied with in peasant art, and this
explains why such art always acts so powerfully; but it is a
condition almost entirely absent from our upper-class art, which
is continually produced by artists actuated by personal aims of
covetousness or vanity.

Such are the three conditions which divide art from its
counterfeits, and which also decide the quality of every work of art
apart from its subject-matter.

The absence of any one of these conditions excludes a work from the
category of art and relegates it to that of art's counterfeits. If
the work does not transmit the artist's peculiarity of feeling, and
is therefore not individual, if it is unintelligibly expressed,
or if it has not proceeded from the author's inner need for
expression--it is not a work of art. If all these conditions are
present, even in the smallest degree, then the work, even if a weak
one, is yet a work of art.

The presence in various degrees of these three
conditions--individuality, clearness, and sincerity--decides the
merit of a work of art, as art, apart from subject-matter. All works
of art take rank of merit according to the degree in which they
fulfil the first, the second, and the third of these conditions. In
one the individuality of the feeling transmitted may predominate;
in another, clearness of expression; in a third, sincerity; while
a fourth may have sincerity and individuality, but be deficient in
clearness; a fifth, individuality and clearness, but less sincerity;
and so forth, in all possible degrees and combinations.

Thus is art divided from not art, and thus is the quality of art, as
art, decided, independently of its subject-matter, _i.e._ apart from
whether the feelings it transmits are good or bad.

But how are we to define good and bad art with reference to its
subject-matter?




