CHAPTER III

MISCONCEPTION OF CHRISTIANITY BY NON-BELIEVERS

     The meaning of the Christian doctrine, which is clear for
     the minority, has become unintelligible for the majority of
     men--The cause of it is the false conception of Christianity
     and the misguided assurance of believers, as well as of
     unbelievers, that they apprehend it--The apprehension of
     Christianity for believers is concealed by the Church--The
     apprehension of Christianity--Its essence and its unlikeness
     to the pagan doctrines--Misunderstood at first, it has grown
     clear to those who embrace it owing to its correspondence with
     the truth--Contemporaneously with it arose the assertion that
     the true meaning of the doctrine was understood, and had been
     confirmed by miraculous transmission--The Council of Disciples
     according to the Acts--Authoritative and miraculous assertion
     of the true conception of Christ's doctrine has found its
     logical conclusion in the acknowledgment of the Credo and
     the Church--The Church could not have been established by
     Christ--Definition of Churches according to the Catechism--There
     are various Churches, ever antagonistic to one another--Where is
     heresy?--The work of Mr. Arnold concerning heresies--Heresies
     are the sign of activity in the Churches--Churches always divide
     mankind, and are ever inimical to Christianity--In what the
     activity of the Russian Church consists--Matthew xxiv. 23--The
     Sermon on the Mount, or the Credo--The Orthodox Church conceals
     from the people the true meaning of Christianity--The same is
     done by other Churches--All the contemporary external conditions
     are such that they destroy the doctrine of the Church, and
     therefore Churches use all their efforts to defend it.


The knowledge which I obtained after the publication of my book in
regard to the views which the minority of mankind have held, and
still hold, concerning the doctrine of Christ in its simplicity
and real significance, as well as the criticisms of clerical and
secular writers, who deny the possibility of apprehending it in
its actual meaning, have convinced me that while the minority has
not only always possessed a true conception of this doctrine, and
that this conception has grown steadily more and more clear, for
the majority, on the other hand, its sense has become more and more
vague, reaching at last such a degree of obscurity that men fail to
understand the simplest commands expressed in the Bible, even when
couched in the plainest possible language.

The inability that prevails at the present time to comprehend the
doctrine of Christ in its true, simple, and actual meaning, when
its light has penetrated into the remotest recesses of the human
understanding, when, as Christ said, they proclaim from the roofs
that which He whispered in the ear; when this doctrine penetrates
every phase of human life, domestic, economical, civil, politic, and
international,--this failure to apprehend it would be inexplicable,
if one had not discovered the reasons for it.

One of the reasons is, that believers as well as unbelievers are
perfectly sure that they long ago understood the doctrine of Christ
so completely, unquestionably, and finally, that it can have no
other meaning but the one which they attribute to it. That is
because the tradition of this false conception has been handed down
for ages,--and therefore its misconception.

The most powerful stream of water cannot add one single drop to a
vessel that is already full.

One might succeed in explaining to the dullest of men the most
difficult of problems, if he had no previous conception in regard to
them; but it is impossible to explain to the cleverest man even the
simplest matters, if he is perfectly sure that he knows everything
about it.

The Christian doctrine appears to men of the present times to be a
doctrine of that kind, known for ages, and never to be questioned
in its most trivial details, and which is susceptible of no other
interpretation.

At the present time Christianity is conceived by those who profess
the doctrines of the Church as a supernatural, miraculous revelation
of all that is expressed in the Credo; while unbelievers look upon
it as an affair of the past, a manifestation of the demand of
humanity for a belief in the supernatural, as an historical fact,
which has found its fullest expression in Catholicism, Orthodoxy,
and Protestantism, and which has for us no vital meaning. For the
believers the real significance of the doctrine is concealed by the
Church; for the unbelievers it is hidden by science.

Let us begin by considering the former.

Eighteen hundred years ago, in the pagan world of Rome, there
appeared a strange and novel doctrine, unlike any of its
predecessors, which was ascribed to the man Christ.

It was a doctrine wholly new in form as well as in substance, both
for the Hebrew world, from whose midst it had sprung, as well as for
the Roman world, in whose midst it was preached and promulgated.

Among the accurately defined religious precepts of the Jews, where,
according to Isaiah, there was precept upon precept, and among the
highly perfected Roman legislative assemblies, there appeared a
doctrine that not only repudiated all deities, all fear of them,
all augury and all faith in it, but also denied the necessity for
any human institutions whatsoever. Instead of the precepts and
creeds of former times, this doctrine presented only an image of
interior perfection, truth, and love in the person of Christ, and
the attainment of this interior perfection possible for men, and, as
a consequence, of the outward perfection foretold by the prophets:
the coming of the Kingdom of God, when all enmity shall cease, when
every man will hear the word of the Lord and be united with another
in brotherly love, and when the lion and the lamb shall lie down
together. Instead of threats of punishment for the non-observance of
the commandments of the old laws, religious no less than secular,
instead of tempting men by promise of rewards to observe these laws,
this doctrine attracted mankind only by proclaiming itself to be the
truth.

"If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether
it be of God, or whether I speak of myself."--John vii. 17.

"Which of you convinceth me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do
ye not believe me?"--John viii. 46.

"But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the
truth...."--John viii. 40.

"And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free."--John viii. 32.

God must be worshiped in truth. All the doctrine will be made plain
by the Spirit of Truth. Do as I command you, and you will know
whether what I say is the truth.

No evidence was brought to prove the doctrine, except the truth and
its harmony therewith. The whole substance consisted in learning the
truth and in following its guidance, drawing nearer and nearer to it
in the affairs of everyday life.

According to this doctrine, there is no mode of action that can
justify a man or make him righteous; as regards interior perfection
we have only the image of truth, in the person of Christ, to win our
hearts, and outward perfection is expressed by a realization of the
Kingdom of God. In order to fulfil the doctrine it needs but to take
Christ for our model, and to advance in the direction of interior
perfection by the road which has been pointed out to us, as well as
in that of exterior perfection, which is the establishment of the
Kingdom of God. The degree of human happiness, whether it be more
or less, depends, according to this doctrine, not on the degree
of perfection at which it arrives, but on the comparative rate of
progress toward that perfection.

The advance toward perfection of Zacchæus the publican, of the
adulteress, of the thief on the cross, is, according to this
doctrine, better than the stagnation of the righteous Pharisee.
The shepherd rejoices more over the one sheep which was lost and
is found than over the ninety and nine which are in the fold. The
prodigal returned, the piece of money which was lost and is found,
is more precious unto God than that which was never lost.

According to this doctrine, each state is but a step on the road
toward the unattainable interior and exterior perfection, and
therefore it has no significance in itself. The progress of this
movement toward perfection is its merit; the least cessation of this
movement means the cessation of good works.

"Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth," and "No
man, having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for
the kingdom of God." "Rejoice not that the spirits are subject unto
you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven."
"Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect." "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness."

The fulfilment of the doctrine lies in a continual progress toward
the attainment of a higher truth, and in the growing realization of
that truth within one's self, by means of an ever increasing love;
as well as in a more and more keen realization of the Kingdom of
God in the world around us. It is evident that the doctrine that
appeared in the midst of the Hebrew and pagan world could not be
accepted by the majority of men, who lived a life so totally unlike
the one prescribed by this new doctrine; and even those who did
accept it could not comprehend its full meaning, because of its
contradiction of all former ideas.

It is only through a series of misapprehensions, errors, one-sided
explanations, corrected and supplemented by generations of men,
that the meaning of the Christian doctrine has become more and more
plain. The Christian world-conception and that of the Hebrew and
pagan peoples mutually acted and reacted upon each other, and the
Christian principle being the more vital, it penetrated deeper and
deeper into the Hebrew and pagan principles that had outlived their
usefulness, and became more clearly defined, freeing itself from
the spurious admixtures imposed upon it. Men understood its meaning
better and better, and realized it more and more unmistakably in
life.

The older the world grew, the more lucid became its apprehension of
Christianity, as must always be the case with any doctrine relating
to human life.

Successive generations rectified the mistakes of the preceding ones
and approached nearer and nearer to the apprehension of its true
meaning. Thus it was from the very beginning of Christianity. And
it was then that certain men came to the front who affirmed that
the only true interpretation was the one which they themselves
proclaimed, adducing the miracles as a proof thereof.

This was the principal cause of its misapprehension in the first
place, and of its complete perversion in the second.

The doctrine of Christ was supposed to be transmitted to mankind not
like any other truth, but in a peculiar, supernatural manner; hence
they propose to prove its authority, not because it satisfies the
demands of reason and of human nature in general, but because of the
miraculous character of its transmission, which is supposed to be
an incontrovertible proof of the validity of its conception. This
idea sprang from a misconception, and the result was that it became
impossible to understand it.

It originated at the very beginning, when the doctrine was so
imperfectly understood and often so erroneously construed; as, for
example, in the Gospels and the Acts. The less men understood it,
the more mysterious it appeared, and the greater need was there for
visible proof of its authenticity. The rule for doing unto others as
you would wish them to do unto you, called for no miraculous proof,
neither did it require faith, because the proposition is convincing
in itself, both to reason and to human nature. But the proposition
that Christ was God needed miraculous testimony.

The more mystical grew the apprehension of Christ's teaching, the
more the miraculous element entered into it; and the more miraculous
it became, the farther it was from its original meaning; and the
more complicated, mystical, and remote from its original meaning it
came to be, the more necessary it was to declare its infallibility,
and the less intelligible it became.

From the very beginning of Christianity one could see from the
Gospels, the Acts, and the Epistles how the misapprehension of the
doctrine called forth the necessity of proofs--miraculous and beyond
human intelligence.

It dated from the time mentioned in the Acts, when the disciples
went up to Jerusalem to consult with the elders in regard to the
question that had arisen as to whether the uncircumcised and those
who abstained not from the meat offered to idols should be baptized.

The very manner of asking the question showed that those who
discussed it misconceived the doctrine of Christ, who rejected all
external rites, such as the washing of the feet, purification,
fasts, and the Sabbath. It is said distinctly: "Not that which goeth
into the mouth defileth a man; but those things which proceed out
of the mouth come forth from the heart; and they defile the man."
And therefore the question in regard to the baptism of those not
circumcised could only arise among men who, loving their Teacher and
with the intuitive perception of the grandeur of his doctrine, could
not as yet comprehend its exact meaning. And so it was.

And in proportion as the members of the assembly failed to
comprehend the doctrine, did they stand in need of an outward
affirmation of their incomplete conception. And in order to decide
the question, whose very proposal proves the misconception of
the doctrine, it was that in this assembly for the first time,
according to the description given in the Acts, were uttered those
awful words, productive of so much harm, by which the truth of
certain propositions has been for the first time confirmed: "For it
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us;" that is to say, it was
a declaration that the truth of what they said was witnessed by a
miraculous participation of the Holy Ghost, that is--of God.

But the assertion that the Holy Ghost--that is to say, God--had
spoken through the apostles, in its turn required proof. And
therefore it became necessary to declare that on the fiftieth day
the Holy Ghost, in the shape of fiery tongues, descended on those
who had made this assertion. [In the description the descent of the
Holy Ghost precedes the council, but the Acts were written much
later than either.] But the descent of the Holy Ghost must also
be proved, though it would be difficult to say why a fiery tongue
hovering over a man's head should be a proof of the truth of what
he says any more than the miracles, the cures, the resurrections,
the martyrdoms, and all the rest of those persuasive miracles with
which the Acts are filled, and which serve rather to repel than to
convince one of the truth of the Christian dogmas. The results of
these methods were such that the more pains they took to confirm
their statements, accumulating stories of miracles, the more the
doctrine itself deviated from its original meaning, and the less
intelligible it became.

Thus it was from the beginning of the Christian era, and thus
it continued to increase, until in its own time it has reached
its logical consummation in the dogma of transubstantiation, the
infallibility of the Pope, the bishops, and Scriptures, which is
something utterly incomprehensible and nonsensical, requiring
a blind faith, not in God or Christ, nor even in the doctrine,
but a faith either in one person, as in Catholicism, or in many
persons, as in Orthodoxy, or in a book, as in Protestantism. The
more widely spread Christianity became, and the larger the number
of uninstructed men it received, the less it was understood, the
more the infallibility of its conceptions was insisted upon,
and the more slender grew the possibility of understanding its
true meaning. Already, about the time of Constantine, the entire
conception of the doctrine amounted to the _résumé_ formulated by
the temporal power,--the outcome of discussions that took place in
the council,--to the Credo, in which it is said: I believe in this
and that, etc., and at the end, "in the one holy, Apostolic and
Œcumenical Church," that is, in the infallibility of the persons
who constitute it; so that it all amounted to this, that a man
believed not in God, nor in Christ, as they revealed themselves to
him, but in that which was believed by the Church.

But the Church is holy, and was founded by Christ. God could not
allow men to interpret His doctrine as they chose, and therefore He
established the Church. All these propositions are so unjust and
unfounded, that one is actually ashamed to refute them. In no place,
and in no manner whatsoever, save in the assertion of the Church,
is it seen that either God or Christ can ever have founded anything
like the Church in its ecclesiastical sense. There is a distinct
and evident warning in the New Testament against the Church, as
an outside authority, in the passage which bids the disciples of
Christ call no man father or master. But nowhere is there a word
in regard to the establishment of what the ecclesiastics call the
Church. The word "church" is used in the New Testament twice, once
in speaking of the assembly which is to decide a dispute; the second
time in connection with the obscure words in regard to the rock,
Peter, and the gates of hell. From these two references, where the
word is used only in the sense of an assembly, men have derived the
institution which we recognize at present under the same of the
Church.

But Christ could by no means have founded a church, that is, what we
understand by that word at the present time, because nothing like
our Church, as we know it in these days, with the sacraments, the
hierarchy, and above all the establishment of infallibility, was to
be found either in the words of Christ, or in the ideas of the men
of those times.

Because men have called something which has been established since,
by the same word that Christ used in regard to another thing, by no
means gives them a right to assert that Christ founded only one true
Church.

Moreover, if Christ had it in his mind to establish a church which
was to be the depository of the whole doctrine and faith, He would
surely have expressed this so plainly and clearly, and would have
given, apart from all stories of miracles which are repeated with
every variety of superstition, such signs as would leave no doubt as
to its authenticity; yet this was not the case, and now, as always,
one finds different institutions, each one calling itself the only
true Church.

The Catholic catechism says: "L'Eglise est la société des fidèles
établie par N.-S. Jésus-Christ, répandue sur toute la terre et
soumise à l'autorité de pasteurs légitimes, principalement notre
S.-P. le pape,"--meaning by "pasteurs légitimes,"[3] a human
institution made up of a number of men bound together by a certain
organization of which the Pope is the head.

  [3] The Church is the society of the faithful, established by our
  Lord Jesus Christ, diffused throughout the world, subject to the
  authority of its lawful pastors and our holy father the Pope.

The Orthodox catechism says: "Our Church is a society established
on earth by Jesus Christ, united by the divine doctrine and the
sacraments under the government and direction of a hierarchy
established by the Lord,"--those words, "established by the Lord,"
signifying a Greek hierarchy, composed of certain men who are
ordained to fill certain places.

The Lutheran catechism says: "Our Church is a holy Christian society
of believers under Christ, our Master, in which the Holy Ghost, by
means of the Bible and the sacraments, offers, communicates, and
dispenses the divine salvation,"--meaning by that, that the Catholic
Church is in error, and has fallen away from grace, and that the
genuine tradition has been preserved in Protestantism.

For Catholics the divine Church is identified with the Pope and
the Roman hierarchy. For the Orthodox it is identified with the
institution of the Eastern and Russian hierarchy.[4] For Lutherans
the divine Church signifies a congregation of men who acknowledge
the Bible and the Lutheran catechism.

  [4] The definition of Homiakov, which had a certain success among
  the Russians, does not help the case, if one believes with him
  that the Orthodox is the only true Church. Homiakov asserts that
  a church is a society of men (without distinction between the
  ecclesiastics and the laity) united by love, and to whom the truth
  is revealed ("Let us love one another, that we may unanimously
  profess," etc.), and that such a church is, in the first place, one
  that professes the Nicene creed, and, secondly, one which, after
  the division of the churches, refused to recognize the authority of
  the Pope and the new dogmas. With such a definition as this, the
  difficulty of identifying a church which is united by love with a
  church professing the Nicene creed, and the accuracy of Photius, as
  Homiakov would have it, is still greater. Hence the statement of
  Homiakov that this church united by love, and therefore holy, is
  the same as that of the Greek hierarchy, is still more arbitrary
  than the assertions of the Catholics and the old Greek Orthodox
  believers. If we admit the existence of the Church according to the
  idea of Homiakov, that is, as a society of men united by love and
  truth, then all that any man can say in regard to it, is that it
  would be most desirable to be a member of that society,--if such
  an one exists,--that is, to live in the spirit of love and truth;
  but there are no outward manifestations by which one could either
  acknowledge one's self, or recognize others as members of this holy
  society, or exclude one's self from it, for there is no outward
  institution to be found which corresponds to that idea.

When those who belong to any one of the existing churches speak of
the beginnings of Christianity, they generally use the word "church"
in the singular, as though there had never been but one church. This
is quite unfair. The Church, which as an institution declares itself
to be the depository of infallible truth, did not arise until there
were already two.

While the faithful still agreed among themselves, the congregation
was united, and there was no occasion for calling itself a church.
It was only when it separated into two hostile parties that each
party felt obliged to assert its possession of the truth by claiming
infallibility.

During the course of the controversies between the two parties,
while each one claimed infallibility for itself and declared its
opponent heretical, arose the idea of the one church.

We know that there was a church in the year 51, which granted
the admission of the uncircumcised, and we know it only because
there was another, the Jewish Church, which denied their right to
membership.

If at the present time there is a Catholic Church which asserts
its infallibility, it is because there are other churches, namely,
the Greek Orthodox and the Lutheran, each one asserting its own
infallibility, and thus disowning all other churches. Hence the idea
of one church is but the product of the imagination, containing not
a shadow of reality.

It is an historical fact that there have existed, and still continue
to exist, numerous bodies, each one of whom maintains itself to be
the true Church established by Christ, declaring at the same time
that all the others who call themselves churches are heretical and
schismatic.

The catechisms of those churches which possess the greatest number
of communicants, the Catholic, the Orthodox, and the Lutheran,
express this in the plainest language.

The Catholic catechism says: "Quels sont ceux qui sont hors de
l'Eglise? Les infidèles, hérétiques, et schismatiques."[5] By
schismatics it means the so-called Orthodox, and by heretics the
Lutherans; so that, according to the Catholic catechism, the Church
is composed only of Catholics.

  [5] Who are those outside the Church? The infidels, heretics, and
  schismatics.

In the so-called Orthodox catechism it says: "The name Church of
Christ means only the Orthodox Church, which has remained in perfect
union with the universal Church. As to the Roman Church and the
Protestant creeds" (they are not even called a church), "they cannot
belong to the one true Church, for they have separated themselves
from it."

According to this definition the Catholics and the Protestants are
outside of the Church, and only the Orthodox are in it.

The Lutheran catechism says: "Die wahre Kirche wird darein erkannt,
das in ihr das Wort Gottes lauter und rein ohne Menschenzusetzung
gelehrt und die Sacramenten treu nach Christ Einsetzung gewartet
werden."[6]

  [6] Thereby may be the true Church known that in it the word of God
  is taught plainly and clearly, without human additions, and that
  sacraments are administered faithfully according to the teaching of
  Christ.

According to this definition, those who have added anything
whatsoever to the teaching of Christ and the apostles, as the
Catholic and Greek Churches have done, are outside the Church, and
the Lutherans alone are in it.

The Catholics assert that the Holy Ghost dwells perpetually with
their hierarchy; the Orthodox assert that the same Holy Ghost
resides also with them; the Arians claim that the Holy Ghost
manifests itself to them (and they have the same right to assert
this as have the prevailing religions of the present day); all the
denominations of Protestants--Lutherans, Reformed Presbyterians,
Methodists, Swedenborgians, and Mormons--assert that the Holy Ghost
manifests itself only with them.

If the Catholics assert that the Holy Ghost during the separation of
the Arian and Greek Churches withdrew from the separating churches
and remained in the one true Church, then the Protestants of any
denomination whatsoever may assert with as much right that during
the separation of their Church from the Catholic, the Holy Ghost
left the Catholic Church and entered into their own. And this is
exactly what they do say. Every church professes to derive its creed
by an unbroken tradition from Christ and the apostles. And certainly
every Christian creed derived from Christ must have reached the
present generation through tradition of some sort. But this is no
proof that any one of these traditions embodies infallible truth, to
the exclusion of all others.

Every branch proceeds from the root without interruption; but the
fact that each one comes from one root, by no means proves it to
be the only branch. And so it is in regard to the churches. The
proofs which each church offers of its apostolic succession, and
the miracles which are to prove its authenticity, are the same in
every case; consequently there is but one exact definition of what
is called a church (not the imaginary church which we may desire,
but the actual church which has really existed). The Church is a
body of men which lays claim to the exclusive possession of the
truth. All these various societies which were afterward transformed
by State authority into powerful organizations have really been the
chief obstacles to the diffusion of true Christianity. It could not
be otherwise: for the principal characteristic which distinguishes
the doctrine of Christ from those of earlier times is that the men
who accepted it strove to understand and to fulfil it more and more
perfectly; whereas the doctrine of the Church affirmed that it was
already thoroughly understood and also fulfilled.

However strange this may seem to us, reared as we have been in the
false doctrine of the Church, as if it were a Christian institution,
and taught to despise heresy, it is nevertheless in that which men
call heresy that true progress, that is, true Christianity, was
manifested, and it only ceased to be such when these heresies were
checked, and it was, so to speak, stamped with the immutable imprint
of the Church.

What, then, is heresy? Read all the theological works which treat of
heresies, of that subject which above all others calls for an exact
definition, for every theologian speaks of the true doctrine in the
midst of the false ones by which it is surrounded, and nowhere will
you find even the shadow of a definition of heresy.

As an instance of the complete absence of the definition of what
is understood by the word heresy, we will quote the opinion of a
learned Christian historian, E. de Pressensé in "Histoire du Dogme,"
with its epigraph, "Ubi Christus, ibi Ecclesia" (Paris, 1869). This
is what he says in his preface (p. 4):--

"I know that they dispute our right to qualify thus" (that is, to
pronounce them heretical) "the tendencies which were so actively
resisted by the early Fathers. The very name of heresy seems an
attack upon liberty of conscience and thought. We cannot share
these scruples, for they would simply deprive Christianity of any
individual character."

And having said that after Constantine the Church did in fact
abuse its authority to describe the dissenters as heretics and
to persecute them, he says, in speaking of the early ages of
Christianity: "The Church is a free association; there is an
advantage to be gained in separating from it. The controversy
against error is based on feelings and ideas; no uniform body of
dogma has as yet been adopted; differences of secondary importance
appear in the East and West with perfect freedom; theology is not
limited by unalterable formulas. If amid these varying opinions a
common groundwork of faith is discerned, have we not the right to
see in this, not a definite system devised and formulated by the
representatives of a school, but faith itself in its most unerring
instinct and spontaneous manifestation? If this very unanimity
which is revealed in the essential matters of faith is found to be
antagonistic to certain tendencies, have we not the right to infer
that these tendencies disagreed with the fundamental principles of
Christianity? Will not this supposition become a certainty if we
recognize in the doctrine rejected by the Church the characteristic
features of one of the religions of the past? If we admit that
gnosticism or ebionitism are legitimate forms of Christian thought,
we must boldly declare that Christian thought does not exist, nor
does it possess any specific characteristic by which it may be
recognized. We should destroy it even while pretending to enlarge
its limits. In the time of Plato no one would have dared to advocate
a doctrine which would leave no room for the theory of ideas, and he
would have been subjected to the well-deserved ridicule of Greece,
if he attempted to make of Epicurus or of Zeno a disciple of the
Academy. Let us then admit that if there exists a religion or a
doctrine called Christianity, it may have its heresies."

The writer's argument amounts to this, that every opinion which does
not accord with the code of dogmas that we have professed at any
given time, is a heresy. At a certain time and in a certain place
men make a certain profession, but this profession can never be a
fixed criterion of the truth. All is summed up in the "Ubi Christus,
ibi Ecclesia," and Christ is wherever we are.

Every so-called heresy which claims that what it professes is the
actual truth, may likewise find in the history of the Church a
consistent explanation of the faith it professes, and apply all
the arguments to its own use. Pressensé simply calls his own creed
Christian truth, precisely as every heretical sect has done.

The primary definition of the word heresy (the word ἁίρεσις means
a part) is the name given by a society of men to any opinion
contradicting any part of the doctrine professed by the society. A
more specific meaning is an expression of an opinion which denies
the truth of the creed, established and maintained by the temporal
power.

There is a remarkable, although little known, work entitled
"Unpartheyische Kirchen und Ketzer-Historie," 1729, by Gottfried
Arnold, which treats of this subject, and points out the illegality,
the perversity, the lack of sense, and the cruelty of employing the
word heresy in the sense of refutation. This book is an attempt to
relate the history of Christianity in the form of a history of
heresies.

In his introduction the author asks a series of questions: (1) Of
those who make heretics (Von denen Ketzermachern selbst); (2) Of
those who have become heretics; (3) Of the subjects of heresy; (4)
Of the ways of making heretics; and (5) Of the aims and consequences
of the making of heretics. To each of these points he adds scores
of other questions, giving the answers from the works of well-known
theologians, but principally leaving it to the reader to draw his
own deductions from the contents of the book. As instances of
questions which are to a certain extent their own answers I will
quote the following:--Concerning the 4th question, of the methods
for making heretics, he asks in one of the questions (the 7th):
"Does not all history tend to show us that the greatest makers of
heretics, the adepts in the art, were those very wiseacres from
whom the Father concealed his secrets--that is, the hypocrites, the
Pharisees, and the Scribes, or utterly godless and evil-minded men?
(Question 20-21) And in the corrupted times of Christianity did
not the hypocrites and envious ones reject the very men, talented
and especially indorsed by the Lord, who would have been highly
esteemed in periods of pure Christianity? (21) And, on the other
hand, would not those men who during the decadence of Christianity
rose above all others, and set themselves up as teachers of the
purest Christianity, would not they, during the times of the
apostles of Christ and his disciples, have been considered as the
shameful heretics and anti-Christians?" Among other things, while
expressing the idea that the verbal declaration of the essence of
faith which was required by the Church, the abjuration of which was
regarded as a heresy, could never cover all the ideas and beliefs
of the faithful, and that hence the requirement that faith shall be
expressed by a certain formula of words is the immediate cause of
heresy, he says in the 21st question:--

"And supposing that holy acts and thoughts appear to a man so high
and so profound that he finds no adequate words wherewith to convey
them, should he be considered a heretic if he is unable to formulate
his conception? (33) And was not this the reason why there were no
heresies in the early times of Christianity, because Christians
judged each other, not by their words, but by their hearts and by
their deeds, enjoying a perfect freedom of expression, without the
fear of being called heretic?" "Was it not one of the convenient and
easiest methods of the Church," he asks in the 31st question, "when
the ecclesiastics wished to rid themselves of any one, or ruin his
reputation, to excite suspicion in regard to the doctrine he held,
and by investing him in the garment of heresy, condemn and cast him
out?"

"Although it is true that among so-called heretics sins and errors
have been committed, it is no less true, as the numerous examples
here quoted bear testimony" (that is to say, in the history of
the Church and of heresies), "that there has never been a sincere
and conscientious man of any importance whose safety has not been
endangered through the envy of the ecclesiastics."

This was the interpretation of heresy almost 200 years ago, and the
same meaning is attached to it to-day, and so long as the idea of
the Church shall exist it will never change. Where the Church exists
there must also exist the idea of heresy. The Church is a body of
men claiming possession of indisputable truth. A heresy is the
opinion of men who do not acknowledge the truth of the Church to be
indisputable.

Heresy is the manifestation of a movement in the Church; it is
an attempt to destroy the immutable assertion of the Church, the
attempt of a living apprehension of the doctrine. Each advance that
has been made toward the comprehension and the practice of the
doctrine has been accomplished by heretics: Tertullian, Origen,
Augustine, and Luther, Huss, Savonarola, Helchitsky, and others were
all heretics. It could not be otherwise.

A disciple of Christ, who possesses an ever growing sense of
the doctrine and of its progressive fulfilment as it advances
toward perfection, cannot, either for himself or others, affirm,
simply because he is a disciple of Christ, that he understands and
practises the doctrine of Christ to its fullest extent; still less
could he affirm this in regard to any body of men. To whatsoever
state of comprehension and perfection he may have arrived, he
must always feel the inadequacy both of his conception and of its
application, and must ever strive for something more satisfactory.
And therefore to claim for one's self, or for any body of men
whatsoever, the possession of a complete apprehension and practice
of the doctrine of Christ is in direct contradiction to the spirit
of Christ's doctrine itself.

However strange this statement may appear, every church, as a
church, has always been, and always must be, an institution not
only foreign, but absolutely hostile, to the doctrine of Christ. It
is not without reason that Voltaire called it "_l'infâme_"; it is
not without reason that all so-called Christian sects believe the
Church to be the Scarlet Woman prophesied by the Revelation; it is
not without reason that the history of the Church is the history of
cruelties and horrors.

Churches in themselves are, as some persons believe, institutions
based upon a Christian principle, from which they have deviated to a
certain extent; but considered in the light of churches, of bodies
of men claiming infallibility, they are anti-Christian institutions.
Between churches in the ecclesiastical sense and Christianity,
not only is there nothing in common except the name, but they are
two utterly contradictory and hostile elements. One is pride,
violence, self-assertion, inertia, and death. The other is meekness,
repentance, submission, activity, and life.

No man can serve these two masters at the same time; he must choose
either the one or the other.

The servants of the churches of every creed, especially in these
modern times, strive to represent themselves as the partisans of
progress in Christianity; they make concessions, they try to correct
the abuses that have crept into the Church, and protest that it is
wrong to deny the principle of the Christian Church on account of
these abuses, because it is only through the medium of the Church
that unity can be obtained, and that the Church is the only mediator
between God and man. All this is untrue. So far from fostering the
spirit of unity, the churches have ever been the fruitful source of
human enmity, of hatred, wars, conflicts, inquisitions, Eves of St.
Bartholomew, and so on; neither do the churches act as the mediators
between God and man,--an office, moreover, quite unnecessary, and
directly forbidden by Christ himself, who has revealed his doctrine
unto each individual; it is but the dead formula, and not the living
God, which the churches offer to man, and which serves rather to
increase than diminish the distance between man and his Creator.
The churches, which were founded upon a misconception, and which
preserve this misconception by their immutability, must of necessity
harass and persecute any new conception, because they know, however
they may try to conceal it, that every advance along the road
indicated by Christ is undermining their own existence.

Whenever one reads or listens to the essays and sermons in which
ecclesiastical writers of modern times belonging to the various
creeds discuss the Christian truths and virtues, when one hears
and reads these artificial arguments, these exhortations, these
professions of faith, elaborated through centuries, that now and
then sound sincere, one is almost ready to doubt if the churches can
be inimical to Christianity. "It cannot be possible that men like
John Chrysostom, Fénelon, Butler, and other Christian preachers,
could be inimical to it." One would like to say, "The churches may
have gone astray from Christianity, may have committed errors, but
they cannot have been hostile to it." But one must first see the
fruit before he can know the tree, as Christ has taught, and one
sees that their fruits were evil, that the result of their works has
been the distortion of Christianity; and one cannot help concluding
that, however virtuous the men may have been, the cause of the
church in which these men served was not Christian. The goodness
and virtue of certain individuals who served the churches were
peculiar to themselves, and not to the cause which they served. All
these excellent men, like Francis of Assisi and Francis de Sales,
Tichon Zadònsky, Thomas à Kempis, and others, were good men, even
though they served a cause hostile to Christianity; and they would
have been still more charitable and more exemplary had they not
yielded obedience to false doctrines.

But why do we speak of, or sit in judgment on, the past, which may
be falsely represented, and is, in any event, but little known to
us? The churches, with their principles and their works, are not of
the past; we have them with us to-day, and can judge them by their
works and by their influence over men.

What, then, constitutes their power? How do they influence men? What
is their work in the Greek, the Catholic, and in all the Protestant
denominations? and what are the consequences of such work?

The work of our Russian so-called Orthodox Church is visible to all.
It is a factor of primary importance, which can neither be concealed
nor disputed.

In what manner is the activity of the Russian Church
displayed,--that vast institution which labors with so much zeal,
that institution which numbers among its servants half a million of
men, and costs the people tens of millions?

The activity of the Church consists in forcing, by every means in
its power, upon the one hundred millions of Russian people, those
antiquated, time-worn beliefs which have lost all significance,
and which were formerly professed by foreigners, with whom we had
nothing in common, beliefs in which nearly every man has lost
his faith, even in some cases those very men whose duty it is to
inculcate them.

The endeavor to force upon the people those formulas of the
Byzantine clergy, marvelous to them and senseless to us, concerning
the Trinity, the Virgin, the sacraments, grace, and so forth,
embraces one province of the activity of the Russian Church; another
function is the encouragement given to idolatry, in the literal
sense of the word: the veneration of holy relics and holy images,
the sacrifices offered to them in the faith that they will hear and
grant prayers. I will pass over in silence what is written in the
ecclesiastical magazines by the clergy who possess a semblance of
learning and liberality, and will speak only of what is really done
by the clergy throughout the immense extent of Russia, among its one
hundred millions of inhabitants. What is it that is taught to the
people with such unremitting pains and endeavor, and with so much
earnestness? What is required of them for the sake of the so-called
Christian religion?

I will start at the beginning, with the birth of the child. When
a child is born, we are taught that a prayer must be read over
the mother and child, in order to purify them, for without that
prayer the mother remains unclean. For that purpose, and facing the
ikons of the saints, whom the common people simply call gods, the
priest takes the infant in his arms, reads the exhortation, and by
that means he is supposed to cleanse the mother. Then the parents
are instructed, nay, even ordered, under penalty of punishment
in the event of non-compliance, to christen the child--that is,
to let the priest immerse it three times in the water, while
words unintelligible to all present are read, and still less
intelligible ceremonies are performed, such as the application of
oil to different parts of the body, the cutting of the hair, the
blowing and spitting of the sponsors at the imaginary devil. All
this is necessary to cleanse the child, and make a Christian of
him. Then the parents are told that the child must receive the
holy sacrament--that is, he is to swallow, in the form of bread
and wine, a particle of the body of Christ, by which means the
child will receive the blessing of Christ, and so on. Then they
are told that as the child grows it must be taught to pray, which
means that he is to stand in front of boards upon which the faces
of Christ, the Virgin, and the saints are painted, bow his head
and body, while with his right hand, his fingers being folded in
a peculiar manner, he touches his forehead, his shoulders, and
his stomach, and utters certain Slavonic words, the commonest of
which, those which all children learn, are the following: "Mother
of God, ... Virgin, rejoice," etc. Then the child is taught that he
must repeat this--that is, that he must make the sign of the cross
whenever he sees a church or an ikon. Furthermore, he is taught
that on a holiday (holidays are either the day on which Christ was
born, although no one knows when that took place, or the day of his
circumcision, or that on which the Virgin died, or when the cross or
the ikon was brought, or when some fanatic beheld a vision, etc.) he
should array himself in his best clothes, go to church, buy candles,
and set them up before the ikons of the saints, give to the priest
memoranda bearing the names of the dead who are to be prayed for,
receive bread with triangular pieces cut out of it, pray repeatedly
for the health and welfare of the Czar and bishops, as well as for
himself and his own affairs, and then kiss the cross and the hand of
the priest.

Thus is he taught to pray; and besides this, he is also taught
that he must perform his devotions once a year. To perform one's
devotions means to go to church and tell one's sins to the priest,
it being assumed that this recital of one's sins to a stranger will
have a purifying effect on a man; then he is to swallow a spoonful
of bread and wine, which will purify him still more. Moreover,
men are told that if a man and woman desire to have their sexual
relation sanctified they must come to church, put crowns of metal
upon their heads, swallow some wine, walk three times round a table,
accompanied by the sound of singing, and this will make their sexual
relation holy and entirely different from any others.

In daily life the observation of the following rules is enjoined:
to eat no meat nor drink no milk on certain days, to say _Te Deums_
and _Requiems_ on certain other days, to invite the priest to
one's house on holidays and present him with money; to take from
the church several times a year boards upon which are painted the
images of the saints, and to carry them on towels through fields and
houses. Before death a man must without fail receive a spoonful of
bread and wine; and if there be time to be anointed with oil, that
is still better, for it insures his welfare in the future life.
After his death his relatives are told that, in order to save his
soul, it is well to place in his hand a printed prayer; it is also a
good thing to read a certain book over the dead, and for his name to
be mentioned in church at stated times.

This is what constitutes every man's religious obligation. But
if any one wishes to take a special care of his soul, this creed
teaches that the greatest amount of happiness may be secured in
the next world by bequeathing money for churches and monasteries,
thereby obliging the saints to pray for one. According to this faith
it is also well to visit monasteries and kiss the miraculous ikons
and the relics.

These are believed to impart a peculiar holiness, strength, and
grace; and to be near these objects, as one must be in kissing them,
placing tapers before them, crawling under them, and repeating _Te
Deums_ before them, greatly promotes salvation.

And this is the faith called Orthodox, this is the true faith,
the one which, under the garb of a Christian religion, has been
energetically taught to the people for many centuries, and is
inculcated at the present time more vigorously than ever.

Let it not be said that the Orthodox teachers look upon all this as
an ancient form of faith which it was not considered worth while
to abolish, and that the essence of the doctrine abides elsewhere.
This is not the truth. Throughout Russia, and lately with increased
energy, the entire Russian clergy teaches this faith, and this
alone. Nothing else is taught. Men may write about other doctrines
and discuss them in the capitals, but among the hundred million
inhabitants this, and only this, is taught. The ecclesiastics may
discuss other doctrines, but only this is what is taught.

All this--the worship of relics and shrines--is included in theology
and the catechism; the people are carefully instructed in all this,
theoretically and practically, by every kind of solemnity, splendor,
authority, and violence; the people are compelled to believe in it
all; they are hypnotized, and the faith is jealously guarded against
any attempt to deliver them from these foolish superstitions.

As I said in my book, I have during the course of many years had
frequent opportunities to remark the ridicule and rude jests
that have been applied to Christ's words and doctrine, and the
ecclesiastics not only failed to condemn it, they even encouraged
this scoffing; but let a man venture to say one disrespectful word
of the ugly idol called the Iverskaya,[7] sacrilegiously carried
around Moscow by intoxicated men, and a groan of indignation will
rise from these same Orthodox ecclesiastics. In fact, it is only an
external worship in the form of idolatry that is propagated. And
let it not be said that the one does not exclude the other, that
"All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do;
but do not ye after their works: for they say, and do not" (Matthew
xxiii. 3). This is said concerning the Pharisees, who fulfilled
all the outward commands of the law, and therefore the words,
"whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do," refer to
acts of benevolence and charity; whereas the words, "do not ye after
their works, for they say and do not," refer to their observances of
the rites and their indifference to works of charity, and directly
contradicts the clerical interpretation of this passage, which
explains it as a commandment which has to do only with the rites. An
external worship is hardly compatible with the service of charity
and truth; one is apt to exclude the other. It was so with the
Pharisees, and the same may be said of our professing Christians.

  [7] The ikon of the Virgin which stands in a chapel in the heart
  of Moscow, and which is the object of a special veneration to the
  Russians.--TR.

If a man is to be saved by redemption, the sacraments, and prayer,
good works are no longer of any value to him. It must be either the
Sermon on the Mount or the Credo. No man can believe in both, and
the ecclesiastics have chosen the latter. The Credo is taught and
recited as a prayer in the churches, while the Sermon on the Mount
is excluded even from selections from the Bible which are read in
churches, so that the congregation never hear it, except on the days
when the entire Bible is read. It is inevitable; the men who can
believe that a cruel and unreasonable God had condemned humanity to
eternal death and sacrificed his own Son, and who had destined a
certain portion of mankind to everlasting torture, cannot believe
in a God of love. A man who believes in God, in the Christ who is
coming in his glory to judge and punish the dead and the living,
cannot believe in a Christ who commands us to turn the other cheek
to the offender, who forbids us to sit in judgment, and who bids us
to forgive our enemies and to love them. A man who believes in the
inspiration of the Old Testament and in the holiness of David, who
on his deathbed ordered the murder of an old man who had offended
him, and whom he could not kill himself because he was bound by
an oath (1 Kings ii. 8,9), and many other horrors of a similar
character, in which the Old Testament abounds, cannot believe in the
moral law of Christ; a man who believes in the doctrine and sermons
of the Church, wherein the practice of war and the penalty of death
are reconciled with Christianity, cannot believe in the brotherhood
of humanity.

But, above all, a man who believes in salvation through faith, in
redemption, and in the sacraments, cannot strive with all his might
to live up to the moral precepts of Christ. A man who has been
taught by the Church the sacrilegious doctrine that he is to be
saved through a certain medium, and not by his own efforts, will
surely have recourse to that medium; he will not trust to his own
efforts, on which, he has been assured, it is sinful to rely. Every
Church, with its doctrines of redemption and salvation, and above
all, the Orthodox faith, with its idolatry, excludes the doctrine
of Christ. But it is said, "This has always been the faith of the
people, and that they will continue to hold it is proved by the
whole history of the Russian nation. It would be wrong to deprive
them of their traditions." Herein lies the fallacy. The people,
it is true, did once upon a time profess something like what is at
present professed by the Church; but besides this worship of images
and relics, the people had always a profound moral conception of
Christianity never possessed by the Church, and only met with in
her noblest representatives; but the people, in the better class,
and in spite of the obstacles raised by the State and the Church,
have long since abandoned the cruder phase of belief, a fact that
is proved by the rationalistic sects that are beginning to spring
up on every side, sects that Russia is filled with at the present
day, and against which the ecclesiastics wage so hopeless a warfare.
The people are beginning to recognize the moral, vital side of
Christianity more and more plainly. And now the Church appears,
failing to give them a moral support, but forcibly teaching old-time
paganism,--the Church, with its immutable formulas, endeavoring to
thrust men back into the gloom from which they are struggling so
earnestly to escape.

The ecclesiastics say: "We are teaching nothing new; it is the same
faith which the people already hold, only we teach it in a more
perfect manner." It is like binding a chicken and trying to put it
back into the shell from which it came. I have often been struck by
the spectacle, which would be simply absurd were not its results so
terrible, of men traveling, so to speak, in a circle, deceived and
deceiving, but wholly unable to escape from the charmed circle.

The first question, the first doubt, that enters the head of
every Russian when he begins to reason, is a suspicion of the
miraculous ikons, and principally of the relics: is it true that
they are incorruptible, and that they perform miracles? Hundreds
and thousands of men ask these questions, and are at a loss for an
answer, especially since bishops and metropolitans and other eminent
persons kiss both the relics and the miraculous images. Ask the
bishops and other personages of importance why they do this, and
they will tell you that they do it in order to impress the masses,
and the masses do it because the bishops and other magnates do it.

The activity of the Russian Church, despite the veneer of modernity
and the scientific and spiritual standards which its members have
begun to establish by their essays, their religious reviews, and
their sermons, consists not only in encouraging the people in a
coarse and grotesque idolatry, but in strengthening and promulgating
superstition and religious ignorance, and in endeavoring to destroy
the vital conception of Christianity that exists in the people side
by side with this idolatry.

I remember being once in a book-shop of the monastery of Optinæ
Desert while an old peasant was selecting spiritual reading for
his educated grandson. The monk was offering him a description of
relics, of holy days, of miraculous ikons, the Book of Psalms, and
the like. I asked the old man if he had a Bible. "No," he replied.
"Give him a Russian Bible," I said to the monk. "We don't sell that
to them," said the monk. This, in short, is the activity of our
Church.

But the European or American reader may say, "That only happens in
barbaric Russia," and the remark will be correct, but only so far as
it applies to the government, which supports the Church to maintain
in our land its stupefying and demoralizing influence.

It is true that there is nowhere in Europe a government so despotic,
or that is in more perfect accord with the established Church.
Therefore in Russia the government authorities play an important
part in demoralizing the people; but it is not true that the Russian
Church differs from other churches in respect to its influence over
the people.

Churches are everywhere alike, and if the Catholic, Anglican, and
Lutheran have not at their beck so submissive a government as the
Russian, we may be sure that they would not fail to take advantage
of it were it within their reach.

The Church as a church, whether it be Catholic, Anglican, Lutheran,
or Presbyterian, or any denomination whatsoever, inasmuch as it is
a church, cannot help striving after the same object as the Russian
Church--namely, to conceal the true meaning of the doctrine of
Christ, and to substitute a meaning of its own, which imposes no
obligations, which excludes the possibility of understanding the
true, living doctrine of Christ, and which above all justifies the
existence of a priesthood living at the expense of the people.

Do we not find Catholicism with its prohibition against reading the
Bible, and with its demand for implicit obedience to the clergy
and the infallible Pope? Wherein does Catholicism differ in its
preaching from the Russian Church? The same external worship, the
same relics, miracles, and statues, miracle-performing Madonnas
and processions; the same vague and mystical utterances concerning
Christianity in books and sermons, and all in support of the
grossest idolatry.

And is it not the same in the Anglican or in the Lutheran, or in any
other Protestant denomination with an established form of church?

The same demands that the congregation shall acknowledge a belief in
dogmas which were defined in the fourth century, and which have lost
all meaning for the men of our time; the same call for idol worship,
if not of relics or ikons, at least of the Sabbath and the letter
of the Bible; the same endeavor to conceal the real requirement of
Christianity and the substitution of exterior rites, and "cant," as
the English so happily define the tendency which finds such sway
among them.

This activity is more noticeable in Protestantism, because that
creed has not even the excuse of antiquity. And is not the same
thing going on in the present "Revivalism," a regenerated Calvinism,
which has given birth to the Salvation Army? Inasmuch as the
attitude of all ecclesiastical dogmas toward the doctrine of Christ
is very much the same, so are their methods of a similar character.

The attitude they have taken obliges them to make every effort to
conceal the doctrine of that Christ in whose name they speak.

The disparity between ecclesiastical creeds and the doctrine of
Christ is so great that a special effort is required to keep mankind
in ignorance. Indeed, one needs but to consider the position of
any adult, I do not say educated, but one who has assimilated
superficially the current notions concerning geology, physics,
chemistry, cosmography, and history, when for the first time he
actually reflects on the faith impressed upon him in his childhood,
and maintained by the Church, concerning the creation of the world
in six days, the appearance of light before the sun was created, the
story of Noah's ark and the animals preserved in it,--concerning
Jesus and his divine origin as the Son of God who created all things
before time existed; that this God came down to earth because of
Adam's sin; that he rose from the dead, ascended into heaven, and
sits on the right hand of the Father; that he will come in the
clouds to judge the living and the dead, etc.

All these ideas evolved by the men of the fourth century, which had
for them a certain meaning, have none whatever for us. The present
generation may repeat these words, but it can never believe in them,
because the statements that God dwells in heaven, that the heavens
opened and a voice was heard to utter certain words, that Christ
arose from the dead and ascended into heaven, that he will come
again from some place in the clouds, etc., have no meaning for us.

It was possible for a man who believed that heaven was a substantial
arch of limited dimensions to believe or to disbelieve that God
created it, that it opened, and that Christ ascended thither,--but
for us there is no sense in such ideas. Men of our time can only
affirm that it is one's duty to believe all this,--which they do.
But they cannot really believe in what has no meaning in it for them.

But if all these utterances are supposed to have an allegorical
signification and are only intended as similes, then we know in the
first place that all the churchmen will not agree to this--on the
contrary, the majority insist on taking the Scriptures literally;
and in the second place, that these interpretations differ greatly,
and are supported by no reliable authority.

And even if a man wished to believe the doctrine of the Church as
it is taught, the increase of culture, the reading of the Bible,
and the intercourse among the members of different churches, form a
greater and more insurmountable obstacle to belief.

Nowadays a man has but to buy the Bible for threepence, and to read
the simple, indisputable words of Christ to the Samaritan woman,
that the Father seeketh worshipers neither in Jerusalem nor in this
or that mountain, but worshipers in spirit and truth; or the words,
that a Christian should pray not like the heathen in the temples,
nor at the corners of streets, but in the secrecy of his closet; or,
that a disciple of Christ may call no one father or mother,--one has
but to read these words to be indubitably convinced that priests who
call themselves teachers in opposition to the teaching of Christ,
and dispute among themselves, cannot be authorities, and that that
which they teach is not Christian.

But this is not enough. If the modern man were to go on believing
in miracles and never read the Bible, the fellowship with men of
other creeds and professions, which is so much a matter of course in
these days, will compel him to question the truth of his religion.
It was natural enough for a man who had never met a believer in a
creed different from his own, to think that his was the only faith;
but an intelligent man has but to encounter--and that is an everyday
occurrence--good and bad men of all creeds, who criticize each
other's beliefs, in order to question the truth of his own religion.
Now, only a man either totally ignorant or indifferent to the
problems of life as dealt with by religion can remain in the faith
of the Church.

What shrewdness is needed, and what efforts must the churches make,
in order to go on, in the face of all these faith-destroying
influences, building temples, saying masses, preaching, instructing,
converting, and above all receiving for this the large compensations
which all those priests, pastors, stewards, superintendents, abbots,
archdeacons, bishops, and archbishops receive!

A special and supernatural effort is called for, and to this the
Church responds, exerting herself more and more. In Russia, besides
many other measures, they employ a simple, rude violence, by virtue
of the power invested in the Church. People who shrink from an
outward observance of faith and who do not conceal the fact are
simply punished or deprived of their civil rights; and to those who
strictly comply with the rites, privileges and rewards are granted.

So much for the Orthodoxy; but every church, without exception,
makes the most of the means at its disposal, and hypnotism is one of
the chief agents.

Every art, from architecture to poetry, is enlisted, in order to
move and intoxicate the human soul. This hypnotic and mesmerizing
influence is markedly displayed in the activity of the Salvation
Army, which employs novel, and to us abnormal, methods, such, for
instance, as drums, horns, singing, banners, uniforms, processions,
dancing, outbursts of tears, and dramatic gestures.

Still, these methods are startling simply because of their novelty.
Is not the familiar form of worship in cathedrals, with their
peculiar illumination, the golden pomp, the candles, choirs, organs,
bells, vestments, the weeping preachers, etc., of a similar nature?
And yet, however powerful may be the influence of this hypnotism,
it is by no means the chief or most harmful form which the activity
of the Church assumes. Its most malign activity is that which is
devoted to deceiving the children--those little ones of whom Jesus
has said, "Woe be unto him who tempts the least of these." From
the earliest awakening of a child's intelligence he is deceived
and formally taught that which his teachers no longer believe
themselves, and this goes on until the delusion becomes from habit
a part of his nature. A child is systematically deceived concerning
the most important affair in life, and when this deception has
become so incorporated with his being that it is difficult to uproot
it, then the world of science and reality is opened to him--a world
that is wholly at variance with the faith which he has imbibed from
his teachers--and he is left to reconcile those contradictions as
best he may.

Given the problem of how to muddle a man so that he will be unable
to discriminate between two antagonistic conceptions that have been
taught to him since his childhood, one could never have devised
anything more effectual than the education of every young man in our
so-called Christian society.

Shocking as it is to contemplate the work of the churches among men,
still, if we consider their position, we shall see that they cannot
act otherwise. They are face to face with a dilemma: the Sermon on
the Mount or the Nicene creed; the one excludes the other. If a man
sincerely believes the Sermon on the Mount, the Nicene creed must
inevitably lose all its meaning for him, and the same would hold
true as regards the Church and its representatives; but if a man
accepts the Nicene creed, that is to say, the Church, or those who
call themselves its representatives, then he will find no use for
the Sermon on the Mount. Hence it is incumbent on the churches to
make every effort to obscure the meaning of the Sermon on the Mount
and to endeavor to draw the people toward them. It is only due to
their intense activity in that direction that the influence of the
churches has not decreased. Let the Church but pause in this effort
to influence the masses by hypnotizing men and deceiving children
for ever so short a time, and men will comprehend the doctrine
of Christ, and this comprehension will do away with churches and
their influence. Therefore the churches cease not for one moment
their compulsory activity through the hypnotism of adults and the
deception of children. And it is this activity of the churches that
gives people a false conception of Christ's doctrine, and prevents
the majority of men, the so-called believers, from understanding it.




