CHAPTER IX

THE ACCEPTANCE OF THE CHRISTIAN LIFE-CONCEPTION DELIVERS MEN FROM
THE MISERIES OF OUR PAGAN LIFE

     The external life of Christian nations remains pagan, but they
     are already penetrated by the Christian life-conception--The
     issue from this contradiction is in the acceptance of the
     Christian life-conception--In it alone is every man free, and
     it alone frees him from all human authority--This deliverance
     is brought about, not by a change of external conditions,
     but only by a change in the conception of one's life--The
     Christian life-conception demands the renunciation of violence,
     and, in delivering the man who accepts it, it frees the world
     from all external authority--The issue from the present
     apparently hopeless position consists in every man accepting
     the Christian life-conception and living accordingly--But
     men consider this method too slow, and see their salvation
     in change of the material conditions of life made with the
     aid of the authority of the State--This method will have no
     issue, because men themselves cause the evil from which they
     suffer--This is especially evident in regard to the submissive
     acceptance of military duty, for it is more advantageous for
     a man to refuse than accept--Human freedom will be brought
     about only through the liberation of each individual man, and
     already there are signs of this liberation, which threatens to
     destroy State organization--The repudiation of the un-Christian
     demands of governments undermines their authority and makes
     men free--Therefore instances of such refusals are feared by
     governments more than conspiracies or violence--Instances, in
     Russia, of refusals to take the oath of allegiance, to pay
     taxes, to accept passports or positions in the police, to take
     part in courts of law, or to be drafted as soldiers--Similar
     instances in other countries--Governments know not how to
     dispose of men who refuse to obey their requirements because of
     the Christian doctrine--These men destroy without a struggle
     the foundations of governments from the inside--To punish them
     would mean for governments to deny Christianity themselves, and
     to contribute to the diffusion of that consciousness from which
     such refusals spring--Hence the position of governments is a
     desperate one, and men who preach the uselessness of personal
     deliverance only arrest the destruction of the existing system
     of government founded on violence.


The Christian nations of the present day are in a position no less
cruel than that of pagan times. In many respects, especially in the
matter of oppression, their position has grown worse.

A contrast like that of modern and ancient times may be seen in the
vegetation of the last days of autumn as compared with that of the
early days of spring. In the autumn the outward decay and death
correspond to the interior process, which is the suspension of life;
in the spring the apparent lifelessness is in direct contradiction
to the real vitality within, and the approaching transition to new
forms of life.

And thus it is as regards the apparent resemblance between pagan
life and that of the present day. It exists only in appearance. The
inner lives of men in the times of paganism were quite unlike those
of the men of our days.

In the former the external aspect of cruelty and slavery
corresponded with the inner consciousness of men, a conformity which
only increased as time went on; in the latter the external condition
of cruelty and slavery is in utter contradiction to the Christian
consciousness of men, a contradiction which grows more and more
striking every year.

The misery and suffering resulting therefrom seem so useless. It is
like prolonged suffering in child-labor. Everything is ready for the
coming life, and yet no life appears.

Apparently the situation is without deliverance. It would indeed
be so were it not that to men, and therefore to the world, there
has been vouchsafed the capacity for a loftier conception of life,
which has the power to set free, and at once, from all fetters,
however firmly riveted.

And this is the Christian life-conception presented to men 1800
years ago.

A man has but to assimilate this life-conception and he will be set
free, as a matter of course, from the fetters that now restrain him,
and feel free as a bird who spreads his wings and flies over the
wall that has kept him a prisoner.

They talk of setting the Christian Church free from the State, of
granting freedom to or withholding it from Christians. Such thoughts
and expressions are strangely misleading. Liberty can neither be
granted to nor withheld from a Christian or Christians.

But if there is a question of granting or withholding liberty, then
evidently it is not the true Christians who are meant, but only men
who call themselves by that name. A Christian cannot help being
free, because in the pursuit and attainment of his object no one can
either hinder or retard him.

A man has but to understand his life as Christianity teaches him to
understand it; that is, he must realize that it does not belong to
himself, nor to his family, nor to the State, but to Him who sent
him into the world; he must therefore know that it is his duty to
live, not in accordance with the law of his own personality, nor of
that of his family or State, but to fulfil the infinite law of Him
who gave him life, in order to feel himself so entirely free from
all human authority that he will cease to regard it as a possible
obstacle.

A man needs but to realize that the object of his life is the
fulfilment of God's law; then the preëminence of that law, claiming
as it does his entire allegiance, will of necessity invalidate the
authority and restrictions of all human laws.

The Christian who contemplates that law of love implanted in every
human soul, and quickened by Christ, the only guide for all mankind,
is set free from human authority.

A Christian may suffer from external violence, may be deprived of
his personal freedom, may be a slave to his passions,--the man who
commits sin is the slave of the sin,--but he cannot be controlled
or coerced by threats into committing an act contrary to his
consciousness. He cannot be forced to this, because the privations
and sufferings that are so powerful an influence over men who hold
the social life-conception have no influence whatever over him. The
privations and sufferings that destroy the material welfare which is
the object of the social life-conception produce no effect upon the
welfare of the Christian's life, which rests on the consciousness
that he is doing God's will--nay, they may even serve to promote
that welfare when they are visited upon him for fulfilling that will.

A Christian, therefore, who submits to the inner, the divine law,
is not only unable to execute the biddings of the outward law when
they are at variance with his consciousness of God's law of love,
as in the case of the demands made upon him by the government; but
he cannot acknowledge the obligation of obeying any individual
whomsoever, cannot acknowledge himself to be what is called a
subject. For a Christian to promise to subject himself to any
government whatsoever--a subjection which may be considered the
foundation of State life--is a direct negation of Christianity;
since an individual who promises beforehand to obey implicitly every
law that men may enact, by that promise utters an emphatic denial of
Christianity, whose very essence is obedience in all contingencies
to the law which he feels to be within him--the law of love.

With the pagan life-conception it was possible to promise to obey
the will of temporal authorities without violating the laws of
God, which were supposed to consist in carrying out such customs
as circumcision, the observance of the Sabbath, the utterance of
prayer at certain periods, abstinence from certain kinds of food,
etc. The one did not contradict the other. But Christianity differs
from paganism inasmuch as its requirements are not of an external
or negative character; on the contrary, they are such as reverse
man's former relations toward his fellow-men, and may call for
acts on his part which could not be anticipated, and consequently
are not defined. Hence it is that a Christian can neither promise
to obey nor to disobey the will of another, ignorant as he must
be of the nature of its requirements; not only must he refuse to
obey human laws, but he cannot promise to do or abstain from doing
anything definite at any given time, because he can never tell at
what hour or in what manner the Christian law of love, on which his
life-conception is based, will demand his coöperation. A Christian,
promising in advance to obey unconditionally the laws of men, admits
by that promise that the inner law of God does not constitute for
him the sole law of his life.

When a Christian promises to obey the commands or laws of men, he
is like a craftsman who, having hired himself out to one master,
promises at the same time to execute the orders of other persons. No
man can serve two masters.

A Christian is freed from human authority by acknowledging
the supremacy of one authority alone, that of God, whose law,
revealed to him through Christ, he recognizes within himself, and
obeys,--that and no other.

And this deliverance is accomplished neither by means of a struggle,
nor by the destruction of previous customs of life, but only through
a change in his life-conception. The deliverance proceeds, in the
first place, from the Christian's acknowledgment of the law of love,
as revealed to him by his Teacher, which suffices to determine the
relations of men, and according to which every act of violence seems
superfluous and unlawful. Secondly, because those privations and
miseries, or the anticipations of such, which influence a man who
holds the social life-conception and reduces him to obedience, seem
to him no more than the inevitable consequences of existence, which
he would never dream of opposing by violence, but bears patiently,
as he would bear disease, hunger, or any other misery; which,
indeed, have no possible influence over his actions. The Christian's
only guide must be the divine indwelling element, subject neither to
restriction nor to control.

A Christian lives in accordance with the words spoken by the Master:
"He shall not strive, nor cry; neither shall any man hear his voice
in the streets. A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax
shall he not quench, _till he send forth judgment unto victory_."[15]

  [15] Matthew xii. 19, 20.

A Christian enters into no dispute with his neighbor, he neither
attacks nor uses violence; on the contrary, he suffers violence
himself without resistance, and by his very attitude toward evil not
only sets himself free, but helps to free the world at large from
all outward authority.

"And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you
free."[16] If there were any doubt of the truth of Christianity
there could be no more indubitable proof of its authenticity than
the complete freedom, recognizing no fetters, which a man feels as
soon as he assimilates the Christian life-conception.

  [16] John viii. 32.

Human beings in their present condition may be likened to bees in
the act of swarming, as we see them clinging in a mass to a single
bough. Their position is a temporary one, and must inevitably be
changed. They must rise and find themselves a new abode. Every bee
knows this, and is eager to shift its own position, as well as that
of the others, but not one of them will do so until the whole swarm
rises. The swarm cannot rise, because one bee clings to the other
and prevents it from separating itself from the swarm, and so they
all continue to hang. It might seem as if there were no deliverance
from this position, precisely as it seems to men of the world who
have become entangled in the social net. Indeed, there would be no
outlet for the bees if each one were not a living creature possessed
of a pair of wings. Neither would there be any issue for men if
each one were not a living individual, being gifted with a capacity
for assimilating the Christian life-conception.

If among these bees who are able to fly not one could be found
willing to start, the swarm would never change its position. And it
is the same among men. If the man who has assimilated the Christian
life-conception waits for others before he proceeds to live in
accordance with it, mankind will never change its attitude. And as
all that is needed to change a solid mass of bees into a flying
swarm is for one bee to spread its wings and fly away, when the
second, the third, the tenth, and the hundredth will follow suit; so
all that is needed to break through the magic circle of social life,
deliverance from which seems so hopeless, is, that one man should
view life from a Christian standpoint and begin to frame his own
life accordingly, whereupon others will follow in his footsteps.

But men think that the deliverance of mankind by this method is
too slow a process, and that a simultaneous deliverance might be
effected by some other method. Just as if bees, when the swarm was
ready to rise, were to decide that it would be too long a process if
they waited for each bee to spread its wings and rise separately,
and that some means must be devised whereby the swarm may rise all
at once, whenever it pleases. But that is impossible. Not until the
first, second, third, and hundredth bee has unfolded its wings and
flown away can the swarm take flight and find for itself a new home.
Not until each individual man adopts the Christian life-conception,
and begins to live in conformity with its precepts, will the
contradictions of human life be solved, and new forms of life become
established.

One of the most striking events of our time is the propaganda
of slavery which is spread among the masses, not only by the
government, to whom it is of use, but by those exponents of
socialistic theories who consider themselves the champions of
freedom.

These men preach that the amelioration in the conditions of life,
the reconciliation between actuality and consciousness, will not be
brought about by the personal efforts of individual men, but that it
will evolve itself out of a certain forced reorganization of society
by some unknown influence. Their theory is that men should not
proceed of their own accord to the place where they wish to go, but
that they should have a platform built under their feet, upon which
they may be carried to the spot they desire to reach. Hence they
must not move as far as their strength will permit, but all their
efforts must be directed toward building this imaginary platform
without stirring from their position.

There is a theory in economics preached in these days of which the
essential principle is this: the worse the condition of affairs,
the better the prospect; the greater the accumulation of capital
and oppression of the working-man resulting therefrom, the nearer
the day of deliverance; and therefore any effort on the part of
the individual to free himself from the oppression of capital is
useless. In regard to the government it is declared that the greater
its authority, which, according to this theory, should include the
domain of private life, hitherto uninvaded, the better it will be,
and hence one should solicit the interference of governments with
private life. In regard to international politics, it is declared
that the increase of armies and modes of extermination will lead
to the necessity of a general disarmament through the agency of
congresses, arbitration, etc. And the most surprising part of all is
that human lethargy is so profound that men credit these theories,
although the whole structure of life, and every stage in human
progress, demonstrate their fallacy.

Men suffer from oppression, and by way of deliverance certain
expedients are suggested for the improvement of their condition,
these means of relief to be administered by authority, to which they
continue to submit. This will naturally tend to augment authority
and to increase the consequent oppression of government.

Of all the errors of humanity there is none that so retards its
progress as this. Men will do anything in the world to achieve their
purpose save the one simple deed, which it is every man's duty to
perform. Men will invent the most ingenious devices for changing the
position which is burdensome to them, but never dream of the simple
remedy of abstaining from the acts which cause it.

I was told of an incident which happened to an intrepid _stanovoy_,
who, on arriving in a village where the peasants had revolted, and
whither troops had been sent, undertook, like the Emperor Nicholas
I., to quell the disturbance by his personal influence. He ordered
several loads of rods to be brought, and having gathered all the
peasants into the barn, he entered himself, shut himself in with
them, and so terrified them by his shouts and threats that in
compliance with his commands they began to flog each other. And so
they went on flogging one another until some fool revolted, and,
shouting to his comrades, bade them leave off. It was not until then
that the flogging ceased, and the _stanovoy_ escaped from the barn.

It is this very advice of the fool that men who believe in the
necessity of civil government seem unable to follow. They are unable
to stop punishing themselves, and setting an absurd example for
others to imitate. Such is the consummation of merely human wisdom.

Is it possible, indeed, to imagine a more striking imitation of
those men flogging one another than the meekness with which the
men of these days fulfil those social duties that lead them into
bondage, especially the military conscription? It is clear that men
enslave themselves; they suffer from this slavery, and yet they
believe it inevitable; they also believe that it will not affect
the ultimate emancipation of mankind, which they declare the final
outcome, in spite of the fact that slavery is ever increasing.

The man of modern times, whoever he may be (I do not mean a true
Christian), educated or ignorant, a believer or an unbeliever, rich
or poor, married or single, does his work, takes his pleasures, and
dreads all restrictions and privations, all enmity and suffering.
Thus he is living, peaceably. Suddenly men come to him and say:
"First, promise on your oath that you will obey us like a slave
in all that we command; believe that whatever we tell you is
unquestionably true, and submit to all that we shall call laws. Or,
secondly, give us a share in the product of your labor, that we
may use it to keep you in bondage, and prevent you from revolting
against our commands. Or, thirdly, choose, or be chosen among, the
so-called officials of the government, knowing that the government
will go on quite regardless of the foolish speeches which you, or
others like you, may utter; that it will be carried on in accordance
with our wishes and the wishes of those who control the army.
Or, fourthly, come to the law-courts, and take part in all the
senseless cruelties which we commit against men, who are erring and
depraved men, and who have become so through our fault,--in the
form of imprisonment, exile, solitary confinement, and execution.
Or, lastly, although you may be on the most friendly terms with
men who belong to other nations, you must be ready at a moment's
notice, whenever the command is issued, to look upon such of them
as we shall indicate as your enemies, and either personally or by
substitute contribute to the ruin, robbery, and murder of these men,
of old men, women, and children--even, if we require it, of your
fellow-countrymen and your parents."

One would think that in these days there could be but one reply from
any man in his senses.

"Why must I do all this? Why must I promise to obey all the orders
of Salisbury to-day, those of Gladstone to-morrow; Boulanger to-day,
and to-morrow the orders of an assembly composed of men like
Boulanger; Peter III. to-day, Catharine to-morrow, and the next day
Pugatchov; to-day the insane King of Bavaria, to-morrow the Emperor
William? Why should I promise this to men whom I know to be wicked
or foolish, or men whom I know nothing at all about? Why should I,
in the form of taxes, hand over to them the fruits of my labor,
knowing that this money will be used to bribe officials, to support
prisons, churches, and armies, to pay for the execution of evil acts
destined for my oppression? In other words, why should I apply the
rod to my own back? Why should I go on wasting my time, averting
my eyes, helping to give a semblance of legality to the acts of
wrong-doers, play a part in elections, and pretend to participate
in the government, when I know perfectly well that the country is
ruled by those who control the army? Why should I go into the courts
and be a party to the infliction of tortures and executions upon
my erring fellow-beings, knowing, if I am a Christian, that the
law of love has been substituted for the law of vengeance, and if
I am an educated man, that punishment, so far from reforming its
victims, serves only to demoralize them? Why should I, in person or
in substitute, go and kill and despoil, and expose myself to the
dangers of war, simply because the key of the temple of Jerusalem
happens to be in the keeping of one bishop rather than in that
of another; because Bulgaria is to be ruled by one German prince
instead of another; or because the privileges of the seal fishery
are reserved for the English to the exclusion of the American
merchants. Why should I regard as my enemies the inhabitants of a
neighboring country, with whom up to the present day I have lived,
and still wish to live, in peace and amity,--why should I go myself,
or pay for soldiers, to murder and ruin them?

"And, above all, why should I contribute, whether in person or by
paying for military service, to the enslavement and destruction of
my brothers and parents? Why should I scourge myself? All this is
of no use to me; on the contrary, it does me harm. It is altogether
degrading, immoral, mean, and contemptible. Why, then, should I do
all this? If I am told that I shall be made to suffer in any event,
I reply that in the first place, there can be no possible suffering
greater than that which would befall me were I to execute your
commands. And in the second place, it is perfectly evident to me
that if we refuse to scourge ourselves, no one else will do it for
us. Governments are but sovereigns, statesmen, officials, who can
no more force me against my will, than the _stanovoy_ could force
the peasants; I should be brought before the court, or thrown into
prison, or executed, not by the sovereign, or the high officials,
but by men in the same position as myself; and as it would be
equally injurious and disagreeable for them to be scourged as for
me, I should probably open their eyes, and they would not only
refrain from injuring me, but would doubtless follow my example.
And in the third place, though I were made to suffer for this, it
would still be better for me to be exiled or imprisoned, doing
battle in the cause of common sense and truth, which must eventually
triumph, if not to-day, then to-morrow, or before many days, than
to suffer in the cause of folly and evil. It would rather be to my
advantage to risk being exiled, imprisoned, or even executed, than
remain, through my own fault, a life-long slave of evil men, to be
ruined by an invading enemy, or mutilated like an idiot, or killed
while defending a cannon, a useless territory, or a senseless piece
of cloth called a flag. I have no inclination to scourge myself,
it would be of no use. You may do it yourselves if you choose--I
refuse."

It would seem as though not only the religious and moral element
in human nature, but ordinary common sense and wise counsel, would
influence every man of the present day thus to make reply, and
to suit the action to the word. But no. Men who hold the social
life-conception consider such a course not only useless, but even
prejudicial to the object in view,--the deliverance of mankind from
slavery. They advise us to go on, like the peasants, punishing
one another, comforting ourselves with the reflection that our
chatter in parliaments and assemblies, our trade unions, our First
of May demonstrations, our conspiracies and covert threats to the
governments that scourge us, must result in our final deliverance,
even though we go on strengthening our fetters. Nothing so hampers
human liberty as this wonderful delusion. Instead of making
individual efforts to achieve freedom, every man for himself
devoting all his energies to that object, through the attainment of
a new life-conception, men are looking for a universal scheme of
deliverance, and are in the meanwhile sinking deeper and deeper into
slavery. It is as if a man were to declare that in order to obtain
heat one must merely place every lump of coal in a certain position,
never minding whether it kindled or not. And yet that the liberation
of mankind can only be accomplished by means of the deliverance of
the individual grows more and more evident.

The liberation of individuals from the dominion of the State, in
the name of the Christian life-conception, which was formerly an
exceptional occurrence and one that attracted but little attention,
has attained in these days a menacing significance for the authority
of State.

If in the days of ancient Rome it happened that a Christian,
professing his faith, refused to take a part in sacrifices, or in
the worship of the emperors or the gods, or in the Middle Ages
refused to worship ikons or to acknowledge the temporal authority of
the Pope, such refusals were the exception; a man might be obliged
to confess to his faith, but he might perhaps live all his life
without being forced to do so. But now all men, without exception,
are subjected to trial of faith. Every man of modern times is
obliged, either to participate in the cruelties of pagan life, or
to repudiate them. And secondly, in those days any refusal to bow
before the gods, the ikons, or the Pope was of no consequence to the
State. Whether those who bowed before the gods, the ikons, or the
Pope were many or few, the State lost none of its power. Whereas
at the present time every refusal to execute the un-Christian
demands of the government undermines the authority of the State,
because the authority of the State rests on the fulfilment of these
anti-Christian requirements.

Temporal authority, in order to maintain itself, has been forced by
the conditions of life to demand from its subjects certain actions
which it is impossible for men who profess true Christianity to
perform. Therefore at the present time every man who professes
it helps to undermine the authority of the government, and will
eventually pave the way for the liberation of mankind.

Of what apparent importance are such acts as the refusal of a score
or two of fools, as they are called,--men who decline to take the
oath of allegiance, to pay taxes, or to take part in courts of law,
or to serve in the army? Such men are tried and condemned, and life
remains unchanged. These occurrences may seem unimportant, and
yet these are precisely the factors that undermine the authority
of the government more than any others, and thus prepare the way
for the liberation of mankind. These are the bees who are the
first to separate themselves from the swarm, and, still hovering
near, they wait for the whole swarm to rise and follow them. The
governments are aware of this, and look upon such occurrences with
more apprehension than upon all the socialists, anarchists, and
communists, with their conspiracies and their dynamite bombs.

A new _régime_ is inaugurated. Each subject, according to custom,
is required to take the oath of allegiance to the new government.
A proclamation is issued, and all are bidden to assemble in the
cathedral to take the oath. Suddenly one man in Perm, another in
Tula, a third in Moscow, a fourth in Kaluga, refuse to take the
oath and (without preconcerted action) justify their refusal by
the same argument,--that the Christian law forbids the oath; but,
even were the oath not forbidden, they could not, according to the
spirit of this law, promise to perform such evil deeds as the oath
requires,--such as reporting those antagonistic to the interests
of the government, defending that government by armed force, or
attacking its enemies. They are summoned to appear before the
_stanovoys_, _spravniks_, priests, governors; they are reasoned
with, coaxed, threatened, and punished; yet they adhere to their
determination, and refuse to take the oath. They are asked, "Is it
true that you never took the oath?"

"It is."

"And what was done to you?"

"Nothing."

Every subject is required to pay his taxes, and the taxes are paid.
But one man in Charkov, another in Iver, and a third in Samara,
refuse to comply, and, as by one accord, each man alleges the same
reason. One of them says that he will pay after he has learned the
object for which his money is to be used. "If it is to be used for
charity, he will give of his own free will, and even more than is
demanded of him. But if it is to be applied to evil purposes, he
will give nothing of his own free will, because, according to the
law of Christ, which he obeys, he can take no part in doing evil."
And the others who refuse to pay taxes, except on compulsion,
express the same idea, perhaps in other words. Those who have
property are forced to pay, and those who have none are simply let
alone.

"Then you have not paid your tax?"

"No."

"And what was done to you?"

"Nothing."

The passport system is instituted. Every man who leaves his home
must apply for one, and pay a tax for it. Suddenly, in different
places, are to be found those who declare that passports should
not be used, that a man should not acknowledge his dependence upon
the State, which is supported by violence; and these men take no
passports, consequently they pay no tax for them. And again, there
are no means of coercing them to comply with the demand. They are
imprisoned, but when after a time they find themselves at liberty
again, they go on living without passports.

Every peasant is expected to perform police duty as _sotsky_ or
_dessiatsky_,[17] etc.; but some peasant in Charkov refuses to
fulfil this duty, because, as he says in explanation of his refusal,
the law of Christ, which he professes, forbids him to arrest,
imprison, or transport his fellow-men. Another peasant in Iver or
in Tambov makes the same statement. The peasants are threatened,
beaten, and imprisoned, but they adhere to their resolution, and
refuse to perform actions contrary to their religious belief. And
they cease to be elected _sotsky_, and are gradually left in peace.

  [17] Petty rural police.--TR.

It is the duty of every citizen to serve on the jury. All at once
men of widely different classes,--carriage-makers, professors,
merchants, peasants, nobles,--as if moved by a single impulse,
refuse to fulfil this duty, not for reasons valid in the eyes of
the law, but because the tribunal itself is, in their opinion,
illegal and un-Christian, and ought not to exist. These men are
fined, and false reasons are ascribed for their refusal, the true
ones meanwhile remaining hidden from the public. The same treatment
is employed in regard to those who, for similar reasons, refuse to
appear as witnesses in courts of law. These, too, are finally left
undisturbed.

Every man at the age of twenty-one must draw lots. Suddenly there
is found a man in Moscow, another in Iver, another in Charkov, and
still another in Kiev, who, as it were by agreement, go to the
department and declare that they will neither take the oath of
allegiance nor serve in the army, because they are Christians. Here
are the details of an affair which was among the earlier cases,--of
late these refusals have begun to multiply,--a case with which I am
myself familiar,[18] which is but one example among many.

  [18] The details of this case are authentic.

In the City Hall of Moscow a young man of average education gives
his reasons for refusing to comply. His words are not heeded, and
he is bidden to repeat the words of the oath with the other men.
He still persists in his refusal, and quotes a certain passage in
the Bible that forbids men to take an oath. No attention is paid
to his arguments, and again he is ordered to take the oath, which
he declines to do. Whereupon it is taken for granted that he is
a sectarian, and therefore misunderstands Christianity; in other
words, that he differs from the priests paid by the State. He is
then sent under guard to the priests that they may convince him,
which they endeavor to do; but the arguments uttered in the name
of Christ, by which they strive to persuade him to deny Christ,
evidently have no effect on the young man. So they declare him
incorrigible, and send him back to the army. Still he openly refuses
to take the oath and to fulfil his military duties.

It is a case not anticipated by the law. A refusal to comply
with the demands of the government cannot be overlooked, neither
can this case be called one of ordinary insubordination. After
conferring, the military authorities decide that, in order to rid
themselves of this objectionable youth, the better way will be
to consider him as a rebel and forward him under military escort
to the Department of the Secret Police. The police officials and
the gendarmes question the young man, but his replies will not
serve to classify his offense under the heading of any crime that
comes within their jurisdiction; they cannot either accuse him of
revolutionary motives, or of conspiracy, because he declares that
he has no desire to destroy anything whatsoever; on the contrary,
he opposes all violence. He says that he has nothing to conceal;
he desires only an opportunity for saying and doing all things in
the most open manner. And as it resulted with the clergy, so also
with the gendarmes, who, though rarely embarrassed as to how to put
the law in operation, can find no pretext for an accusation against
the young man, and send him back to the ranks. Once more there is a
conference, and his superiors decide that, although he has not taken
the oath of allegiance, he is to be regarded as a soldier. He is put
into uniform, his name is entered on the lists, and he is sent under
convoy to his post. Here his immediate superiors once more order
him to perform his military duty, and still he refuses to obey, and
in the presence of the other soldiers he states his reasons, saying
that, as a Christian, he cannot of his own free will prepare himself
to commit murder, which was forbidden even by the law of Moses.

All this takes place in a provincial city. The occurrence excites
the interest and the sympathy, not only of outsiders, but even of
the officers, and therefore there is hesitation about employing
the usual punishment for contumacy. However, for the sake of
appearances, he is thrown into jail, and a request is sent to the
higher military authorities for further instructions in the case.
From an official standpoint this refusal to take part in a military
organization, in which the Czar himself serves, and which is
blessed by the Church, must be regarded as insanity, and therefore
the message is received from St. Petersburg that the young man is
probably insane, and that before any violent measures are used
against him he must be sent to the insane hospital. Thither he is
sent in the hope that he will remain there, as happened some ten
years ago in the case of a young man from Iver, who also refused
to serve, and who was tortured in the hospital until at last he
was subdued. But in the present instance even this measure fails
to relieve the military authorities from this troublesome young
man. The doctors examine him, become interested in him, and,
discovering no symptoms of insanity, they return him to his post.
He is received, and pretending that his refusal and its causes are
forgotten, he is once more invited to join the drill, and again he
refuses, in the presence of other soldiers, stating his reasons
for his refusal. The affair attracts more and more notice from
soldiers as well as from civilians. Again the question is referred
to St. Petersburg, and thence comes the order to transfer the young
man to the frontier, where the troops are in active service, and
where, if he refuses to obey orders, he may be shot without exciting
attention, as there are but few Russians and Christians in that
far-away territory, the majority being foreigners and Mohammedans.
This is done. The young man is ordered to join the Trans-Caspian
troops, and with other criminals he is delivered into the hands of
commanders noted for their severity and determination.

Meanwhile, during all these transportations from place to place,
the young man has suffered from harsh treatment, from cold, hunger,
and filth, and his life has been made miserable. Yet all these
trials do not weaken his resolution. In the Trans-Caspian province,
where he is once more ordered to serve as a sentry under arms, he
refuses to obey. He consents to stand where he is sent, beside the
hayricks, but declines to take a weapon in his hand, declaring that
on no account will he use violence against any one whomsoever.
All this occurs in the presence of the soldiers. Such contumacy
cannot go unpunished; consequently he is court-martialed for an
infringement of military discipline, convicted, and sentenced to two
years' confinement in a military prison. And once again, with the
criminals, he is sent by _étape_ to the Caucasus and then thrown
into prison, his fate being left to the discretionary power of the
jailer. There he is tortured for a year and a half, but still his
resolution to avoid the use of weapons remains unchanged, and he
continues to explain to every one whom he meets the reasons for his
refusal. Toward the end of the second year, before his term has
really expired, he is set at liberty; and although not in accordance
with the law, they are so anxious to rid themselves of him, that his
imprisonment is accepted as an equivalent of further active service.

And in various parts of Russia others are found who, as if by a
concerted plan, imitate his example, and in every case the action
of the government is undecided, vacillating, and underhanded.
Some of these men are confined in the insane hospitals, some are
appointed military clerks and sent to serve in Siberia, some are
made foresters, others are thrown into prison, others are fined.
At the present time several of these men are imprisoned, not for
their substantial offense, denying the legality of the acts of
the government, but for disobeying the particular orders of their
superiors. For instance, an officer of the reserve recently failed
to give information of the place of his residence, and declined
to serve further in the army; he was fined thirty roubles for
disobeying the orders of the authorities,--and this he declined to
pay, except under compulsion. Several peasants and soldiers who
refused to take part in a drill and to use weapons were put under
arrest for disobedience and contention.

Such instances of a refusal to comply with the demands of the
State when opposed to Christianity, especially refusals to perform
military service, occur not only in Russia, but everywhere. I
know that in Servia, men from the so-called sect of Nazarenes
steadily refuse to enter the army, and the Austrian government has
for several years made futile attempts to convert them by means
of imprisonment. In 1885 there were 130 refusals of this kind. I
know that in Switzerland, in 1890, there were men in confinement in
the castle of Chillon for refusing to perform military duty whose
determination was not to be influenced by punishment. Such refusals
have occurred in Sweden; the men there also were imprisoned, and the
government carefully concealed the affairs from the people. Similar
instances occurred in Prussia. I know of one subaltern officer in
the guards who, in 1891, in Berlin, announced to his superiors that
he, as a Christian, could not continue his military service, and in
spite of all remonstrances and threats he adhered to his resolution.
In the south of France a community of men called the Hinschist has
recently been established (my information is derived from the _Peace
Herald_ of July, 1891), who, as professing the Christian doctrine,
refuse to perform military duty. At first they were told off to
serve in hospitals, but now, with the increase of the sect, they are
punished for insubordination, while they still refuse to bear arms.

Socialists, communists, and anarchists, with their bombs and their
revolutions, are far less dangerous to governments than these men,
who from different places proclaim their refusals, all based upon
the same doctrine, familiar to all. Every government knows how to
defend itself from revolutionists; it holds the means in its own
hands, and therefore does not fear these external foes. But what can
a government do to protect itself from men who declaim against all
authority as useless, superfluous, and injurious, offering, however,
no opposition to authority, merely rejecting its offices, dispensing
with its services, and therefore refusing to participate in it?

The revolutionists say: "State organization is bad, either for one
reason or for another; it should be destroyed, and replaced by such
and such a system." But a Christian says: "I know nothing of State
organization, whether it be good or bad, and it is for this very
reason that I do not wish to support it. And I cannot undertake
submission, because such submission is contrary to my conscience."

All the institutions of the State are opposed to the conscience of a
Christian: the oath of allegiance, taxation, courts of law, armies;
while the whole authority of government is dependent upon them.
Revolutionary foes struggle against the government, but Christianity
enters not into this contest; internally, it destroys the principles
on which government is based.

With the Russian people, in whose midst, particularly since the
time of Peter I., the protest of Christianity against the State has
never ceased; in the midst of this people, where the conditions
of life are such that whole communes emigrate to Turkey, China,
and uninhabited portions of the globe, who, so far from needing
the government, always consider it an unnecessary burden, and
only endure it as a calamity, whether it be Russian, Chinese, or
Turkish,--the cases of isolated individuals who, from Christian
motives, have liberated themselves from the control of government
have grown more and more frequent in these latter days. Such
manifestations are particularly dreaded by the government at the
present time, because the men who protest often belong not to the
so-called lower, the uneducated classes, but are men of average
and even superior education, and because these men explain their
refusals, not by some mystical belief peculiar to the individual,
as in olden times, nor do they complicate them with superstition
and fanaticism, like the sects of the Self-burners or Bieguni, but
assign as the reason for their refusals the simplest, most obvious
of truths, patent to and admitted by all the world.

Thus men refuse to pay taxes of their own free will, because the
money is used to promote violence; in other words, to pay the wages
of the violators in the army, for building prisons and fortresses,
or for manufacturing cannon,--in all of which, as Christians, they
consider it wrong and immoral to take a part.

They refuse to take the oath of allegiance, for were they to promise
to obey the authorities,--that is, men who use violence,--they must
contradict the sense of the Christian doctrine.

They refuse to swear in court, because an oath is distinctly
forbidden by the gospel.

They decline police duties, because in that office they would be
compelled to use violence against their brethren and to distress
them, and a Christian cannot do this.

They refuse to take part in courts of law, because they look upon
every tribunal as a vehicle for the law of vengeance, and therefore
incompatible with the Christian law of forgiveness and love.

They decline to have anything to do with military preparations, or
to enter the ranks of the army, because they neither can nor will be
executioners, nor prepare themselves for such an office.

And the reasons alleged for these refusals are of such a nature
that, however arbitrary the governments may be, they cannot punish
openly those who refuse.

Were the governments to punish men for such refusals, they would be
forced to abjure forever both justice and virtue, those principles
by which, as they assure us, all their authority is supported.

What are governments to do with these men? Of course they have the
power to execute, to imprison, and to condemn to transportation
and penal servitude all enemies who attempt to overthrow them by
violence; they can obtain by bribery half the men they need, and
have at their command millions of armed soldiers, who are ready to
put to death all the enemies of authority. But what can be done with
men who wish neither to destroy nor to establish anything, whose
sole desire is to avoid in their own private lives any act that
may be opposed to the Christian law, and who consequently refuse
to perform duties which are regarded by the government as the most
natural and obligatory of all?

If they were revolutionists, preaching violence and practising it,
it would be an easy matter to oppose them. Some might be bribed,
some deceived, others intimidated, and those who could neither be
bought, deceived, nor intimidated would be manifestly criminals,
enemies of society who, as such, could be executed or beaten to
death; and the people would approve the acts of the government. If
they were fanatics belonging to some particular sect, one might, in
view of the superstitions inherent in their doctrine, refute at the
same time what truth their arguments contained. But what is to be
done with men who neither preach rebellion nor any special dogmas,
who wish to live in peace with all mankind, who refuse to take the
oath of allegiance or to pay taxes, or to take part in tribunals,
to perform military service, and the various duties of a similar
nature, on which the whole organization of the State is founded?
What is to be done with them? They cannot be bribed. The very risk
they are willing to take shows their integrity. Neither can they be
deceived when these things are represented as the commands of God,
because their refusal is based on the indubitable law of God, by
which the very men who are trying to coerce them to disobey this law
profess to hold themselves bound. It is vain to hope to intimidate
them by threats, because the very suffering and privations which
they endure for righteousness' sake serve but to strengthen their
devotion to their faith, whose law distinctly commands them first of
all to obey God, to fear not them that kill the body, but to fear
those who can kill both body and soul. Neither can they be executed
or imprisoned for life. Their past lives, their thoughts and
actions, their friends, speak for them; every one knows them to be
gentle, kindly, and harmless men, and it is impossible to represent
them in the light of criminals whose suppression is needed for the
salvation of society. Moreover, the execution of men acknowledged
by all to be virtuous would arouse defenders who would endeavor to
explain the causes for their disobedience. And when all men are
made to recognize the reasons why these Christians refuse to obey
the demands of the State, they cannot fail to acknowledge the same
obligation, and to admit that all men should long since have refused
obedience.

Confronted with these insubordinations, governments find themselves
in a desperate plight. They realize that the prophecies of
Christianity are about to be fulfilled, that it is loosening the
fetters of them that are in bonds and setting men free; they realize
that such freedom will inevitably destroy those who have held
mankind in bondage. Governments realize this; they know that their
hours are counted, that they are helpless to resist. All that they
are able to do is to retard the hour of dissolution. And this they
try to do; but their position is still a desperate one.

It is like the predicament of a conqueror who wishes to preserve the
town set on fire by the inhabitants. No sooner does he put the fire
out in one place than two other fires break out; when he separates
the burning portion from the main body of a large building the
flames burst out at both extremities. These outbreaks are not, as
yet, of frequent occurrence, but the spark has been kindled, and the
fire will burn steadily until all is consumed.

The position of governments in the presence of men who profess
Christianity is so precarious that very little is needed to shake
to pieces their power, built up through so many centuries, and
apparently so solid in structure. And it is now that the sociologist
comes forward, preaching that it is useless, and even hurtful and
immoral, for the individual to emancipate himself alone.

Let us suppose that men have been working for a long time to divert
the course of a river; they have at last succeeded in digging a
canal, and all that remains now is to make an opening and let the
water flow through it into the canal; suppose now certain other men
arrive upon the scene and suggest that, instead of letting the water
flow into the canal, it would be much better to erect over the river
some form of machinery, by means of which the water would be poured
from one side to the other.

But things have gone too far. Governments are aware of their
weakness and helplessness, and men of the Christian faith are
awakening from their torpor, beginning already to realize their
power.

"I am come to send fire on the earth," said Christ.

And this is the fire that begins to burn.




