CHAPTER X

USELESSNESS OF VIOLENCE FOR THE DESTRUCTION OF EVIL. THE MORAL
ADVANCE OF MANKIND IS ACCOMPLISHED, NOT ONLY THROUGH THE KNOWLEDGE
OF TRUTH, BUT ALSO THROUGH THE ESTABLISHMENT OF PUBLIC OPINION

     Christianity destroys the State--Which is more necessary,
     Christianity or the State?--There are men who defend the
     necessity of the State, and others who, on the same grounds,
     deny this necessity--Neither can be proved by abstract
     reasoning--The question decides the character of a man's
     consciousness, which either allows or forbids him to participate
     in the organization of the State--Realization of the uselessness
     and immorality of taking part in the organization of the
     State, which is contradictory to Christian doctrine, decides
     this question for each one, regardless of the destiny of the
     State--Argument of the defenders of the State, as a form of
     social life indispensable for the defense of the good from the
     wicked, until all nations, and all members of each nation,
     shall have become Christians--The more wicked are always those
     in power--History is but a recital of the usurpation of power
     by the bad over the good--The acknowledgment by authority of
     the necessity of struggle with evil by violence is equivalent
     to self-destruction--The annihilation of violence is not
     only possible, but is going on before our eyes--However, it
     is not destroyed by State violence, but through those men
     who, obtaining power by violence, and recognizing its vanity
     and futility, benefit by experience and become incapable of
     using violence--This is the process through which individual
     men, as well as whole nations, have passed--It is in that
     way that Christianity penetrates into the consciousness of
     men, and not only is this accomplished despite the violence
     used by authority, but through its agency, and therefore the
     abolition of authority is not only without danger, but it goes
     on continually as life itself--Objection of the defenders
     of the State system that the diffusion of Christianity is
     improbable--Diffusion of Christian truth interdicting violence
     accomplished not only slowly and gradually, by the internal
     method, by individual recognition of the truth, by prophetic
     intuition, by the realizing of the emptiness of power and
     abandonment of it by individual men, but accomplished also by
     the external method, by which large numbers of men, inferior in
     intellectual development, at once, in view of their confidence
     in the others, adopt the new truth--The diffusion of truth at
     a certain stage creates a public opinion, which compels the
     majority of men who have previously opposed it to recognize
     the new truth at once--Therefore a universal renunciation of
     violence may very soon come to pass; namely, when a Christian
     public opinion shall be established--The conviction of the
     necessity of violence prevents the establishment of Christian
     public opinion--Violence compels men to discredit the moral
     force which can alone exalt them--Neither nations nor individual
     men have been conquered by violence, but by public opinion,
     which no violence can resist--It is possible to conquer savage
     men and nations only by the diffusion of Christian public
     opinion among them, whereas the Christian nations, in order
     to conquer them, do everything in their power to destroy the
     establishment of a Christian public opinion--These unsuccessful
     experiments cannot be cited as a proof of the impossibility of
     conquering men by Christianity--Violence which corrupts public
     opinion only prevents the social organization from becoming
     what it should be, and with the abolition of violence Christian
     public opinion will be established--Whatever may take place
     when violence has been abolished, the unknown future can be no
     worse than the present, and therefore one need not fear it--To
     penetrate to the unknown and move toward it is the essence of
     life.


Christianity, faithfully interpreted, saps the foundations of the
civil law, and this was always understood from the very outset.
It was for this that Christ was crucified; and until men felt the
necessity for justifying the establishment of the Christian state,
they always accepted that interpretation. The cleverly constructed
theories intended to reconcile the doctrines of Christianity with
that of the State date back to the time when rulers of nations
adopted a nominal external Christianity. But in these times it
is impossible for a sincere and earnest man not to perceive the
incompatibility of the Christian doctrine of love, meekness of
spirit, and forgiveness of injuries, with the despotism, the
violence, and the wars of the State. The profession of true
Christianity not only forbids the recognition of the State, but
strikes at its very foundations.

But if it be true that Christianity is incompatible with the State,
one naturally asks which is the better adapted to promote the
well-being of mankind, the system prescribed by the State, or the
precepts of Christianity?

There are those who affirm that the State organization is the more
indispensable; they declare that its overthrow would check all
human progress, that no development is possible save through the
channels of civil government, and that all those evils which we
find prevailing among nations who live under State laws are not
the result of the organization, which permits progress and the
attainment of the highest degree of civilization.

They who hold these views quote, in support of their position,
certain historical, philosophical, and even religious arguments,
which seem to them irrefutable. But there are others who entertain
views diametrically opposed to these. For instance, they say
that the fact of the world having existed at one time without a
government, might be taken to prove the State to be only a temporary
condition; that the time was sure to come when men would require
a change, which time had now arrived. To support their theory,
these men in turn adduce historical, philosophical, and religious
arguments which seem to them irrefutable.

Volumes may be and have been written in defense of the former
position, and of late years a great deal has been written, and ably
written too, from the opposite standpoint.

It can neither be proved on the one hand, as the partizans of the
State claim, that its destruction would be followed by a general
upheaval, by robberies and murders, and by the nullification of all
social laws, and the return of man to a condition of barbarism; nor
on the other, as the enemies of the State affirm, that man has grown
so virtuous and well disposed that, preferring peace to enmity, he
will no longer rob and murder his neighbor; that he is quite able,
without State assistance, to establish a community, and conduct
his own affairs; and that the State itself, while assuming an air
of protection, is really exerting a demoralizing influence. It is
impossible to prove either one or the other by abstract arguments.
And naturally neither point can be proved by experience, as it is a
question first of all of getting the requisite experience.

Whether or not the time has arrived for abolishing the State is a
question which could not be answered were it not that we possess
other means that will assist us to settle it beyond dispute.

It needs no one to tell the young birds when it is time to burst the
shell; they know very well when there is no longer room for them
in the eggs, and begin of their own accord to break the shell and
leave it behind. So it is with this question of a change in human
affairs. Has the time come for men to cast aside the customs of the
State and establish a new order? When a man's inner consciousness
has so developed that he feels himself hampered by the requirements
of the State, and can no longer submit to the restraint, realizing
at the same time that he has ceased to need its protecting care,
the question whether or no men have matured sufficiently to enable
them to dispense with the State is disposed of without reference to
former arguments. A man who has outgrown the State can no more be
coerced into submission to its laws than can the fledgling be made
to reënter its shell.

"The State may have been necessary at one time, and for aught that
I know it may even now serve the purposes you mention," says the
man who holds the Christian life-conception. "I can only say that
_I_ have no need of it, nor can _I_ conform to its requirements.
You must decide for yourself whether it be advantageous or no. I
shall not attempt to generalize on the subject with the expectation
of proving my point. I only recognize what I need and what I don't
need; what I can, and what I cannot do. I know, as far as I am
myself concerned, that _I_ do not need to separate from the men of
other nations, and therefore I can neither recognize an exclusive
affiliation to this or that one, nor acknowledge myself the subject
of any one government. I need none of the institutions established
by the State, and therefore I am not willing to surrender the fruits
of my labor in the form of taxes to support institutions which I
believe to be not only unnecessary but positively injurious. I know
that _I_ need neither magistrates, nor tribunals founded on and
supported by violence, and therefore I can have nothing to do with
them; I know that _I_ feel no inclination to attack other nations
and put their citizens to death, neither do I wish to defend myself
against them by force of arms, and therefore I can take no part
in wars nor in preparations for wars. Doubtless there are men who
believe that all these things are an indispensable part of human
life,--I cannot argue with them,--but I know that for me they have
no meaning, and that I will have nothing to do with them.

"And this is not a matter of personal selection, but because I must
obey the commands of Him who has sent me into the world, and has
given me an unmistakable law by which I am to be guided through
life."

Whatever arguments may be advanced to prove that harm and probably
disaster will accrue from abolishing the authority of the State,
the man who has already outgrown the State ideal cannot possibly
be bound by it. And whatever arguments may be adduced to prove its
necessity, he can never return to it. He is like the young bird who
can never return to its outgrown shell.

"But granting this to be true," say the partizans of the existing
order, "we cannot dispense with the supremacy of the State until all
men are Christians, because even among those who claim the title
there are many who are very far from being Christians--evil-doers,
who seek their own gratification at the expense of their fellow-men,
and if the governments were overthrown, so far from improving the
condition of the people, it would greatly add to their miseries. The
subversion of the State would be a misfortune, not only where the
minority are true Christians, but even supposing the whole people to
be so; while the neighboring nations are still non-Christian, these
latter would make their lives a martyrdom by rapine and murder and
all manner of violence. It would serve only to provide the vicious
and unprincipled with an opportunity to oppress the innocent.
Therefore the State should not be abolished until all the wicked
have ceased from troubling, which will not happen just at present.
Hence, however much certain individual Christians may wish to escape
from the authority of the State, the greater good of the greater
number demands its preservation." So say the defenders of the State
principle. "If it were not," they say, "for State authority there
would be no protection against the malice and injustice of the
oppressor; that authority alone makes it possible to restrain the
wicked."

But in uttering these sentiments the partizans of the existing order
take it for granted that they have proved the truth of what they
assert. When they declare that the evil-doers would ride roughshod
over the defenseless and the innocent were it not for the authority
of the State, they imply that the governing power is vested at
the present time in a body of virtuous men, who control all the
wrong-doers. But this is a proposition which must be proved. It
could only be a correct statement if we happened to resemble the
inhabitants of China, where it is popularly believed, although
the belief is not justified by fact, that the good are always in
authority, because should it become known that the rulers are
no better than those over whom they rule, it is the duty of the
citizens to overthrow the government. But although this is supposed
to be one of the customs of China, it is not, nor would it be
possible for it to be so, since, in order to overthrow a criminal
government, one needs the power as well as the right. Even in China
this is a mere supposition, and in our own Christian land we have
never so much as dreamed of it. As far as we are concerned, there
is no reason to believe that power is in the hands of the virtuous
and high-minded, rather than in those of men who took it by violence
and have held it for themselves and their descendants. For surely
it would be impossible for a high-minded man to usurp authority by
violence and to continue to hold it.

In order to gain possession of power, and to retain it, one
must have a love for it, and the love of power is incompatible
with goodness; it accords with the opposite qualities of pride,
duplicity, and cruelty.

Both the origin and the maintenance of power depend upon the
exaltation of the individual, and the degradation of the people by
means of hypocrisy and fraud, by prisons, fortresses, and murders.
"If State authority were to be abolished, then would the more wicked
people dominate over the less wicked," say the upholders of State
organization. But if the Egyptians conquered the Hebrews, and the
Persians the Egyptians, and the Macedonians the Persians, and the
Romans the Greeks, and the barbarians the Romans, is it really
possible that the conquerors are always better than the conquered?
And so with political changes in the State; is the power always
transferred to the better men? When Louis XVI. was deposed, and
control passed into the hands of Robespierre, and when, later, he
was in turn succeeded by Napoleon, was it the better or the worse
man who held the power? Again, were they of Versailles or the
communists the better men? Charles the First or Cromwell? When Peter
III. reigned, or, after his murder, when Catharine ruled over one
part of Russia, and Pugatchov over the other--who then was good and
who was wicked?

All those in authority affirm that their office is required in
order that the unprincipled may be hindered from oppressing the
innocent, implying thereby that they themselves, being virtuous,
are protecting other virtuous men from the malice of the evil-doer.
To possess power and to do violence are synonymous terms; to do
violence means doing something to which the victim of violence
objects, and which the aggressor would resent were it directed
against himself. Therefore the possession of power really means
doing unto others what we should not like if it were done to
ourselves,--that is, harm.

Obedience signifies that a man holds patience to be better than
violence, and to choose patience rather than violence means to be
good, or, at least, not so wicked as those who do unto others what
they would not wish to have done to themselves.

Therefore all the probabilities are that those in authority were
in past times, as they are in present, worse men than those they
ruled over. Doubtless there are wicked men among those who submit
to authority, but it is impossible that the better men should rule
over the worse.

This might be thought in pagan times, when the definition of
goodness was inaccurate; but with the clear and exact conception of
the qualities of good and evil presented by Christianity before us
we cannot imagine it. If in the pagan world they who were more or
less good, and they who were more or less bad, might not be easily
distinguished, the characteristics of goodness and wickedness have
been so clearly defined by the Christian conception that it is
impossible to mistake them. According to the doctrine of Christ, the
good are those who submit and are long-suffering, who do not resist
evil by violence, who forgive injuries, and love their enemies; the
wicked are the vainglorious, who tyrannize, who are arrogant and
violent with others. Therefore, if we are guided by the doctrine of
Christ, we shall have no difficulty in deciding where to seek the
good and the wicked among rulers and subjects. It is even absurd to
speak of Christians as sovereigns or rulers.

The non-Christians--that is, those to whom life is but a matter of
temporal welfare--must always rule over the Christians, for whom
life means self-denial and disregard of temporal things.

And thus it has always been, and it has been manifested more and
more plainly as the Christian doctrine has become more clearly
defined and widespread.

The farther true Christianity extended, the firmer the hold it
gained on the consciousness of men, the less possible it became
for Christians to belong to the dominant class, and the easier for
non-Christians to gain the ascendancy.

"To abolish the supremacy of the State before all men have become
true Christians would only afford the wicked a chance to tyrannize
over the good and maltreat them with impunity," say the upholders of
the existing order.

It has always been the same from the beginning of the world until
this present time, and it always will be. _The wicked always
rule over the good and do violence to them_. Cain did violence
to Abel, the astute Jacob betrayed the trusting Esau, and was
himself deceived by Laban; Caiaphas and Pilate sat in judgment on
Christ; the Roman emperors ruled over Seneca, Epictetus, and other
high-minded Romans of those times; Ivan IV. with his Opritchniks,
the tipsy syphilitic Peter with his clowns, the prostitute Catharine
with her lovers, ruled over the industrious, God-fearing Russian
people of those times, and trampled upon them. William rules the
Germans, Stambulov the Bulgarians, and the Russian officials rule
over the Russian people; the Germans ruled over the Italians, and
now they rule over the Hungarians and the Slavs. The Turks ruled
over the Greeks and now rule over the Slavs, the English over the
Hindoos, the Mongolians over the Chinese.

So we see that whether the tyranny of the State is or is not to be
abolished, the position of the innocent, who are oppressed by the
tyrants, will not be materially affected thereby.

Men are not to be frightened by being told that the wicked will
oppress the good, because that is the natural course, and will never
change.

The whole of pagan history is a mere narrative of events wherein
the wicked have got the upper hand, and, once in power, by craft
and cruelty have kept their hold upon men, announcing themselves
meanwhile as the guardians of justice and the defenders of the
innocent against the oppressor. All revolutions are but the result
of the appropriation of power by the wicked and their rule over the
good. When the rulers say that if their power were to be destroyed
the evil-doers would tyrannize over the innocent, what they really
mean is that the tyrants in power are reluctant to yield to those
other tyrants who would fain wrest from them their authority. When
they protest that this authority of theirs, which is actually
violence, is necessary to defend the people against the possible
tyranny of others,[19] they are simply denouncing themselves. The
reason why violence is dangerous is that, whenever it is employed,
all the arguments which the perpetrators advanced in their own
defense may be used against them with even greater force. They talk
of the violence done in the past, and more frequently of future and
imaginary violence, while they themselves are the real offenders.
"You say that men committed robbery and murder in former times, and
profess anxiety lest all men be robbed or murdered unless protected
by your authority. This may or may not be true, but the fact that
you allow thousands of men to perish in prisons by enforced labor,
in fortresses, and in exile, that your military requisitions ruin
millions of families and imperil, morally and physically, millions
of men, this is not a supposititious but an actual violence, which,
according to your own reasoning, should be resisted by violence.
And therefore, by your own admission, the wicked ones, against whom
one should use violence, are yourselves." Thus should the oppressed
reply to their oppressors. And such are the language, the thoughts,
and the actions of non-Christians. Wherever the oppressed are more
wicked than the oppressor, they attack and overthrow them whenever
they are able; or else--and this is more frequently the case--they
enter the ranks of the oppressors and take part in their tyranny.

  [19] Such declarations on the part of Russian authorities, who are
  noted for their oppression of foreign nationalities,--the Poles, the
  Germans of the Baltic provinces, and the Jews,--strike one as both
  amusing and artless. The Russian government, which has oppressed
  its own subjects for centuries, and which has never protected the
  Malo-Russians in Poland, the Latishi in the Baltic provinces,
  nor the Russian peasants, of whom all sorts of people have taken
  advantage for hundreds of years, suddenly becomes a champion of
  the oppressed, of the very same people whom it still continues to
  oppress.

Thus the dangers of which the defenders of State rights make a
bugbear--that if authority were overthrown the wicked would prevail
over the good--potentially exist at all times. The destruction of
State violence, in fact, never can, for this very reason, lead to
any real increase of violence on the part of the wicked over the
good.

If State violence disappeared, it is not unlikely that other acts
of violence would be committed; but the sum of violence can never be
increased simply because the power passes from the hands of one into
those of another.

"State violence can never be abolished until all the wicked
disappear," say the advocates of the existing order, by which
they imply that there must always be violence, because there will
always be wicked people. This could only prove true, supposing
the oppressors to be really beneficent, and supposing the true
deliverance of mankind from evil must be accomplished by violence.
Then, of course, violence could never cease. But as, on the
contrary, violence never really overcomes evil, and since there is
another way altogether to overcome it, the assertion that violence
will never cease is untrue. Violence is diminishing, and clearly
tending to disappear; though not, as is claimed by the defenders of
the existing order, in consequence of the amelioration of those who
live under an oppressive government (their condition really gets
worse), but because the consciousness of mankind is becoming more
clear. Hence even the wicked men who are in power are growing less
and less wicked, and will at last become so good that they will be
incapable of committing deeds of violence.

The reason why humanity marches forward is not because the inferior
men, having gained possession of power, reform their subjects
by arbitrary methods, as is claimed both by Conservatives and
Revolutionists, but is due above all to the fact that mankind in
general is steadily, and with an ever increasing appreciation,
adopting the Christian life-conception. There is a phenomenon
observable in human life in a manner analogous to that of boiling.
Those who profess the social life-conception are always ambitious
to rule, and struggle to attain power. In this struggle the most
gross and cruel, the least Christian elements of society, bubble up,
as it were, and rise, by reason of their violence, into the ruling
or upper classes of society. But then is fulfilled what Christ
prophesied: "Woe unto you that are rich! Woe unto you that are full!
Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you!" (Luke vi.
24-26). The men who have attained power, and glory, and riches, and
who have realized all their cherished aims, live to discover that
all is vanity, and gladly return to their former estate. Charles
V., Ivan the Terrible, Alexander I., having realized the evils of
power and its futility, renounced it because they recognized it as
a calamity, having lost all pleasure in the deeds of violence which
they formerly enjoyed.

But it is not alone kings like Charles V. and Alexander I. who
arrive at this disgust of power, but every man who has attained the
object of his ambition. Not only the statesman, the general, the
millionaire, the merchant, but every official who has gained the
position for which he has longed this half score of years, every
well-to-do peasant who has saved one or two hundred roubles, finds
at last the same disillusion.

Not only individuals, but entire nations, mankind as a whole, have
passed through this experience.

The attractions of power and all it brings--riches, honors,
luxury--seem to men really worth struggling for only until they are
won; for no sooner does a man hold them within his grasp than they
manifest their own emptiness and gradually lose their charm, like
clouds, lovely and picturesque in outline seen from afar, but no
sooner is one enveloped in them than all their beauty vanishes.

Men who have obtained riches and power, those who have struggled for
them, but more particularly those who have inherited them, cease to
be greedy for power or cruel in its acquisition.

Having learned by experience, sometimes in one generation, sometimes
in several, how utterly worthless are the fruits of violence, men
abandon those vices acquired by the passion for riches and power,
and growing more humane, they lose their positions, being crowded
out by others who are less Christian and more wicked; whereupon they
fall back into a stratum, which, though lower in the social scale,
is higher in that of morality, thus increasing the mean level of
Christian consciousness. But straightway, the worse, the rougher,
and less Christian elements rise to the surface, and being subject
to the same experience as their predecessors, after one or two
generations these men, too, recognize the hollowness of violent
ambitions, and, being penetrated with the spirit of Christianity,
fall back into the ranks of the oppressed. These are in turn
replaced by new oppressors, less despotic than the former, but
rougher than those whom they oppress. So that although the authority
is to all outward seeming unchanged, yet the number of those who
have been driven by the exigencies of life to adopt the Christian
life-conception increases with every change of rulers. They may be
more harsh, more cruel, and less Christian than their subjects;
but always men less and less violent replace their predecessors in
authority.

Violence chooses its instruments from among the worst elements
of society; men who gradually become leavened, and, softened and
changed for the better, are returned into society.

Such is the process by means of which Christianity takes fuller
possession of men day by day. Christianity enters into the
consciousness of men in spite of the violence of power, and even
owing to that violence.

The argument of the defenders of the State, that if power were
abolished the wicked would tyrannize over the good, not only fails
to prove that the domination of the wicked is a new thing to be
dreaded,--as it exists already,--but proves, on the contrary, that
the tyranny of the State, which allows the wicked to govern the
good, is itself the real evil which we ought to eradicate, and which
is constantly decreasing by the very nature of things.

"But if State violence is not to cease until the rulers have become
so far Christianized that they will renounce it of their own accord
and no others will be found to take their places,--if these things
are coming to pass," say the defenders of the existing order, "when
is it to happen? If 1800 years have passed, and still so many long
to rule, it is wholly improbable that we shall soon behold this
change, if it ever takes place at all.

"Even though there may be at present, as there always have been,
certain individuals who would not rule if they could, who do not
choose to benefit themselves in that way, still the number of those
who do prefer to rule rather than to be ruled is so great that it is
difficult to imagine a time when the number will be exhausted.

"In order to accomplish the conversion of all men, to induce each
one to exchange the pagan for the Christian life-conception,
voluntarily resigning riches and power, there being none left to
profit by these, it would be necessary that not only all the rude,
half-barbarous people, unfitted either to accept Christianity or
follow its precepts, who are always to be found in every Christian
community, should become Christians, but that all savage and
non-Christian nations, which are still numerous, should also become
Christian.

"Therefore were one to admit that the Christianizing process may
at some future time embrace all humanity, we must still take into
consideration the degree of progress that has been made in 1800
years, and realize that this can only happen after many centuries.
Hence we need not for the present trouble ourselves about the
overthrow of authority; all we have to do is to look to it that it
is in the best hands."

Thus reply the partizans of the existing system. And this reasoning
would be perfectly consistent, provided that the transition of men
from one life-conception to another were only to be effected by the
process of individual conversion; that is to say, that each man,
through his personal experience, should realize the vanity of power,
and apprehend Christian truth. This process is constantly going on,
and in that way, one by one, men are converted to Christianity.

But men do not become converted to Christianity merely in this way;
there is an exterior influence brought to bear which accelerates
the process. The progression of mankind from one system of life
to another is accomplished not only gradually, as the sand glides
through the hour-glass, grain by grain, until all has run out, but
rather as water which enters an immersed vessel, at first slowly,
at one side, then, borne down by its weight, suddenly plunges, and
at once fills completely.

And this is what happens in human communities during a change in
their life-conception, which is equivalent to the change from one
organization to another. It is only at first that men by degrees,
one by one, accept the new truth and obey its dictates; but after
it has been to a certain extent disseminated, it is accepted, not
through intuition, and not by degrees, but generally and at once,
and almost involuntarily.

And therefore the argument of the advocates of the present system,
that but a minority have embraced Christianity during the last
1800 years, and that another 1800 years must pass away before the
rest of mankind will accept it, is erroneous. For one must take
into consideration another mode, in addition to the intuitive of
assimilating new truth, and of making the transition from one mode
of life to another. This other mode is this: men assimilate a truth
not alone because they may have come to realize it through prophetic
insight or through individual experience, but the truth having been
spread abroad, those who dwell on a lower plane of intelligence
accept it at once, because of their confidence in those who have
received it and incorporated it in their lives.

Every new truth that changes the manner of life and causes humanity
to move onward is at first accepted by a very limited number, who
grasp it by knowledge of it. The rest of mankind, accepting on faith
the former truth upon which the existing system has been founded, is
always opposed to the spread of the new truth.

But as, in the first place, mankind is not stationary, but is
ever progressing, growing more and more familiar with truth and
approaching nearer to it in everyday life: and secondly, as all
men progress according to their opportunities, age, education,
nationality, beginning with those who are more, and ending with
those who are less, capable of receiving new truth--the men nearest
those who have perceived the truth intuitively pass, one by one,
and with gradually diminishing intervals, over to the side of the
new truth. So, as the number of men who acknowledge it increases,
the truth itself becomes more clearly manifested. The feeling of
confidence in the new truth increases in proportion to the numbers
who have accepted it. For, owing to the growing intelligibility of
the truth itself, it becomes easier for men to grasp it, especially
for those lower intellectually, until finally the greater number
readily adopt it, and help to found a new _régime_.

The men who go over to the new truth, once it has gained a certain
hold, go over _en masse_, of one accord, much as ballast is rapidly
put into a ship to maintain its equilibrium. If not ballasted,
the vessel would not be sufficiently immersed, and would change
its position every moment. This ballast, which at first may seem
superfluous and a hindrance to the progress of the ship, is
indispensable to its equipoise and motion.

Thus it is with the masses when, under the influence of some new
idea that has won social approval, they abandon one system to adopt
another, not singly, but in a body. It is the inertia of this mass
which impedes the rapid and frequent transition from one system of
life, not ratified by wisdom, to another; and which for a long time
arrests the progress of every truth destined to become a part of
human consciousness.

It is erroneous, then, to argue that because only a small percentage
of the human race has in these eighteen centuries adopted the
Christian doctrine, that many, many times eighteen centuries must
elapse before the whole world will accept it,--a period of time so
remote that we who are now living can have no interest in it. It is
unfair, because those men who stand on a lower plane of development,
whom the partizans of the existing order represent as hindrances to
the realization of the Christian system of life, are those men who
always go over in a body to a truth accepted by those above them.

And therefore that change in the life of mankind, when the powerful
will give up their power without finding any to assume it in their
stead, will come to pass when the Christian life-conception,
rendered familiar, conquers, not merely men one by one, but masses
at a time.

"But even if it were true," the advocates of the existing order
may say, "that public opinion has the power to convert the inert
non-Christian mass of men, as well as the corrupt and gross who are
to be found in every Christian community, how shall we know that
a Christian mode of life is born, and that State violence will be
rendered useless?

"After renouncing the despotism by which the existing order has been
maintained, in order to trust to the vague and indefinite force of
public opinion, we risk permitting those savages, those existing
among us, as well as those outside, to commit robbery, murder, and
other outrages upon Christians.

"If even with the help of authority we have a hard struggle against
the anti-Christian elements ever ready to overpower us, and destroy
all the progress made by civilization, how then could public
opinion prove an efficient substitute for the use of force, and
avail for our protection? To rely upon public opinion alone would
be as foolhardy as to let loose all the wild beasts of a menagerie,
because they seem inoffensive when in their cages and held in awe by
red-hot irons.

"Those men entrusted with authority, or born to rule over others by
the divine will of God, have no right to imperil all the results of
civilization, simply to make an experiment, and learn whether public
opinion can or cannot be substituted for the safeguard of authority."

Alphonse Karr, a French writer, forgotten to-day, once said, in
trying to prove the impossibility of abolishing the death penalty:
"Que Messieurs les assassins commencent par nous donner l'exemple."
And I have often heard this witticism quoted by persons who really
believed they were using a convincing and intellectual argument
against the suppression of the penalty of death. Nevertheless, there
could be no better argument against the violence of government.

"Let the assassins begin by showing us an example," say the
defenders of government authority. The assassins say the same, but
with more justice. They say: "Let those who have set themselves up
as teachers and guides show us an example by the suppression of
legal assassination, and we will imitate it." And this they say, not
by way of a jest, but in all seriousness, for such is in reality the
situation.

"We cannot cease to use violence while we are surrounded by those
who commit violence."

There is no more insuperable barrier at the present time to the
progress of humanity, and to the establishment of a system that
shall be in harmony with its present conception of life, than this
erroneous argument.

Those holding positions of authority are fully convinced that men
are to be influenced and controlled by force alone, and therefore to
preserve the existing system they do not hesitate to employ it. And
yet this very system is supported, not by violence, but by public
opinion, the action of which is compromised by violence. The action
of violence actually weakens and destroys that which it wishes to
support.

At best, violence, if not employed as a vehicle for the ambition of
those in high places, condemns in the inflexible form a law which
public opinion has most probably long ago repudiated and condemned;
but there is this difference, that while public opinion rejects
and condemns all acts that are opposed to the moral law, the law
supported by force repudiates and condemns only a certain limited
number of acts, seeming thus to justify all acts of a like order
which have not been included in its formula.

From the time of Moses public opinion has regarded covetousness,
lust, and cruelty as crimes, and condemned them as such. It condemns
and repudiates every form that covetousness may assume, not only
the acquisition of another man's property by violence, fraud, or
cunning, but the cruel abuse of wealth as well. It condemns all
kinds of lust, let it be impudicity with a mistress, a slave, a
divorced wife, or with one's wife; it condemns all cruelty,--blows,
bad usage, murder,--all cruelty, not only toward human beings, but
toward animals. Whereas, the law, based upon violence, attacks only
certain forms of covetousness, such as theft and fraud, and certain
forms of lust and cruelty, such as conjugal infidelity, assault,
and murder; and thus it seems to condone those manifestations of
covetousness, lust, and cruelty which do not fall within its narrow
limits.

But violence not only demoralizes public opinion, it excites in the
minds of men a pernicious conviction that they move onward, not
through the impulsion of a spiritual power, which would help them
to comprehend and realize the truth by bringing them nearer to that
moral force which is the source of every progressive movement of
mankind,--but, by means of violence,--by the very factor that not
only impedes our progress toward truth, but withdraws us from it.
This is a fatal error, inasmuch as it inspires in man a contempt for
the fundamental principle of his life,--spiritual activity,--and
leads him to transfer all his strength and energy to the practice of
external violence.

It is as though men would try to put a locomotive in motion by
turning its wheels with their hands, not knowing that the expansion
of steam was the real motive-power, and that the action of the
wheels was but the effect, and not the cause. If by their hands
and their levers they move the wheels, it is but the semblance of
motion, and, if anything, injures the wheels and makes them useless.

The same mistake is made by those who expect to move the world by
violence.

Men affirm that the Christian life cannot be established save by
violence, because there are still uncivilized nations outside of the
Christian world, in Africa and Asia (some regard even the Chinese
as a menace of our civilization), and because, according to the new
theory of heredity, there exist in society congenital criminals,
savage and irredeemably vicious.

But the savages whom we find in our own community, as well as
those beyond its pale, with whom we threaten ourselves and others,
have never yielded to violence, and are not yielding to it now.
One people never conquered another by violence alone. If the
victors stood on a lower plane of civilization than the conquered,
they always adopted the habits and customs of the latter, never
attempting to force their own methods of life upon them. It is by
the influence of public opinion, not by violence, that nations are
reduced to submission.

When a people have accepted a new religion, have become Christians,
or turned Mohammedans, it has come to pass, not because it was
made obligatory by those in power (violence often produced quite
the opposite result), but because they were influenced by public
opinion. Nations constrained by violence to accept the religion of
the conqueror have never really done so.

The same may be said in regard to the savage elements found in
all communities: neither severity nor clemency in the matter of
punishments, nor modifications in the prison system, nor augmenting
of the police force, have either diminished or increased the
aggregate of crimes, which will only decrease through an evolution
in our manner of life. No severities have ever succeeded in
suppressing the vendetta, or the custom of dueling in certain
countries. However many of his fellows may be put to death for
thieving, the Tcherkess continues to steal out of vainglory. No girl
will marry a Tcherkess who has not proved his daring by stealing a
horse, or at least a sheep. When men no longer fight duels, and the
Tcherkess cease to steal, it will not be from fear of punishment
(the danger of capital punishment adds to the prestige of daring),
but because public manners will have undergone a change. The same
may be said of all other crimes. Violence can never suppress that
which is countenanced by general custom. If public opinion would but
frown upon violence, it would destroy all its power.

What would happen if violence were not employed against hostile
nations and the criminal element in society we do not know. But
that the use of violence subdues neither we do know through long
experience.

And how can we expect to subdue by violence nations whose education,
traditions, and even religious training all tend to glorify
resistence to the conqueror, and love of liberty as the loftiest
of virtues? And how is it possible to extirpate crime by violence
in the midst of communities where the same act, regarded by the
government as criminal, is transformed into an heroic exploit by
public opinion?

Nations and races may be destroyed by violence--it has been done.
They cannot be subdued.

The power transcending all others which has influenced individuals
and nations since time began, that power which is the convergence
of the invisible, intangible, spiritual forces of all humanity, is
public opinion.

Violence serves but to enervate this influence, disintegrating it,
and substituting for it one not only useless, but pernicious to the
welfare of humanity.

In order to win over all those outside the Christian fold, all the
Zulus, the Manchurians, the Chinese, whom many consider uncivilized,
and the uncivilized among ourselves, there is _only one way_. This
is by the diffusion of a Christian mode of thought, which is only to
be accomplished by a Christian life, Christian deeds, a Christian
example. But instead of employing this _one way_ of winning those
who have remained outside the fold of Christianity, men of our epoch
have done just the opposite.

In order to convert uncivilized nations who do us no harm, whom we
have no motive for oppressing, we ought, above all, to leave them
in peace, and act upon them only by our showing them an example of
the Christian virtues of patience, meekness, temperance, purity, and
brotherly love. Instead of this we begin by seizing their territory,
and establishing among them new marts for our commerce, with the
sole view of furthering our own interests--we, in fact, rob them;
we sell them wine, tobacco, and opium, and thereby demoralize them;
we establish our own customs among them, we teach them violence and
all its lessons; we teach them the animal law of strife, that lowest
depth of human degradation, and do all that we can to conceal the
Christian virtues we possess. Then, having sent them a score of
missionaries, who gabble an absurd clerical jargon, we quote the
results of our attempt to convert the heathen as an indubitable
proof that the truths of Christianity are not adaptable to everyday
life.

And as for those whom we call criminals, who live in our midst,
all that has just been said applies equally to them. There is
only _one way_ to convert them, and that is by means of a public
opinion founded on true Christianity, accompanied by the example of
a sincere Christian life. And by way of preaching this Christian
gospel and confirming it by Christian example, we imprison, we
execute, guillotine, hang; we encourage the masses in idolatrous
religions calculated to stultify them; the government authorizes the
sale of brain-destroying poisons--wine, tobacco, opium; prostitution
is legalized; we bestow land upon those who need it not; surrounded
by misery, we display in our entertainments an unbridled
extravagance; we render impossible in such ways any semblance of a
Christian life, and do our best to destroy Christian ideas already
established; and then, after doing all we can to demoralize men, we
take and confine them like wild beasts in places from which they
cannot escape, and where they will become more brutal than ever;
or we murder the men we have demoralized, and then use them as an
example to illustrate and prove our argument that people are only to
be controlled by violence.

Even so does the ignorant physician act, who, having placed his
patient in the most unsanitary conditions, or having administered
to him poisonous drugs, afterward contends that his patient has
succumbed to the disease, when had he been left to himself he would
have recovered long ago.

Violence, which men regard as an instrument for the support of
Christian life, on the contrary, prevents the social system from
reaching its full and perfect development. The social system is such
as it is, not because of violence, but in spite of it.

Therefore the defenders of the existing social system are
self-deceived when they say that, since violence barely holds the
evil and un-Christian elements of society in awe, its subversion,
and the substitution of the moral influence of public opinion, would
leave us helpless in face of them. They are wrong, because violence
does not protect mankind; but it deprives men of the only possible
chance of an effectual defense by the establishment and propagation
of the Christian principle of life.

"But how can one discard the visible and tangible protection of the
policeman with his baton, and trust to invisible, intangible public
opinion? And, moreover, is not its very existence problematical?
We are all familiar with the actual state of things; whether it be
good or bad we know its faults, and are accustomed to them; we know
how to conduct ourselves, how to act in the present conditions; but
what will happen when we renounce the present organization, and
confide ourselves to something invisible, intangible, and utterly
unfamiliar?"

Men dread the uncertainty into which they would plunge if they
were to renounce the familiar order of things. Certainly were our
situation an assured and stable one, it would be well to dread
the uncertainties of change. But so far from enjoying an assured
position, we know that we are on the verge of a catastrophe.

If we are to give way to fear, then let it be before something that
is really fearful, and not before something that we imagine may be
so.

In fearing to make an effort to escape from conditions that are
fatal to us, only because the future is obscure and unknown, we are
like the passengers of a sinking ship who crowd into the cabin and
refuse to leave it, because they have not the courage to enter the
boat that would carry them to the shore; or like sheep who, in fear
of the fire that has broken out in the farmyard, huddle together in
a corner and will not go out through the open gate.

How can we, who stand on the threshold of a shocking and devastating
social war, before which, as those who are preparing for it tell
us, the horrors of 1793 will pale, talk seriously about the danger
threatened by the natives of Dahomey, the Zulus, and others who live
far away, and who have no intention of attacking us; or about the
few thousands of malefactors, thieves, and murderers--men whom we
have helped to demoralize, and whose numbers are not decreased by
all our courts, prisons, and executions?

Moreover, this anxiety lest the visible protection of the police be
overthrown, is chiefly confined to the inhabitants of cities--that
is, to those who live under abnormal and artificial conditions.
Those who live normally in the midst of nature, dealing with its
forces, require no such protection; they realize how little avails
violence to protect us from the real danger that surrounds us. There
is something morbid in this fear, which arises chiefly from the
false conditions in which most of us have grown up and continue to
live.

A doctor to the insane related how, one day in summer, when he was
about to leave the asylum, the patients accompanied him as far as
the gate that led into the street.

"Come with me into town!" he proposed to them.

The patients agreed, and a little band followed him. But the farther
they went through the streets where they met their sane fellow-men
moving freely to and fro, the more timid they grew, and pressed more
closely around the doctor. At last they begged to be taken back to
the asylum, to their old but accustomed mode of insane life, to
their keepers and their rough ways, to strait jackets and solitary
confinement.

And thus it is with those whom Christianity is waiting to set
free, to whom it offers the untrammeled rational life of the
future, the coming century; they huddle together and cling to their
insane customs, to their factories, courts, and prisons, their
executioners, and their warfare.

They ask: "What security will there be for us when the existing
order has been swept away? What kind of laws are to take the place
of those under which we are now living? Not until we know exactly
how our life is to be ordered will we take a single step toward
making a change." It is as if a discoverer were to insist upon
a detailed description of the region he is about to explore. If
the individual man, while passing from one period of his life to
another, could read the future and know just what his whole life
were to be, he would have no reason for living. And so it is with
the career of humanity. If, upon entering a new period, a program
detailing the incidents of its future existence were possible,
humanity would stagnate.

We cannot know the conditions of the new order of things, because
we have to work them out for ourselves. The meaning of life is to
search out that which is hidden, and then to conform our activity to
our new knowledge. This is the life of the individual as it is the
life of humanity.




