CHAPTER II


For the production of every ballet, circus, opera, operetta,
exhibition, picture, concert, or printed book, the intense and
unwilling labor of thousands and thousands of people is needed at
what is often harmful and humiliating work. It were well if artists
made all they require for themselves, but, as it is, they all need
the help of workmen, not only to produce art, but also for their own
usually luxurious maintenance. And, one way or other, they get it;
either through payments from rich people, or through subsidies given
by government (in Russia, for instance, in grants of millions of
roubles to theaters, conservatoires, and academies). This money is
collected from the people, some of whom have to sell their only cow
to pay the tax, and who never get those æsthetic pleasures which art
gives.

It was all very well for a Greek or Roman artist, or even for a
Russian artist of the first half of our century (when there were
still slaves, and it was considered right that there should be),
with a quiet mind to make people serve him and his art; but in our
day, when in all men there is at least some dim perception of the
equal rights of all, it is impossible to constrain people to labor
unwillingly for art, without first deciding the question whether it
is true that art is so good and so important an affair as to redeem
this evil.

If not, we have the terrible probability to consider, that while
fearful sacrifices of the labor and lives of men, and of morality
itself, are being made to art, that same art may be not only useless
but even harmful.

And therefore it is necessary for a society in which works of art
arise and are supported, to find out whether all that professes to
be art is really art; whether (as is presupposed in our society) all
that which is art is good; and whether it is important and worth
those sacrifices which it necessitates. It is still more necessary
for every conscientious artist to know this, that he may be sure
that all he does has a valid meaning; that it is not merely an
infatuation of the small circle of people among whom he lives which
excites in him the false assurance that he is doing a good work; and
that what he takes from others for the support of his often very
luxurious life, will be compensated for by those productions at
which he works. And that is why answers to the above questions are
especially important in our time.

What is this art, which is considered so important and necessary for
humanity that for its sake these sacrifices of labor, of human life,
and even of goodness may be made?

"What is art? What a question! Art is architecture, sculpture,
painting, music, and poetry in all its forms," usually replies the
ordinary man, the art amateur, or even the artist himself, imagining
the matter about which he is talking to be perfectly clear, and
uniformly understood by everybody. But in architecture, one inquires
further, are there not simple buildings which are not objects of
art, and buildings with artistic pretensions which are unsuccessful
and ugly and therefore cannot be considered as works of art? Wherein
lies the characteristic sign of a work of art?

It is the same in sculpture, in music, and in poetry. Art, in all
its forms, is bounded on one side by the practically useful, and on
the other by unsuccessful attempts at art. How is art to be marked
off from each of these? The ordinary educated man of our circle,
and even the artist who has not occupied himself especially with
æsthetics, will not hesitate at this question either. He thinks the
solution has been found long ago, and is well known to every one.

"Art is such activity as produces beauty," says such a man.

If art consists in that, then is a ballet or an operetta art? you
inquire.

"Yes," says the ordinary man, though with some hesitation, "a good
ballet or a graceful operetta is also art, in so far as it manifests
beauty."

But without even asking the ordinary man what differentiates the
"good" ballet and the "graceful" operetta from their opposites
(a question he would have much difficulty in answering), if you
ask him whether the activity of costumiers and hairdressers, who
ornament the figures and faces of the women for the ballet and
the operetta, is art; or the activity of Worth, the dressmaker;
of scent-makers and men cooks,--then he will, in most cases, deny
that their activity belongs to the sphere of art. But in this the
ordinary man makes a mistake, just because he is an ordinary man
and not a specialist, and because he has not occupied himself with
æsthetic questions. Had he looked into these matters, he would
have seen in the great Renan's book, "Marc Aurele," a dissertation
showing that the tailor's work is art, and that those who do not
see in the adornment of woman an affair of the highest art are very
small-minded and dull. "_C'est le grand art_," says Renan. Moreover,
he would have known that in many æsthetic systems--for instance,
in the æsthetics of the learned Professor Kralik, "Weltschönheit,
Versuch einer allgemeinen Æsthetik, von Richard Kralik," and in "Les
Problèmes de l'Esthétique Contemporaine," by Guyau--the arts of
costume, of taste, and of touch are included.

"_Es Folgt nun ein Fünfblatt von Künsten, die der subjectiven
Sinnlichkeit entkeimen_" (There results then a pentafoliate of arts,
growing out of the subjective perceptions), says Kralik (p. 175).
"_Sie sind die ästhetische Behandlung der fünf Sinne._" (They are
the æsthetic treatment of the five senses.)

These five arts are the following:--

_Die Kunst des Geschmacksinns_--The art of the sense of taste (p.
175).

_Die Kunst des Geruchsinns_--The art of the sense of smell (p. 177).

_Die Kunst des Tastsinns_--The art of the sense of touch (p. 180).

_Die Kunst des Gehörsinns_--The art of the sense of hearing (p. 182).

_Die Kunst des Gesichtsinns_--The art of the sense of sight (p. 184).

Of the first of these--_die Kunst des Geschmacksinns_--he says:
"_Man hält zwar gewöhnlich nur zwei oder höchstens drei Sinne für
würdig, den Stoff künstlerischer Behandlung abzugeben, aber ich
glaube nur mit bedingtem Recht. Ich will kein allzugrosses Gewicht
darauf legen, dass der gemeine Sprachgebrauch manch andere Künste,
wie zum Beispiel die Kochkunst kennt._"[39]

  [39] Only two, or at most three, senses are generally held worthy
  to supply matter for artistic treatment, but I think this opinion
  is only conditionally correct. I will not lay too much stress on
  the fact that our common speech recognizes many other arts, as, for
  instance, the art of cookery.

And further: "_Und es ist doch gewiss eine ästhetische Leistung,
wenn es der Kochkunst gelingt ans einem thierischen Kadaver einen
Gegenstand des Geschmacks in jedem Sinne zu machen. Der Grundsatz
der Kunst des Geschmacksinns (die weiter ist als die sogenannte
Kochkunst) ist also dieser: Es soll alles Geniessbare als Sinnbild
einer Idee behandelt werden und in jedesmaligem Einklang zur
auszudrückenden Idee._"[40]

  [40] And yet it is certainly an æsthetic achievement when the art of
  cooking succeeds in making of an animal's corpse an object in all
  respects tasteful. The principle of the Art of Taste (which goes
  beyond the so-called Art of Cookery) is therefore this: All that is
  eatable should be treated as the symbol of some Idea, and always in
  harmony with the Idea to be expressed.

This author, like Renan, acknowledges a _Kostümkunst_ (Art of
Costume) (p. 200), etc.

Such is also the opinion of the French writer, Guyau, who is highly
esteemed by some authors of our day. In his book, "Les Problèmes
de l'Esthétique Contemporaine," he speaks seriously of touch,
taste, and smell as giving, or being capable of giving, æsthetic
impressions: "_Si la couleur manque au toucher, il nous fournit en
revanche une notion que l'œil seul ne peut nous donner, et qui a
une valeur esthétique considérable, celle du_ doux, _du_ soyeux,
_du_ poli. _Ce qui caractérise la beauté du velours, c'est sa
douceur au toucher non moins que son brillant. Dans l'idée que nous
nous faisons de la beauté d'une femme, le velouté de sa peau entre
comme élément essentiel._"

"_Chacun de nous probablement avec un peu d'attention se rappellera
des jouissances du goût, qui ont été de véritables jouissances
esthétiques._"[41] And he recounts how a glass of milk drunk by him
in the mountains gave him æsthetic enjoyment.

  [41] If the sense of touch lacks color, it gives us, on the
  other hand, a notion which the eye alone cannot afford, and one
  of considerable æsthetic value, namely, that of _softness_,
  _silkiness_, _polish_. The beauty of velvet is characterized not
  less by its softness to the touch than by its luster. In the idea
  we form of a woman's beauty, the softness of her skin enters as an
  essential element.

  Each of us, probably, with a little attention, can recall pleasures
  of taste which have been real æsthetic pleasures.

So it turns out that the conception of art, as consisting in making
beauty manifest, is not at all so simple as it seemed, especially
now, when in this conception of beauty are included our sensations
of touch and taste and smell, as they are by the latest æsthetic
writers.

But the ordinary man either does not know, or does not wish to know,
all this, and is firmly convinced that all questions about art may
be simply and clearly solved by acknowledging beauty to be the
subject-matter of art. To him it seems clear and comprehensible that
art consists in manifesting beauty, and that a reference to beauty
will serve to explain all questions about art.

But what is this beauty which forms the subject-matter of art? How
is it defined? What is it?

As is always the case, the more cloudy and confused the conception
conveyed by a word, with the more _aplomb_ and self-assurance do
people use that word, pretending that what is understood by it is so
simple and clear that it is not worth while even to discuss what it
actually means.

This is how matters of orthodox religion are usually dealt with,
and this is how people now deal with the conception of beauty.
It is taken for granted that what is meant by the word beauty is
known and understood by every one. And yet not only is this not
known, but, after whole mountains of books have been written on
the subject by the most learned and profound thinkers during one
hundred and fifty years (ever since Baumgarten founded æsthetics in
the year 1750), the question, What is beauty? remains to this day
quite unsolved, and in each new work on æsthetics it is answered
in a new way. One of the last books I read on æsthetics is a not
ill-written booklet by Julius Mithalter, called "Rätsel des Schönen"
(The Enigma of the Beautiful). And that title precisely expresses
the position of the question, What is beauty? After thousands of
learned men have discussed it during one hundred and fifty years,
the meaning of the word beauty remains an enigma still. The Germans
answer the question in their manner, though in a hundred different
ways. The physiologist-æstheticians, especially the Englishmen,
Herbert Spencer, Grant Allen, and his school, answer it, each in
his own way; the French eclectics, and the followers of Guyau and
Taine, also each in his own way; and all these people know all the
preceding solutions given by Baumgarten, and Kant, and Schelling,
and Schiller, and Fichte, and Winckelmann, and Lessing, and Hegel,
and Schopenhauer, and Hartmann, and Schasler, and Cousin, and
Lévêque, and others.

What is this strange conception "beauty," which seems so simple
to those who talk without thinking, but in defining which all the
philosophers of various tendencies and different nationalities can
come to no agreement during a century and a half? What is this
conception of beauty, on which the dominant doctrine of art rests?

In Russian, by the word _krasota_ (beauty) we mean only that which
pleases the sight. And though latterly people have begun to speak of
"an ugly deed," or of "beautiful music," it is not good Russian.

A Russian of the common folk, not knowing foreign languages, will
not understand you if you tell him that a man who has given his last
coat to another, or done anything similar, has acted "beautifully,"
that a man who has cheated another has done an "ugly" action, or
that a song is "beautiful."

In Russian a deed may be kind and good, or unkind and bad. Music may
be pleasant and good, or unpleasant and bad; but there can be no
such thing as "beautiful" or "ugly" music.

Beautiful may relate to a man, a horse, a house, a view, or a
movement. Of actions, thoughts, character, or music, if they please
us, we may say that they are good, or, if they do not please us,
that they are not good. But beautiful can be used only concerning
that which pleases the sight. So that the word and conception "good"
includes the conception of "beautiful," but the reverse is not
the case; the conception "beauty" does not include the conception
"good." If we say "good" of an article which we value for its
appearance, we thereby say that the article is beautiful; but if we
say it is "beautiful," it does not at all mean that the article is a
good one.

Such is the meaning ascribed by the Russian language, and therefore
by the sense of the people, to the words and conceptions "good" and
"beautiful."

In all the European languages, _i.e._ the languages of those nations
among whom the doctrine has spread that beauty is the essential
thing in art, the words "beau," "schön," "beautiful," "bello,"
etc., while keeping their meaning of beautiful in form, have come
to also express "goodness," "kindness," _i.e._ have come to act as
substitutes for the word "good."

So that it has become quite natural in those languages to use such
expressions as "belle ame," "schöne Gedanken," of "beautiful deed."
Those languages no longer have a suitable word wherewith expressly
to indicate beauty of form, and have to use a combination of words
such as "beau par la forme," "beautiful to look at," etc., to convey
that idea.

Observation of the divergent meanings which the words "beauty" and
"beautiful" have in Russian on the one hand, and in those European
languages now permeated by this æsthetic theory on the other hand,
shows us that the word "beauty" has, among the latter, acquired a
special meaning, namely, that of "good."

What is remarkable, moreover, is that since we Russians have begun
more and more to adopt the European view of art, the same evolution
has begun to show itself in our language also, and some people
speak and write quite confidently, and without causing surprise, of
beautiful music and ugly actions, or even thoughts; whereas forty
years ago, when I was young, the expressions "beautiful music"
and "ugly actions" were not only unusual, but incomprehensible.
Evidently this new meaning given to beauty by European thought
begins to be assimilated by Russian society.

And what really is this meaning? What is this "beauty" as it is
understood by the European peoples?

In order to answer this question, I must here quote at least a
small selection of those definitions of beauty most generally
adopted in existing æsthetic systems. I especially beg the reader
not to be overcome by dullness, but to read these extracts through,
or, still better, to read some one of the erudite æsthetic authors.
Not to mention the voluminous German æstheticians, a very good
book for this purpose would be either the German book by Kralik,
the English work by Knight, or the French one by Lévêque. It is
necessary to read one of the learned æsthetic writers in order to
form at firsthand a conception of the variety in opinion and the
frightful obscurity which reigns in this region of speculation; not,
in this important matter, trusting to another's report.

This, for instance, is what the German æsthetician Schasler says
in the preface to his famous, voluminous, and detailed work on
æsthetics:--

"Hardly in any sphere of philosophic science can we find such
divergent methods of investigation and exposition, amounting even to
self-contradiction, as in the sphere of æsthetics. On the one hand,
we have elegant phraseology without any substance, characterized
in great part by most one-sided superficiality; and on the other
hand, accompanying undeniable profundity of investigation and
richness of subject-matter, we get a revolting awkwardness of
philosophic terminology, infolding the simplest thoughts in an
apparel of abstract science, as though to render them worthy to
enter the consecrated palace of the system; and finally, between
these two methods of investigation and exposition there is a third,
forming, as it were, the transition from one to the other, a method
consisting of eclecticism, now flaunting an elegant phraseology, and
now a pedantic erudition.... A style of exposition that falls into
none of these three defects but it is truly concrete, and, having
important matter, expresses it in clear and popular philosophic
language, can nowhere be found less frequently than in the domain of
æsthetics."[42]

  [42] M. Schasler, "Kritische Geschichte der Æsthetik," 1872, vol.
  i., p. 13.

It is only necessary, for instance, to read Schasler's own book to
convince oneself of the justice of this observation of his.

On the same subject the French writer Véron, in the preface to
his very good work on æsthetics, says: "_Il n'y a pas de science,
qui ait été plus que l'esthétique livrée aux rêveries des
métaphysiciens. Depuis Platon jusqu'aux doctrines officielles de nos
jours, on a fait de l'art je ne sais quel amalgame de fantaisies
quintessenciées, et de mystères transcendantaux qui trouvent leur
expression suprême dans la conception absolue du Beau idéal,
prototype immuable et divin des choses réelles_" ("L'Esthétique,"
1878, p. 5).[43]

  [43] There is no science which, more than æsthetics, has been handed
  over to the reveries of the metaphysicians. From Plato down to the
  received doctrines of our day, people have made of art a strange
  amalgam of quintessential fancies and transcendental mysteries,
  which find their supreme expression in the conception of an absolute
  ideal Beauty, immutable and divine prototype of actual things.

If the reader will only be at the pains to peruse the following
extracts, defining beauty, taken from the chief writers on
æsthetics, he may convince himself that this censure is thoroughly
deserved.

I shall not quote the definitions of beauty attributed to
the ancients,--Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, etc., down to
Plotinus,--because, in reality, the ancients had not that conception
of beauty separated from goodness which forms the basis and aim of
æsthetics in our time. By referring the judgments of the ancients on
beauty to our conception of it, as is usually done in æsthetics, we
give the words of the ancients a meaning which is not theirs.[44]

  [44] See on this matter Benard's admirable book, "L'Esthétique
  d'Aristote," also Walter's "Geschichte der Æsthetik in Altertum."




