CHAPTER X


In consequence of their unbelief, the art of the upper classes
became poor in subject-matter. But besides that, becoming
continually more and more exclusive, it became at the same time
continually more and more involved, affected, and obscure.

When a universal artist (such as were some of the Grecian artists
or the Jewish prophets) composed his work, he naturally strove to
say what he had to say in such a manner that his production should
be intelligible to all men. But when an artist composed for a small
circle of people placed in exceptional conditions, or even for a
single individual and his courtiers,--for popes, cardinals, kings,
dukes, queens, or for a king's mistress,--he naturally only aimed
at influencing these people, who were well known to him, and lived
in exceptional conditions familiar to him. And this was an easier
task, and the artist was involuntarily drawn to express himself
by allusions comprehensible only to the initiated, and obscure to
every one else. In the first place, more could be said in this way;
and secondly, there is (for the initiated) even a certain charm in
the cloudiness of such a manner of expression. This method, which
showed itself both in euphemism and in mythological and historical
allusions, came more and more into use, until it has, apparently,
at last reached its utmost limits in the so-called art of the
Decadents. It has come, finally, to this: that not only is haziness,
mysteriousness, obscurity, and exclusiveness (shutting out the
masses) elevated to the rank of a merit and a condition of poetic
art, but even incorrectness, indefiniteness, and lack of eloquence
are held in esteem.

Théophile Gautier, in his preface to the celebrated "Fleurs du Mal,"
says that Baudelaire, as far as possible, banished from poetry
eloquence, passion, and truth too strictly copied ("_l'éloquence, la
passion, et la vérité calquée trop exactement_").

And Baudelaire not only expressed this, but maintained his thesis
in his verses, and yet more strikingly in the prose of his "Petits
Poèmes en Prose," the meanings of which have to be guessed like a
rebus, and remain for the most part undiscovered.

The poet Verlaine (who followed next after Baudelaire, and was also
esteemed great) even wrote an "Art Poétique," in which he advises
this style of composition:--

    _De la musique avant toute chose,
    Et pour cela préfère l'Impair
    Plus vague et plus soluble dans l'air,
    Sans rien en lui qui pèse ou qui pose._

    _Il faut aussi que tu n'ailles point
    Choisir tes mots sans quelque méprise:
    Rien de plus cher que la chanson grise
    Où l'Indécis au Précis se joint._

And again:--

    _De la musique encore et toujours!
    Que ton vers soit la chose envolée
    Qu'on sent qui fuit d'une âme en allée
    Vers d'autres cieux à d'autres amours._

    _Que ton vers soit la bonne aventure
    Eparse au vent crispé du matin,
    Qui va fleurant la menthe et le thym....
    Et tout le reste est littérature._[103]

  [103]

      Music, music before all things
      The eccentric still prefer,
      Vague in air, and nothing weighty,
      Soluble. Yet do not err,

      Choosing words; still do it lightly,
      Do it too with some contempt;
      Dearest is the song that's tipsy,
      Clearness, dimness not exempt.

          *     *     *     *

      Music always, now and ever
      Be thy verse the thing that flies
      From a soul that's gone, escaping,
      Gone to other loves and skies.

      Gone to other loves and regions,
      Following fortunes that allure,
      Mint and thyme and morning crispness....
      All the rest's mere literature.

After these two comes Mallarmé, considered the most important of the
young poets, and he plainly says that the charm of poetry lies in
our having to guess its meaning--that in poetry there should always
be a puzzle:--

_Je pense qu'il faut qu'il n'y ait qu'allusion_, says he. _La
contemplation des objets, l'image s'envolant des rêveries suscitées
par eux, sont le chant: les Parnassiens, eux, prennent la chose
entièrement et la montrent; par là ils manquent de mystère; ils
retirent aux esprits cette joie délicieuse de croire qu'ils créent._
Nommer un objet, c'est supprimer les trois quarts de la jouissance
du poème, qui est faite du bonheur de deviner peu à peu: le
suggérer, voilà le rêve. _C'est le par fait usage de ce mystère qui
constitue le symbole: évoquer petit à petit un objet pour montrer un
état d'âme, ou, inversement, choisir un objet et en dégager un état
d'âme, par une sèrie de déchiffrements._

.... _Si un être d'une intelligence moyenne, et d'une préparation
littéraire insuffisante, ouvre par hasard un livre ainsi fait et
prétend en jouir, il y a malentendu, il faut remettre les choses à
leur place._ Il doit y avoir toujours énigme en poèsie, _et c'est
le but de la littérature, il n'y en a pas d'autre,--d'évoquer les
objets_.--"Enquête sur l'Évolution Littéraire," Jules Huret, pp. 60,
61.[104]

  [104] I think there should be nothing but allusions. The
  contemplation of objects, the flying image of reveries evoked by
  them, are the song. The Parnassiens state the thing completely, and
  show it, and thereby lack mystery; they deprive the mind of that
  delicious joy of imagining that it creates. To _name an object is to
  take three-quarters from the enjoyment of the poem, which consists
  in the happiness of guessing little by little: to suggest, that is
  the dream_. It is the perfect use of this mystery that constitutes
  the symbol: little by little, to evoke an object in order to show a
  state of the soul; or, inversely, to choose an object, and from it
  to disengage a state of the soul by a series of decipherings.

  .... If a being of mediocre intelligence and insufficient literary
  preparation chance to open a book made in this way and pretends to
  enjoy it, there is a misunderstanding--things must be returned to
  their places. _There should always be an enigma in poetry_, and the
  aim of literature--it has no other--is to evoke objects.

Thus is obscurity elevated into a dogma among the new poets. As the
French critic Doumic (who has not yet accepted the dogma) quite
correctly says:--

"_Il serait temps aussi d'en finir avec cette fameuse 'théorie de
l'obscurite' que la nouvelle école a élevée, en effet, à la hauteur
d'un dogme._"--"Les Jeunes, par René Doumic."[105]

  [105] It were time also to have done with this famous "theory of
  obscurity," which the new school have practically raised to the
  height of a dogma.

But it is not French writers only who think thus. The poets of
all other countries think and act in the same way: German, and
Scandinavian, and Italian, and Russian, and English. So also do
the artists of the new period in all branches of art: in painting,
in sculpture, and in music. Relying on Nietzsche and Wagner, the
artists of the new age conclude that it is unnecessary for them to
be intelligible to the vulgar crowd; it is enough for them to evoke
poetic emotion in "the finest nurtured," to borrow a phrase from an
English æsthetician.

In order that what I am saying may not seem to be mere assertion,
I will quote at least a few examples from the French poets who
have led this movement. The name of these poets is legion. I have
taken French writers, because they, more decidedly than any others,
indicate the new direction of art, and are imitated by most European
writers.

Besides those whose names are already considered famous, such as
Baudelaire and Verlaine, here are the names of a few of them: Jean
Moréas, Charles Morice, Henri de Régnier, Charles Vignier, Adrien
Remacle, René Ghil, Maurice Maeterlinck, G. Albert Aurier, Rémy de
Gourmont, Saint-Pol-Roux-le-Magnifique, Georges Rodenbach, le comte
Robert de Montesquiou-Fezensac. These are Symbolists and Decadents.
Next we have the "Magi": Joséphin Péladan, Paul Adam, Jules Bois, M.
Papus, and others.

Besides these, there are yet one hundred and forty-one others, whom
Doumic mentions in the book referred to above.

Here are some examples from the work of those of them who are
considered to be the best, beginning with that most celebrated man,
acknowledged to be a great artist worthy of a monument--Baudelaire.
This is a poem from his celebrated "Fleurs du Mal":--


No. XXIV

    _Je t'adore à l'égal de la voûte nocturne,
    O vase de tristesse, ô grande taciturne,
    Et t'aime d'autant plus, belle, que tu me fuis,
    Et que tu me parais, ornement de mes nuits,
    Plus ironiquement accumuler les lieues
    Qui séparent mes bras des immensités bleues._

    _Je m'avance à l'attaque, et je grimpe aux assauts,
    Comme après un cadavre un chœur de vermisseaux,
    Et je chéris, ô bête implacable et cruelle,
    Jusqu'à cette froideur par où tu m'es plus belle!_[106]

  [106] For translation, see Appendix IV.

And this is another by the same writer:--


No. XXXVI

_DUELLUM_

    _Deux guerriers ont couru l'un sur l'autre; leurs armes
    Ont éclaboussé l'air de lueurs et de sang.
    Ces jeux, ces cliquetis du fer sont les vacarmes
    D'une jeunesse en proie à l'amour vagissant._

    _Les glaives sont brisés! comme notre jeunesse,
    Ma chère! Mais les dents, les ongles acérés,
    Vengent bientôt l'épée et la dague traîtresse.
    O fureur des cœurs mûrs par l'amour ulcérés!_

    _Dans le ravin hanté des chats-pards et des onces
    Nos héros, s'étreignant méchamment, ont roulé,
    Et leur peau fleurira l'aridité des ronces._

    _Ce gouffre, c'est l'enfer, de nos amis peuplé!
    Roulons-y sans remords, amazone inhumaine,
    Afin d'éterniser l'ardeur de notre haine!_[107]

  [107] For translation, see Appendix IV.

To be exact, I should mention that the collection contains verses
less comprehensible than these, but not one poem which is plain
and can be understood without a certain effort--an effort seldom
rewarded; for the feelings which the poet transmits are evil and
very low ones. And these feelings are always, and purposely,
expressed by him with eccentricity and lack of clearness. This
premeditated obscurity is especially noticeable in his prose, where
the author could, if he liked, speak plainly.

Take, for instance, the first piece from his "Petits Poèmes":--


_L'ETRANGER_

     _Qui aimes-tu le mieux, homme énigmatique, dis? ton père, ta
     mère, ta sœur, ou ton frère?_

     _Je n'ai ni père, ni mère, ni sœur, ni frère._

     _Tes amis?_

     _Vous vous servez là d'une parole dont le sens m'est restê
     jusqu'à ce jour inconnu._

     _Ta patrie?_

     _J'ignore sous quelle latitude elle est située._

     _La beauté?_

     _Je l'aimerais volontiers, desse et immortelle._

     _L'or?_

     _Je le hais comme vous haïssez Dieu._

     _Et qu'aimes-tu donc, extraordinaire étranger?_

     _J'aime les nuages .... les nuages qui passent .... là bas, ....
     les merveilleux nuages!_[108]

The piece called "La Soupe et les Nuages" is probably intended to
express the unintelligibility of the poet even to her whom he loves.
This is the piece in question:--

     _Ma petite folle bien-aimée me donnait à dîner, et par la
     fenêtre ouverte de la salle à manger je contemplais les
     mouvantes architectures que Dieu fait avec les vapeurs, les
     merveilleuses constructions de l'impalpable. Et je me disais,
     à travers ma contemplation: "Toutes ces fantasmagories sont
     presque aussi belles que les yeux de ma belle bien-aimée, la
     petite folle monstrueuse aux yeux verts."_

     _Et tout à coup je reçus un violent coup de poing dans le dos,
     et j'entendis une voix rauque et charmante, une voix hystérique
     et comme enrouée par l'eau-de-vie, la voix de ma chère petite
     bien-aimée, qui me disait, "Allez-vous bientôt manger votre
     soupe, s.... b.... de marchand de nuages?"_[108]

  [108] For translation, see Appendix IV.

However artificial these two pieces may be, it is still possible,
with some effort, to guess at what the author meant them to express,
but some of the pieces are absolutely incomprehensible--at least to
me. "Le Galant Tireur" is a piece I was quite unable to understand.


_LE GALANT TIREUR_

     _Comme la voiture traversait le bois, il la fit arrêter dans le
     voisinage d'un tir, disant qu'il lui serait agréable de tirer
     quelques balles pour tuer le Temps. Tuer ce monstre-là, n'est-ce
     pas l'occupation la plus ordinaire et la plus légitime de
     chacun?--Et il offrit galamment la main à sa chère, délicieuse
     et exécrable femme, à cette mystérieuse femme à laquelle il
     doit tant de plaisirs, tant de douleurs, et peut-être aussi une
     grande partie de son génie._

     _Plusieurs balles frappèrent loin du but proposè, l'une d'elles
     s'enfonça même dans le plafond; et comme la charmante créature
     riait follement, se moquant de la maladresse de son époux,
     celui-ci se tourna brusquement vers elle, et lui dit: "Observez
     cette poupée, là-bas, à droite, qui porte le nez en l'air et qui
     a la mine si hautaine. Eh bien! cher ange_, je me figure que
     c'est vous." _Et il ferma les yeux et il lâcha la détente. La
     poupée fut nettement décapitée._

     _Alors s'inclinant vers sa chère, sa délicieuse, son exécrable
     femme, son inévitable et impitoyable Muse, et lui baisant
     respectueusement la main, il ajouta: "Ah! mon cher ange, combien
     je vous remercie de mon adresse!"_[109]

  [109] For translation, see Appendix IV.

The productions of another celebrity, Verlaine, are not less
affected and unintelligible. This, for instance, is the first poem
in the section called "Ariettes Oubliés."

                    "_Le vent dans la plaine
                    Suspend son haleine._"--FAVART.

    _C'est l'extase langoureuse,
    C'est la fatigue amoureuse,
    C'est tous les frissons des bois
    Parmi l'étreinte des brises,
    C'est, vers les ramures grises,
    Le chœur des petites voix._

    _O le frêle et frais murmure!
    Cela gazouille et susurre,
    Cela ressemble au cri doux
    Que l'herbe agitée expire....
    Tu dirais, sous l'eau qui vire,
    Le roulis sourd des cailloux._

    _Cette âme qui se lamente
    En cette plainte dormante
    C'est la nôtre, n'est-ce pas?_
    _La mienne, dis, et la tienne,
    Dont s'exhale l'humble antienne
    Par ce tiède soir, tout bas?_[110]

  [110] For translation, see Appendix IV.

What "_chœur des petites voix_"? and what "_cri doux que l'herbe
agitée expire_"? and what it all means, remains altogether
unintelligible to me.

And here is another "Ariette":--


_VIII_

    _Dans l'interminable
    Ennui de la plaine,
    La neige incertaine
    Luit comme du sable._

    _Le ciel est de cuivre,
    Sans lueur aucune.
    On croirait voir vivre
    Et mourir la lune._

    _Comme des nuées
    Flottent gris les chênes
    Des forêts prochaines
    Parmi les buées._

    _Le ciel est de cuivre,
    Sans lueur aucune.
    On croirait voir vivre
    Et mourir la lune._

    _Corneille poussive
    Et vous, les loups maigres,
    Par ces bises aigres
    Quoi donc vous arrive?_

    _Dans l'interminable
    Ennui de la plaine,_
    _La neige incertaine
    Luit comme du sable._[111]

  [111] For translation, see Appendix IV.

How does the moon seem to live and die in a copper heaven? And
how can snow shine like sand? The whole thing is not merely
unintelligible, but, under pretense of conveying an impression, it
passes off a string of incorrect comparisons and words.

Besides these artificial and obscure poems there are others which
are intelligible, but which make up for it by being altogether
bad, both in form and in subject. Such are all the poems under the
heading "La Sagesse." The chief place in these verses is occupied by
a very poor expression of the most commonplace Roman Catholic and
patriotic sentiments. For instance, one meets with verses such as
this:--

    _Je ne veux plus penser qu'à ma mère Marie,
    Siège de la sagesse et source de pardons,
    Mère de France aussi_ de qui nous attendons
    Inébranlablement l'honneur de la patrie.[112]

  [112]

      I do not wish to think any more, except about my mother Mary,
      Seat of wisdom and source of pardon,
      Also Mother of France, _from whom we
      Steadfastly expect the honor of our country_.

Before citing examples from other poets, I must pause to note
the amazing celebrity of these two versifiers, Baudelaire and
Verlaine, who are now accepted as being great poets. How the French,
who had Chénier, Musset, Lamartine, and, above all, Hugo,--and
among whom quite recently flourished the so-called Parnassiens:
Leconte de Lisle, Sully-Prudhomme, etc.,--could attribute such
importance to these two versifiers, who were far from skilful in
form and most contemptible and commonplace in subject-matter, is
to me incomprehensible. The conception of life of one of them,
Baudelaire, consisted in elevating gross egotism into a theory, and
replacing morality by a cloudy conception of beauty, and especially
artificial beauty. Baudelaire had a preference, which he expressed,
for a woman's face painted rather than showing its natural color,
and for metal trees and a theatrical imitation of water rather than
real trees and real water.

The life-conception of the other, Verlaine, consisted in weak
profligacy, confession of his moral impotence, and, as an antidote
to that impotence, in the grossest Roman Catholic idolatry. Both,
moreover, were quite lacking in naïveté, sincerity, and simplicity,
and both overflowed with artificiality, forced originality and
self-assurance. So that in their least bad productions one sees more
of M. Baudelaire or M. Verlaine than of what they were describing.
But these two indifferent versifiers form a school, and lead
hundreds of followers after them.

There is only one explanation of this fact: it is that the art
of the society in which these versifiers lived is not a serious,
important matter of life, but is a mere amusement. And all
amusements grow wearisome by repetition. And, in order to make
wearisome amusement again tolerable, it is necessary to find some
means to freshen it up. When, at cards, ombre grows stale, whist
is introduced; when whist grows stale, écarté is substituted; when
écarté grows stale, some other novelty is invented, and so on. The
substance of the matter remains the same, only its form is changed.
And so it is with this kind of art. The subject-matter of the art of
the upper classes growing continually more and more limited, it has
come at last to this, that to the artists of these exclusive classes
it seems as if everything has already been said, and that to find
anything new to say is impossible. And therefore, to freshen up this
art, they look out for fresh forms.

Baudelaire and Verlaine invent such a new form, furbish it up,
moreover, with hitherto unused pornographic details, and--the
critics and the public of the upper classes hail them as great
writers.

This is the only explanation of the success, not of Baudelaire and
Verlaine only, but of all the Decadents.

For instance, there are poems by Mallarmé and Maeterlinck which have
no meaning, and yet for all that, or perhaps on that very account,
are printed by tens of thousands, not only in various publications,
but even in collections of the best works of the younger poets.

This, for example, is a sonnet by Mallarmé:--

    _A la nue accablante tu
    Basse de basalte et de laves
    A même les échos esclaves
    Par une trompe sans vertu._

    _Quel sépulcral naufrage (tu
    Le soir, écume, mais y baves)
    Suprême une entre les épaves
    Abolit le mât dévêtu._

    _Ou cela que furibond faute
    De quelque perdition haute
    Tout l'abîme vain éployé
    Dans le si blanc cheveu qui traîne
    Avarement aura noyé
    Le flanc enfant d'une sirène._[113]

                                  ("Pan," 1895, No. 1.)

  [113] This sonnet seems too unintelligible for translation.--TR.

This poem is not exceptional in its incomprehensibility. I have read
several poems by Mallarmé, and they also had no meaning whatever. I
give a sample of his prose in Appendix I. There is a whole volume of
this prose called "Divagations." It is impossible to understand any
of it. And that is evidently what the author intended.

And here is a song by Maeterlinck, another celebrated author of
to-day:--

    _Quand il est sorti,
    (J'entendis la porte)_
    _Quand il est sorti
    Elle avait souri ...._

    _Mais quand il entra
    (J'entendis la lampe)
    Mais quand il entra
    Une autre était là ...._

    _Et j'ai vu la mort,
    (J'entendis son âme)
    Et j'ai vu la mort
    Qui l'attend encore ...._

    _On est venu dire,
    (Mon enfant j'ai peur)
    On est venu dire
    Qu'il allait partir ...._

    _Ma lampe allumée,
    (Mon enfant j'ai peur)
    Ma lampe allumée
    Me suis approchée ...._

    _A la première porte,
    (Mon enfant j'ai peur)
    A la première porte,
    La flamme a tremblé ...._

    _A la seconde porte,
    (Mon enfant j'ai peur)
    A la seconde porte,
    La flamme a parlé ...._

    _A la troisième porte,
    (Mon enfant j'ai peur)
    A la troisième porte,
    La lumière est morte ...._

    _Et s'il revenait un jour
    Que faut-il lui dire?_
    _Dites-lui qu'on l'attendit
    Jusqu'à s'en mourir ...._

    _Et s'il demande où vous êtes
    Que faut-il répondre?
    Donnez-lui mon anneau d'or
    Sans rien lui répondre ...._

    _Et s'il m'interroge alors
    Sur la dernière heure?
    Dites lui que j'ai souri
    De peur qu'il ne pleure ...._

    _Et s'il m'interroge encore
    Sans me reconnaître?
    Parlez-lui comme une sœur,
    Il souffre peut-être ...._

    _Et s'il veut savoir pourquoi
    La salle est déserte?
    Montrez lui la lampe éteinte
    Et la porte ouverte ...._[114]

                                  ("Pan," 1895, No. 2.)

  [114] For translation, see Appendix IV.

Who went out? Who came in? Who is speaking? Who died?

I beg the reader to be at the pains of reading through the samples
I cite in Appendix II. of the celebrated and esteemed young
poets--Griffin, Verhaeren, Moréas, and Montesquiou. It is important
to do so in order to form a clear conception of the present position
of art, and not to suppose, as many do, that Decadentism is an
accidental and transitory phenomenon. To avoid the reproach of
having selected the worst verses, I have copied out of each volume
the poem which happened to stand on page 28.

All the other productions of these poets are equally unintelligible,
or can only be understood with great difficulty, and then not
fully. All the productions of those hundreds of poets, of whom I
have named a few, are the same in kind. And among the Germans,
Swedes, Norwegians, Italians, and us Russians, similar verses are
printed. And such productions are printed and made up into book
form, if not by the million, then by the hundred thousand (some of
these works sell in tens of thousands). For type-setting, paging,
printing, and binding these books, millions and millions of working
days are spent--not less, I think, than went to build the great
pyramid. And this is not all. The same is going on in all the other
arts: millions and millions of working days are being spent on the
production of equally incomprehensible works in painting, in music,
and in the drama.

Painting not only does not lag behind poetry in this matter, but
rather outstrips it. Here is an extract from the diary of an amateur
of art, written when visiting the Paris exhibitions in 1894:--

"I was to-day at three exhibitions: the Symbolists', the
Impressionists', and the Neo-Impressionists'. I looked at the
pictures conscientiously and carefully, but again felt the same
stupefaction and ultimate indignation. The first exhibition, that of
Camille Pissarro, was comparatively the most comprehensible, though
the pictures were out of drawing, had no subject, and the colorings
were most improbable. The drawing was so indefinite that you were
sometimes unable to make out which way an arm or a head was turned.
The subject was generally '_effets_'--_Effet de brouillard_, _Effet
du soir_, _Soleil couchant_. There were some pictures with figures,
but without subjects.

"In the coloring, bright blue and bright green predominated. And
each picture had its special color, with which the whole picture
was, as it were, splashed. For instance, in 'A Girl Guarding
Geese,' the special color is _vert de gris_, and dots of it were
splashed about everywhere; on the face, the hair, the hands, and the
clothes. In the same gallery--'Durand Ruel'--were other pictures
by Puvis de Chavannes, Manet, Monet, Renoir, Sisley--who are all
Impressionists. One of them, whose name I could not make out,--it
was something like Redon,--had painted a blue face in profile. On
the whole face there is only this blue tone, with white-of-lead.
Pissarro has a water-color all done in dots. In the foreground is a
cow, entirely painted with various-colored dots. The general color
cannot be distinguished, however much one stands back from, or draws
near to, the picture. From there I went to see the Symbolists. I
looked at them long without asking any one for an explanation,
trying to guess the meaning; but it is beyond human comprehension.
One of the first things to catch my eye was a wooden _haut-relief_,
wretchedly executed, representing a woman (naked) who with both
hands is squeezing from her two breasts streams of blood. The blood
flows down, becoming lilac in color. Her hair first descends, and
then rises again, and turns into trees. The figure is all colored
yellow, and the hair is brown.

"Next--a picture: a yellow sea, on which swims something which is
neither a ship nor a heart; on the horizon is a profile with a halo
and yellow hair, which changes into a sea, in which it is lost.
Some of the painters lay on their colors so thickly that the effect
is something between painting and sculpture. A third exhibit was
even less comprehensible: a man's profile; before him a flame and
black stripes--leeches, as I was afterwards told. At last I asked
a gentleman who was there what it meant, and he explained to me
that the _haut-relief_ was a symbol, and that it represented '_La
Terre_.' The heart swimming in a yellow sea was '_Illusion perdue_,'
and the gentleman with the leeches '_Le Mal_.' There were also some
Impressionist pictures: elementary profiles, holding some sort of
flowers in their hands: in monotone, out of drawing, and either
quite blurred or else marked out with wide black outlines."

This was in 1894; the same tendency is now even more strongly
defined, and we have Böcklin, Stuck, Klinger, Sasha Schneider, and
others.

The same thing is taking place in the drama. The play-writers
give us an architect who, for some reason, has not fulfilled his
former high intentions, and who consequently climbs on to the roof
of a house he has erected, and tumbles down head foremost; or an
incomprehensible old woman (who exterminates rats), and who, for an
unintelligible reason, takes a poetic child to the sea, and there
drowns him; or some blind men who, sitting on the seashore, for some
reason always repeat one and the same thing; or a bell of some kind,
which flies into a lake, and there rings.

And the same is happening in music--in that art which, more than any
other, one would have thought, should be intelligible to everybody.

An acquaintance of yours, a musician of repute, sits down to the
piano and plays you what he says is a new composition of his own,
or of one of the new composers. You hear the strange, loud sounds,
and admire the gymnastic exercises performed by his fingers; and you
see that the performer wishes to impress upon you that the sounds
he is producing express various poetic strivings of the soul. You
see his intention, but no feeling whatever is transmitted to you
except weariness. The execution lasts long, or at least it seems
very long to you, because you do not receive any clear impression,
and involuntarily you remember the words of Alphonse Karr, "_Plus
ça va vite, plus ça dure longtemps_."[115] And it occurs to you
that perhaps it is all a mystification; perhaps the performer is
trying you--just throwing his hands and fingers wildly about the
keyboard in the hope that you will fall into the trap and praise
him, and then he will laugh and confess that he only wanted to see
if he could hoax you. But when at last the piece does finish, and
the perspiring and agitated musician rises from the piano evidently
anticipating praise, you see that it was all done in earnest.

  [115] The quicker it goes the longer it lasts.

The same thing takes place at all the concerts, with pieces by
Liszt, Wagner, Berlioz, Brahms, and (newest of all) Richard
Strauss, and the numberless other composers of the new school, who
unceasingly produce opera after opera, symphony after symphony,
piece after piece.

The same is occurring in a domain in which it seemed hard to be
unintelligible,--in the sphere of novels and short stories.

Read "Là Bas," by Huysmans, or some of Kipling's short stories, or
"L'Annonciateur," by Villiers de l'Isle Adam in his "Contes Cruels,"
etc., and you will find them not only "abscons" (to use a word
adopted by the new writers), but absolutely unintelligible both in
form and in substance. Such, again, is the work by E. Morel, "Terre
Promise," now appearing in the _Revue Blanche_, and such are most of
the new novels. The style is very high-flown, the feelings seem to
be most elevated, but you can't make out what is happening, to whom
it is happening, and where it is happening. And such is the bulk of
the young art of our time.

People who grew up in the first half of this century, admiring
Goethe, Schiller, Musset, Hugo, Dickens, Beethoven, Chopin, Raphael,
da Vinci, Michael Angelo, Delaroche, being unable to make head or
tail of this new art, simply attribute its productions to tasteless
insanity, and wish to ignore them. But such an attitude toward
this new art is quite unjustifiable, because, in the first place,
that art is spreading more and more, and has already conquered for
itself a firm position in society, similar to the one occupied by
the Romanticists in the third decade of this century; and, secondly
and chiefly, because, if it is permissible to judge in this way of
the productions of the latest form of art, called by us Decadent
art, merely because we do not understand it, then remember there are
an enormous number of people,--all the laborers, and many of the
non-laboring folk,--who, in just the same way, do not comprehend
those productions of art which we consider admirable: the verses
of our favorite artists--Goethe, Schiller, and Hugo; the novels of
Dickens, the music of Beethoven and Chopin, the pictures of Raphael,
Michael Angelo, da Vinci, etc.

If I have a right to think that great masses of people do not
understand and do not like what I consider undoubtedly good because
they are not sufficiently developed, then I have no right to deny
that perhaps the reason why I cannot understand and cannot like the
new productions of art is merely that I am still insufficiently
developed to understand them. If I have a right to say that I,
and the majority of people who are in sympathy with me, do not
understand the productions of the new art, simply because there is
nothing in it to understand, and because it is bad art, then, with
just the same right, the still larger majority, the whole laboring
mass, who do not understand what I consider admirable art, can say
that what I reckon as good art is bad art, and there is nothing in
it to understand.

I once saw the injustice of such condemnation of the new art
with especial clearness, when, in my presence, a certain poet,
who writes incomprehensible verses, ridiculed incomprehensible
music with gay self-assurance; and, shortly afterwards, a certain
musician, who composes incomprehensible symphonies, laughed at
incomprehensible poetry with equal self-confidence. I have no right,
and no authority, to condemn the new art on the ground that I (a man
educated in the first half of the century) do not understand it; I
can only say that it is incomprehensible to me. The only advantage
the art I acknowledge has over the Decadent art, lies in the fact
that the art I recognize is comprehensible to a somewhat larger
number of people than the present-day art.

The fact that I am accustomed to a certain exclusive art, and
can understand it, but am unable to understand another still
more exclusive art, does not give me a right to conclude that my
art is the real true art, and that the other one, which I do not
understand, is an unreal, a bad art. I can only conclude that art,
becoming ever more and more exclusive, has become more and more
incomprehensible to an ever increasing number of people, and that,
in this its progress toward greater and greater incomprehensibility
(on one level of which I am standing, with the art familiar to me),
it has reached a point where it is understood by a very small number
of the elect, and the number of these chosen people is ever becoming
smaller and smaller.

As soon as ever the art of the upper classes separated itself from
universal art, a conviction arose that art may be art and yet be
incomprehensible to the masses. And as soon as this position was
admitted, it had inevitably to be admitted also that art may be
intelligible only to the very smallest number of the elect, and,
eventually, to two, or to one, of our nearest friends, or to oneself
alone. Which is practically what is being said by modern artists: "I
create and understand myself, and if any one does not understand me,
so much the worse for him."

The assertion that art may be good art, and at the same time
incomprehensible to a great number of people, is extremely unjust,
and its consequences are ruinous to art itself; but at the same time
it is so common and has so eaten into our conceptions, that it is
impossible sufficiently to elucidate all the absurdity of it.

Nothing is more common than to hear it said of reputed works of art,
that they are very good but very difficult to understand. We are
quite used to such assertions, and yet to say that a work of art
is good, but incomprehensible to the majority of men, is the same
as saying of some kind of food that it is very good, but that most
people can't eat it. The majority of men may not like rotten cheese
or putrefying grouse--dishes esteemed by people with perverted
tastes; but bread and fruit are only good when they please the
majority of men. And it is the same with art. Perverted art may not
please the majority of men, but good art always pleases every one.

It is said that the very best works of art are such that they cannot
be understood by the mass, but are accessible only to the elect who
are prepared to understand these great works. But if the majority of
men do not understand, the knowledge necessary to enable them to
understand should be taught and explained to them. But it turns out
that there is no such knowledge, that the works cannot be explained,
and that those who say the majority do not understand good works of
art, still do not explain those works, but only tell us that, in
order to understand them, one must read, and see, and hear these
same works over and over again. But this is not to explain, it is
only to habituate! And people may habituate themselves to anything,
even to the very worst things. As people may habituate themselves to
bad food, to spirits, tobacco, and opium, just in the same way they
may habituate themselves to bad art--and that is exactly what is
being done.

Moreover, it cannot be said that the majority of people lack the
taste to esteem the highest works of art. The majority always
have understood, and still understand, what we also recognize as
being the very best art: the epic of Genesis, the gospel parables,
folk-legends, fairy-tales, and folk-songs, are understood by all.
How can it be that the majority has suddenly lost its capacity to
understand what is high in our art?

Of a speech it may be said that it is admirable, but
incomprehensible to those who do not know the language in which it
is delivered. A speech delivered in Chinese may be excellent, and
may yet remain incomprehensible to me if I do not know Chinese; but
what distinguishes a work of art from all other mental activity
is just the fact that its language is understood by all, and that
it infects all without distinction. The tears and laughter of a
Chinese infect me just as the laughter and tears of a Russian;
and it is the same with painting and music and poetry, when it is
translated into a language I understand. The songs of a Kirghiz or
of a Japanese touch me, though in a lesser degree than they touch
a Kirghiz or a Japanese. I am also touched by Japanese painting,
Indian architecture, and Arabian stories. If I am but little
touched by a Japanese song and a Chinese novel, it is not that I do
not understand these productions, but that I know and am accustomed
to higher works of art. It is not because their art is above me.
Great works of art are only great because they are accessible
and comprehensible to every one. The story of Joseph, translated
into the Chinese language, touches a Chinese. The story of Sakya
Muni touches us. And there are, and must be, buildings, pictures,
statues, and music of similar power. So that, if art fails to move
men, it cannot be said that this is due to the spectators' or
hearers' lack of understanding; but the conclusion to be drawn may
and should be, that such art is either bad art, or is not art at all.

Art is differentiated from activity of the understanding, which
demands preparation and a certain sequence of knowledge (so that one
cannot learn trigonometry before knowing geometry), by the fact that
it acts on people independently of their state of development and
education, that the charm of a picture, sounds, or of forms, infects
any man whatever his plane of development.

The business of art lies just in this,--to make that understood and
felt which, in the form of an argument, might be incomprehensible
and inaccessible. Usually it seems to the recipient of a truly
artistic impression that he knew the thing before but had been
unable to express it.

And such has always been the nature of good, supreme art; the
"Iliad," the "Odyssey," the stories of Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph,
the Hebrew prophets, the psalms, the gospel parables, the story
of Sakya Muni, and the hymns of the Vedas: all transmit very
elevated feelings, and are nevertheless quite comprehensible now
to us, educated or uneducated, as they were comprehensible to
the men of those times, long ago, who were even less educated
than our laborers. People talk about incomprehensibility; but if
art is the transmission of feelings flowing from man's religious
perception, how can a feeling be incomprehensible which is founded
on religion, _i.e._ on man's relation to God? Such art should be,
and has actually always been, comprehensible to everybody, because
every man's relation to God is one and the same. And therefore
the churches and the images in them were always comprehensible to
every one. The hindrance to understanding the best and highest
feelings (as is said in the gospel) does not at all lie in
deficiency of development or learning, but, on the contrary, in
false development and false learning. A good and lofty work of art
may be incomprehensible, but not to simple, unperverted peasant
laborers (all that is highest is understood by them)--it may be,
and often is, unintelligible to erudite, perverted people destitute
of religion. And this continually occurs in our society, in which
the highest feelings are simply not understood. For instance, I
know people who consider themselves most refined, and who say that
they do not understand the poetry of love to one's neighbor, of
self-sacrifice, or of chastity.

So that good, great, universal, religious art may be
incomprehensible to a small circle of spoilt people, but certainly
not to any large number of plain men.

Art cannot be incomprehensible to the great masses only because it
is very good--as artists of our day are fond of telling us. Rather
we are bound to conclude that this art is unintelligible to the
great masses only because it is very bad art, or even is not art at
all. So that the favorite argument (naïvely accepted by the cultured
crowd), that in order to feel art one has first to understand it
(which really only means habituate oneself to it), is the truest
indication that what we are asked to understand by such a method is
either very bad, exclusive art, or is not art at all.

People say that works of art do not please the people because they
are incapable of understanding them. But if the aim of works of art
is to infect people with the emotion the artist has experienced, how
can one talk about not understanding?

A man of the people reads a book, sees a picture, hears a play or
a symphony, and is touched by no feeling. He is told that this is
because he cannot understand. People promise to let a man see a
certain show; he enters and sees nothing. He is told that this is
because his sight is not prepared for this show. But the man well
knows that he sees quite well, and if he does not see what people
promised to show him, he only concludes (as is quite just) that
those who undertook to show him the spectacle have not fulfilled
their engagement. And it is perfectly just for a man who does feel
the influence of some works of art to come to this conclusion
concerning artists who do not, by their works, evoke feeling in him.
To say that the reason a man is not touched by my art is because
he is still too stupid, besides being very self-conceited and also
rude, is to reverse the rôles, and for the sick to send the hale to
bed.

Voltaire said that "_Tous les genres sont bons, hors le genre
ennuyeux_;"[116] but with even more right one may say of art that
_Tous les genres sont bons, hors celui qu'on ne comprend pas, or
qui ne produit pas son effet_,[117] for of what value is an article
which fails to do that for which it was intended?

  [116] All styles are good except the wearisome style.

  [117] All styles are good except that which is not understood, or
  which fails to produce its effect.

Mark this above all: if only it be admitted that art may be art
and yet be unintelligible to any one of sound mind, there is no
reason why any circle of perverted people should not compose works
tickling their own perverted feelings and comprehensible to no one
but themselves, and call it "art," as is actually being done by the
so-called Decadents.

The direction art has taken may be compared to placing on a large
circle other circles, smaller and smaller, until a cone is formed,
the apex of which is no longer a circle at all. That is what has
happened to the art of our times.




