CHAPTER IV

MISCONCEPTION OF CHRISTIANITY BY SCIENTISTS

     The relation of scientists to religions in general--What
     are religions, and their significance to human life--Three
     conceptions of life--The Christian doctrine is the expression of
     the divine life-conception--The misconception of Christianity
     by scientists who study its outward manifestations due to
     the fact that they consider it from the standpoint of the
     social life-conception--Opinion resulting therefrom, that
     the teaching of Christ is exaggerated and unpractical--The
     expression of the life-conception of the gospel--Erroneous
     judgments of scientists concerning Christianity are based upon
     the assurance that they possess an infallible criterion of
     knowledge--Hence arise two misapprehensions in regard to the
     Christian doctrine--The first misapprehension concerning the
     impracticability of the doctrine arises from the fact that the
     Christian doctrine presents a conduct of life different from
     that of the social life-conception--Christianity offers not a
     rule, but an ideal--Christ adds the consciousness of a divine
     power to that of an animal power--Christianity seems to exclude
     the possibility of life only when the indication of the ideal
     is taken for the rule--An ideal cannot be belittled--According
     to the doctrine of Christ, life is movement--The ideal and
     the commandments--The second misapprehension arises from the
     attempt to replace the love of God and His service by the love
     and service of humanity--Scientists believe that Christianity
     and their doctrine concerning the service of humanity are
     identical--The doctrine of love toward humanity has for its
     foundation the social life-conception--The love for humanity
     which springs logically from love for the individual has no
     meaning, because humanity is a fiction--Christian love springing
     from the love of God has for its object not only humanity but
     the whole world--Christianity teaches a life in accordance with
     its divine nature--It indicates that the essence of a man's soul
     is love, and that its good is obtained from its love of God,
     whom he feels to be within him through love.


Let us now turn our attention to another fallacious conception of
Christianity, which is antagonistic to its actual principles,--the
scientific conception.

The Christianity of the churchmen is something which they have
evolved for themselves, and which they believe to be the only true
interpretation of Christian doctrine.

The scientists take the professions of faith of the various
churches for Christianity, and assuming that these dogmas embody
an exhaustive definition of Christian doctrine, they affirm that
Christianity has had its day.

One needs but to take into consideration the important part
which all religions, and especially Christianity, have played in
the life of man, and the significance which science attaches to
them, to see at once how impossible it would be to obtain any just
apprehension of Christian doctrine through these conceptions. As
each individual must possess certain impressions in regard to the
meaning of his life, and, though often unconsciously, conform his
conduct thereunto, so mankind in the aggregate, or groups of men
living under the same conditions, must likewise possess a conception
of the meaning of their common life and its consequent activities.
As an individual passing from one period of life to another
inevitably changes his ideas, the point of view of a grown-up man
differs from that of a child, so also mankind in the aggregate--the
nation--inevitably, and in conformity with its age, changes its
views of life and the activity that springs therefrom.

The difference in this respect between an individual and mankind
in general lies in the fact that while the individual, in forming
his conception of the significance and responsibilities of that new
period of life upon which he is about to enter, may avail himself of
the advice of his predecessors who have already passed that stage,
mankind can have no such advantage, because it is advancing along an
unbeaten track and there is no one of whom it can ask for the clue
to the mystery of life, or how it shall demean itself under these
unfamiliar conditions to which no nation has ever yet been subjected.

The married man with a family of children will not continue to
view life as he did when he was a child; neither is it possible
for mankind, with the many changes that have taken place,--the
density of the population, the constant intercourse of nations,
the perfected means of combating the forces of nature, and the
increase of knowledge generally,--to view the life of the present
day in the light of the past; hence it becomes necessary to evolve
a life-conception from which activities corresponding with a new
system which is to be established will naturally develop.

And this need is supplied by that peculiar capacity of the race for
producing men able to impart a new significance to human life,--a
significance developing a different set of activities.

The birth of the life-conception, which always takes place when
mankind enters upon new conditions and its subsequent activities, is
what we call religion.

Therefore, in the first place, religion is not, as science regards
it, a phenomenon which formerly traveled hand in hand with the
development of mankind, and which has since been left behind; on the
contrary, it is a phenomenon inherent to human existence itself, and
never more distinctly manifested than at the present day. In the
second place, religion defines future rather than past activities;
therefore it is evident that an investigation of the phenomena of
the past can by no means touch the essence of religion.

The longing to typify the forces of nature is no more the essence
of religion than is the fear of those same forces, or the need of
the miraculous and its outward manifestations, as the scientists
suppose. The essence of religion lies in the power of man to
foreknow and to point out the way in which mankind must walk. It is
a definition of a new life which will give birth to new activities.

This faculty of foreknowledge concerning the destiny of humanity
is more or less common, no doubt, to all people; still from time
to time a man appears in whom the faculty has reached a higher
development, and these men have the power clearly and distinctly
to formulate that which is vaguely conceived by all men, thus
instituting a new life-conception from which is to flow an unwonted
activity, whose results will endure for centuries to come. Thus far
there have been three of these life-conceptions; two of them belong
to a bygone era, while the third is of our own time and is called
Christianity. It is not that we have merged the various conceptions
of the significance of life into three arbitrary divisions, but that
there really have been but three distinct conceptions, by which the
actions of mankind have been influenced, and save through these we
have no means of comprehending life.

These three life-conceptions are--firstly, the individual or animal;
secondly, the social or pagan; and thirdly, the universal or divine.

According to the first of these, a man's life is his personality,
and that only, and his life's object is to gratify his desires.
According to the second, his life is not limited to his own
personality; it includes the sum and continuity of many
personalities,--of the family, of the race, and of the State,
and his life's object is to gratify the will of the communities
of individuals. And according to the third, his life is confined
neither to his personality nor to that of the aggregate of
individuals, but finds its significance in the eternal source of all
life,--in God Himself.

These three life-conceptions serve as the basis for the religions of
every age.

The savage sees life only through the medium of his own desires. He
cares for nothing but himself, and for him the highest good is the
full satisfaction of his own passions. The incentive of his life is
personal enjoyment. His religion consists of attempts to propitiate
the gods in his favor, and of the worship of imaginary deities, who
exist only for their own personal ends.

A member of the pagan world recognizes life as something concerning
others besides himself; he sees it as concerning an aggregate of
individuals,--the family, the race, the nation, the State, and is
ready to sacrifice himself for the aggregate. The incentive of his
life is glory. His religion consists in honoring the chiefs of his
race, his progenitors, his ancestors, his sovereigns, and in the
worship of those gods who are the exclusive patrons of his family,
his tribe, his race, and his State.[8]

  [8] The unity of this social and pagan life-conception is by no
  means destroyed by the numerous and varied systems which grow out of
  it, such as the existence of the family, of the nation, and of the
  State, and even of that life of humanity conceived according to the
  theory of the Positivists.

  These multifarious systems of life are based upon the fundamental
  idea of the insignificance of the individual, and the assurance that
  the meaning of life is to be sought and found only in humanity,
  taken in its broadest sense.--AUTHOR.

The man who possesses the divine life-conception neither looks upon
life as centered in his own personality nor in that of mankind at
large, whether family, tribe, race, nation, or State; but rather
does he conceive of it as taking its rise in the eternal life of
God, and to fulfil His will he is ready to sacrifice his personal,
family, and social well-being. Love is the impelling motive of his
life, and his religion is the worship, in deed and in truth, of the
beginning of all things,--of God Himself.

History is but the transcript of the gradual transition from the
animal life-conception of the individual to the social, and from
the social to the divine. The history of the ancients for thousands
of centuries, culminating in that of Rome, is the history of the
evolution from the animal life-conception of the individual to that
of society and the State. From the advent of Christianity and the
fall of Imperial Rome we have the history of that change which is
still going on from the social to the divine life-conception.

The latter, together with the Christian doctrine which is based
upon it, and by which our lives are shaped, and our activities,
both practical and scientific, are quickened, is regarded by the
pseudo-scientists, who judge it only by its outward signs, as
something outlived, which has lost all meaning for us.

According to scientists this doctrine is embodied in the dogmas
of the Trinity, the Redemption, the miracles, the Church and its
sacraments, etc., and is only one of the many religions which have
arisen during the progress of human history, and now, having played
its part and outlived its time, is vanishing before the dawn of
science and true enlightenment.

The grossest of human errors spring in most cases from the fact
that men who stand on a low intellectual plane, when they encounter
phenomena of a higher order, instead of trying to rise to the
higher plane from which these phenomena may be fitly regarded, and
making an effort to understand them, judge them by their own low
standard, and the less they know of what they speak, the more bold
and determined are their judgments.

Most scientists, who treat of the moral doctrine of Christ from the
lower standpoint of a social life-conception, regard it as nothing
more than an amalgam without cohesion of the asceticism of India
with the doctrine of the Stoics and Neo-Platonists, and of vague
anti-social dreams, devoid of all serious meaning in these latter
days; they simply see its outward manifestation in the form of
dogmas in Catholicism, in Protestantism, and in its struggle with
the powers of the world. Interpreting the design of Christianity
from its outward aspects, they are like unto deaf men, who judge
of the meaning and excellence of music by the movements of the
musicians.

Hence it is that all such men, from Comte and Strauss to Spencer
and Renan, not understanding the purport of Christ's words, knowing
nothing whatever of their intention, ignorant of the question
to which they serve as an answer, and taking no pains to learn
it,--such men, if they are inimical to Christianity, utterly deny
the sense of the doctrine; but if they are leniently inclined, then,
from the height of their superior wisdom, they amend it, taking for
granted that Christ would have said what they think He meant, had He
known how to express himself. They treat His doctrine just as men
of overweening self-conceit treat their inferiors, correcting them
in their speech: "You mean so and so." And the spirit of emendation
is always such as to reduce the doctrine of the higher, the divine
life-conception, to that of the lower and the social conception.

It is usually admitted that the moral teaching of Christianity
is good but exaggerated; that in order to make it perfect, its
hyperboles, which are incompatible with our present mode of life,
should be discarded. "A doctrine which requires so much that is
impracticable is more hurtful than one which demands of men only
what is in proportion to their strength." Thus declare the learned
interpreters of Christianity, thus unwittingly reiterating the
assertion of those who misunderstood the Christian doctrine long
years ago, and crucified the Master.

The Hebrew law, "An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth," the
retributive justice known to mankind thousands of years ago, seems
far better suited to the court of contemporary scientists than the
law of love which Christ preached 1800 years ago, and which was to
replace this identical law of justice.

It would seem that every action of those men who accepted the
teaching of Christ in its literal sense, and lived up to it, all the
words and deeds of sincere Christians, and all the agencies which,
under the guise of socialism and communism, are now transforming
the world, are merely exaggeration, not worth discussing. Nations
which have lived under Christian influences, and which are now
represented by their advanced thinkers, the scientists, have
arrived at the conclusion that the Christian doctrine is a matter
of dogma; that its practical teaching has been a mistake and an
exaggeration, inimical to the just requirements of morality that
are in accord with human nature, and that the very doctrine which
Christ repudiated, and for which he substituted a dogma of his own,
is far better suited to us. The scientist considers the commandment
of non-resistance to evil by violence an exaggeration, and even an
act of folly. It would be far better, in his opinion, to reject it,
never dreaming that it is not the doctrine of Christ which he is
controverting, but something which he assumes to be the doctrine in
question. He does not realize when he says that the commandment of
non-resistance in the doctrine of Christ is an exaggeration, that
he is like one who, teaching the theory of the circle, declares
that the equality of the radii is an exaggeration. It is just as
if one who has no idea of the form of a circle were to affirm that
the law which requires that each point of its circumference shall
be equidistant from its center, is an exaggeration. As a suggestion
to reject or modify the proposition concerning the equality of the
radii of a circle signifies an ignorance in regard to the circle
itself, so also does the idea of rejecting or modifying, in the
practical teaching of Christ, the commandment of non-resistance to
evil by violence signify a misunderstanding of the doctrine.

And those who entertain these views do not really comprehend the
doctrine. They do not understand that it is the unfolding of a new
conception of life, corresponding to the new phase of existence
upon which the world entered 1800 years ago, and a definition of
the new activity to which it gave birth. Either they do not believe
that Christ said what He meant to say, or that what is found in the
Sermon on the Mount and elsewhere He said either from His enthusiasm
or lack of wisdom and simplicity of character.[9]

  [9] Here, for example, is a characteristic expression of opinion
  in the American periodical, _The Arena,_ for November, 1890,
  from an article entitled "New Basis of Church Life." Discussing
  the significance of the Sermon on the Mount, and especially the
  doctrine of non-resistance to evil, the author, having no reason for
  obscuring its meaning as the ecclesiastics do, says:--

       "Devout common sense must gradually come to look upon Christ
       as a philanthropic teacher, who, like every enthusiast who
       ever taught, went to an Utopian extreme in his own philosophy.
       Every great agitation for the betterment of the world has been
       led by men who beheld their own mission with such absorbing
       intensity that they could see little else. It is no reproach to
       Christ to say that he had the typical reformer's temperament;
       that his precepts cannot be literally accepted as a complete
       philosophy of life; and that men are to analyze them reverently,
       but, at the same time, in the spirit of ordinary truth-seeking
       criticism," etc.

       "Christ did in fact preach absolute communism and anarchy; but,"
       and so on. Christ would have been glad to have expressed Himself
       in more fitting terms, but He did not possess our critical
       faculty in the use of exact definitions, therefore we will set
       Him right. All He said concerning meekness, sacrifice, poverty,
       and of taking no thought for the morrow, were but haphazard
       utterances, because of His ignorance of scientific phraseology.

     Matt. vi. 25-34.--25. _Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought
     for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor
     yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more
     than meat, and the body than raiment?_

     26. _Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither
     do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father
     feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they?_

     27. _Which of you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his
     stature?_

     28. _And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of
     the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin:_

     29. _And yet I say unto you, That even Solomon in all his glory
     was not arrayed like one of these._

     30. _Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which
     to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not
     much more clothe you, O ye of little faith?_

     31. _Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or,
     What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?_

     32. _(For after all these things do the Gentiles seek:) for your
     heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things._

     33. _But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his
     righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you._

     34. _Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow
     shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto the
     day is the evil thereof._

     Luke xii. 33-34.--33. _Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide
     yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens
     that faileth not, where no thief approacheth, neither moth
     corrupteth._

     34. _For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also._

     Matt. xix. 21.--"_Go and sell that thou hast, and give to the
     poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and
     follow me._"

     Mark viii. 34.--"_Whosoever will come after me, let him deny
     himself, and take up his cross, and follow me._"

     John iv. 34.--"_My meat is to do the will of him that sent me,
     and to finish his work._"

     Luke xxii. 42.--"_Not my will, but thine, be done._"

     _Not what I wish, but what Thou wishest, and not as I wish, but
     as Thou wishest. Life consists in doing not your own will, but
     the will of God._

All these doctrines are regarded by men who adhere to the lower
life-conception as expressions of enthusiastic exaltation, with no
special reference to daily life. And yet these doctrines are no less
the natural outcome of the Christian life-conception than is the
idea of giving one's labor for the common good, or of sacrificing
one's life to defend one's country, the outcome of the social
life-conception.

As the believer in the social life-conception says to the savage:
"Rouse yourself! Consider what you are doing! The life that man
lives for himself alone cannot be the true one, for life is fleeting
and full of woe. It is the life of the community at large, the
race, the family, the State, that endures: therefore a man must
sacrifice his personality for the life of the family and the State;"
Christianity in like manner says unto him who believes in a social
life-conception of the community: "Repent, μετανοετα, that
is, arouse yourself, consider your ways, else shall you perish. Know
you that this bodily, animal life is born to-day and dies to-morrow;
nothing can assure its permanence, no outward expedients, no system
whatsoever can give it stability. Consider your ways and learn that
the life you live is not the real life, that neither family, social,
nor State life will save you from perdition. An honest rational
life is possible for man provided that he be, not a participant
of the life of the family or life of the State, but a partaker of
the source of all life--that of the Father Himself; then his life
is united to the life of the Father." Such is beyond a doubt the
meaning of the Christian conception of life, clearly set forth in
every maxim of the New Testament.

One may not share such a conception of life, one may deny it, or
prove it to be inaccurate and fallacious; but no man can possibly
judge a doctrine without having first made himself familiar with the
life-conception which forms its basis; and still more impossible is
it to judge a lofty subject from a low standpoint, to pronounce upon
the belfry from a knowledge of the foundation. Yet this is precisely
what is done by contemporary scientists. And this is because they
are laboring under an error similar to that of the clergy, in
believing that they possess such infallible methods of studying
their subject that, if they but bring their so-called scientific
methods to bear upon the subject under consideration, there can be
no doubt as to the accuracy of their conclusion.

The possession of a guide to knowledge, which they believe to be
infallible, is really the chief obstacle to the comprehension of
the Christian doctrine among unbelievers and so-called scientists,
by whose opinions the great majority of unbelievers, the so-called
educated classes, are guided. All the errors of the scientists
concerning Christianity, and especially two strange misapprehensions
that avail more than anything else to blind men to its real
signification, arise therefrom.

One of these misapprehensions is that the doctrine of a Christian
life not being practical, it remains optional with the individual
whether he take it for his guide or no; and if he chooses to do
so, it may then be modified to suit the exigencies of our social
life. The second misapprehension is that the Christian doctrine of
love of God, and therefore of the service due to Him, is a mystical
requirement, neither clearly expressed nor offering any well-defined
object of love: consequently the more definite and intelligible
doctrine of love of man and of the service of humanity may be
substituted for it.

The first misapprehension which relates to the impracticability of
the Christian doctrine arises from the fact that men who believe in
the social life-conception, not comprehending the rule obeyed by
men who hold the Christian doctrine, and mistaking the Christian
standard of perfection for the guiding principle of life, believe
and declare that it is impossible to follow the teaching of Christ,
because implicit obedience to this doctrine would end by destroying
life. "If man were to fulfil the precepts of Christ, he would
destroy his life; and if all the world were to fulfil them, the
human race would soon become extinct. If you were to take no thought
for the morrow, neither of what ye shall eat or drink, nor what
ye shall put on; if one may not resist evil by violence or defend
one's life, nor even give up one's life for his friend; if one is to
preserve absolute chastity, mankind could not long exist;" so they
believe and affirm.

And they are right, if one takes the incentives to perfection
offered by the teaching of Christ as laws which each man must obey,
just as, for instance, in the social order every man must pay his
taxes, and some must serve in the courts of law, and so on.

The misapprehension consists in overlooking the fact that the
doctrine of Christ, and the doctrine formulated by a lower
life-conception, guide men in very different ways. The doctrines of
the social life-conception guide men in fulfilling the requirements
of the law. The doctrine of Christ guides men by manifesting the
infinite perfection of the Heavenly Father, to which it is natural
for every man to aspire, whatever may be his shortcomings.

The misconception of those who judge the Christian doctrine by the
standard of the state or civil doctrine is this,--that they imagine
that the perfection of which Christ speaks may be attained in this
life, and ask themselves just as they would ask concerning some law
of the State, what will happen when all this shall be fulfilled?
This hypothesis is fallacious, because the perfection indicated
by Christianity is infinite and can never be attained; and Christ
promulgates his doctrine, knowing that although absolute perfection
will never be attained, yet the aspiration toward it will ever
contribute to the welfare of mankind, that this welfare may by this
means be everlastingly increased.

Christ is not teaching angels, but men who live and move in an
animal life, and whose impulses are of an animal nature. And to
this animal impulse Christ, so to speak, adds another force by
communicating to man a sense of the divine perfection, guiding the
current of life between these two forces.

To take it for granted that human life is to follow the direction
indicated by Christ would be like expecting the boatman, who,
crossing a swift river, steers almost directly against the current,
to float in that direction.

Christ recognizes the fact that a parallelogram has two sides,
and that a man's life is controlled by two indestructible forces:
his animal nature and his consciousness of a filial relationship
to God. Disregarding the factor of the animal life, which never
looses its hold, and is beyond man's control, Christ speaks of the
divine consciousness, urging man to its fuller recognition, its
complete emancipation from all that fetters it, and to its utmost
development.

Man's true life, according to the precepts of Christ, is only to
be found in this emancipation and in the growth of the divine
consciousness. According to the old dispensation, a true life meant
the fulfilment of the precepts of the law; but according to Christ,
it means the closest approach to the divine perfection which has
been manifested to every man, and which every man recognizes,--a
closer and closer union of his will to the will of God; a union
which every man is striving to attain, and which would utterly
destroy the life we now lead.

God's perfection is the asymptote of human life, toward which it is
forever aspiring and drawing nearer, although it can only reach its
goal in the infinite.

It is only when men mistake the suggestion of an ideal for a rule
of conduct that the Christian doctrine seems at odds with life.
Indeed, the reverse is true, for it is by the doctrine of Christ,
and that alone, that a true life is rendered possible. "It is a
mistake to require too much," men usually say, when discussing the
demands of the Christian religion. "One ought not to be required
to take no thought for the morrow, as the Bible teaches, but of
course one should not be over-anxious; one cannot give all that he
possesses to the poor, still he should bestow a certain portion of
his goods in charity; one ought not to remain unmarried, but let him
avoid a dissolute life; one need not renounce his wife and children,
although one must not idolize them."

These arguments are equivalent to telling a man who is crossing a
swift river and steering his boat against the current, that no one
can cross a river by steering against the current, but that he must
direct his boat in a straight line toward the point he wishes to
reach.

The doctrine of Christ differs from former doctrines in that it
influences men, not by outward observances, but by the interior
consciousness that divine perfection may be attained.

It is this illimitable and divine perfection that absorbs the soul
of man, not restricted laws of justice and philanthropy. It needs
but the aspiration toward this divine perfection to impel the
course of human life from the animal to the divine, so far as may be
humanly possible.

In order to land at any given point one must steer beyond it. To
lower the standard of an ideal means not only to lessen the chances
of attaining perfection, but to destroy the ideal itself. The
ideal that influences mankind is not an ingenious invention; it is
something that dwells in the soul of each individual. It is this
ideal of utter and infinite perfection that excites men and urges
them to action. A possible degree of perfection would have no appeal
to the souls of men.

It is because the doctrine of Christ requires illimitable
perfection, that is to say, the blending of the divine essence,
which is in each man's soul, with the will of God, the union of
the Son with the Father, that it has authority. It is only the
emancipation of the Son of God, who dwells with each one of us, from
the animal element within us, and the drawing near to the Father,
that can, in the Christian sense of the word, be called life.

The presence of the animal element in man is not enough of itself to
constitute human life. Neither is a spiritual life, which is guided
only by the will of God, a human life. A true human life is composed
of an animal and of a spiritual life united to the will of God, and
the nearer this component life approaches to the life of God, the
more it has life.

According to the Christian doctrine, life is a condition of progress
toward the perfection of God; hence no one condition can be either
higher or lower than another, because each is in itself a certain
stage in human progress toward the unattainable perfection, and
therefore of equal importance with all the others. Any spiritual
quickening, according to this doctrine, is simply an accelerated
movement toward perfection. Therefore the impulse of Zacchæus the
publican, of the adulteress, and the thief on the cross, show forth
a higher order of life than does the passive righteousness of the
Pharisee. This doctrine, therefore, can never be enforced by
obligatory laws. The man who, from a lower plane, lives up to the
doctrine he professes, ever advancing toward perfection, leads a
higher life than one who may perhaps stand on a superior plane of
morality, but who is making no progress toward perfection.

Thus the stray lamb is dearer to the Father than those which are in
the fold; the prodigal returned, the coin that was lost and is found
again, more highly prized than those that never were lost.

Since the fulfilment of this doctrine is an impulse from self toward
God, it is evident that there can be no fixed laws for its movement.
It may spring from any degree of perfection or of imperfection; the
fulfilment of rules and fulfilment of the doctrine are by no means
synonymous; there could be no rules or obligatory laws for its
fulfilment.

The difference between social laws and the doctrine of Christ
is the natural result of the radical dissimilarity between the
doctrine of Christ and those earlier doctrines which had their
source in a social life-conception. The latter are for the most
part positive, enjoining certain acts, by the performance of which
men are to be justified and made righteous, whereas the Christian
precepts (the precept of love is not a commandment in the strict
sense of the word, but the expression of the very essence of the
doctrine), the five commandments of the Sermon on the Mount, are all
negative, only meant to show men who have reached a certain degree
of development what they must avoid. These commandments are, so to
speak, mile-stones on the infinite road to perfection, toward which
humanity is struggling; they mark the degrees of perfection which it
is possible for it to attain at a certain period of its development.

In the Sermon on the Mount Christ expressed the eternal ideal to
which mankind instinctively aspires, showing at the same time the
point of perfection to which human nature in its present stage may
attain.

The ideal is to bear no malice, excite no ill-will, and to love all
men. The commandment which forbids us to offend our neighbor is one
which a man who is striving to attain this ideal must not do less
than obey. And this is the first commandment.

The ideal is perfect chastity in thought, no less than in deed; and
the commandment which enjoins purity in married life, forbidding
adultery, is one which every man who is striving to attain this
ideal must not do less than obey. And this is the second commandment.

The ideal is to take no thought for the morrow, to live in the
present, and the commandment, the fulfilment of which is the point
beneath which we must not fall, is against taking oath or making
promises for the future. Such is the third commandment.

The ideal--to use no violence whatsoever--shows us that we must
return good for evil, endure injuries with patience, and give up the
cloak to him who has taken the coat. Such is the fourth commandment.

The ideal is to love your enemies, to do good to them that
despitefully use you. In order to keep the spirit of this
commandment one must at least refrain from injuring one's enemies,
one must speak kindly of them, and treat all one's fellow-creatures
with equal consideration. Such is the fifth commandment.

All these commandments are reminders of that which we, in our
striving for perfection, must and can avoid; reminders, too, that we
must labor now to acquire by degrees habits of self-restraint, until
such habits become second nature. But these commandments, far from
exhausting the doctrine, do not by any means cover it. They are but
stepping-stones on the way to perfection, and must necessarily be
followed by higher and still higher ones, as men pursue the course
toward perfection.

That is why a Christian doctrine would make higher demands than
those embodied in the commandments, and not in the least decrease
its demands, as they who judge the Christian doctrine from a social
life-conception seem to think.

This is one of the mistakes of the scientists in regard to the
significance of Christ's doctrine. And the substitution of the
love of humanity for the love and service of God is another, and it
springs from the same source.

In the Christian doctrine of loving and of serving God, and (as
the natural consequence of such love and service) of loving and
serving one's neighbor, there seems to the scientific mind a certain
mysticism, something at once confused and arbitrary; and, believing
that the doctrine of love for humanity rests on a firmer basis and
is altogether more intelligible, they utterly reject the requirement
of love and service of God.

The theory of a scientist is that a virtuous life, a life with a
purpose, must be useful to the world at large; and in a life of this
kind they discover the solution of the Christian doctrine, to which
they reduce Christianity itself. Assuming their own doctrine to be
identical with that of Christianity, they seek and believe that they
find in the latter an affirmation of their own views.

This is a fallacy. The Christian doctrine, and the doctrine of the
Positivists, and of all advocates of the universal brotherhood of
man, founded on the utility of such a brotherhood, have nothing
in common, and especially do they differ in that the doctrine of
Christianity has a solid and a clearly defined foundation in the
human soul, whereas love of humanity is but a theoretical conclusion
reached through analogy.

The doctrine of the love of humanity has for its basis the social
life-conception.

The essence of the social life-conception consists in replacing the
sense of individual life by that of the life of the group. In its
first steps, this is a simple and natural progression, as from the
family to the tribe; from the family to the race is more difficult,
and requires special education,--which has arrived at its utmost
limits when the State has been reached.

It is natural for every man to love himself, and he needs no
incentive thereto; to love his tribe, which lends both support and
protection; to love his wife, the delight and comfort of his daily
life; the children, who are his consolation and his future hope; his
parents, who gave him life and cherished him,--all this, although
not so intense as love of self, is natural and common to mankind.

To love one's race, one's people, for their own sake, although not
so instinctive, is also common. To love one's ancestors, one's
kinsfolk, through pride, is also natural and frequent; and a man may
feel love for his fellow-countrymen, who speak the same language
and profess the same faith as himself, although the emotion is
less strong than love of self or love of family. But love for a
nation, Turkey, for instance, or Germany, England, Austria, Russia,
is almost impossible, and notwithstanding the training given in
that direction, it is only a fictitious semblance; it has no real
existence. At this aggregate ceases man's power of transfusing
his innermost consciousness; for such a fiction he can feel no
direct sentiment. And yet the Positivists and all the preachers
of the scientific fraternity, not taking into consideration the
fact that this feeling is weakened in proportion to the expansion
of its object, continue to theorize on the same lines. They say:
"If it were to the advantage of an individual to transfuse his
consciousness into the family, and thence into the nation and the
State, it follows that it will be to his further advantage to
transfuse his consciousness into the universal entity, mankind, that
all men may live for humanity, as they have lived for the family and
for the State."

And theoretically they are right.

After having transferred the consciousness and love for the
individual to the family, and from the family to the race, the
nation, and the State, it would be perfectly logical for men, in
order to escape the strife and disasters that result from the
division of mankind into nations and states, to transfer their love
to humanity at large. This would appear to be the logical outcome,
and it has been offered as a theory by those who forget that love
is an innate sentiment, which can never be inspired by preaching;
that it must have a real object, and that the entity which men call
humanity is not a real object, but a fiction.

A family, a race, even a State, are no inventions of men; these
things have formed themselves like a hive of bees, or a colony of
ants, and possess an actual existence. The man who loves his family,
after a human fashion, knows whom he is loving--Ann, Maria, John, or
Peter. The man who loves his ancestors, and is proud of them, knows
that he loves the Guelphs, for instance, or the Ghibellines; the man
who loves his country knows that he loves France from the Rhine to
the Pyrenees, that he loves its capital, Paris, and all its history.
But the man who loves humanity, what is it that he loves? There is a
State, there is a people, there is the abstract conception of man.
But humanity as a concrete conception is impossible.

Humanity? Where is its limit? Where does it end and where does
it begin? Does it exclude the savage, the idiot, the inebriate,
the insane? If one were to draw a line of demarcation so as to
exclude the lower representatives of the human race, where ought
it to be drawn? Ought it to exclude the Negro, as they do in the
United States, or the Hindoos, as some Englishmen do, or the Jews,
as does another nation? But if we include all humanity without
exception, why should we restrict ourselves to men? Why should we
exclude the higher animals, some of whom are superior to the lowest
representatives of the human race?

We do not know humanity in the concrete, nor can we fix its limits.
Humanity is a fiction, and therefore it cannot be loved. Indeed,
it would be advantageous if men could love humanity as they love
the family. It would be very useful, as the communists say, to
substitute a community of interests for individual competition,
or the universal for the personal; in a word, to make the whole
world a mutual benefit society,--only that there are no motives to
bring about such a result. The Positivists, communists, and all
the exponents of the scientific fraternity exhort us to extend
the love which men feel for themselves, their families, their
fellow-countrymen, over humanity at large, forgetting that the love
of which they speak is a personal love, which may be kindled for the
family, and even extend to include one's native country, but which
expires altogether when it is appealed to in behalf of an artificial
state, such as Austria, England, or Turkey; and when claimed for
that mystical object, humanity in general, one cannot even grasp the
idea.

"A man loves himself, his physical personality, he loves his family,
he even loves his country. Why should he not also love mankind?
It would seem such a happy consummation! And it so happens that
Christianity inculcates the same precept." These are the opinions of
the Positivist, the communist, and the socialist fraternities.

It would indeed be fortunate, but it is impossible, because love
founded on a personal and social life-conception can go no further
than the love of country.

The flaw in the argument arises from the fact that the social
life-conception, the basis of family love and of patriotism, is
itself an individual love, and such a love, in its transference from
a person to a family, a race, a nation, and a State, gradually loses
its efficiency, and in the State has reached its final limit, and
can go no further.

The necessity for widening the sphere of love is not to be denied,
and yet it is the very attempt to satisfy this requirement that
destroys its possibility, and proves the inadequacy of personal
human love.

And here it is that the advocates of the Positivist, communist, and
socialist brotherhood offer as a prop to the humanitarianism that
has proved its inefficiency, a Christian love, not in its essence,
but only in its results; in other words, not the love of God, but
the love of man.

But there can be no such love; it has no _raison d'étre_. Christian
love comes only from a Christian life-conception, whose sole
manifestation is the love and service of God.

By a natural sequence in the extension of love from the individual
to the family, and thence to the race, the nation, and the State,
the social life-conception has brought men not to the consciousness
of love for humanity,--which is illimitable--the unification of
every living creature,--but to a condition which evokes no feeling
in man, to a contradiction for which it provides no reconciliation.

It is only the Christian doctrine which, by lending to human life
a new significance, is able to solve the difficulty. Christianity
presents the love of self and the love of the family, as well as
patriotism and the love of humanity, but it is not to be restricted
to humanity alone; it is to be given to every living creature; it
recognizes the possibility of an indefinite expansion of the kingdom
of love, but its object is not to be found outside itself, in the
aggregate of individuals, neither in the family, nor in the race,
nor in the State, nor in mankind, nor all the wide world, but in
itself, in its personality,--a divine personality, whose essence is
the very love which needed a wider sphere.

The distinction between the Christian doctrine and those which
preceded it may be thus defined. The social doctrine says: Curb thy
nature (meaning the animal nature alone); subject it to the visible
law of the family, of society, and of the State. Christianity says:
Live up to thy nature (meaning the divine nature); make it subject
to nothing; neither to thine own animal nature, nor to that of
another, and then thou shalt attain what thou seekest by subjecting
thine outward personality to visible laws. The Christian doctrine
restores to man his original consciousness of self, not the animal
self, but the godlike self, the spark of divinity, as the son
of God, like unto the Father, but clothed in a human form. This
consciousness of one's self as a son of God, whose essence is love,
satisfies at once all those demands made by the man who professes
the social life-conception for a broader sphere of love. Again, in
the social life-conception the enlargement of the domain of love was
a necessity for the salvation of the individual; it was attached
to certain objects, to one's self, to one's family, to society,
and to humanity. With the Christian world-conception love is not a
necessity, neither is it attached to any special object; it is the
inherent quality of a man's soul; he loves because he cannot help
loving.

The Christian doctrine teaches to man that the essence of his soul
is love; that his well-being may be traced, not to the fact that he
loves this object or that one, but to the fact that he loves the
principle of all things--God, whom he recognizes in himself through
love, and will by the love of God love all men and all things.

This is the essential difference between the Christian doctrine and
that of the Positivists, and all other non-Christian theorists of a
universal brotherhood.

Such are the two chief misapprehensions in regard to the Christian
doctrine, and from those most of the false arguments on the subject
have originated.

One is, that the doctrine of Christ, like the doctrines which
preceded it, promulgates rules which men must obey, and that these
rules are impracticable. The other, that the whole meaning of
Christianity is contained in the doctrine of a coöperative union of
mankind, in one family, to attain which, leaving aside the question
of love of God, one should obey only the rule of love of one's
fellow-men.

Finally, the mistake of scientists, in supposing that the doctrine
of the supernatural contains the essence of Christianity, that
its life-teaching is not practicable, together with the general
misapprehensions that result from such a misconception, further
explains why men of our time have so misunderstood Christianity.




