PART III


PIERRE CORNEILLE




CHAPTER XIII


CRITICISM OF THE CRITICISM


There is no longer any necessity for a criticism of Corneille's
tragedies in a negative sense, for it is already to be found in
several works. Further, if there exists a poet, who stands outside
the taste and the preoccupations of our day (at least in France), it
is Corneille. The greater number of lovers of poetry and art confess
without reserve that they cannot endure his tragedies, which "have
nothing to say to them." The fortune of Corneille has declined more
and more with the growth of the fame of Shakespeare, which has been
correlative to the formation and the growth of modern aesthetic
and criticism; and if the fame of Shakespeare seemed strange and
repugnant to classicistic elegance, the same fate has befallen the
French dramatist, as the result of Shakespeareanism in relation to the
appreciation of art which has now penetrated everywhere. Corneille
once represented "_la profondeur du jugement_" as opposed to "_les
irrégularités sauvages et capricieuses_" of the Englishman, decorum
against the lack of it, calm diffused light against shadows pierced
at rare intervals with an occasional flash. Lessing had selected for
examination and theme the _Rodogune,_ which he held to be a work, not
of poetical genius, but of an ingenious intellect, because genius loves
simplicity, and Corneille, after the manner of the ingenious, loved
complications. Schiller, when he had read the most highly praised works
of Corneille, expressed his astonishment at the fame which had accrued
to an author of so poor an inventive faculty, so meagre and so dry in
his treatment of character, so lacking in passion, so weak and rigid in
the development of action, and almost altogether deprived of interest.
William Schlegel noted in him, in place of poetry, "tragic epigrams"
and "airs of parade," pomp without grandeur--he found him cold in the
love scenes--his love was not as a rule love, but, in the words of the
hero Sertorius, a well calculated _aimer par politique--_intricate
and Machiavellian and at the same time ingenuous and puerile in
the representation of politics. He defined the greater part of the
tragedies as nothing but treatises on the reason of State in the
form of discussions, conducted rather in the manner of a chess-player
than of a poet. Even the most temperate De Sanctis could not succeed
in enjoying this writer, as is to be gathered from his lectures upon
dramatic literature delivered in 1847. He found that he does not render
the fullness of life, but only the extreme points of the passions
in collision, and that he prefers eloquence to the development of
tragedy, so that he often unconsciously turns tragedy into comedy. The
confrontation of Corneille's _Cid_ with its Spanish original, _Las
mocedades_ of Guillén de Castro, has however prevailed above all others
as the text upon which to base arguments against the French dramaturge.
Shack declared that the work of Corneille was altogether negative, that
he reduced and reëlaborated his original, losing the poetical soul
of the Spanish poet in the process and destroying the alternate and
spontaneous expression of tenderness and of violent passion. He found
that he substituted oratorical adornments and a swollen phraseology
for the pure language of sentiment, coquetry for the struggle of the
affections, to which it is directly opposed, and a boastful charlatan
for the heroic figure of Rodrigo. Klein, passing from severe
criticism into open satire, described the _Cid_ to be a "commentary in
Alexandrines" upon the poem of the _Mocedades,_ comparing the Spanish
Jimena to a fresh drop of dew upon "a flower that has hardly bloomed,"
and the French Chimène on the contrary to a "muddy drop, which presents
a tumultuous battle of infusorians to the light of the sun": the
"infusorians" would represent the antithesis to the "Alexandrine tears"
(_Alexandrinerthränen_), which she pours forth.

But these negative judgments were not restricted altogether and
at first to foreigners and romantics. In the eighteenth century,
Voltaire (who for that matter sometimes lifts his eyes to the
dangerous criterion of Shakespeare in his notes upon Corneille) did
not refrain from criticising his illustrious predecessor for the
frequent _froideur_ observable in his dramatic work, as well as for his
constant habit of speaking himself as the author and not allowing his
personages to speak, for his substitution of reflections for immediate
expressions, and for the artifices, the conventions and the padding, in
which he abounds. Vauvenargues showed himself irreconcilable (Racine
was his ideal). He too blamed the heroes of Corneille for uttering
great things and not inspiring them, for talking, and always talking
too much, with the object of making themselves known--whereas great
men are rather characterised by the things they do not say than those
they do say--and in general for ostentation, which takes the place
of loftiness, and for declamation, which he substitutes for true
eloquence. Gaillard allowed the influence of the generally unfavorable
verdict or the verdict full of retractations and cautions in respect
of its theme, to colour the eulogy which he composed in 1768. It used
to be said of Corneille that he aimed rather at "admiration" than at
"emotion," and that he was in fact "not tragic." This insult (declared
Gaillard) was spoken, but not written down, "because the pen is always
wiser than the tongue." But the accusation of "coldness" had made
itself heard on the lips of Corneille's contemporaries in the second
half of the seventeenth century, particularly when the tragedies of
Racine, with their very different message to the heart, had appeared to
afford a contrast.

The defenders of Corneille have often yielded to the temptation of
accepting Shakespeare's dramas or at least the tragedies of Racine as
a standard of comparison and a reply to criticism. They have attempted
to prove that Corneille should be read, judged and interpreted in the
spirit of those poets. They have claimed to discover in Corneille just
that which their adversaries failed to discover and of which they
denied the existence: this they call truth, reality and life, meaning
thereby, passion and imagination. Thus we find Sainte-Beuve lamenting
that not only foreigners, but France herself, had not remarked and
had not gloried in the possession of Pauline (in _Polyeucte_), one
of the divine poetical figures, which are to be placed in the brief
list containing the Antigones, the Didos, the Francescas da Rimini,
the Desdemonas, the Ophelias. More recently others have elevated the
Cleopatra (of _Rodogune_) to the level of Lady Macbeth, and the Cid, on
account of the youthful freshness of his love-making, to the rank of
_Romeo and Juliet,_ while they have discovered in _Andromède_ nothing
less than that kind of _féerie poétique_ "to which the English owe a
_Midsummer Night's Dream_ and the _Tempest._" They also declare that
the _Horace_ is a tragedy in which reigns a sort of "savage Roman
sanctity," culminating in the youthful Horace, "intransigent and
fanatical, ferociously religious"; while his sister Camilla is "a
creature of nerves and flesh, who has strayed into a family of heroes"
and rises up in revolt against that hard world. For them Camilla is
an "invalid of love," "one possessed by passion," a "neurotic," of
an altogether modern complexion. _Polyeucte_ represents "a drama of
nascent Christianity," and its protagonist, a "mystical rebel," recalls
at once "Saint Paul, Huss, Calvin and Prince Krapotkine," arousing
the same curiosity as a Russian nihilist, such as one used to see
some years ago in the beershops, with bright eyes, pale and fair, the
forehead narrow about the temples and of whom it was whispered that he
had killed some general or prefect of police at Petersburg. Severus
seems to them to be similar in some respects to "a modern exegete,"
who is writing the history of the origin of Christianity. There exists
no play "which penetrates more profoundly into the human soul or opens
a wider perspective of untrodden paths." _Cinna_ represents in the
tragedy of Augustus another neurotic after the modern manner. Augustus,
ambitious and without scruples, has attained to the summit of his
desires and is weary and tired of power. He negates the man who ordered
the proscriptions that is in himself and his generosity is due almost
to satiety for too easy triumphs and vengeances. Attila, in the tragedy
of that name, springs out before us as "a monster of pride, cruel,
emphatic and subtle, conscious of being the instrument of a mysterious
power, an ogre with a mission": this "stupendous" conception is worthy
to stand side by side with the gigantic figures of the _Légende des
Siècles._

These are all fantastic embroideries, metaphors, easel pictures, which
sometimes do honour to the artistic capacity of the eulogists, but
have no connexion whatever with the direct impression of Corneille's
tragedies. Spinoza would have said that they have as much connexion
with them as the dog of zoology with the dog-star. An obvious instance
of this is the strange comparison of the character Polyeucte with
the "Russian nihilist"--but it is little less evident in the other
instances, because it is altogether arbitrary to interpret the Augustus
of the _Cinna_ as though he were a Shakespearean Richard II or Henry IV
and to attribute to him the psychology of what Nietzsche describes as
the "generous man."

Fancy for fancy, as well admit Napoleon's comment. He declared himself
persuaded that Augustus was certainly not changed in a moment into a
_"prince débonnaire,"_ into a poor prince exercising "_une si pauvre
petite vertu_" as clemency, and that if he holds out to Cinna the right
hand of friendship, he only does this to deceive him and in order to
revenge himself more completely and more usefully at the propitious
moment. It is an amusement like another to take up the personages of
a play or of a story and refashion them in our own way by the free
use of the fancy, or to weave a new mode of feeling out of the facts
concerning certain cases and characters. Camilla can thus be quite
well transformed even into a nymphomaniac; but unfortunately criticism
insinuates itself into the folds of fancy and causes the fancier
himself (Lemaître) to note that Camilla sacrifices her love to her duty
_"délibérément,"_ that she certainly resembles a character of Racine,
but "_non certes par la langue,_" and that she would show us what she
really is "_si elle parlait un langage moins rude at moins compact._"
As though the speech and the inflection were an accident and not the
whole of a poetic creation, the beating of its heart! The demoniacal,
the neurotic Camilla, it is true, speaks in this way:

    "Il vient, préparons-nous a montrer constamment
    Ce que doit une amante à la mort d'un amant."

Here Voltaire's unconquerable good sense could not refrain from
remarking: "'_Préparons-nous_' adds to the defect. We see a woman who
is thinking how she can demonstrate her affliction and may be said to
be rehearsing her lesson of grief."

The same fantastic and anticritical method of comparison has been
adopted with De Castro's play, with the object of obtaining a contrary
result: this comparison, whenever it is conducted with the criterion
of realistic art, or of art full of passion, cannot but result in
a condemnation of Corneille's reëlaboration of the theme. This has
been frankly admitted by more than one French critic (Fauriel for
example), who contrived to loosen somewhat the chains of national
preconceptions and traditional admirations. Indeed it was already
implied in the celebrated judgment of the Academy, which is not the
less just and acute for having been delivered by an academy and written
by a Chapelain. Guillen de Castro's play, which is epical and popular
in tone, celebrates the youthful hero Rodrigo, the future Cid, strong,
faithful and pious, admired by all, and looked upon with love by
princesses. An anecdote is recounted, with the object of celebrating
him, describing how he was obliged to challenge and to slay the father
of the maiden he loved. Bound to the same degree as himself by the laws
of chivalry, she is held to be obliged to provide for the vendetta
required by the death of her father. She performs her duty without
hatred and solely as a legal enemy, an _"ennemie légitime"_ (to employ
a phrase of the same Corneille in the _Horace)._ She does not cease
to love, nor does she feel any shame in loving. Finally, his prowess
and the favour of heaven, which he deserves and which ever accompanies
him, obtain for Rodrigo the legal conquest of his loving beloved,
who is also his enemy for honour's sake. De Castro's play is limpid,
lively, full of happenings. Corneille both simplifies and complicates
it, reducing it to series of casuistical discussions, vivified here and
there with echoes of the passionate original, softened with moments
of abandonment, as in the vigorous scene of the challenge, which is
an echo of the Spanish play, or in the tender sigh of the duet,
"_Rodrigue, qui Veut cru?... Chimène, qui l'eût dit?..._" which is also
in De Castro. After this, it can be asserted that Corneille "has made a
human drama, a drama of universal human appeal, out of an exclusively
Spanish drama"; it will also be declared that "the most beautiful
words of the French language find themselves always at the point of
the pen, when one is writing about the _Cid;_ duty, love, honour, the
family, one's native land," because "everything there is generous,
affectionate, ingenuous, and there never has been breathed a livelier
or a purer air upon the stage, the air of lofty altitudes of the soul."
But this is verbiage. It is also possible to revel in the description
of "the fair cavalier, protected of God and adored by the ladies, who
carries his country about with him wherever he goes, and along with it
everybody's heart; in the beautiful maiden with the long black veil, so
strong and yet so weak, so courageous and so tender; in the grand old
man, so majestic and yet so familiar, the signor so rude and so hoary,
yet with a soul as straight and as pure as a lily, in whom dwells the
ancient code of honour and all the glory of times past; in the king,
so good-natured and ingenuous, yet so clever, like the good king one
finds in fairy stories; in the gentle little infanta, with her precious
soliloquies, so full of gongorism and knightly romances ..."; but as we
have previously observed, this will be merely drawing fancy pictures.
It suffices to read the _Cid,_ to see that it contains nothing of this
and nothing of this is to be found among the tragedies of Corneille.

The vanity of such criticisms, which attempt to alter Corneille by
presenting him as that which he is not and does not wish to be, a
poet of immediate passions, would at once be apparent, were it to be
realised that no such attempts are made in the case of Racine, whose
passionate soul makes its presence at once felt through literary and
theatrical conventions, in the affection which he experiences for the
sweet, for what is tremendous and mysterious with religious emotion,
which palpitates in Andromache, in Phaedra, in Iphigenia and Eriphylis
in Joad and in Attila. But it confutes itself by becoming modified,
sometimes among the very critics whom we have been citing, into the
thesis that Corneille is the poet of the "reason," or of "the rational
will." And we say modified, because the reason or the rational will
is in poetry itself a passion, and he would be correctly described
as a poet of that kind of inspiration, who should accentuate the
rational-volitional moment in the representation of the passions, by
creating types of wise and active men, such as are to be found in the
epic, in many dramatic masterpieces, in high romance and elsewhere. But
not even this exists in Corneille, so much so that the very persons who
maintain the thesis, remark that he isolates a principle and a force,
the reason and the will, and seeks out how the one makes the other
triumph. To this, they declare, we must attribute the "character of
stiffness" proper to the heroes of Corneille, who are necessarily bound
to lack "the seductive flexibility, the languors, the perturbations,
which are to be observed in those moved by sentiment." Now this is not
permissible in art, because art, in portraying a passion, even if it
be that of inflexible rationality and inflexible will and duty, never
"isolates" it, in the fashion of an analyst in a laboratory, or a
physicist, but seizes it in its becoming, and so together with all the
other passions, and together with the "languors" and "disturbances."
Thus Corneille, described as they describe him by isolating the reason
and the will, would be a slayer of life, and so of the will and the
reason themselves. And when he is blamed for having given so small and
so unhappy a place to love, "to the act by which the race perpetuates
itself, to the relations of the sexes and to all the sentiments that
arise from them, and which, by the nature of things form an essential
part of the life of the human race," it is not observed that beneath
this reproof, which is somewhat physiological and lubricious and lacks
seriousness of statement, there is concealed the yet more serious
and more general reproof that Corneille suffocates and suppresses
the quiver of life. La Bruyère was probably among the first to give
currency to the saying, which has been repeated, that Corneille depicts
men not "as they are," but "as they ought to be," and leads to a like
conclusion, though expressed in an euphemistic form; because poetry in
truth knows nothing of being or of having to be, and its existence is a
having to be, its having to be a being.

This critical position, which desires to explain and to justify
Corneille as poet of the reason and of the rational will (although, as
we shall see further on, it contains some truth), is indeed equivocal,
because it seems to assert on the one hand that he possesses a
particular form of passion, and on the other takes it away from him
with its "isolation," its "having to be," and with its assertion that
his personages "surpass nature," with its boasting of his "Romans
being more Roman than Romans," his "Greeks more Greek than Greeks"
and the like, that is to say, by making of him an exaggerator of
types and of abstractions, the opposite of a poet. The passage, then,
is easy from this position to its last thesis or modification, by
means of which Corneille is exalted as an eminent representative of
a special sort of poetry, "rationalistic poetry," which is held to
coincide with poetry that is especially "French." The theory here
implied is to be found both among the French and those who are not
French, among classicists and romantics, sometimes being looked upon
among both as a merit, that is to say, it is recognised by them that
this sort of poetry is legitimate. In the course of his proof that
French rationalistic tragedy excludes the lyrical element and demands
the intrigue of action and the eloquence of the passions, Frederick
Schlegel indicated "the splendid side of French tragedy, where it
evinces lofty and incomparable power, fully responding to the spirit
and character of a nation, in which eloquence occupies a dominant
position, even in private life." A contemporary writer on art,
Gundolf, blames his German conationals for the prejudices in which
they are enmeshed, and for their lack of understanding of the great
rationalistic poetry of France, so logical, so uniform, so ordered and
subordinated, so regular and so easily to be understood. It is the
natural and spontaneous expression of the French character, in the same
way as is the monarchy of Louis XIV, differing thereby from the narrow
convention or imitation, which it became in the hands of Gottsched and
others of Gallic tendencies, in other countries. Sainte-Beuve, alluding
in particular to Corneille, argued that in French tragedy "things are
not seen too realistically or over-coloured, since attention is chiefly
bestowed upon the saying of Descartes:--I think, therefore I am: I
think, therefore I feel;--and everything there happens in or is led
back to the bosom of the interior substance," in the "state of pure
sentiment, of reasoned and dialogued analysis," in a sphere "no longer
of sentiment, but of understanding, clear, extended, without mists and
without clouds." Another student of Corneille opposes the different and
equally admissible system of the French tragedian, "a constructor and
as it were an engineer of action," to that of Shakespeare, portrayer
of the soul and of life. Thus, while all the most famous plays of
Shakespeare are drama, but lyrical drama, "hardly one of the most
beautiful and popular plays of Corneille is essentially lyrical." What
are we to think of "rationalistic" or "intellectualistic," or "logical"
or "non-lyrical" poetry? Nothing but this: that it does not exist. And
of French poetry? The same: that it does not exist; because what is
poetry in France is naturally neither intellectualiste nor essentially
French, but purely and simply poetry, like all other poetry that has
grown in this earthly flower-bed. And if the old-fashioned romanticism,
which sanctifies and gives substance to nationality and demands of art,
of thought and of everything else, that it should first be national, is
reappearing among French writers in the disguise of anti-romanticism
and neo-classicism, this is but a proof the more of the spiritual
dulness and mental confusion of those nationalists, who embrace their
presumed adversary.

The only reality that could be concealed in "rationalistic poetry,"
for which Corneille is praised, as shown above, would be one of the
categories in old-fashioned books of literary instruction, known as
"didactic poetry," which was not too well spoken of, even there.
Corneille is admired from this point of view, among other things,
for his famous political dissertations in the _China_ and in the
_Sertorius,_ where Voltaire considers that he is deserving of great
praise for "having expressed very beautiful thoughts in correct and
harmonious verse." In this connexion are quoted the remarks of the
Maréchal de Grammont about the _Othon,_ that "it should have been the
breviary of kings," or of Louvois, "an audience of ministers of state
would be desirable for the judgment of such a work." It is indeed only
in "didactic poetry," which is versified prose, that we find "thoughts"
that are afterwards "versified." The method employed by another man of
letters would also make of the tragedies of Corneille masked didactic
poetry. He is an unconscious manipulator of thesis, antithesis and
synthesis, in the manner of Hegel, and describes it as "the alliance of
the individual with the species, of the particular with the general,"
which were separate in the medieval "farces" and "moralities," the
former being all compact of individuals and actions, the latter of
ideas, which Corneille was able to unite, being one of those great
masters who proceed from the general to the particular and vivify the
abstractions of thought with the power of the imagination.

The justification of the tragedies of Corneille, as based upon the
foundations of French society and history in the time of Corneille,
is certainly more solid than that which explains them as based upon a
mystical French "character," or "race," or "nation." Do conventions and
etiquette govern and embarrass the development of dialogue and action
in every part of those tragedies? But such was life at court, or life
modelled upon life at court, in those days. Do the characters rather
reason about their sentiments than express them? But such was the
custom of well-bred men of that day. And do they always discuss matters
according to all the rules of rhetoric and with perfect diction? But
to speak well was the boast of men in society and diplomatists at that
time. Do the women mingle love and politics, and rather make love
for political reasons than politics for love? But the ladies of the
Fronde did just this; indeed Cardinal Mazarin, in conversation with the
Spanish ambassador, gave vent to the opinion that in France "an honest
woman would not sleep with her husband, nor a mistress with her lover,
unless they had discussed affairs of State with them during the day."
And so discussions continue and are to be found continuing in Taine
and many others, without explaining anything, because they pass over
the poetry and the problem of the poetry, which is not, as Taine held,
"the expression of the genius of an age" or "the reflection of a given
society" (society reflects and expresses itself in its own actions
and customs), but "poetry, that is to say, one of the free forces of
every people, society and time, which must be interpreted with reasons
contained in itself."[1] It is superfluous to add that the poetry is
lost sight of in the delight of finding the personages and social types
of the French seventeenth century, beyond the verses and the ideal
conceptions of character; for example, we find them declaring their
own affectionate sympathy for "Christian Theodora," for this martyr,
of the dress with the starched collar and the equally proudly starched
sentiments, "for this proud martyr, in the grand style of Louis XIII,"
altogether forgetting the reality of the art of Corneille and the
critical problems suggested by the _Théodora._ This is certainly very
prettily and gracefully said, but it misses the point.

There remains to mention but one last form of defence, which however is
not a justification of the art of Corneille, but a eulogy of him as an
ingenious man, who deserved well of culture and possessed refinement
of manners, particularly as regards theatrical representations. To him
belongs the "great merit" (said Voltaire in concluding his commentary)
of "having found France rustic, gross and ignorant, about the time of
the _Cid,_ and of having changed it 'by teaching it not only tragedy
and comedy, but even the art of thinking." And his rival Racine, in
his praise of Corneille before the Academy at the time of his death,
had recorded "the debt that French poetry and the French stage owed
to him." He had found it disordered, irregular and chaotic, and after
having sought the right road for some time and striven against the
bad taste of his age, "he inspired it with an extraordinary genius
aided by study of the ancients, and exhibited reason (_la raison_)
on the stage, accompanied with all the pomp and all the ornaments, of
which the French language is capable." All the historians of French
literature repeat this, beginning by bowing down before Corneille, the
"founder," or "creator" of the French theatre. Such praise as this
means little or nothing in art, because non-poets, or poets of very
slender talents, even pedants, are capable of exercising this function
of being founders and directors of the culture and the literature of
a people. An instance of this in Italy was Pietro Bembo, "who removed
this pure, sweet speech of ours from its vulgar obscurity, and has
shown us by his example what it ought to be."

He was not a poet, yet was surrounded with the gratitude, and with the
most sincere reverence on the part of poets of genius, among whom was
Ariosto, to whom belong the verses cited above.

That other merit accorded to Corneille, of having accomplished a
revolution, cleared the ground and "raised the French tragic system
upon it," the "classical system," is without poetical value. We shall
leave it to others to define as they please, precisely of what this
work consisted, the introduction of the unities and of the rules of
verisimilitude, the conception and realisation of tragic psychological
tragedy, or the tragedy of character, of which actions and catastrophes
should form, the consequences, the fusing and harmonising in a single
type of sixteenth century tragedy, which starts from "the tragic
incident," with that of the seventeenth century, which ends with it,
and so on. We prefer to remark, with reference to this and to so many
other disputes that have taken place since the time of Calepio and
Lessing onward, and especially during the romantic period, with regard
to the merits and the defects of the "French system," as compared with
the "Greek system" and with the "romantic" or "Shakespearean," that
"systems" either have nothing to do with poetry, or are the abstract
schemes of single poems, and therefore that such disputes are and
always have been, sterile and vain. Here too it should be mentioned
that a "system" may be the work of non-poets or of mediocre poets, as
was the case in Italy with the system of "melodrama," of which (to
employ the figure of De Sanctis), Apostolo Zeno was the "architect"
and Pietro Metastasio the "poet." In England too, the system of the
drama was not fixed by Shakespeare, but by his predecessors, small fry
indeed as compared with him. We would also observe that death or life
may exist in one and the same system, for indeed a system is a prison,
with bolts and bars. Note in this respect, that although the romantics
had boasted the salvation that lay in the Shakespearean system, a new
dramatic genius springing therefrom was vainly awaited. There appeared
only semigeniuses and a crowd of strepitous works, not less cold and
empty than those that had been condemned in the opposing "French
system."

We may therefore conclude that the arguments of the admirers and
apologists of Corneille, which have been passed in review, do not
embrace the problem, but leave the judgments of negative criticism free
to exercise their perilous potency. They find in Corneille intellectual
combinations in place of poetical formations, abstractions in place of
what is concrete, oratory in place of lyrical inspiration and shadow in
place of substance.


[Footnote 1: "Est-ce que la critique moderne n'a pas abandonné l'art
pour l'histoire? La valeur intrinsèque d'un livre n'est rien dans
l'école Sainte-Beuve-Taine. On y prend tout en considération, sauf le
talent." (Flaubert, _Correspondence,_ IV, 81.)]




