CHAPTER XIV


THE IDEAL OF CORNEILLE


Nevertheless, when all this has been said and the conclusion drawn,
there remains the general impression of the work, which has in it
something of the grandiose, and brings back to the lips the homage
that the next generations rendered to the author, when they called
him "the great Corneille." It is to be hoped that no one has been
deceived as to the intention of our discourse up to this point, which
has been directed not against Corneille, but against his critics,
nor among them against those who have written many other things both
true and beautiful on the subject; we have but to refer to the acute
Lemaître among the most recent, to the diligent and loving Dorchain,
and to the most solid of all, Lanson. We shall avail ourselves of
them in what follows, but shall oppose their particular theories
and presuppositions, which are misrepresentations of the subject of
their judgments itself. For the negative criticism, which we have
recapitulated, does not win our confidence, but rather shows itself
to be erroneous or (which amounts to the same thing) incomplete,
exaggerated and one-sided, for the very reason that it does not account
for that impression of the grandiose. Conducted as it has been, it
would very well suit a writer who was a rhetorician with an appearance
of warmth, a writer able to make a good show before the public and in
the theatre, while remaining internally unmoved himself, superficial
and frivolous. But Corneille looks upon us and upon those critics with
so serious and severe a countenance, that we lose the courage to treat
him in so unceremonious and so expeditious a manner.

Whence comes that air of severity, which we find not only in his
portraits but in every page of his tragedies, even in those and in
those parts of them, in which he fails to hit the mark, or appears to
be tired, to have lost his way, and to be making efforts?

From this fact alone: that Corneille had an ideal, an ideal in which
he believed, and to which he clung with all the strength of his soul,
of which he never lost sight and which he always tended to realise in
situations, rhythms, and words, seeking and finding his own intimate
satisfaction, the incarnation of his ideal, in those brave and solemn
scenes and sounds.

His contemporaries felt this, and it was for this reason that Racine
wrote that above all, "what was peculiar to Corneille consisted of a
certain force, a certain elevation, which astonishes and carries us
away, and renders even his defects, if there be found some to reprove
him for them, more estimable than the virtues of others"; and La
Bruyère also summed it up in the phrase that "what Corneille possessed
of most eminent was his soul, which was sublime."

The most recent interpreters have found Corneille's ideal to reside
in will for its own sake, the "pure will," superior or anterior to
good and evil, in the energy of the will as such, which does not pay
attention to particular ends. Thus the false conception of him as
animated with the ideal of moral duty or with that of the triumph of
duty over the passions has been eliminated, and agreement has been
reached, not only with the reality of the tragedies, but also with
what Corneille himself laid down in his _Discours_ as to the dramatic
personage. Such a personage may indeed be plunged in all sorts of
crimes, like Cleopatra in the _Rodogune,_ but in the words of the
author, "all his actions are accompanied with so lofty a greatness of
soul that we admire the source whence his actions flow, while we detest
those actions themselves."

On the other hand, the concept of the pure will runs some risk of
being perverted at the hands of those who proceed to interpret it by
identification with that other "will for power" of Nietzsche, who
understood the French poet in this hyperbolical manner and referred
to him with fervent admiration on account of this fancy of his. The
ideal of the will for power has an altogether modern origin, in the
protoromantic and romantic superman, in over-excited and abstract
individualism. It did not exist at the time of Corneille, or in the
heart of the poet, who was very healthy and simple. The figures of
Corneille's tragedies must be looked at through coloured and deforming
glasses, as supplied by fashionable literature, in order to see in them
such attitudes and gestures.

The further definition, which, while it renders the first conception
more exact and more appropriate, at the same time shuts the door on
these new fancies, is this: that Corneille's ideal does not express
the pure will at the moment of violent onrush and actuation, but of
ponderation and reflection, that is to say, as _deliberative will._
This was what Corneille truly loved: the spirit which deliberates
calmly and serenely and having formed its resolution, adheres to it
with unshakeable firmness, as to a position that has been won with
difficulty and with difficulty strengthened. This represented for
him the most lofty form of strength, the highest dignity of man.
_"Laissez-moi mieux consulter mon âme,"_ says one of Corneille's
personages, and all of them think and act in the same way. "_Voyons,_"
says the king of the Gepidi to the king of the Goths in the _Attila,
"--voyons qui se doit vaincre, et s' il faut que mon âme. A votre
ambition immole cette flamme. Ou s'il n'est point plus beau que votre
ambition. Elle-même s'immole a cette passion."_

Augustus hesitates a long while, and gives vent to anguished
lamentations, when he has discovered that Cinna is plotting against
his life, as though to clear his soul and to make it better capable of
the deliberation, which begins at once under the influence of passion,
in the midst of anguish and with anguish. Has he the right to lament
and to become wrathful? Has he not also made rivers of blood to flow?
Does he then resign himself in his turn? Does he forsake himself as
the victim of his own past? Far from it: he has a throne and is bound
to defend it, and therefore will punish the assassin. Yes, but when he
has caused more blood to flow, he will find new and greater hatreds
surrounding him, new and more dangerous plots. It is better, then, to
die? But wherefore die? Why should he not enjoy revenge and triumph
once again? This is the tumult of irresolution, which, while felt as a
hard, a desperate torment, and although it seems to hold the will in
suspense, in reality sets it in motion, insensibly guiding it to its
end. _"O rigoureux combat d'un cœur irrésolu!..."_ The more properly
deliberative process enters his breast with the appearance upon the
scene of Livia, to whose advice he is opposed, for he disputes and
combats it, yet listens and weighs it, seeming finally to remain still
irresolute, yet he has already formed hi:; resolve, he has decided in
his heart to perform an act of political clemency, so thunderous, so
lightning-like in quality, as to bewilder his enemy and to hurl him
vanquished at his feet.

The two brother princes in _Rodogune_ are conversing, while they await
the announcement as to which is the legitimate heir to the throne.
Upon this announcement also depends which shall become the happy
husband of Rodogune, whom they both love with an equal ardour. How will
they face and support the decision of fate? One of the two, uncertain
and anxious about the future, proposes to renounce the throne in favour
of his brother, provided the latter renounces Rodogune; but he is met
with the same proposal by the other. Thus the satisfaction of both,
by means of mutual renunciation, is precluded. But the other course
is also precluded, that of strife and conflict, for their brotherly
affection is firm, and so is the sentiment of moral duty in both. This
also forbids the one sacrificing himself for the other, because neither
would accept the sacrifice. What can be saved from a collision, from
which it seems that, nothing can be saved? One of the two brothers,
after these various and equally vain attempts at finding a solution,
returns upon himself, descends to the bottom of his soul, finds there
a better motive and is the first to formulate the unique resolution:
"_Malgré l'éclat du trône et l'amour d'une femme, Faisons si bien
régner l'amitié sur notre âme, Qu'étouffant dans leur perte un regret
suborneur, Dans le bonheur d'un frère on trouve son bonheur...._" And
the other, who has not been the first to see and to follow this path
asks: "_Le pourriez, vous mon frère?_" The first replies: "_Ah; que
vous me pressez! Je le voudrais du moins, mon frère, et c'est assez; Et
ma raison sur moi gardera tant d'empire, Que je désavoûrai mon cœur,
s'il en soupire."_ The other, firm in his turn replies: "_J'embrasse
comme vous ces nobles sentiments...._"

Loving as he did, in this way, the work of the deliberative will (we
have recorded two only of the situations in his tragedies, and we could
cite hundreds), Corneille did not love love, a thing that withdraws
itself from deliberation, a severe illness, which man discovers in his
body, like fire in his house, without having willed it and without
knowing how it got there. Sometimes the deliberative will is affected
by it and for the moment at least upset, and then we hear the cry of
Attila: "_Quel nouveau coup de foudre! O raison confondue, orgueil
presque étouffé..._." as he struggles against its enchantments: _"cruel
poison de l'âme et doux charme des yeux."_ But as a general rule,
he promptly drives it away from him, coldly and scornfully; or he
subdues it and employs it as a means and an assistance in far graver
matters, such as ambition, politics, the State; or he accepts it for
what it contains of useful and worthy, which as such is the object and
the fruit of deliberation. "_Ce ne sont pas les sens que mon amour
consulte: Il hait des passions l'impétueux tumulte.._.." Certainly,
this attitude is intransigent, ascetic and severe: but what of it?
"_Un peu de dureté sied bien aux grandes âmes._" Certainly love comes
out of it diminished and humiliated: "_D'Amour n'est pas le maître
alors qu'on délibère_;" love deserves its fate and almost deserves
the gibe: "_La seule politique est ce qui nous émeut; On la suit et
l'amour s'y mêle comme il peut: S'il vient on l'applaudit; s'il manque
on s'en console..._." It manages as best it can and becomes less
powerful and wonderfully ductile beneath this pressure, ready to bend
in whatever direction it is commanded to bend by the reason. Sometimes
it remains suspended between two persons, like a balance, which awaits
the addition of a weight in order to lean over: "..._Ce cœur des deux
parts engagé, Se donnant à vous deux ne s'est point partagé, Toujours
prêt d'embrasser son service et le vôtre, Toujours prêt à mourir et
pour l'un et pour l'autre. Pour n'en adorer qu'une, il eût fallu
choisir; Et ce choix eût été au moins quelque désir, Quelque espoir
outrageux d'être mieux reçu d'elle ..._." On another occasion, although
there might be some inclination or desire, rather toward the one than
the other side, it is yet kept secret, beneath the resolve to suffocate
it altogether, should reason ordain that love must flow into a contrary
channel. Not only are Corneille's personages told to their face: _"Il
ne faut plus aimer,"_ an act of renunciation to be asked of a saint,
but they are also bidden thus: "_Il faut aimer ailleurs,_" an act
worthy of a martyr.

He did not love love, not because it is love, but because it is
passion, which carries one away and which, if it be allowed to do so,
will not consent to state the terms of the debate clearly, and engage
in deliberation. His dislike for the inebriation of hatred and of
anger, which blind or confound the vision, and which, as passion, is
also foreign to his ideal, also appears in confirmation of this view.
"_Qui hait brutalement permet tout à sa haine, Il s'emporte où sa
fureur l'entraîne.... Mais qui hait par devoir ne s'aveugle jamais;
c'est sa raison qui hait ..._." His ideal personages sometimes declare,
when face to face with their enemy: "_je te dois estimer, mais je te
dois haïr._" On the other hand, we perceive clearly why Corneille was
led to admire the will, even when without moral illumination, even
indeed when it is actively opposed to or without morality; for it has
the power of not yielding to and of dominating the passions, of not
being violent weakness, but strength, or as it was called during the
Renaissance, "virtú." In that sphere of deliberation there existed a
common ground of mutual understanding between the honest and dishonest
man, between the hero of evil and the hero of good, for each pursued
a course of duty, in his own way and both agreed in withstanding and
despising the madness of the passions.

And we also see why the domain towards which Corneille directed his
gaze and for which he had a special predilection, was bound to be that
of politics, where "virtú," in the sense that it possessed during the
period of the Renaissance, found ample opportunity for free expansion
and for self-realisation. In politics, we find ourselves continuously
in difficult and contradictory situations, where acuteness and long
views are of importance and where it is necessary to make calculations
as to the interests and passions of men, to act energetically upon
what has been decided after nice weighing in the balance, to be
firm as well as prudent. It has been jocosely observed by William
Schlegel that Corneille, the most upright and honest of men, was more
Machiavellian than any Machiavelli in his treatment and representation
of politics, that he boasted of the art of deceiving, and that he
had no notion of true politics, which are less complicated and far
more adroit and adaptable. Lemaître too admits that in this respect
he was _"fort candide."_ But who is not excessive in the things that
he loves? Who is not sometimes too candid regarding them, with that
candour and simplicity which is born of faith and enthusiasm? His very
lack of experience in real politics, his simplicism and exaggeration
in conceiving them, is there to confirm the vigour of his affection
for the ideal of the politician, as supremely expressed by the man who
ponders and deliberates. He always has _la raison d'état_ and _les
maximes d'état_ upon his lips. We feel that these words and phrases
move, edify and arouse in him an ecstasy of admiration.

It was free determination and complete submission to reason, duty,
objective utility, to what was fitting--and not a spirit of courtly
adulation--that led him to look with an equal ecstasy of admiration
upon personages in high positions and upon monarchs, the summit of
the pyramid. He did not therefore admit them because they can do
everything, still less because they can enjoy everything, but on
the contrary, because, owing to their office, their discipline and
tradition, they are accustomed to sacrifice their private affections
and to conduct themselves in obedience to motives superior to the
individual. Kings too have a heart, they too are exposed to the soft
snares of love; but better than all others they know what is becoming
behaviour: "_Je suis reine et dois régner sur moi: Je rang que nous
tenons, jaloux de notre gloire, Souvent dans un tel choix nous défend
de nous croire, Jette sur nos désirs un joug impérieux, Et dédaigne
l'avis et du cœur et des yeux._" And elsewhere: "_Les princes out cela
de leur haute naissance, Leur âme dans leur rang prend des impressions
Qui dessous leur vertu rangent leurs passions; Leur générosité soumet
tout à leur gloire ..._." They love, certainly, as it happens to all
to love, but they do not on that account yield to the attractions of
the senses. "_Je ne le cèle point, j'aime, Carlos, oui, j'aime; Mais
l'amour de l'état plus fort que de moi-même, Cherche, au lieu de
l'objet le plus doux à mes yeux, Le plus digne héros de régner en ces
lieux._" His predilection for history, especially for Roman history,
has the same root, and had long been elaborated as an ideal--even in
the Rome of the Empire, yet more so at the time of the Renaissance and
during the post-Renaissance, and even in the schools of the Jesuits.
It was thus transformed into a history that afforded examples of civic
virtues, such as self-sacrifice, heroism, and greatness of resolve. We
spare the reader the demonstration that this tendency was altogether
different from, and indeed opposed to historical knowledge and to the
so-called "historical sense," because questions of this sort and the
accompanying eulogies accorded to Corneille as a historian, are now to
be looked upon as antiquated.

The historical relations of Corneille's ideal are clearly indicated or
at any rate adumbrated in these references and explanations, as also
its incipience and genesis, which is to be found, as we have stated,
in the theory and practice of the Renaissance, concerning politics and
the office of the sovereign or prince, and for the rest in the ethics
of stoicism, which was so widely diffused in the second half of the
sixteenth century, and not less in France than elsewhere. The image
of Corneille is surrounded in our imagination with all those volumes,
containing baroque frontispieces illustrative of historical scenes,
which at that time saw the light every day in all parts of Europe.
They were the works of the moralists, of the Machiavellians, of the
Taciteans, of the councillors in the art of adroit behaviour at court,
of the Jesuit casuists Botero and Ribadeneyra, Sanchez and Mariana,
Valeriano Castiglione and Matteo Pellegrini, Gracian and Amelot de la
Houssaye, Balzac and Naudée, Scioppio and Justus Lipsius. They might
be described as comprizing a complete and conspicuous section of the
Library of the Manzonian Don Ferrante, the "intellectual" of the
seventeenth century.

Such literature as this and the history of the time itself have been
more than once given as the source of the poetical inspiration proper
to Corneille, and indeed they appear spontaneously in the mind of
anyone acquainted with the particular mode of thought and of manners
that have prevailed during the various epochs of modern society. It
is therefore unpleasant to find critics intent on fishing out other
origins for it, in an obscure determinism of race and religion, almost
as if disgusted with the obvious explanation, which is certainly the
only true one in this case, pointing out for instance in Corneille "an
energy that comes from the north," that is to say from the Germany that
produced Luther and Kant, or from the country that was occupied for a
time by their forefathers the Normans, those Scandinavian pirates who
disembarked under the leadership of Rollo (if this fancy originated
with Lemaître, they all repeat it); or they discover the characteristic
of his poetry in the subtlety and litigious spirit of the Norman, and
in the lawyer and magistrate whose functions he fulfilled.

The customary association of his ideal with the theory of Descartes is
also without much truth. Chronological incompatibility would in any
case preclude derivation or repercussion from this source, the utmost
that could be admitted being that both possessed common elements, since
they were both descended from a common patrimony of culture, namely
the stoical morality already mentioned, and from the cult of wisdom in
general. In Descartes, as later in Spinoza, the tendency was towards
the domination of the passions by means of the intellect or the pure
intelligence, which dissipates them by knowing and thinking them,
while with Corneille the domination was all to be effected by means of
an effort of the will.

The historical element in the ideal of Corneille does not mean that its
value was restricted to the times of the author and should be looked
upon as having disappeared with the disappearance of those customs and
doctrines, because every time expresses human eternal truth in its
forms that are historically determined, laying in each case especial
stress upon particular aspects or moments of the spirit. The idea of
the deliberative will has been removed in our day to the second rank,
indeed it has almost been lost in the background, under the pressure
of other forces and of other more urgent aspects of reality. Yet it
possesses eternal vigour and is perpetually returning to the mind and
soul, through the poets and philosophers and through the complexities
of life itself, which make us feel its beauty and importance. The
history of the manners, of the patriotism, of the moral spirit, of
the military spirit of France, bears witness to this, for one of its
mainstays in the past as in the present has been the tragedies of
Corneille. The heroic, the tragic Charlotte Corday gave reality in her
own person to one of Corneille's characters, so full of will power
and ready for any enterprise: she was one of those _aimables furies,_
nourished like the tyrannicides of the Renaissance on the _Lives_ of
Plutarch, whom her great forefather had set on paper with such delight.

It is inconceivable that such heroines as she, sublime in their
meditated volitional act, should have been audaciously classed and
confounded with those weak and impulsive beings extolled by the
philosophers and artists of the will for power, from Stendhal to
Nietzsche, who freely sought their models among the degenerates of the
criminal prisons.

The whole life of Corneille, the whole of his long activity, was
dominated by the ideal that we have described, with a constancy
and a coherence which leaps to the eye of anyone who examines the
particulars. As a young man, he touched various strings of the lyre,
the tragedy of horrors in the manner of Seneca (_Médée,_) eccentric
comedy in _L'Illusion comique,_ the romantic drama of adventures and
incidents in _Clitandre,_ the comedies of love; but we already find
many signs in these works and especially in the comedies, of the
tendency to fix the will in certain situations, as will for a purpose
and choice. After his novitiate (in which period is to be comprehended
the _Cid,_ which is rather an attempt than a realisation, rather a
beginning than an end) he proceeded in a straight line and with over
increasing resolution and self-consciousness. It is due to a prejudice,
born of extrinsic or certainly but little acute considerations, that
an interval should be placed between the _Cid_ and the later works,
though this was done by Schlegel, by Sainte-Beuve and by many others,
both foreigners and French. They deplored that Corneille should have
abandoned the Spanish mediaeval and knightly style, so in harmony
with his generous, grandiose and imaginative inclinations, so full of
promise for the romantic future, and should have restricted himself to
the Graeco-Roman world and to political tragedy. It is impossible (as
we have shown in passing), to assert the originality and the beauty of
the _Cid,_ when it is compared with and set in opposition to the model
offered to Corneille by Guillen de Castro. Now if there is not to be
found beauty, there is certainly to be found a sort of originality in
the personality of Corneille, who eats into the popular epicity of the
model and substitutes for it the study of deliberative situations. The
harmonious versification of these explains in great part the success
which the play met with in a society accustomed to debate "questions
of love" (as they had been called since the period of the troubadours
at the Renaissance), and those of honour and knighthood, of challenges
and duels. But on the other hand, the reason of its success was also
to be found in what persisted scattered here and there of the ardour
and tenderness of the original play, which moved the spectators and
made them love Chimène: "_Tout Paris pour Chimene a les yeux de
Rodrigue._" Yet these words of tenderness and strong expressions,
though beautiful in themselves, show themselves to be rather foreign
to the new form of the drama, and there is some truth in the strange
remark of Klein: that "there is not enough Cidian electricity, enough
material for electro-dramatic shocks in that atmosphere full of the
exhalations of the _antichambre,_ to produce a slap in the face of
equally pathetic force and consequence" with the _bofetada_ which
Count Lozano applied to the countenance of the decrepit Diego Laynez
in the Spanish drama. And there is truth also in the judgment of the
Academy, that the subject of the _Cid_ is "defective in the essential
part" and "lacking in verisimilitude"; of course not because it was
so with Guillen de Castro, or that a subject, that is to say, mere
material, can be of itself good or bad, verisimilar or the reverse,
poetic or unpoetic, but because it had become defective and discordant
in the hands of Corneille, who elaborated and refined it. Rodrigue,
Jimena the lady Urraca, are simple, spontaneous, almost childlike
souls, in the mould of popular heroes. Chimène and Rodrigue and the
Infanta are reflective and dialectical spirits, and since their novel
psychological attitude does not chime well with the old-fashioned
manner of behaviour, Rodrigue and the father sometimes appear to be
charlatans, Chimène sometimes even a hypocrite, the Infanta insipid and
superfluous. Also, when Corneille returned to the "Spanish style," in
_Don Sanche d'Aragon,_ he charged it with reflections and ponderations
and deliberative resolutions, without aiming at the picturesque, as the
romantics did later, but at dialectic and subtlety. It must however be
admitted that all this represents a superiority, if viewed from another
angle: but this superiority does not reside in the artistic effect
obtained; it is rather mental and cultural and represents a more
complex and advanced humanity.

Thus the _Cid_ is to be looked upon as really a work of transition,
a transition to the _Horace,_ which has seemed to a learned German,
to be substantially the same as the _Cid,_ the _Cid_ reconstructed
after the censures passed upon it by his adversaries and in the
Academy, which Corneille inwardly felt to be, in a certain measure
at any rate, just. But another prejudice creates a gap between what
are called the four principal tragedies, the _Cid,_ the _Horace,_
the _China_ and the _Polyeucte_--"the great Cornelian quadrilateral"
eulogised by Péguy in rambling prose,--and the later tragedies, as
though Corneille had changed his method in these and begun to pursue
another ideal, "political tragedy." Setting aside for the time being
the question of greater or lesser artistic value, it is certain that
he never really changed his method. In the _Horace,_ there is no
suggestion of the ferocious national sanctity of a primitive society,
in the _Cinna,_ there is no trace of the imagined tragedy of satiety
or of the _lassitude,_ which the sanguinary Augustus is supposed to
have experienced. The _Polyeucte_ does not contain a shadow of the
fervour, the delirium, the fanaticism, of a religion in the act of
birth, but as Schlegel well expressed it, "a firm and constant faith
rather than a true religious enthusiasm." In the four tragedies above
mentioned, _le cœur_ is not supreme, any more than _l'esprit_ is
supreme in the later tragedies, but "political tragedy" is present more
or less in all of them, in the intrinsic sense of a representation
of calculations, ponderations and resolutions, and often too in the
more evident sense of State affairs. He pursues these and suchlike
forms of representation, heedless, firm and obstinate, notwithstanding
the disfavour of the public and of the critics, who asked for other
things. They divest themselves of extraneous elements and attain to
the perfection at which they aimed. This may be observed in one of the
very latest, the _Pulchérie._ The author congratulated himself upon its
half-success or shadow of success, declaring that "it is not always
necessary to follow the fashion of the time, in order to be successful
on the stage." Just previously, he was pleased with Saint-Évremond
for his approbation of the secondary place to be assigned to love in
tragedy, "for it is a passion too surcharged with weaknesses to be
dominant in a heroic drama." Voltaire was struck with this constancy
to the original line of development, for he felt bound to remark at
the conclusion of his commentary, not without astonishment and in
opposition to the current opinion, that "he wrote very unequally,
but I do not know that he had an unequal genius, as is maintained by
some; because I always see him intent, alike in his best and in his
inferior works, upon the force and the profundity of the ideas. He is
always more disposed to debate than to move, and he reveals himself
rich in finding expedients to support the most ungrateful of arguments,
though these are but little tragic, since he makes a bad choice of his
subjects from the _Oedipe_ onwards, where he certainly does devise
intrigues, but these are of small account and lack both warmth and
life. In his last works he is trying to delude himself." But Corneille
did not delude himself; rather he knew himself, and he himself the
author was a personage who had deliberated and had made up his mind,
once and for all.

The vigour of this resolution and the compactness of the work which
resulted from it, are not diminished, but are rather stressed by
the fact that Corneille possessed other aptitudes and sources of
inspiration, which he neglected and of which he made little or no
use. Certainly, the poet who versified the delicious _Psyche,_ in
collaboration with Molière, would have been able, had he so desired,
to enter into the graces of those "_doucereux_" and "_enjoués,_" whom
he despised. There are witty, tender and melancholy poems among his
miscellaneous works, and in certain parts of the paraphrase of the
_Imitation_ and other sacred compositions, there is a religious fervour
that is to seek in the _Polyeucte._ His youthful comedies contain a
power of observation of life, replete with passionate sympathy, which
foreshadows the coming social drama. We refer especially to certain
personages and scenes of the _Galerie du Palais,_ of the _Veuve_ and
of the _Suivante;_ to certain studies of marriageable girls, obedient
to the resolve of their parents, and to mothers, who still carry in
their heart how much that submission cost them in the past and do
not wish to abuse the power which they possess over their daughters.
There are also certain tremulous meetings of lovers, who had been
separated and are annoyingly interrupted by the irruption of prosaic
reality in the shape of their relations and friends ("_Ah! mère, sœur,
ami, comme vous m'importunez!_") and certain odious and painful
psychological cases, like that of Amaranthe, the poor girl of good
family, who is made companion of the richer girl, not superior to her
either in attractiveness, or spirit, or grace, or blood. She envies
and intrigues against her, attempts to carry off her lover and being
finally vanquished, hurls bitter words at society and distils venomous
maledictions.

_"Curieux," "étonnant," "étrange," "paradoxal," "déconcertant,"_ are
the epithets that the critics alternately apply to the personage
of Alidor, in the _Place Royale,_ and Corneille himself calls him
"_extravagant_" in the examination of his work that he wrote later.
All too have held that uncompromising lover of his own liberty to be
very "Cornelian" or "pure Cornelian," who although in love, is afraid
of love, because it threatens to deprive him of his internal freedom.
He therefore tries to throw the woman he loves and who adores him,
into the arms of others, by stratagem. Failing in this endeavour, and
being finally abandoned by the lady herself, who decides to enter a
convent, instead of sorrowing or at least being mortified at this, he
rejoices at his good fortune. Indeed, Corneille, despite the tardy
epithet of _"extravagant,"_ which he affixes to this personage,
does not turn him to ridicule in the comedy, nor does he condemn or
criticise him. On the contrary, in the dedicatory epistle, addressed to
an anonymous gentleman, who might be the very character in question,
he approves of the theory, which Alidor illustrates. "I have learned
from you"--he writes--"that the love of an honest man must always be
voluntary; that he must never love in one way what he cannot but love;
that if he should find himself reduced to this extremity, it amounts
to a tyranny and the yoke must be shaken off. Finally, the loved one
must have by so much the more claim to our love, in so far as it is
the result of our choice and of the loved one's merit and does not
derive from blind inclination imposed upon us by a heredity which we
are unable to resist." But the disconcertion and perplexity caused
by the play in question, have their origin in this; that Corneille
had not yet succeeded in repressing and suppressing the spontaneous
emotions, and therefore throws his ideal creation into the midst of a
throng of beings, whose limbs are softer, their blood warmer and more
tumultuous, who love and suffer and despair, like Angélique. This would
render that ideal personage comic, ironical and extravagant, if the
poet did not for his part think and feel it to be altogether serious. A
subtle flaw, therefore, permeates every part of the play, which lacks
fusion and unity of fundamental motive. This is doubtless a grave
defect, but a defect which adds weight to the psychological document
that it contains, proving the absolute power which the ideal of the
deliberative will was acquiring in Corneille.




