CHAPTER XII


SHAKESPEARE AND OURSELVES


Shakespeare (and this applies to every individual work) had a history,
but has one no longer. He had a history, which was that of his poetical
sentiment, of its various changing notes, of the various forms in
which it found expression. He had also (we must insist), an individual
history which it is difficult to identify united with that of the
Elizabethan drama, to which he belongs solely as an actor and provider
of theatrical works. The general traits, which, among many differences,
he shares with his contemporaries, predecessors and imitators (even
when these are more substantial than theatrical imitations, conventions
and habits) form part of the history of the Renaissance in general and
of the English Renaissance in particular, but do not of themselves
constitute the history that was properly speaking his own.

But he no longer has this, because what happened afterwards and what
happens in the present, is the history of others, is our history,
no longer his. Indeed, the histories of Shakespeare, which have
been composed, considered in the light of later times--and they are
still being written--have been and are understood, in a first sense,
as the history of the criticism of his works; and it is clear that
in this case, it is the history of us, his critics, the history of
criticism and of philosophy, no longer that of Shakespeare. Or they
are understood as the history of the spiritual needs and movements of
different periods, which now approach and now recede from Shakespeare,
causing either almost complete forgetfulness of his poetry, or causing
it to be felt and loved. In this case too, it is the history, not of
Shakespeare, but of the culture and the mode of feeling of other times
than his. Or they are understood in a third sense, as the history of
the literary and artistic works, in which the so-called influence of
Shakespeare is more or less discernible; and since this influence would
be without interest, if it produced nothing but mere mechanical copies,
and on the contrary has interest only because we see it transformed in
an original manner by new poets and artists, it is the history of the
new poets and artists and no longer that of Shakespeare.

As regards the last statement, it will not be out of place to remark
that the accounts which have been given of the representations of
his plays are altogether foreign to Shakespeare; because theatrical
representations are not, as is believed, "interpretations," but
variations, that is to say "creations of new works of art," by means
of the actors, who always bring to them their own particular manner of
feeling. There is never a _tertium comparationis,_ in the sense of a
presumably authentic and objective interpretation, and here the same
criterion applies as to music and painting suggested by plays, which
are music and painting, and not those plays. Giuseppe Verdi, who for
his part composed an _Othello,_ wrote to the painter Morelli, who had
conceived a painting of Iago (in a letter of 1881, recently published):
"You want a slight figure, with little muscular development, and if I
have understood you rightly, one of the cunning, malignant sort ...
But if were I an actor and wished to represent Iago, I should prefer a
lean, meagre figure, with thin lips, and small eyes close to the nose,
like a monkey's, a high retreating forehead, with a deal of development
at the back of the head; absent and _nonchalant_ in manner, indifferent
to everything, incredulous, sneering, speaking good and evil lightly,
with an air of thinking about something quite different from what he
says ..." They might have entered into a long discussion as to the two
different interpretations, had not Verdi, with his accustomed good
sense, hastened to conclude: "But whether Iago be small or big, whether
Othello be Venetian or Turk, _execute them as you conceive them_: the
result will always be good. But remember _not to think too much about
it._"

The insurmountable difference that exists between the most studiously
poetic theatrical representation and the original poetry of
Shakespeare, is the true reason why, contrary to the general belief in
Shakespeare's eminent "theatricality," Goethe considered that "he was
not a poet of the theatre and did not think of the stage, which is too
narrow for so vast a soul, that the visible world is too narrow for
it." Coleridge too held that the plays were not intended for acting,
but to be read and contemplated as poems, and added sometimes to say
laughingly, that an act of Parliament should be passed to prohibit the
representation of Shakespeare on the stage.

Certainly, Lear and Othello, Macbeth and Hamlet, Cordelia and
Desdemona are part of our souls, and so they will be in the future,
more or less active, like every part of our souls, of our experiences,
of our memories. Sometimes they seem inert and almost obliterated, yet
they live and affect us; at others they revive and reawaken, linking
themselves to our greatest and nearest spiritual interests. This latter
was notably the case in the epoch that extends from the "period of
genius" at the end of romanticism, from the criticism of Kant to the
exhaustion of the Hegelian school. At that time, poets created Werther
and Faust, as though they were the brothers of Hamlet, Charlotte and
Margaret and Hermengarde, as though sisters of the Shakespearean
heroines, and philosophers constructed systems, which seemed to frame
the scattered thoughts of Shakespeare, reducing his differences to
logical terms, and crowning them with the conclusion that he either did
not seek or did not find. At that time persisted even the illusion that
the spirit of Shakespeare had transferred itself from the Elizabethan
world to the new world of Europe, was poetising and philosophising with
the mouths of the new men and directing their sentiments and actions.

Perhaps after that period, love of Shakespeare, if not altogether
extinguished, greatly declined. The colossal mass of work of every sort
devoted to Shakespeare, cannot be brought up against this judgment,
for this mass, in great part due to German, English and American
philologists, proves rather the sedulity of modern philology, than a
profound spiritual impulse. This was more lively, when Shakespeare
was far less investigated, rummaged and hashed up, and was read in
editions far less critically correct. How could he be truly loved and
really felt in an age which buried dialectic and idealism beneath
naturalism and positivism, for the former of which he stood and which
he represented in his own way? In this age, the consciousness of the
distinction between liberty and passion, good and evil, nobility and
vileness, fineness and sensuality, between the lofty and the base
in man, became obscured; everything was conceived as differing in
quantity, but identical in substance, and was placed in a deterministic
relation with the external world. In such an atmosphere artistic
work became blind, diseased, gloomy, instinctive; struggling for
expression amid the torment of sick senses, no longer amid passionate,
moral struggles of the soul; confused writers, half pedantic, half
neurasthenic, were taken for and believed themselves to be, the heirs
of Shakespeare. Even when one reads some of the most highly praised
pages of the critics of the day upon Shakespeare, so abounding in
exquisite refinements, a sort of repugnance comes over one, as though a
warning that this is not the genuine Shakespeare. He was less subtle,
but more profound, less involved, but more complex and more great than
they.

This is not a lamentation directed against the age, which is perhaps
now drawing to a close and perhaps has no desire to do so, and will
continue to develop its own character for a greater or lesser period.
It is simply an observation of fact, which belongs to that history,
which is not the history of William Shakespeare. He continues to live
his own history, in those spirits alone, who are perpetually making
anew that history which was truly his, as they read him with an
ingenuous mind and a heart that shares in his poetry.




