CHAPTER XV


THE MECHANISM OF THE CORNELIAN TRAGEDY


The ideal of the deliberative will, then, formed the real, living
_passion_ of this man devoid of passions; for no one that lives can
withhold himself from passion: he is only able to change its object by
passing from one to the other. The judgment that holds Corneille to
be an intrinsically prosaic, ratiocinatory and casuistical genius is
therefore to be looked upon as lacking of penetration. Had he been a
casuist, it seems clear that he would have composed casuistical works.
Nor did he lack of requests and encouragement in that direction in the
literature that was admired and sought after in his time. Instead,
however, of acceding to them, he dwelt ever in the world of poetry
and was occupied throughout his life, up to his seventieth year, with
the composition of tragedies. He was not a casuist, although he loved
casuistry: these two things are as different as the love for warlike
representations and accounts of wars and the being actually a soldier,
the perpetual dwelling of the imagination upon matters of business,
commerce and speculation (like Honoré de Balzac for instance), and
being really a man of business. Nor can his gift be described as merely
that of a didactic poet, although he often gives a dissertation in
verse, because he was not inspired with the wish to teach, but rather
to admire and to present the power and the triumphs of the free will
for admiration. Those philologists who have patiently set to work to
reconstruct Corneille's conception of the State into a _Staatsidee_
have not understood this. Corneille's conception of the State, of
absolute monarchy, of the king, of legitimacy, of ministers, of
subjects, and so on, were not by any means in him political doctrine,
but just forms and symbols of an attitude of mind, which he caressed
and idolised.

The enquiry as to the nature and degree and tone of that passion
differs altogether from the fact of Corneille's powerful passionality,
as to which there can be no doubt. The problem, that is to say, is,
whether passion, which is certainly a necessary condition for poetry,
was so shaped and found in him such compensations and restraints as
to yield itself with docility to poetry and to give it a fair field
for expression. It is well known that the sovereign passion, the pain
that renders mute, the love that leads to raving, impede the dream of
the poet, they impede artistic treatment, the cult of perfect form
and the joy in beauty. There is too a form of passion, which has in
it something of the practical: it is more occupied with embodying
its favourite dreams, in order to obtain from them stimulus and
incentive, than with fathoming them poetically and idealising them in
contemplation.

It seems impossible to deny that something of this sort existed in
the case of Corneille, for as we read his works, while we constantly
receive the already mentioned impression of seriousness and severity,
there is another impression that is sometimes mingled with these and
suggests the disquieting presence of men firmly fixed and rooted
in an ideal. When faced with his predilection for deliberation and
resolution, the figure of the Aristophanic Philocleon sometimes returns
to the memory. This Philocleon was a "philoheliast," that is to say
he was the victim of a mania for judging, τοὔ δικάζειν. His son
locked him up, but he climbed out of window, in order to hasten to the
tribunal and satisfy his vital need of administering justice!

The consequences of this excess of practical passionality in the case
of Corneille, of its exclusive domination in him, was that he either
did not love or refused to allow himself to love anything else in the
world, and lost interest in all the rest of life. He did not surpass
it ideally, in which case he would have remained trembling and living
in its presence, although it was combated and suppressed, but he drove
it out or cut it off altogether. He acted as one, who for the love of
the human body, should eliminate from his picture, landscape, sky,
air, the background of the picture, upon and from which the figure
rises and with which it is conj nected, although separated from it
in relief, and should limit himself to the delineation of bodies and
attitudes of bodies. Corneille, having abolished all other forms
of life, found nothing before him but a series of situations for
deliberation, vigorously felt, warmly expressed, sung with full voice,
and illustrated with energetic yet becoming gestures.

What tragedy, what drama, what representation, could emerge from such a
limitation of volitional attitudes? How could the various tonalities
and affections and so the various personages, unite and harmonise
among themselves with all their shades and gradations? The bridge
that should give passage to this full and complete representation was
wanting or had been destroyed. All that was possible was a suite of
deliberative lyrics, of magnificent perorations, of lofty sentiments,
sometimes standing alone, sometimes also taking the form of a duet
or a dialogue, a theory of statues, draped in solemn attitudes, of
enormous figures, rigid and similar as Byzantine mosaics. Here and
there a writer such as Lanson has to some extent had an inkling of this
intrinsic impossibility when, writing about the _Nicomède,_ he remarked
that Corneille "in his pride at having founded a new kind of tragedy,
without pity or terror, and having admiration as its motive, did not
perceive that he was founding it upon a void; because the tragedy will
be the less dramatic, the purer is the will, since it is defeats or
semi-defeats that are dramatic, the slow, difficult victories of the
will, incessant combats." But he held on the other hand that Corneille
had once constructed, in _Nicomède,_ a perfect tragedy, on the single
datum of the pure will, _par un coup de génie_; but this was the
only one that ever could be written, the reason that it could not be
repeated being "that all the works of Corneille are dramatic, precisely
to the extent that the will falls short in them of perfection and in
virtue of the elements that separate it from them." The beauty, he
says, of the _Cid,_ of _Polyeucte_ and of _Cinna_, "consists in what
they contain of passion, cooperating with and striving against the will
of the heroes." But "strokes of genius" are not miracles and they do
not make the impossible possible and the other dramas of Corneille that
we have mentioned do not differ substantially from the _Nicomède,_ for
in them passionate elements are intruded and felt to be out of harmony
(as in the _Cid_), or they are apparent and conventional.

Apparent and conventional: because the lack of the bridge for crossing
over forbade Corneille to construct poetically out of volitional
situations representations of life, to which they did not of themselves
lead. It did not however prevent another kind of construction, which
may be called intellectualistic or practical. He deduced other
situations and other antitheses from the volitional situations and
their antitheses that he had conceived, and thus he formed a sort of
semblance of the representation of life. At the same time he reduced it
to the dimensions of the drama that he was originating mentally, partly
through study of the ancients and above all Seneca, partly from the
Italian writers of tragedy of the sixteenth century, partly from that
of the Spanish writers and of his French predecessors, but not without
consulting, following or modifying the French and Italian casuists and
regulating the whole with his own sense for theatrical effect and for
the forms of it likely to suit the taste of the French public of his
day.

This structure of tragedy, with its antitheses and parallelisms, its
expedients for accelerating and arresting and terminating the action
has been qualified with praise or blame as possessing great "logical"
perfection. Logic, however, which is the life of thought, has nothing
to do with the balancing and counter-balancing of mechanical weights,
whose life lies outside them, in the head and in the hand that has
constructed and set them in motion. It has been also compared to
architecture and to the admirable proportions of the Italian art of the
Renaissance. But here too, we must suspect that the true meaning of
the works thus characterised escapes us, for attention is paid only to
the external appearance of things, in so far as it can be expressed in
mathematical terms. We have said exactly the same thing, without having
recourse to logic or to architecture, when we noted that the structure
of Corneille's tragedies did not derive from within, that is, from his
true poetical inspiration, but rose up beside it, and was due to the
unconscious practical need of making a canvas or a frame upon which to
stretch the series of volitional situations desired by the imagination
of the poet. Thus it was poetically a cold, incoherent, absurd thing,
but practically rational and coherent, like every "mechanism."
This word is not pronounced here for the first time owing to our
irreverence, but is to be found among those who have written about
Corneille and have felt themselves unable to refrain from referring
to his _"mécanique théâtrale"_ and to the "_système fermé_" of his
tragedies, where _"s'opère par un jeu visible de forces, la production
d'un état définitif appelé dénouement."_

When this has been stated, it is easy to see that anyone who examines
this assemblage of thoughts and phrases with the expectation of
finding there a soft, rich, sensuous and passionate representation of
life, full of throbs, bedewed with tears, shot through with troubles
and enjoyments, such as are to be found in Shakespearean drama and
also in Sophoclean tragedy, is disappointed, and thereupon describes
Corneille's art as false, whereas he should perhaps describe his own
expectation as false. But it is strange to find, as counterpoise to
that delusion, the attempt to demonstrate that the apparatus is not
an apparatus, but flesh and blood, that the frame is not a frame
but a picture, like one of Titian's or Rembrandt's, and now setting
comparisons aside, that the pseudo-tragedy and the pseudo-drama
of Corneille is pure drama or tragedy, that his intellectualistic
deductions, his practical devices, are lyrical motives and express the
truth of the human heart. Such, however, is the wrong-headedness of
the criticisms that we have reviewed above. The mode of procedure is
to deny what is evident, for example that Corneille argues through the
mouths of his characters, instead of expressing and setting in action
his own mode of feeling, in such a way as the situations would require,
were they poetically treated. Faguet answers Voltaire's remarks upon
the famous couplet of Rodogune: _"Il est des nœuds secrets, il est des
sympathies..."_ to the effect that "the poet is always himself talking
and that passion does not thus express itself," by saying that people
are accustomed to express themselves in this way, that is to say, in
the form of general ideas, when they are calm, as though the question
could be settled with an appeal to the reality of ordinary life,
whereas on the contrary it is a question of poeticity, that is to say,
of the tragic situation, which by its own nature, excludes _couplets_
in certain cases, however well turned they be.

Yet the very same critics, who are thus guilty of sophistry in their
attempts to defend Corneille, are capable of observing on another
occasion that if not all, at any rate many or several of Corneille's
tragedies are "melodramas," and that the author tended more and more
to melodrama, in the course of his development or decadence, as we
may like to call it. Perhaps in so saying, they are making a careless
use of the word "melodrama," and mean by it a drama of intrigue, of
surprises, of shocks and of recognitions. If on the contrary they
have employed it in its true sense, or if their tongue has been
instinctively more correct than their thought, since "melodrama" means
precisely a melodrama, that does not exist for itself, but for the
music, and is a canvas or frame, they have again declared the extrinsic
character of the Cornelian tragedy.

Another confirmation of this character of the tragedies is to be found
in that suspicion of I comicality, which lurks so frequently in the
background as we read them, and occasionally makes itself clearly
audible in the course of development of their pseudo-tragic action. It
has been asked whether the _Cid_ were a tragedy or a comedy and inquiry
has resulted in no satisfactory answer being arrived at, because
involuntary comicality is present there, akin to what is to be found
in certain of the pompous and emphatic melodramas of Metastasio. It
is true that Don Diego's reply to the king has been cited as sublime,
when he does not wish the new duel to take place at once, in order
that the Cid may have a little rest, after the great battle that he
has won against the Moors, which he has described triumphantly and at
great length: "_Rodrigue a pris haleine en vous la racontant!_" But
are we then to regard as sinful the smile that gradually dawns upon
the lips of those who are not pledged to admire at all costs? And
consider the case of the furious Emilia, who at the end of the _Cinna_
gets rid in the twinkling of an eye, of all the convictions anchored
in her breast, of that hatred that burned her up, much in the same
manner as a stomach-ache disappears upon the use of a sedative, and
declares that she has all of a sudden become the exact opposite of what
she was previously? _"Ma haine va mourir, que j'ai cru immortelle;
elle est morte et ce cœur devient sujet fidèle, Et prenant désormais
cette haine en horreur, L'ardeur de vous servir succède à sa fureur."_
And Curiace, who finds himself in such a situation as to deliver
the following madrigal to his betrothed: "_D'Albe avec mon amour
j'accordais la querelle; je soupirais pour vous, en combattant pour
elle; Et s'il fallait encor que l'on en vint aux coups, Je combattrais
pour elle en soupirant pour vous."?_ But we will not insist upon this
descent into the comic, for it is not always to be avoided, being a
natural effect of the "mechanicity" of the Cornelian drama and is for
the rest in conformity with the theory which explains the comic as
_"l'automatisme installé dans la vie et imitant la vie"_ (Bergson).

Another form of the comic, discoverable in him, must also be insisted
upon; but this is not involuntary and blameworthy, but coherent and
praiseworthy. The form in question is that which led to the comedy
of character and of costume, to psychological and political comedy.
Brunetière even said between jest and earnest: "The _Cid, Horace,
Cinna_ and _Polyeucte,_ give me much trouble. Were it not for these
four, I should say that Corneille is fundamentally and above all a
comic poet, and an excellent comic poet; and this is perfectly true;
but how are we to say it, when the _Cid, Horace, Cinna_ and _Polyeucte_
are there? These four tragedies embarrass me exceedingly!" And he
proceeds to note and illustrate the "family scenes" scattered among
his tragedies, the prosaic and conversational phraseology, which so
displeased Voltaire, and the complete absence in some of them of tragic
quality, even of the external sort, that is, scenes of blood and death,
and the prevalence of the ethical over the pathetic representation,
in the manner of the comedy of Menander and of Terence. Despite all
this, his definition of Corneille as a comic poet will be admired as
acute and ingenious, but will never carry conviction as being true:
none of those tragedies is a comedy, because none is accentuated in
that manner. For the same reason that Corneille could not attain to the
poetical representation of life, because he was not able to pass beyond
the one-sidedness of his ideal, by merging it in the fulness of things,
he was unable to present the comic or ethical side of them, because
he did not pass beyond the spectacle of life and so of his ideal, by
viewing it _sub specie intellectus,_ in its external and internal
limitations. The attempt to do so in the Alidor of the _Place Royale_
had not been successful, and it never was successful, even assuming
that he attempted it. He did not indeed attempt it, and the ethos
that so often took the place of the pathos in the structure of his
tragedies, was itself a natural consequence of their mechanicity. Owing
to this, when they had lost the guidance of the initial poetic motive,
they often fluctuated between emphasis and cold observation, between
eloquence and prose, between stylisation of the characters and certain
realistic determinations.

This hybridism, which has sometimes led to the belittling of Corneille
to the level of a poet of observation and of comicality, has more often
led, from another point of view, to his being increased in stature and
importance, to his being belauded and acclaimed as possessing "romantic
tendencies," or as a "French Shakespeare," although but "a Shakespeare
in trammels." There is really nothing whatever in him of the romantic,
in the conception, that is to say, and in the sentiment of life; and
there is less than nothing in him of Shakespeare, whose work had
its origins in a far wider and certainly a very different sphere
of spiritual interests. But since "romanticism" and "Shakespeare"
perhaps stand here simply for poetry, it must be admitted that he is a
poet, who does not explain himself fully, or explains himself badly,
without the liberty, the sympathy, the abandonment of self necessary
for poetry. He harnesses his inspiration to an apparatus of actions
and reactions, of parallelisms and of conventions, which may be well
described as "trammels," when compared with poetry.

But they are in any case trammels which he sets in his own way,
trammels which he creates and fixes in his soul and are not imposed
upon him by the rules, conventions and usages, which were in vogue
at the time he wrote, as is erroneously maintained, coupled with
lamentations as to the unfavorable period for the writing of poetry,
which fell to his lot. What poet can be trammeled from without? The
poet sets such obstacles aside, or he passes through them, or he goes
round them, or he feigns to bow to them, or he does bow to them, but
only in secondary matters that are almost indifferent. For this reason,
disputes and doctrines as to the three unities, as to the characters
of tragedy, as to the manner of obtaining the catharsis or purgation,
have considerable importance for anyone investigating the history of
aesthetic and critical ideas, of their formation, growth and progress,
by means of struggles that seem to us now to be ridiculous, though
they were once serious; but they have no importance whatever as an
element in the judgment of a poem. Corneille did not rebel against the
so-called rules, because he did not feel any need for rebellion; he
accepted or accustomed himself to them, because, having treated tragedy
mechanically, it suited him, or did him no harm, to take heed of the
mechanical rules, laid down by custom and literary and theatrical
precepts.

For this reason, his method of theatrical composition was not only
susceptible of being tolerated, but even of pleasing and receiving the
praise, the applause and the admiration of the contemporary public,
which did not seek in them the joy of poetic rapture, but a different
and more or less refined pleasure, answering to its spiritual needs and
aspirations. It could later and can now prove insupportable, because
the delight of a certain period in dexterity, expedients and clever
devices, in the fine phrases of the courtier, in certain actions that
were the fashion, in the gallantries of pastoral and heroic romance,
in epigrams, antitheses and madrigals, are no longer our delights.
Passionate or realistic art, as it is called, flourishes everywhere,
in place of the old scholastic, academic and court models. But for us,
everything that concerns Corneille's composition and the technique of
his work is indifferent, since we are viewing the problem from the
point of view of poetry. We shall not therefore busy ourselves with
discriminating those parts of it that are well from those that are
ill put together, nor his clever from his unsuccessful expedients,
his well-constructed "scenes" from those that suffer from padding,
his "acts" that run smoothly from those that drag, the more from the
less happy "endings," as is the habit of those critics, who nourish a
superstitious admiration for what Flaubert would have called _"l'arcane
théâtral."_ We care nothing for the canvas, but only for what of
embroidery in the shape of poetry there is upon it.




