Chapter V.


Humility is the root of charity, and meekness the fruit of both. There is
no solid and pure ground of love to others, except the rubbish of
self-love be first cast out of the soul; and when that superfluity of
naughtiness is cast out, then charity hath a solid and deep foundation:
“The end of the command is charity out of a pure heart,” 1 Tim. i. 5. It
is only such a purified heart, cleansed from that poison and contagion of
pride and self-estimation, that can send out such a sweet and wholesome
stream, to the refreshing of the spirits and bowels of the church of God.
If self-glory and pride have deep roots fastened into the soul, they draw
all the sap and virtue downward, and send little or nothing up to the tree
of charity, which makes it barren and unfruitful in the works of
righteousness, and fruits of mercy and meekness. There are obstructions in
the way of that communication, which only can be removed by the plucking
up of these roots of pride and self-estimation, which prey upon all, and
incorporate all in themselves, and yet, like the lean kine that had
devoured the fat, are never the fatter or more well-favoured.

It is no wonder, then, that these are the first principles that we must
learn in Christ’s school, the very A B C of Christianity: “Learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls,”
Matth. xi. 29. This is the great Prophet sent of the Father into the world
to teach us, whom he hath, with a voice from heaven, commanded us to hear:
“This is my well-beloved Son, hear him.” Should not the fame and report of
such a Teacher move us? He was testified of very honourably, long before
he came, that he had the Spirit above measure, that he had “the tongue of
the learned;” (Isa. l. 4.) that he was a greater prophet than Moses,
(Deut. xviii. 15, 18.) that is, the wonderful Counsellor of heaven and
earth, (Isa. ix. 6.) the “Witness to the people,” a Teacher and “Leader to
the people.” And then, when he came, he had the most glorious testimony
from the most glorious persons,—the Father and the Holy Ghost,—in the most
solemn manner that ever the world heard of, Matth. xvii. 5. “Behold, a
voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased; hear ye him.” Now, this is our Master, our Rabbi, Matth.
xxiii. 8. This is the  Apostle and High Priest of our profession (Heb.
iii. 1.); “the light of the world and life of men,” John viii. 12. and vi.
33, 51. Having, then, such a Teacher and Master, sent us from heaven, may
we not glory in our Master? But some may suppose, that he who came down
from heaven, filled with all the riches and treasures of heavenly wisdom,
should reveal in his school unto his disciples, all the mysteries and
profound secrets of nature and art, about which the world hath ploded
since the first taste of the tree of knowledge, and beaten out their
brains to the vexation of all their spirits, without any fruit, but the
discovery of the impossibility of knowing, and the increase of sorrow by
searching. Who would not expect, when the Wisdom of God descends among
men, but that he should show unto the world that wisdom, in the
understanding of all the works of God, which all men have been pursuing in
vain; that he by whom all things were created, and so could unbowel and
manifest all their hidden causes and virtues, all their admirable and
wonderful qualities and operations, as easily by a word, as he made them
by a word; who would not expect, I say, but that he should have made this
world, and the mysteries of it, the subject of all his lessons, the more
to illustrate his own glorious power and wisdom? And yet behold, they who
had come into his school and heard this Master and Doctor teach his
scholars, they who had been invited to come, through the fame and report
of his name, would have stood astonished and surprised to hear the subject
of his doctrine; one come from on high to teach so low things as these,
“Learn of me, I am meek and lowly.” Other men that are masters of
professions, and authors of sects or orders, do aspire unto some
singularity in doctrine to make them famous. But behold our Lord and
Master, this is the doctrine he vents! It hath nothing in it that sounds
high, and looks big in the estimation of the world. In regard of the
wisdom of the world, it is foolishness, a doctrine of humility from the
most High! A lesson of lowliness and meekness from the Lord and Maker of
all! There seems, at first, nothing in it to allure any to follow it. Who
would travel so far as the college of Christianity to learn no more but
this, when every man pretends to be a teacher of it?

But truly there is a majesty in this lowliness and there is a singularity
in this commonness. If ye would stay and hear a little longer, and enter
into a deep search of this doctrine, we would be surcharged and overcome
with wonders. It seems shallow till ye enter but it has no bottom.
Christianity makes no great noise, but it runs the deeper. It is a light
and overly knowledge of it, a small smattering of the doctrine of it, that
makes men despise it and prefer other things, but the deep and solid
apprehension of it will make us adore and admire, and drive us to an _O
altitudo!_ “O the depth both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!” Rom. xi.
33. As the superficial knowledge of nature makes men atheists, but the
profound understanding of it makes men pious so all other things,
_vilescit scientia_, “grow more contemptible by the knowledge of them.” It
is ignorance of them which is the mother of that devout admiration we bear
to them. But Christianity only, _vilescit ignorantia, clarescit scientia_,
is common and base, because not known. And that is no disparagement at all
unto it, that there is none despises it, but he that knoweth it not, and
none can do any thing, but despise all besides it that once knows it. That
is the proper excellency and glory of it.

All arts and sciences have their principles, and common axioms of
unquestionable authority. All kind of professions have some fundamental
doctrines and points which are the character of them. Christianity hath
its principles too. And principles must be plain and uncontroverted; they
must be evident by their own light, and apt to give light to other things.
All the rest of the conclusions of the art are but derivations and
deductions from them. Our Master and Doctor follows the same method. He
lays down some common principles some fundamental points of this
profession, upon which all the building of Christianity hangs. “Learn of
me, for I am meek and lowly.” This was the high lesson that his life
preached so exemplarily, and his doctrine pressed so earnestly, and in
this he is very unlike other teachers who impose burdens on others, and
themselves do not so much as touch them. But he first practises his
doctrine and then preaches it. He first casts a pattern in himself, and
then presses to follow it. Examples teach better than rules, but both
together are most effectual and sure. The rarest example and noblest rule
that ever was given to men are here met together.

The rule is about a thing that has a low name, but a high nature.
Lowliness and meekness in reputation and outward form, are like servants,
yet they account it no robbery to be equal with the highest and most
princely graces. The vein of gold and silver lies very low in the bowels
of the earth, but it is not therefore base, but the more precious. Other
virtues may come with more observation, but these, like the Master that
teaches them, come with more reality. If they have less pomp, they have
more power and virtue. Humility, how suitable is it to humanity! They are
as near of kin one to another, as _homo_ and _humus_,(420) and therefore,
except a man cast off humanity, and forget his original, the ground, the
dust from whence he was taken, I do not see how he can shake off humility.
Self knowledge is the mother of it, the knowledge of that _humus_ would
make us _humiles_.(421) Look to the hole of the pit from whence thou art
hewn. A man could not look high that looked so low as the pit from whence
we were taken by nature, even the dust, and the pit from whence we are
hewn by grace, even man’s lost and ruined state. Such a low look would
make a lowly mind. Therefore pride must be nothing else but an empty and
vain tumour, a puffing up. “Knowledge puffeth up,” not self knowledge.
That casts down, and brings down all superstructures, razes out all vain
confidence to the very foundation, and then begins to build on a solid
ground. But knowledge of other things without, joined with ignorance of
ourselves within, is but a swelling, not a growing, it is a bladder or
skin full of wind, a blast or breath of an airy applause or commendation,
will extend it and fill it full. And what is this else but a monster in
humanity, the skin of a man stuffed or blown up with wind and vanity, to
the shadow and resemblance of a man; but no bones or sinews, nor real
substance within? Pride is an excrescence. It is nature swelled beyond the
intrinsic terms or limits of magnitude, the spirit of a mouse in a
mountain. And now, if any thing be gone without the just bounds of the
magnitude set to it, it is imperfect, disabled in its operations, vain and
unprofitable, yea, prodigious like. If there be not so much real
excellency as may fill up the circle of our self estimation, then surely
it must be full of emptiness and vanity, fancy and imagination must supply
the vacant room, where solid worth cannot extend so far. Now, I believe,
if any man could but impartially and seriously reflect upon himself, he
would see nothing of that kind, no true solid and real dignity to provoke
love, but real baseness and misery to procure loathing. There is a lie in
every sin, but the greatest and grossest lie is committed in pride, and
attribution of that excellency to ourselves which is not. And upon what
erroneous fancy, which is a sandy and vain foundation, is built the tower
of self estimation, vain gloriation, and such like? Pride, which is the
mother of these, says most presumptuously, “By the strength of my hand I
have done it, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent,” (Isa. x. 13.) “I am and
none else besides me,” Isa. xlvii. 10. It is such a false imagination, as
“I am of perfect beauty,” “I am and none else,” “I am a god,” (Ezek.
xxvii. 3. and xxviii. 2.) which swells and lifts up the heart. Now what a
vain thing is it, an inordinate elevation of the heart upon a false
misapprehension of the mind? The “soul which is lifted up, is not upright
in him,” Hab. ii. 4. It must be a tottering building that is founded on
such a gross mistake.

Some cover their pride with the pretence of high spiritedness, and please
themselves in apprehensions of some magnanimity and generosity. But the
truth is, it is not true magnitude, but a swelling out of the
superabundance of pestilent humours. True greatness of spirit is inwardly
and throughout solid, firm from the bottom, and the foundation of it is
truth. Which of the two do ye think hath the better spirit, he that calls
dust, dust, and accounts of dung as dung, or he that, upon a false
imagination, thinks dust and dung is gold and silver, esteems himself a
rich man, and raises up himself above others? Humility is only true
magnanimity, for it digs down low, that it may set and establish the
foundation of true worth. It is true, it is lowly, and bows down low. But
as the water that comes from a height, the lower it comes down the higher
it ascends up again, so the humble spirit, the lower it fall in its own
estimation, the higher it is raised in real worth and in God’s estimation.
“He that humbles himself shall be exalted, and he that exalts himself
shall be abased,” Matt. xxiii. 12. He is like a growing tree, the deeper
the roots go down in the earth, the higher the tree grows above ground, as
Jacob’s ladder, the foot of it is fastened in the earth, but the top of it
reaches the heaven. And this is the sure way to ascend to heaven. Pride
would fly up upon its own wings. But the humble man will enter at the
lowest step, and so goes up by degrees, and in the end is made manifest.
Pride catches a fall,(422) and humility is raised on high; it descended
that it might ascend. “A man’s pride shall bring him low, but honour shall
uphold the humble in spirit,” Prov. xxix. 23. “Pride goeth before
destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall.” But “before honour is
humility,” Prov. xvi. 18. and xviii. 12. The first week of creation, as it
were, afforded two signal examples of this wise permutation of divine
justice, angels cast out of heaven, and man out of paradise, a high and
wretched aim at wisdom brought both as low as hell. The pride of angels
and men was but the rising up to a height, or climbing up a steep to the
pinnacle of glory, that they might catch the lower fall. But the last week
of the creation, to speak so, shall afford us rare and eminent
demonstrations of the other, poor, wretched, and miserable sinners lifted
up to heaven by humility, when angels were thrown down from heaven for
pride. What a strange sight, an angel, once so glorious, so low, and a
sinner, once so wretched and miserable, so high! Truly may any man
conclude within himself, “Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the
lowly, than to divide the spoil with the proud,” Prov. xvi. 19. Happy
lowliness, that is the foundation of true highness! “But miserable
highness that is the beginning of eternal baseness.” “Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven,” Matt. v. 3. Blessedness
begins low, in poverty of spirit. And Christ’s sermon upon blessedness
begins at it, but it arises in the end to the riches of a kingdom, a
heavenly kingdom. Grace is the seed of glory, and poverty of spirit is the
seed, first dead before it be quickened to grow up in fruits. And indeed
the grain “is not quickened except it die,” (1 Cor. xv. 36) and then it
gets a body, and “bringeth forth much fruit,” John xii. 24. Even so, grace
is sown into the heart, but it is not quickened except it die in humility,
and then God gives it a body, when it springs up in other beautiful
graces, of meekness, patience, love, &c. But these are never ripe till the
day that the soul get the warm beams of heaven, being separated from the
body, and then is the harvest a rich crop of blessedness. Holiness is the
ladder to go up to happiness by, or rather our Lord Jesus Christ as
adorned with all these graces. Now these are the steps of it, mentioned
Matt. v., and the lowest step that a soul first ascends to him by, is
poverty of spirit, or humility. And truly the spirit cannot meet with
Jesus Christ till he first bring it down low, because he hath come so low
himself, as that no soul can ascend up to heaven by him, except they bow
down to his lowliness, and rise upon that step.

Now a man being thus humbled in spirit before God, and under his mighty
hand, he is only fit to obey the apostolic precept “Be ye all of you
subject one to another,” 1 Pet. v. 5. Humility towards men depends upon
that poverty and self emptying under God’s mighty hand, ver. 6. It is only
a lowly heart that can make the back to bow, and submit to others of
whatsoever quality, and condescend to them of low degree, Rom. xii. 16,
Eph. v. 21. But the fear of the Lord humbling the spirit will easily set
it as low as any other can put it. This is the only basis and foundation
of Christian submission and moderation. It is not a complemental
condescendence. It consists not in an external show of gesture and voice.
That is but an apish imitation. And indeed pride often will palliate
itself under voluntary shows of humility, and can demean itself to
undecent and unseemly submissions to persons far inferior, but it is the
more deformed and hateful, that it lurks under some shadows of humility.
As an ape is the more ugly and ill favoured that it is liker a man,
because it is not a man, so vices have more deformity in them when they
put on the garb and vizard of virtue. Only it may appear how beautiful a
garment true humility is, when pride desires often to be covered with the
appearance of it, to hide its nakedness. O how rich a clothing is the
mean-like garment of humility and poverty of spirit! “Be ye clothed with
humility,” 1 Pet. v. 5. It is the ornament of all graces. It covers a
man’s nakedness by uncovering of it. If a man had all other endowments,
this one dead fly, would make all the ointment unsavoury, pride. But
humility is _condimentum virtutum,_ as well as vestimentum.(423) It
seasons all graces, and covers all infirmities. Garments are for ornament
and necessity both. Truly this clothing is alike fit for both, to adorn
and beautify whatsoever is excellent, and to hide or supply whatsoever is
deficient:  _ornamentum et operimentum_.(424)

The apostle Paul gives a solemn charge to the Romans (Rom. xii. 3), that
no man should think high of himself; but soberly, according to the measure
of faith given. That extreme undervaluing and denial of all worth in
ourselves, though it be suitable before God (Luke xvii. 6, 7, 10, Prov.
xxx. 2, 3, Job xlii. 6, 1 Cor. iii. 7), yet is uncomely and incongruous
before men. Humility doth not exclude all knowledge of any excellency in
itself, or defect in another, it can discern, but this is the worth of it:
that it thinks soberly of the one, and despises not the other. The humble
man knows any advantage he has beyond another, but he is not wise in his
own conceit. He looks not so much upon that side of things, his own
perfections and others’ imperfections. That is very dangerous. But he
casts his eye most on the other side, his own infirmities and others’
virtues, his worst part and their best part, and this makes up an equality
or proportion. Where there is inequality, there is a different measure of
gifts and graces, there are diverse failings and infirmity, and degrees of
them. Now, how shall so unequal members make up one body, and join unto
one harmonious being, except this proportion be kept, that the defects of
one be made up by the humility of another? The difference and inequality
is taken away this way, by fixing my eye most upon my own disadvantages
and my brother’s advantages. If I be higher in any respect, yet certainly
I am lower in some, and therefore the unity of the body may be preserved
by humility. I will consider in what I come short, and in what another
excels, and so I can condescend to them of low degree. This is the
substance of that which is subjoined. (Rom. xii. 16) “Mind not high
things, but condescend to men of low estate. Be not wise in your own
conceits.” And this makes us meet in honour to prefer one another, taking
ourselves up in the notion of what evil is in us, and another up in the
notion of what good is in him. Rom. xii. 10, “Be kindly affectioned one to
another, with brotherly love, in honour preferring one another.” Thus
there may be an equality of mutual respect and love, where there is an in
equality of gifts and graces, there may be one measure of charity, where
there are different measures of faith, because both neglect that
difference, and pitch upon their own evils and another’s good.

It is our custom to compare ourselves among ourselves, and the result of
that secret comparison is estimation of ourselves, and despising others.
We take our measure, not by our own real and intrinsic qualifications, but
by the stature of other men’s, and if we find any disadvantage in others,
or any pre-eminence in ourselves, in such a partial application and
collation of ourselves with others (as readily self love, if it find it
not, will fancy it), then we have a tacit gloriation within ourselves, and
a secret complacency in ourselves. But the humble Christian dares not make
himself of that number, nor boast of things without his measure. He dare
not think himself good, because, _deterioribus melior_, “better than
others who are worse.” But he judges himself by that intrinsic measure
which God hath distributed unto him, and so finds reason of sobriety and
humility, and therefore he dare not stretch himself beyond his measure, or
go without his station and degree, 2 Cor. x. 12-14. Humility makes a man
compare himself with the best, that he may find how bad he himself is. But
pride measures by the worst, that it may hide from a man his own
imperfections. The one takes a perfect rule, and finds itself nothing. The
other takes a crooked rule, and imagines itself something. But this is the
way that unity may be kept in the body, if all the members keep this
method and order, the lowest to measure by him that is higher, and the
higher to judge himself by him that is yet above him, and he that is above
all the rest, to compare with the rule of perfection, and find himself
further short of the rule than the lowest is below him. If our comparisons
did thus ascend, we would descend in humility, and all the different
degrees of persons would meet in one centre of lowliness of mind. But
while our rule descends, our pride ascends. The scripture holds out pride
and self estimation as the root of many evils, and humility as the root of
many good fruits among men. “Only through pride comes contention,” Prov.
xiii. 10. There is pride at least in one of the parties, and often in
both. It makes one man careless of another, and out of contempt not to
study equity and righteousness towards him, and it makes another man
impatient of receiving and bearing an injury or disrespect. While every
man seeks to please himself, the contention arises. Pride in both parties
makes both stiff and inflexible to peace and equity, and in this there is
a great deal of folly. For, by this means, both procure more real
displeasure and dissatisfaction to their own spirits. “But with the well
advised is wisdom.” They who have discretion and judgment will not be so
wedded to their own conceits, but that in humility they can forbear and
forgive for peace’ sake. And though this seem harsh and bitter at first,
to a passionate and distempered mind, yet O how sweet is it after! There
is a greater sweetness and refreshment in the peaceable condescendence of
a man’s spirit, and in the quiet passing by any injury, than the highest
satisfaction that ever revenge or contention gave to any man. “When pride
comes, then comes shame, but with the lowly is wisdom,” Prov. xi. 2. Pride
groweth to maturity and ripeness. Shame is near hand it, almost as near as
the harvest. If pride come up, shame is in the next rank behind it. But
there is a great wisdom in lowliness. That is, the honourable society that
it walks in. There may be a secret connection between this and the former
verse, “divers and false balances are abomination to the Lord, but a just
balance is his delight.” Now, if it be so in such low things as
merchandise, how much more abominable is a false spiritual balance in the
weighing of ourselves! Pride hath a false balance in its hand, the weight
of self love carries down the one scale by far.

Lowliness of mind is the strongest bond of peace and charity. It banishes
away strife and vain glory, and makes each man to esteem another better
than himself, (Philip. ii. 3) because the humble man knows his own inside,
and only another’s outside. Now certainly the outside is always better and
more specious than the inside, and therefore a humble man seeing nothing
but his neighbour’s outside, and being acquainted throughly with his own
inside, he esteems another better than himself. Humility, as it makes a
man to think well of another, so it hinders him to speak evil of his
brother. James iv. He lays down the ground work in the 10th verse, “Humble
yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up.” He raises
his superstructure, verses 11, 12: “Speak not evil one of another,
brethren. He that speaketh evil of his brother, and judgeth his brother,
speaketh evil of the law, and judgeth the law, but if thou judge the law,
thou art not a doer of the law, but a judge. There is one lawgiver, who is
able to save, and to destroy. who art thou that judgest another?” For
truly the very ground of evil speaking of that nature, is some advantage,
we conceive, that may redound to our own reputation, by the diminution of
another’s fame. Or, because we are so short sighted in ourselves,
therefore we are sharp sighted towards others, and because we think little
of our own faults, we are ready to aggravate other men’s to an extremity.
But in so doing we take the place of the judge and law upon us, which
judges others, and is judged by none. So we judge others, and not
ourselves. Neither will we suffer ourselves to be judged by others. This
is to make ourselves the infallible rule, to judge the law.

Humility levels men to a holy subjection and submission to another,
without the confusion of their different degrees and stations. It teaches
men to give that respect and regard to even one that is due to his place
or worth, and to signify it in such a way as may testify the simplicity of
their estimation, and sincerity of their respect. Eph. v. 21, “Submit
yourselves one to another in the fear of God.” 1 Pet. v. 5, “All of you be
subject one to another, and be clothed with humility.” Now, if humility
can put a man below others, certainly it will make him endure patiently
and willingly to be placed in that same rank by others. When others give
him that place to sit into, that he had chosen for himself, will he
conceive himself wronged and affronted, though others about him think so?
Nay, it is hard to persuade him of an injury of that kind, because the
apprehension of such an affront hath for its foundation the imagination of
some excellency beyond others, which lowliness hath razed out. He hath
placed himself so low for every man’s edification and instruction, that
others can put him no lower, and there he sits quietly and peaceably.
_Bene qui latuit bene vixit._(425) Affronts and injuries fly over him, and
light upon the taller cedars, while the shrubs are safe.

Qui cadit in plano, (vix hoc tamen evenit ipsum,)
Sic cadit, ut tacta surgere possit humo.(426)

He sits so low, that he cannot fall lower, so a humble man’s fall upon the
ground is no fall indeed, but in the apprehension of others, but it is a
heavy and bruising fall from off the tower of self conceit.

Now the example that is given us, “Learn of me,” is certainly of greater
force to persuade a man to this humble, composed, and quiet temper of
spirit, than all the rules in the world. That the Son of God should come
down and act it before our eyes, and cast us a pattern of humility and
meekness, if this do not prevail to humble the heart, I know not what can.
Indeed this root of bitterness, which is in all men’s hearts by nature, is
very hard to pluck up, yea, when other weeds of corruption are extirpated
this poisonable one, pride groweth the faster, and roots the deeper.
Suppose a man should be stript naked of all the garments of the old man,
this would be certainly nearest his skin and last to put off. It is so
pestilent an evil, that it grows in the glass window as well as on the
dunghill and, which is strange, it can spring out of the heart, and take
moisture and aliment from humility, as well as from other graces. A man is
in hazard to wax proud that he is not proud, and to be high minded because
he is lowly. Therefore, it is not good to reflect much upon our own
graces, no more than for a man to eat much honey.

I know not any antidote so sovereign as the example of Jesus Christ, to
cure this evil, and he himself often proposes this receipt to his
disciples, (John xiii. 13-17) “Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say
well, for so I am. If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet
ye also ought to wash one another’s feet. For I have given you an example,
that ye should do as I have done to you. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
the servant is not greater than his lord, neither he that is sent greater
than he that sent him. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do
them.”  Matt xi. 29, 30, “Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my
yoke is easy, and my burden is light.” Matt. xx. 27, 28, “And whosoever
will be chief among you, let him be your servant. Even as the Son of man
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a
ransom for many.”  Might not that sound always in our ears, the servant is
not above his lord, the “Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister?” O whose spirit would not that compose? What apprehension of
wrong would it not compensate? What flame of contention about worth and
respect would it not quench? What noise of tumultuous passions would it
not silence? Therefore, the apostle of the Gentiles prescribes this
medicine, (Phil. ii. 5-8) “Let this mind be in you, which was also in
Christ Jesus who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be
equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the
form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men, and being found in
fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even
the death of the cross.” If he did humble himself out of charity, who was
so high, how should we humble ourselves, both out of charity and
necessity, who are so low! If we knew ourselves, it were no strange thing
that we were humble, the evidence of truth would extort it from us. But
here is the wonder, that he who knew himself to be equal to God, should
notwithstanding become lower than men, that the Lord of all should become
the servant of all, and the King of glory make himself of no reputation!
That he pleased to come down lowest, who knew himself to be the highest of
all, no necessity could persuade it, but charity and love hath done it.
Now, then, how monstrous and ugly a thing must pride be after this! That
the dust should raise itself, and a worm swell, that wretched, miserable
man should be proud, when it please the glorious God to be humble, that
absolute necessity shall not constrain to this, that simple love persuaded
him to!  How doth this heighten and elevate humility, that such an one
gives out himself, not only as the teacher, but as the pattern of it.
“Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest
unto your souls.”





SEVERAL SERMONS UPON THE MOST IMPORTANT SUBJECTS OF PRACTICAL RELIGION.




The Publisher To The Reader.


There are no sermons I know of any divine or pastor in this kingdom, that
have been more frequently printed, or more universally read and esteemed,
than the elegant and judicious discourses of Mr. Binning, which were
published after his death, at different times, in four small volumes. As
there was a great demand for these valuable writings, about twenty six
years ago; so these printed copies of them were compared with his own
manuscript copy now in my hand, carefully revised, and then printed, in a
large 4to of 641 pages, by Robert Fleming, Printer at Edinburgh, in the
year 1735, to which was prefixed a short account of his Life, chiefly
taken from the large memoirs of his Life, that the Reverend Mr. Robert
M’Ward, some time minister of the gospel at Glasgow, wrote, in a long
letter to the Reverend Mr. James Coleman, Minister of the gospel at Sluys
in Flanders, who translated Mr. Binning’s Sermons into High Dutch, and
printed them for the benefit of the Christian congregations in Holland and
Flanders. Some of the most memorable particulars of this great man’s life
have been also published, anno 1753, by the reverend, learned, and
industrious Mr. John Wesley, late Fellow of Lincoln college, Oxford, in
his Christian Library, which contains about fifty volumes in 8vo of
Extracts from, and Abridgments of, the choicest pieces of practical
Divinity, we have printed in our language. It is prefixed to Mr. Binning’s
Sermons upon the first and part of the second chapters of the first
Epistle of John, in the 29th volume of that useful work.(427)

Mr. Binning’s elegant and judicious Treatise of Christian Love was first
printed from a manuscript in my hand, at Edinburgh, 1743, in an octavo
pamphlet of forty-seven pages, in short print, by Robert Fleming, to which
he hath prefixed a short preface. And the publisher tells us, “That he had
revised about twenty four sermons, upon very edifying and profitable
subjects, to print in a separate volume, from which they [his readers]
should receive as great improvement and satisfaction, as from any of his
printed treatises, which every person may easily discover from the style
and language to be Mr. Binning’s genuine compositions, as his manner of
writing can scarcely be imitated by any other person.” These sermons were
carefully transcribed some little time ago, and revised by the assistance
of a friend, and are now printed in this small volume.... And not to
detain the reader further from the serious and candid perusal of this
book, I shall only add, that I have faithfully transcribed these sermons
from the manuscript copy without the smallest alteration of his
sentiments. I have endeavoured to rectify a few grammatical errors of the
transcribers and the old form of spelling, and altered a few words not now
used in our modern sermons, for words of the same meaning. As I have added
several sermons of this author upon the kingdom of God, which I
transcribed since the proposals of this book were printed, so I could not
insert the sermons upon Acts xxvi. 18; Acts xiv. 11, 12, without almost
doubling the price, which I feared would not be agreeable to some of the
encouragers of this work. I intend to put the other sermons I have
transcribed, or may yet copy, into the hands of some friends to revise
before they be printed; as also Mr. M’Ward’s Life of this worthy
gentleman, taken from his own papers....

It is my sincere wish, that all the readers of this book may be builded up
in spiritual wisdom and goodness unto eternal life.

Brousterland, September 12th, 1760




Sermon I.


    1 John iii. 23.—“And this is his commandment, That we should
    believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one
    another.”


It is a common doctrine often declared unto you, that the most part of
those who hear the gospel do run, in their pretended course to heaven,
either upon a rock of dashing discouragement, or the sands of sinking
presumption. These are in all men’s mouths; and no question they are very
dangerous, so hazardous, as many fools make shipwreck either of the faith,
or a good conscience,—of the faith, by running upon and dashing upon the
rock,—of a good conscience, by sitting down upon the quicksand. But I fear
that which is commonly confessed by all is cordially believed by few, and
so, little regarded in our course and conversation. All Christians pretend
to be making a voyage heaven-ward, and that is only home-ward. Now the
gospel is given us to direct our course, and teach us how to steer between
these two hazards, both safely and surely. This is the shore that shall
guide us, and conduct to our intended haven, that is heaven, if we set our
compass by it, and steer our course accordingly. Yet strange it is to
behold the infinite wanderings and errors of men, on the one hand or the
other:—some presuming upon the news of mercy, and the sound of God’s
grace, to walk after the imagination of their own hearts, and to live and
continue in sin, for which Christ died, that he might redeem us from it,
fancying a possibility of living in sin, and escaping wrath, and so
abusing the tender of grace to promote licentiousness;—others, again,
apprehending the wrath of God, and their just deservings, abusing the
notion of God’s justice, and the perfection of his holiness, to the
prejudice of the glory of his grace and mercy, and their own salvation.
This is certainly the cunning sleight of Satan, with the deceitfulness and
ignorance of our own hearts, that leads men, and sometimes one and the
same man, at diverse times, to contrary misapprehensions of divine truths.
The wind of temptation gets fires to one corner of the house and then to
another, and sometimes over-persuades the notion of mercy, and another
time overstretches the apprehension of his justice; and yet in effect
there is no true persuasion of any of them, but a cloud or shadow is
apprehended instead of them.

Now I say, there is one cure for both these,—the right apprehension of the
gospel in its entire and whole sum, the right uptaking of the light which
shines in a dark place, and is given to lead us to our place of rest—to
have a complete model, and a short summary of the gospel, always in our
heart and eye. For truly it is the apprehending of parcels of divine
truth, which leads men into such opposite mistakes and courses. To remedy
this, we have some brief comprehensive models of the gospel set down by
the Holy Ghost, and none in better terms than this here: “This is his
commandment, that ye believe,” &c. You have it in two words, faith and
love. This is the form of sound words which we should hold fast, 2 Tim. i.
13. This is the mould of doctrine delivered by Christ and his Apostles. It
is the separation of these two in some men’s fancy, that leads too many in
such paths of destruction. Truly they can as little be divided as the
sun’s light and heat, but the motions and shadows of them may, and it is
the following the shadows of some of them which shipwrecks souls. Now not
only the common multitude of the hearers of the gospel are in hazard of
this, but even God’s own children, who have believed in him.

The taking up of these things apart, creates the heart much trouble and
perplexity, and occasioneth much sin and stumbling. I do think it is the
ignorance and advertency of this conjunction, that makes our case both
more sad and sinful than otherwise it would be. And these two indeed have
a mutual influence upon one another, loosing reins to sin more freely, for
it unquestionably disturbs the soul’s peace, and procures it much
bitterness. And again, the quitting hold of the promise of grace in Christ
Jesus, and the indulging our own sad and sullen apprehensions, cannot but
in the issue disable the soul from the duties of love, and expose it unto
the violence of every temptation. As these two do mutually strengthen one
another, the faith of Jesus Christ, and the lively apprehension of his
grace and goodness, so they are the most noble and effectual persuasives
to live unto him, and to walk in love. Besides, faith is the mean and way
which God hath appointed to convoy his influence unto the soul; and then
again, love carrying itself actively in duties to God and men, bestirring
itself for God and those who are beloved of God, it brings in a supply to
faith, and returns by a straight compass to the spring from whence it
first issued, and increases it still more. Believing on the name of the
Son sends forth the stream of holy affection to him, and all begotten of
the Father, and this returns again by the circuit of obedience to his
commands and submission to his easy yoke, to unbosom itself in the
fountain from whence it first issued; and whereas faith was at first one
simple soul adherence to a Saviour, and a hearty embracing of him, this
accession of the fruits of it exalts it unto that height of assurance, and
gives that evidence which it wanted; and faith being thus strengthened,
and rooted, and built up to the top of assurance of God’s grace, love, and
salvation, it becomes more able to bear the yoke of his commands, which
are not grievous. The spring of believing, thus swelled by the concurrence
of so many streams, it breaks forth the more, and sends out more love and
delight in God, and more charity, compassion, and meekness towards men.
And this is the circle and round Christianity runs, until that day come
that the head-spring of faith shall be obscured and shrivelled up in the
great sea of the love of God, which shall overflow all the saints’ graces
in due time, when we shall see God face to face.

This is a true Christian, which this apostle so beloved of God describes.
Here is one under a commandment, and not above it, as some fondly
conceive. He is a keeper of his commands, and a doer of these things which
are pleasant in God’s sight. This is no legal notion, if it be right
taken.

It is not the bondage of the creature to be under the command of God,
truly it is the beauty and liberty of a reasonable soul. Some speak of all
subjection unto a law as slavery, but is it not an infinitely greater
slavery to be at liberty to sin, and serve our own lusts? O wretched and
base liberty! the Son indeed makes us truly free, and that from sin; and
he is truly a Redeemer who redeems us from all iniquity, John viii. 32;
Psal. cxxx. ult.; Tit. ii. 14.

But this commandment here spoken of, would not indeed be gospel, unless
there was a prior command, a brighter precept, given by the Father to the
Son. I find two commands given by the Father, and received by the Son,
which two you may conjoin and make one of, as here faith and love are made
one commandment. The first is, John x. 18, “I lay down my life of myself,
no man taketh it from me. This commandment have I received from my Father,
and no other.” John xii. 49, 50, “The Father gave me a commandment, what I
should say and speak, and I know that his commandment is life
everlasting.” This is more expressly and clearly set down, John vi. 39,
40, “This is the Father’s will that sent me, that of all that he gave me I
should lose none, but raise them up at the last day. This is the will of
him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on
him, should have everlasting life.” Here, then, beloved in the Lord, is
the foundation of our hope, and that which makes all commandments given by
God to us to come under a gospel notion, that which makes Christ’s yoke
easy, and his burden light, and his commands not grievous. The great
commandment was imposed upon our Saviour. The great weight of that wrath
due to our sins was put upon his shoulders. This was the Father’s will,
that he should lay down his life for his sheep; this command he received
willingly, and obeyed faithfully and fully. And by his obedience to this,
that great obligation to satisfy God’s justice, and pay a ransom for our
souls is taken off us; inasmuch as he died, justice cannot come and demand
it at our hand. Now, therefore, there is another commandment given to
Christ, which directly concerns us, and it is this in substance: “I will
and command that thou who hast come in the place of sinners, and resolvest
to die for them, that thou give eternal life to whom thou wilt, even to as
many as believe in thy name; I give to thee the absolute disposal of life
and death; I command thee to preach life everlasting to all pious souls,
that shall flee unto thee upon the apprehension of the danger of death,
and that thou bestow that life upon them, and raise them up at the last
day to be partakers of it.” This is the commission the Father gave to the
Son, a sweet commission for poor sinners, and the charter of our
salvation. And for this errand he was anointed with the Holy Spirit, and
sent into the world; nay, the commission extends further than grace, even
to eternal glory also. Christ has received commandment of the Father, to
give repentance and remission of sin, both to give faith, and love, and
all other graces, else it were defective. Thus Christ comes instructed to
the world. He lays open his commission in preaching the gospel. He obeys
the first commandment in his own person, by offering up himself upon the
cross a sacrifice for sins, and he is about the fulfilling the next
commandment, that is, the giving life to them that believe: and that he
may accomplish it, having ascended himself unto heaven to intercede for
us, he also sent his ambassadors into the world, to whom he hath committed
the word of reconciliation, and he gives them commission to publish and
proclaim this commandment in his own name. This is his command, that ye
“believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ.” And this we do proclaim in
his name, since he has gotten a commandment to give life everlasting to
believers. This, then, is his charge to you, to come and receive it from
him. Come and embrace him, and ye shall have life and all in him. This is
the hardest and heaviest burden he imposes upon you, the weight of your
life and salvation he hath taken upon himself. But O! now come and lay
hold on him, who is thus offered unto you. Know that you are lost and
undone in yourselves, consider the impossibilities you lie under to escape
his wrath. Behold the anger of God hanging over your head, ready to be
revealed in flaming fire, and a tempestuous cloud of eternal misery. Will
ye consider that ye are born heirs of wrath? Your natural inheritance is
in the lake of fire; and whatsoever your endowments by nature, or your
privileges by birth be, nothing shall exeem you from this. Shall not then
this Saviour be welcome to you? For truly faith is but a cordial
salutation and embracement of our blessed Redeemer. The soul brings him
into the house, and makes him welcome, and he is standing ready to come in
to your heart, and to bring in salvation with him.

Now whatever soul hath obeyed this commandment by belief of the truth, and
receiving of Christ into the heart, there is but one commandment behind,
and it is not grievous, viz., love me, and love one another; love me, and
live unto me. This is an easy yoke; and there is good reason for it,
though it had never been required to love him, and live to him, who loved
not his life unto the death for us. There is mention made only of
brotherly love here, but certainly the other love to God flowing from the
sense of his love, is the right wing of the soul, and brotherly love the
left; and by these the pious soul mounts up to heaven with the wings of an
eagle. The love of our brother is but the fruit and consequent of this
love, but it is set down as a probation, and clear evidence of the love of
God in our souls.

Love is commanded as the very sum and substance of the whole law, as the
fountain of all other duties. Things are compacted in their causes, and
lie hid within the virtue of them. Truly this is the way to persuade and
constrain you to all the duties of godliness and righteousness, of piety
towards God, and charity towards men,—if once we could fasten this chain
of affection upon your hearts, and engage your souls by love to God and
man. We cannot but beat the air, while we seek to persuade you to the
serious practice of religious duties, of prayer in secret and in your
families, of reading and meditation upon the word, of sanctifying the
Sabbath, of dealing justly and moderately with all men, of sobriety and
temperance in your conversation, of denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
of walking humbly with God and towards men, of restraining and subduing
your inordinate lusts and passions; I say, it is almost in vain to press
these things upon you, or expect them from you, till once the Spirit of
power and love enter into your hearts; and indeed the spirit of love is a
powerful spirit, the love of God possessing the heart within, cannot but
conform all within and without to his love and good pleasure. Love only
can do these things which are pleasant in his sight, for it doth them
pleasantly, heartily, and cheerfully; and God loves a cheerful giver, a
cheerful worshipper. Brotherly love is rather expressed, because little or
not at all studied by the most part. Other duties to God, if men come not
up in practice to them, yet they approve them in their soul and mind. But
there is scarce a notion of the obligation of charity and love towards our
brethren, yea, not so much as in the minds of Christians, let be in their
practice. It is the special command which Christ left to his disciples
when he was going away, John xiii. 35. But, alas! we have forgotten it, it
is so long since.




Sermon II.


    1 John iii. 23.—“This is his commandment, that,” &c.


We commonly make many rules in religion, and turn it into a laborious art,
full of intricate questions, precepts, and contentions. As there hath been
a great deal of vanity in the conception of speculative divinity, by a
multitude of vain and unedifying questions which have no profit in them,
or are beneficial to them that are occupied therein, but only have stirred
up strife and envy, and raised the flame of contention in the Christian
world; so I fear that practical divinity is no less vitiated and spoiled
in this age amongst true Christians (by many perplexed cases relating to
every condition), than the other among the schoolmen. Hereby it seems to
me, that Christ and his apostles did not suppose it to be so perplexed a
business as we now do make it; neither did the hearers weary themselves or
others with so many various objections against the practice of the
fundamental commandment of the gospel, believing in Jesus Christ. The
plain nature of the gospel being holden forth and received, I am
persuaded, was and is able (like the sun arising in brightness) to dispel
and scatter all these mists and clouds which do arise both in the one and
other, from ignorance at first, and which are elevated to a greater height
by the custom of the times. The matter, my brethren, is not so dark as you
make it. Here it is plainly and simply expressed: “This is his
commandment, that ye believe in the name of his Son;” and then, “love one
another.” Ye all know that we had commandments given us by God, which were
by nature impressed on the heart of man; but by his fall into sin, the
tables of the law (which I may say were in Adam’s mind and heart,
understanding and affection), those two tables were broken in the fall,
and since there could be no obedience, because of ignorance and
perversion, the tables breaking in pieces, their ruptures have produced
these two opposite principles. The fall of man hath broken his mind, and
so darkened his understanding, and broken his will, and put it in a wrong
set. This appointed it, set it in a posture of enmity against God.
However, we are by this fall utterly disabled to stand up before God in
acceptable obedience. There is no man breathing, how blameless soever he
be before the world, but must fall down as guilty before God in many
things, yea, in all things. But the law being thus obliterated out of
men’s consciences, as he lost ability to obey, so he lost almost all
conscience of sin and disobedience. He not knowing his charge and
obligation, could not accuse himself for falling in rebellion. Therefore
it pleased the Lord to cause the law to be written in tables of stone in
mount Sinai. He transcribes the commandments over again, that all the
world may see their obligation, and how infinitely short they have come in
their subjection, and how just their condemnation may be. For this
purpose, the Lord causes proclaim the old bond in the ears of men with
great majesty and authority, as it became the Lawgiver, that all may
become guilty, and stop their mouth before God, Rom. iii. 19. He would
once have all men knowing that they are under infinite breaches of his
commandments, that they may see themselves also subject to his judgment.
Now, what do you think of a soul that stands at the foot of this mountain,
and hears a dreadful accusation read against it, to all which the
conscience within must subscribe unto, and both together pronounce the
person guilty and liable to eternal punishment? I say, what can such a
soul do, who has with trembling heard his voice? Satisfaction there cannot
be given for an infinite offence against an infinite nature. The curse and
sentence which was the sanction and confirmation of this commandment is
just, and there appears no way how, without violation of God’s justice, it
can be repealed. Obedience to these commandments is now both impossible
and unprofitable;—impossible, I say, because of the weakness and
wickedness of the flesh, that has no ability nor willingness but to offend
and disobey; and unprofitable, because it cannot at all relax the former
sentence of condemnation. Now obedience, being a present duty, cannot pay
old debts, or satisfy for our former rebellions, and so it must leave a
man to seen condemnation. I fear this is a puzzle that all consciences
must come unto here, or elsewhere. Here is a strait indeed.

But yet there is an enlargement, there is a way found out of bringing the
soul out of the miry clay, and deep pit of misery; and it is this, God
hath found out a ransom for himself, without our procurement, or consent,
or knowledge. He hath provided a satisfaction to his justice in his Son
Jesus Christ. Having laid upon him our iniquities, he exacts of him our
deserved punishment, and makes him a curse who knew no sin. Now this being
done, the Lord sends forth to all poor sinners who are trembling at mount
Sinai this proclamation,—this is my last and most peremptory command, that
ye believe in the name of my Son Jesus Christ. This is my well-beloved
Son, in whom I am well-pleased, hear ye him. Have ye heard me the lawgiver
condemning you? Now go and hear him, the Mediator and Saviour, absolving
you, for I have committed all judgment unto him. Though I pronounce the
sentence in this world against you, yet I have committed all the execution
of it to him, and if you come to him, you may prevent it. You have broken
all my former commandments, and I have pronounced a sentence against you
for that. But now I give a new commandment instead of all the former,
which if you obey, then the sentence of death is relaxed. You who cannot
obey the law and give satisfaction in your own persons, I charge you to
flee unto my Son Christ, who hath given me full satisfaction both to the
curse, by suffering, and to the command, by obedience, and lay hold on his
righteousness as your own, and in him ye are justified, and delivered from
all these sentences and hard writings against you. I give a new
commandment as the cure and remedy of all broken commandments. Believe on
this name, in which is salvation. Take his obedience and suffering for
your cure, and present me with that, I shall be as well satisfied as with
your own personal satisfaction.

This now is very plain business. All commands are broken. There is yet one
published in the gospel to help all, and it is in substance to embrace and
welcome Jesus Christ for all, to seek our life and salvation in him, to
take him as a priest to offer sacrifice for us, and expiate our sins, and
to come to him as a prophet to seek wisdom and illumination, and all grace
from him; to choose him as our King, henceforth to submit to his easy yoke
of government. Now I say there will be no more debates about this. Will ye
yet dispute whether ye may believe or not? Will ye inquire after this
whether you have a warrant or not? Truly such a question would occasion
much jealousy and provocation among men. If a man had signified as much
willingness by command, by invitation, by request, by frequent repetition
of these, yet to call in question or dispute whether or not I may go to
such a person, will he make me welcome, were it not the greatest affront I
could put upon him? Would it not alienate his affection more than any
thing, to be jealous of his real kindness to me.

I would desire to hold out unto you the sin, the danger, and the vanity of
such a way. I say the sin is great, it is no less than the highest and
most heinous disobedience to the gospel, which of all others is of the
deepest dye. You have disobeyed the law, and broken all the ten
commandments. And will ye therefore disobey the gospel, too, and break
this fundamental commandment? Is it not enough that ye have broken the
rest, and will ye break this also, which was given for the cure of all?

Consider, I say, this is his commandment. Now commands should be obeyed,
and not disputed, coming from an infallible and uncontrollable authority.
Would ye not silence all the rebellions of your hearts against the
commands of praying, hearing, reading, dealing justly, and walking
soberly, with this one word, it is his command, it is his sovereign will?
And why do ye not see the stamp of that same authority upon this? Now if
you consider it aright, it hath more authority upon it than upon others,
because it is his last command, and so would be taken as most pungent and
weighty. When your hearts rise up to question and dispute this matter, I
pray you cut all these knotty objections with the sword of his
commandment. You use to go about to loose them by particular answers and
untie them at leisure with art and skill, but truly it would be a readier
and wiser course to cut them in pieces at one stroke, by this piercing and
pungent precept. If your reasons and scruples be weighty, and you cannot
get answers to overbalance them, I pray you put this weighty seal of
divine authority into the balance, and sure I am it will weigh down all.
Consider then the danger of it. It is the last and most peremptory
command, after which you may expect no other, but the execution of
justice. How sad and severe is the certification, “He that believeth not
is condemned already,” and “the wrath of God abideth on him.” There needs
no new sentence to be pronounced against you. Why? Because, if you believe
not, that prior sentence of the law is yet standing above your heads to
condemn you, that wrath abides on you. This is the only way to remove it,
to come to him, who hath taken it on himself, after the breach of all
commands. Ye have this retreat, this refuge to flee unto, a new command to
come unto the Son, and have life; but after this disobedience of the Son,
you have none. There is nothing after unbelief, but ye are turned over, or
rather left over, in the hand of the law and divine justice. Therefore it
is the most dangerous and damnable thing to disobey this. It is to refuse
the very remedy of sin. Consider also what vanity and uselessness is in
these debates. What an unreasonable and senseless thing is it to dispute
against our own soul, and against our own happiness! All is wrapt up here,
and we do no less than the highest act of self-murder that can be. He that
hateth me, wrongs his own soul. What an unreasonable thing then is it,
because ye are miserable, to refuse mercy; because ye are unclean,
therefore to maintain that ye are not to come to the blessed fountain of
cleansing; because ye have broken the rest of the commands, therefore ye
may not obey this? Is there any sense or reason in such things; because I
am a sinner, therefore I will not come to a Saviour? Alas! to what purpose
was the Son sent and given, and for what end came he? Was it not to seek
and to save such as are lost and undone, and to deliver them from misery?
What do you gain by such questions? For at length you must turn and enter
in at the door of a naked command and promise, when you have wearied
yourselves to find that in your hearts which is not in them, to seek
waters in the wilderness, and springs in the desert, qualifications and
graces in your own hearts to warrant your boldness in coming to the
promise. I say, when you have sought and all in vain, you must at length
come to this fountain in which is all grace and happiness. If you had what
you seek, yet if ye would indeed believe in Christ, you must deny them and
look upon yourselves as ungodly, to be justified by faith. Why then do you
grasp after that which can do you no good, (though you had it), I mean, in
point of your acceptation? Consider it, my beloved, that the honour of God
and your own happiness lies most in this, nay not only that, but your
holiness too, which you pretend to seek after, lies in it. Till you come
to Christ, it is in vain to seek it elsewhere.




Sermon III.


    1 John iii. 23.—“And this is his commandment,” &c.


There are different tempers of mind among men, some more smooth and
pliable, others more refractory and froward. Some may be persuaded by
love, who cannot be constrained by fear. With some a request will more
prevail than a command. Others again are of a harsher disposition. Love
and condescension doth rather embolden them, and therefore they must be
restrained with the bridle of authority. It would seem that the Lord hath
some regard to this in the administration of the gospel. He accommodates
himself to the diverse dispositions of men, and (if we may say with
respect to him which yet can be no disrespect, seeing he hath humbled
himself lower) he doth become all things to all men, that he may gain
some. You see the gospel sometimes running in the channel of love and
kindness, sometimes in the channel of authority and majesty. God sometimes
stoopeth down to invite, and affectionately to beseech sinners to come
unto his Son for life. He hath prepared a marriage and banquet for us in
Christ. He hath made all things ready for the receiving, for the eating,
and he sends forth his servants to entreat and invite all such, who have
no bread and clothing, who are poor and lame, to this wedding. He gives an
hearty invitation to all that stand at an infinite distance from God, and
so are feeding upon empty vanities without him, to come and enjoy the
riches of his grace, which runs as a river in Christ between these two
golden banks, the pardon of sin, and the purification of our soul from its
pollution. You have a hearty invitation, Isa. lv. 1, 2, 3, “Ho, every one
that thirsteth, come to the waters.” But he comes yet lower to request and
obtest poor sinners, as if he could have advantage by it; he will not
stand(428) to be a supplicant at any man’s door, to beseech him to be
reconciled to God, 2 Cor. v. 14, 19, 20. As if we could do him a favour
and benefit, he requests us most earnestly. Truly it is strange that this
doth not melt the heart, and make it fall down into the belief and
obedience of the truth. Affection is the most insinuating and prevailing
thing with an ingenuous spirit, most of all when it is accompanied with
majesty in the person that hath it, and humility in the carriage and
disposition. For a great personage to descend out of love, to affectionate
and humble requests and solicitations, this cannot but have a mighty
influence on any spirit that is not wild and savage. But because the heart
of man is desperately wicked, and hath lost that true ingenuity and
nobleness of spirit, and is now become stubborn and froward, as a wild
ass, or as a swift dromedary traversing her ways, therefore the Lord takes
another way of dealing with men suitable to their froward natures; he
gives out his royal statute backed with majesty and authority; “This is
his command,” &c.—that when fair means could not prevail, other means more
terrible might reduce lost rebellious men. He hedges in our way with
threatenings and promises annexed to the commandment, “He that believeth
has everlasting life, but he that believeth not is condemned already, and
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him.” He declares all
men traitors if they come not in to his Son, to be reconciled to God,
before the decree of wrath pass forth.

Truly it is a wonder that there should be any need either of an
invitation, or a request, or a command, or a threatening; that we should
need to be invited, or requested, or commanded, or threatened to our own
happiness. Might not a bare and simple offer, or proposal of Jesus Christ,
his nature, and offices, of the redemption and salvation purchased by him,
suffice? What needed more, but to declare unto us that we are lost and
utterly undone by nature, and that there is a refuge and remedy provided
in Christ? Surely in any other thing of little importance, we needed no
entreaty. Were it not a good enough invitation to a man that is like to
starve for hunger, to cast meat freely before him; or to a man that is in
hazard of drowning, to cast a cord to him? We would seek no other
persuasion to go and dig for a treasure of gold, than to show us where it
is hid. But strange is the rebellious and perverse disposition of man’s
heart. What an enmity is in it to the ways of God! What strange
inclination to self-murder, ever since man destroyed himself! We cannot
express it unto you; but you may perceive it well enough, both by the
Lord’s frequent obtesting, and protesting to us in his word, and the
experience of the great barrenness of all such means. Whence is it, I pray
you, that there should need so many means to persuade you to that which is
your own advantage, and to call you to shun the ways of destruction? And
whence is it that notwithstanding of all those invitations, entreaties,
commandments, promises and threatenings often sounding in your ears, yet
the most part are not reduced to obedience, nor reclaimed from the ways of
death, and do not take hold of the path of life. Truly it may plainly
point out to you the desperate wickedness of the heart, the stubbornness
and rebelliousness of our disposition, and if once we could persuade you
of this we had gained a great point which few do seriously consider, and
so do not abhor themselves.

The commandments mentioned in the text are these two, to believe in
Christ, and to love our brother. It is no wonder they are recommended with
so much seriousness and earnestness; for they are both the most
comprehensive, and the most pleasing commandments. They are most
comprehensive; for it appears that all the commands spoken of in the
preceding verse, are summed up in this one precept, “And this is his
commandment,” &c. And that they are most pleasant in God’s sight is
evident, for the true Christian being described from this, that he does
these things that are pleasing in God’s sight,—that he is one that studies
to conform himself to his good pleasure, this is subjoined, as the two
most pleasing exercises of Christianity, “This is his commandment,” that
is, his pleasing commandment, that ye should believe in Christ, and love
one another.

This command of believing in Jesus is comprehensive, because it takes in
all precepts, and that under a threefold consideration. It takes them all
in as broken and transgressed by men, as fulfilled by Christ, and also
takes them all in as a rule of righteousness, according to which the
believer ought henceforth to walk.

The command of believing in Christ doth first of all import this—that a
sinner should examine himself according to the law of God,—that he should
lay his whole life and course his heart and ways, down before the perfect
and holy commandments,—that he may stop his own mouth with shame and
silence, and find himself guilty before God. Many use to speak of
humiliation preparatory to believing, and the work of the law preparatory
to the gospel. But truly I conceive it would be more fitly expressed, if
it were holden out thus, that it is one of the essential ingredients in
the bosom of believing, and one of the first articles of the gospel law,
to charge all sinners to acknowledge their sin and misery, to discern
their own abounding iniquity, and danger of perishing by it, how guilty
they are before God, and how subject to his judgment, that so finding
themselves undone, they may have recourse to a Saviour.

Truly the Spirit’s work is to convince of sin, and then of righteousness,
and when we are commanded to believe, the first part of our believing is
crediting and subscribing to the law, to the justice and righteousness of
God against us, and then the believing and acknowledging the gospel is the
end and purpose to that. “Ye believe in God, believe also in me.” This
takes in completely the two books of saving faith towards God as a
Lawgiver and Judge, and faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ as a Saviour
and Redeemer; and it doth but beget misapprehensions in many, when the one
is looked upon as a condition without which we shall not be welcome to the
other. Truly, I think, both are proposed as essentials of saving faith;
none of them in such a way as to procure right and warrant to the other,
but only in such an order as is suitable to any reasonable nature to be
wrought upon, and that is all. It is only required of you, upon that
account, because fleeing unto a Saviour for refuge is a rational and
deliberate action, which necessarily includes the sense of misery without
him. But the sense of sin and misery is not urged as one thing which ye
should go about to prepare, and fit yourselves for more welcome at
Christ’s hand as commonly it is taken. Here it is easy to understand how
the command of believing belongs unto all who hear it, even to the vilest
and grossest sinners, who are yet stout, hard hearted, and far from
righteousness, (Isa. xlvi. 12.) those who are spending their money for
that which is not bread, and their labour for that which satisfies not,
and those whose hearts are uncircumcised, and their lives profane. And yet
the commandment of coming to the Son and believing on him for life, is
extended unto them all. All are invited, requested, commanded, and
threatened to this duty. There is no bar of exclusion set down in the
gospel to hold out one, and let in another; as many suppose these
promises, that sound condition wise, to be limitations and restrictions of
the right and warrant to persons to believing. Indeed it is true all are
not exhorted at the first hand to assurance of God’s love, and an interest
in Christ. There is no question that none have right to this seal, but
them who have believed and set to their own seal to the character or truth
of the word. But all are charged to believe in Christ that is, out of a
sense of their own lost estate, to embrace a Saviour for righteousness and
strength. Neither is there any fear that men can come too soon to Christ.
We need not set down exclusions or extractions, for if they be not
sensible of sin and misery, they will certainly not come to him at all.
And therefore the command that enjoins them to believe on the Son, charges
them also to believe that they are lost without him. And if the most
presumptuous sinners would once give obedience to this commandment, really
there would be no fear of presumption in coming too soon unto Jesus. A
sense of sin is not set as a porter, to keep out any who are willing to
come in, but rather to open the door, and constrain them that were
unwilling to enter in, so that if the least measure of that can do this,
we are not to stand till we have more, but to come to the Prince exalted
to get remission of sins, and more true gospel sorrow which worketh
repentance unto salvation from dead works. You should not therefore
understand any promises in the scriptures so, as if there were any
conditions set down to seclude any from coming, who are willing to come.
For they do but declare the nature and manner of what they are invited to,
that no man may mistake believing, and take his own empty presumptions or
fancies, which embolden him to sin more, for that true faith which is full
of good fruits.

Now, in the text, the pious soul, having once subscribed to the guilt and
curse of all the commandments by believing the law, he looks also upon the
Son, Jesus Christ, and finds the law fulfilled, the curse removed, all
satisfied in him. He finds all the commandments obeyed in his person, all
the wrath due for the breach of them pacified and quenched by his
sufferings. And he gives a cheerful and cordial approbation of all this.
He receives Christ as the end of the law for righteousness, which Christ
made up by obedience and suffering to supply our disobedience. We should
stay or rest upon this, as that which pacifies the Father’s wrath to the
full. This is what gives the answer of a good conscience, and pacifies
every penitent soul, and secures his title to heaven. Now this presents
God with a full atonement and obedience to all the law, which he accepts
from a believer as if it were his own. This is the large comprehension of
believing, it takes in its arms, as it were, in one bundle,(429) all the
precepts and curses, and devolves them over on Christ, puts them in an
able hand, and then takes them all, as satisfied and fulfilled by him, and
holds them up in one bundle to the Father. And hence it proceeds, in the
third place, that believing on the Son takes in all again to be the rule
of walking and the mark to aim at. Finding such a perfect exoneration of
bygones(430) in Christ and standing in such favour with God, the soul is
sweetly constrained to love and delight in the divine laws. And truly this
is the natural result of faith. I wish you may rightly observe this
conjunction, that this is inseparably knit with it, love to God and men,
delight to do his will, to love him, and live unto him. Do not deceive
yourselves with vain words. If you find not the smartness of the gospel,
and the doctrine of grace laying this restraint upon the heart, ye are yet
in your sins. This is the reasoning of a believing soul. Shall I, who am
dead unto sin, live any longer therein? Shall I not delight in those
commandments, when Christ hath delivered me from the curse of the law?
Though such a one fall, and come short, yet the pressure of the heart is
that way. But then attend unto the order, ye must first believe on the
Son, and then love him, and live unto him. Ye must first flee unto his
righteousness, and then the righteousness of the law shall be wrought in
you. Therefore do not weary yourselves to no purpose. Do not wrong your
own souls by seeking to prevent this order, which was established for your
joy and salvation. Know that you must first meet with satisfaction in all
the commands of Christ, before obedience to any of them be accepted, and
having met with that, know that the sincere endeavour of thy soul, and the
affectionate bensal(431) of thy heart to thy duty, is accepted. And if ye
find yourselves thereafter surcharged with guilt and unanswerable walking,
yet ye know the way is to begin at this again, to believe in the Son. This
is the round you must walk, as long as ye are in the body. When you are
defiled, run into the fountain, and when you are washed, study to keep
your garments clean, but if defiled again, get your hearts washed from
wickedness. “These things,” says John, “I write to you that ye sin not,”
who believe but if any sin, who desire not to transgress, you have a
propitiation for the sins of the whole world.

Now love is a very comprehensive command. It is the fulfilling of the
whole law, Rom xiii. 10, Matth. xxii. 37, 38. It is indeed the true
principle and pure fountain of our obedience unto God and men. All fruits
of the Spirit are moral virtues that grow out of the believer. Whether
pleasant unto God, or refreshing unto men, they are all virtually in this
root of love, all the streams are compacted in this fountain. Therefore he
names one for all, viz. brotherly love, which is the bond of perfection,
Col. iii. 14. It is a bundle of many divine graces, a company or society
of many Christian virtues combined together. They are named bowels of
mercies, long suffering, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
forbearance, and forgiveness, all which are tied to the believer’s girdle
by charity, so that where love is, every good comes. After it a troop of
so many sweet endowments and ornaments also come, and where this is
wanting, (as truly it is the epidemical disease of the time), there are
many sins abounding, for when iniquity abounds “the love of many shall wax
cold,” Matt. xxiv. 12. Oh! that is our temper or rather our distempered
nature,—love cold, and passion hot! When charity goes away, these wild and
savage beasts of darkness come forth, viz. bitter envying and strife,
rigid censuring and judging, unmercifulness and implacableness of spirit
upon others’ failings and offences. Self love, that keeps the throne, and
all the rest are her attendants. For where self love and pride is, there
is contention, strife, envy, and every evil work, and all manner of
confusion. Thus they lead one another as in a chain of darkness, Prov.
xiii. 10, James iii. 16. Think not that love is a complimental word, and
an idle motion of loving, it is a more real thing, a more vital thing. It
hath bowels of mercy, they move themselves when others are moved, and they
bring their neighbours misery into the inmost seat of the heart, and make
the spirit a solemn companion in misery. And it is also exercised in
forbearing and forgiving. Charity is not easily provoked, therefore it can
forbear, is easily appeased, therefore it can forgive, it is not soon
displeased, or hard to be pleased, “forbearing and forgiving one another
in love.” Study then this grace more. See it to be the fulfilling of the
law, for “the end of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, a
good conscience, and faith unfeigned.” The end of the law is not strife
and debate, nor such intricate and perplexed matters as minister endless
questions and no edification. Though men pretend conscience and scripture,
yet the great end of both is violated, that is charity, which mainly
studies edification in truth and love. And therefore it is a violent
perversion of the commandment, or word, to overstretch every point of
conscience, or difference, so far as to the renting of Christian peace and
unity. What hath kindled all these names of bloody war, what hath
increased all these fiery contentions among us, but the want of this? As
James says of the tongue, so I may speak of uncharitableness and self
love, they set on fire the course of nature, and they are set on fire of
hell. The true zeal and love of God, is like that elementary fire of which
they speak, that in its own place hath a temperate heat, and doth not burn
or consume what is about it. But our zeal is like the fire that is mixed
with some gross matter, a preying, devouring, and consuming thing, zeal
down in the lower region of man’s heart, it is mixed with many gross
corruptions, which are as oil and fuel to it, and gives it an extreme
intemperate destroying nature.

But then consider, that this commandment of love is our Lord and Saviour’s
last testamentary injunction to his disciples, John xiii. 34, 35. “A new
commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved
you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are
my disciples, if ye have love one to another.” It is Christ’s latter will,
and given us as a token and badge of discipleship. Every profession hath
its own signs and rules, every order their own symbol, every rank their
own character. Here is the differential or peculiar character and livery
of a Christian, brotherly love,—“By this shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye have love one to another,” &c. I remember a story of a
dying father who called his sons to him on his death bed, and having sent
for a bundle of arrows, he tried them one by one if they could break them,
and when they had all tried this in vain, he caused loose the bundle, and
take the arrows one by one, and so they were easily broken, by which he
gave them to understand, that their stability and strength would consist
in unity and concord, but, if love and charity were broken, they were
exposed to great hazard.(432) I think our Lord and Saviour gives such a
precept unto his disciples at his departure out of this world,—“A new
command I give unto you,” &c.  (John xiii. 34)—to show them that the
perfection of the body, into which they were all called as members,
consisted in that bond of charity. And indeed love is not only a bond or
bundle of perfection in respect of graces, but in regard of the church
too. It is that bond or tie which knits all the members into one perfect
body, Col. iii. 14, 15, 16. Without this bond, all must needs be rents,
rags, and distractions.

Now I shall add but one word of the other, that these commands are
pleasing in God’s sight. And truly believing in the Son must be grateful
to him, not only from the general nature of obedience to his will, but
also because this doth most honour both to the Father and to the Son. The
Father counts himself much honoured, when we honour the Son, and there is
no honour the creature can be in a capacity to give unto him like this, to
cast all our hope, and hang all our happiness upon him, (John v. 23, 24),
to set to our seal that he is true and faithful, (John iii. 33), which is
done by believing. But most of all, this is pleasing in his sight because
the Father’s good pleasure concentres in the same point with the soul’s
good pleasure, that is, on the well beloved Son, Christ. Therefore faith
must needs be well pleasing to the Father, for what is faith else but the
soul’s complacency and satisfaction in the Son. As the Father is already
well pleased with his death and sufferings, so he propones and holds him
out in the gospel, that you may be as well pleased with him as he is. This
is believing indeed, to be pleased with him as the Father is pleased, and
this pleases the Father too. Oh that you could understand this! The gospel
is not brought unto you, that you may reconcile God, and procure a change
in his affection, but for this end, to beseech you to be reconciled unto
God, to take away all hostile affections out of your heart. And this is
the business we have to do, to persuade you that the Father holds him
abundantly contented with his Son. “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased.” And to move you to be as well contented with him as he is,
he says, “Hear him. I hear him for you, hear ye him for me. I hear him
interceding for you, hear ye him beseeching you.” Now this may take down
all ground of jealousy concerning our welcome and acceptance, it cannot
but be an acceptable and pleasing thing to God, that the affection and
desire of the soul fall in and embosom itself with his good pleasure upon
Christ his Son.

And then, in the next place, it is well pleasing to God that ye love one
another, not only because he shall see his own image and likeness in your
love, (for there is nothing in which a Christian more eminently resembles
his Father, or more evidently appears to be a child of the Highest, than
in free loving all, especially the household of faith, and forbearing and
forgiving one another, and so he cannot choose but like it well), but
especially, because your love concentres too, and meets upon the same
objects with his love, these whom the Father so loved, that he gave his
only begotten Son for them, and the Son so loved them, that he gave
himself for them. If these be thy delight, and thou forbear them as the
Father and the Son hath done, that conspiracy of affections into one point
cannot but be pleasing unto him. Now, if these please him so well, whom
should they not please?




Sermon IV.


    James iii. 14.—“But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your
    hearts, glory not,” &c.


It is a common evil of those who hear the gospel, that they are not
delivered up to the mould and frame of religion that is holden out in it,
but rather bring religion into a mould of their own invention. It was the
special commendation of the Romans, that they obeyed from the heart that
form of doctrine into which they were delivered, (Rom. vi. 17) that they
who were once servants, or slaves of sin, had now become voluntary
captives of truth, and had given themselves up to the gospel, to be
modelled and fashioned by it; and if so, then certainly the most
substantial points of religion would be most deeply engraven upon them.
Every thing would have its own due place with us, if we were cast in the
primitive mould of godliness, but when we cast godliness in a mould of our
own apprehension, they cannot choose but a miserable confusion and
disorder will follow in the duties of religion. For according as our fancy
and inclination impose a necessity upon things, so we do pursue them, and
not according to the real weight that is in them. I find the scripture
laying most weight upon the most common things, placing most religion in
the most obvious and known things, and for other things more remote from
common capacity, I find them set far below, in the point of worth and
moment, even these things that seem least. But I find that order quite
perverted in the course of Christians. Some particular points that are not
so obvious to every understanding, are put in the first place, and made
the distinguished character of a Christian, and others again, in which
true and undefiled religion doth more consist, are despised and set in a
low place, because of their ceremonies. I think this apostle hath observed
this confusion, and hath applied himself to remove it, by correcting the
misapprehensions of Christians, and reducing their thoughts and ways to
the frame of true Christianity. Even as Christ dealt with the Pharisees,
who brought in such a confusion in religion, by imposing a necessity upon
ceremonies, and an indifferency upon the very substance itself, truly, I
think, it may be said unto us, you tithe mint, anise, and cummin, and pass
over judgment and the love of God, these things ye ought to have done, and
not to leave the other undone. Ye neglect the weightier matters of the
law, judgment, mercy, faith and truth, and in the room of these ye have
misplaced things, that are higher in God’s esteem from an apprehension of
their necessity. Thus by your traditions and opinions of things so remote
from the kingdom of God, ye have made the unquestionable commandments of
God of none effect, Matth. xv. 6. You think possibly, if this apostle was
coming out to preach unto you this day, that he would certainly resolve
you in many controverted points, and would bring some further light to the
debates of the time. But truly I think if he knew the temper of our
spirits, he would preach over this sermon to us again, “My brethren, be
not many masters,” &c. I suppose he would bring that old primitive light
of pure and undefiled religion, the splendour of which our present ways
and courses could not endure, but would be constrained to hide themselves
in darkness. What would you think of such a sermon as this, “If any man
among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, this man’s
religion is vain?” Jam. i. 26. “If any man offend not in word, the same is
a perfect man,” Jam. iii. 2. This is accounted a common and trivial
purpose. But believe it, sirs, the Christian practice of the most common
things, hath more religion in it than the knowledge of the profoundest
things, and till you learn to do what you know, it is a mockery to study
to know further what to do. There is a strange stirring of mind after more
light and knowledge in some particulars of the time. But I would fain
know, if there be as much ardour and endeavour to practise that which we
have already. To him that hath shall be given, to him that makes use of
his knowledge for the honour of God, and the good of mankind, and their
edification, more shall be given, but from him that hath not, shall be
taken away even that which he hath, and yet really and cordially hath not,
because he hath no use of it. Therefore he may by inquiry find more
darkness, because his old light shall rather be put out. Do you not all
know that ye should bridle your tongues, that it is a great point of that
Christian victory over the world to tame and danton(433) that undantoned
wild beast, to quench that fire brand of hell? Do ye not all know that we
should be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to wrath? And as the
apostle Paul speaks on another subject, “Doth not even nature itself teach
you when you have but one tongue, and two ears, that ye should hear much,
and speak little?” Are not our ears open, and our tongue enclosed and shut
up, to teach us to be more ready to hear than to speak? Now I say, till
Christians learn to practise these things that are without all
controversy, you may make it your account never to want controversy, and
never to get clearness. For to what purpose should more light be revealed,
when that which is revealed is to no purpose?

But it is in vain to think to reform the tongue, till you have the heart
first reformed. They say the belly hath no ears. Truly the tongue is all
tongue, and has no ears to take an admonition or instruction. We must,
then, with the apostle, retire into the heart, and abate from the
abundance of the superfluity and naughtiness that is within; and therefore
our apostle descends to the cure of pride, envy and strife in the heart,
that are fountains of all that pestiferous flood which flows out of every
man’s mouth. “Is there any wise man among you?” &c. And indeed this is the
orderly proceeding both of nature and grace. Nature begins within to probe
among the superfluous and noisome humours which abound in the body, and
desolate the members, and doth not think it sufficient to apply external
plasters. Grace must begin within too, to purge the heart, for out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, the eye looks, and the feet walk.
If there be no destroyer in the members or outward man, it is not the
preserving of rules and cautions that will suffice to restrain, to abate,
or to cure, but the disease must be ripped up to the bottom, the cause
found within, as our apostle doth here. Hence, says he, proceed all these
feverish distempers among you, your hot and passionate words, your evil
speakings and reproachings, your contentions and wars about matters either
civil or religious. Whence are all these? From a vain persuasion of
wisdom, from a foolish imagination of some excellency in yourselves, and
some inward affection to be accounted something of among men. “Who is a
wise man,” &c. You would be accounted wise, and so you do account
yourselves, and this begets strife and envy in the heart, and predisposeth
the mind to strife and contention with others. And therefore he takes the
mask off, by deciphering the very nature of such a wisdom; he embowels
that pretended wisdom in religion and gives it its own name, and because
things are best known, and most livelily comprehended in their opposition
and comparison with one another, he shows wherein true wisdom and religion
consist, and sets the one against the other, that the deformity of the one
and the beauty of the other may appear. We shall then speak a word of this
that is supposed, and then of that which is expressed, the descriptions of
true wisdom, and pretended wisdom. I conceive this interrogation, “Is
there a wise man among you?” imports chiefly these two one is,—that it is
the natural disease of all men to esteem themselves something, and desire
to be esteemed such by others; another is,—that the misapprehension of
that wherein true wisdom and excellency doth especially consist, is the
ground of many miscarriages in the seeking or venting of that.

It was an ancient remark, that “vain man would be wise, though he be born
like a wild ass’s colt.” Empty man is wise in his own eyes, and would be
so in other men’s too. He hath no reality nor solidity, but is like these
light things which the wind carries away, or the waters bear above, and
tosses hither and thither, yet he apprehends some solid and real worth in
himself, and would impose that apprehension upon others. And truly this is
a drunkenness of mind, which makes a man light and vain, to stagger to and
fro. It is a giddiness of spirit, that makes him inconstant and reeling,
but insensible of it. Though he be born as stupid and void of any real
wisdom and excellency, as a wild ass’s colt, yet he hath this madness and
folly superadded to all that natural stupidity, that he seems to be wise
and understanding, and truly it was a more ancient disease than Job’s
days. We may trace the steps of its antiquity to be from the very
beginning, and there we shall find the true original of it. What was it, I
pray you, did cast the angels out of heaven, down to the lowest hell, to
be reserved in chains for everlasting darkness? I do not conceive what
their natures so abstracted from all sensual lusts could be capable of,
but this spiritual darkness and madness of self conceit, and an ambitious
aspiring after more wisdom, whence did flow that malcontent and envious
humour, in maligning the happiness of man. And this was the poison that
Satan, the chief of these angels, did drop into man’s nature, by
temptations and suggestions of an imaginary wisdom and happiness, “You
shall be as gods knowing good and evil.” And truly this poison is so
strong and pestilent, that having once entered into the body, it spreads
through all the members, it infects all the posterity that were in Adam’s
loins. Being once distilled into the lump, it diffuses itself through the
whole, such a strange contagion is it. That wretched aim at a higher
wisdom, hath thrown us all down into this brutish and stupid condition, to
be like wild asses colts. Yet this false and fond imagination of wisdom
and excellence remains within us, which is so much the nearer madness,
that now there is no apparent ground left for such a fairly.(434) And if
one of a cubit’s height should imagine himself as tall as a mountain, and
accordingly labour to stretch out himself, we would seek no other sign of
madness. Truly this malignant and poisonable humour is so subtile that it
hath insinuated itself into all the parts and powers of the soul, and
steals in without observation into all our thoughts, purposes, affections,
ways, and courses. It is of so infectious and pestiferous a nature, that
it defiles all that is in the man, and all that comes out of the man.

The apostle speaks of covetousness, that it “is the root of all evil.”
Truly I think that comprehends many inordinate affections in it. Now, both
self love and earth love arise from some false imagination of that which
is not. Whether it be an imagination of some excellency in ourselves, or
some worth in these worldly and earthly things, man first makes a god of
it, and then worships it. Therefore covetousness is called idolatry, self
idolatry and earth idolatry. We first attribute some divinity to ourselves
like these people (Isa. xliv. 17) to their idols. We then fall down and
worship ourselves, but we do not consider in our heart, that we are but
dust. And then we ascribe some divinity to the perishing things of the
world, and then worship them, but do not consider that they are earthly
and perishing vanities. Thus we feed upon ashes, a deceived heart hath
turned us aside, and we cannot deliver our own souls, by discovering the
lie that is in our right hand. We feed partly on the element of the air,
by seeking that of others that we have of ourselves, and partly upon the
element of the earth, by the love of this world. And these two degenerated
evils, are the root of all evils, self estimation, and creature affection.

I think this apostle in this one word “Is there any wise man among you, or
any endowed with knowledge” and that word, “glory not,” strikes at the
root of all the forementioned and aftermentioned evils. From whence I say
doth that promptitude and bensal(435) to speak, that slowness and
difficulty to hear, that readiness and inclination to pride, (reproved,
James i. 19, 20) proceed? Is it not from an overweening conceit of our own
wisdom, that we are so swift to speak, and so slow to hear, and that we
would teach others and yet be taught of none? We are so much in love with
our own apprehensions, that we imagine they shall find as much esteem and
affection among men, and so being like barrels full of liquor, in our own
conceit, we are like to burst if we vent not, and are as incapable of
taking from others as of retaining what is within. The word of God was a
fire in Jeremiah’s heart that would have consumed him, if he had not given
it vent. Truly self love is a fire that must vent one way or other, or it
would burn up all within by displeasure, and then it is the over
apprehension of some excellency in ourselves, which so disposes us to
anger, that makes us combustible matter, like the spirit of gunpowder, for
the least spark of injury or offence, will set all in a flame. It is
certainly the fond imagination of some great worth in ourselves, that is
the very immediate predisposition to the apprehension of an injury.
Humility cannot be affronted, it is hard to persuade of an injury. Why?
Because there is no excellency to be hurt or wronged. Therefore Christ
conjoins these, “meek and lowly in heart,” (Matth. xi. 29,) lays poverty
of spirit down as the foundation of meekness, Matth. v. 3-5. Whence is it
that we accept of men’s persons by judging according to the outward
appearance, and are so ready to displease our brethren, especially these
who are inferior to us in body, or mind, or estate? Is it not from this
root, self admiration? This makes us elevate ourselves above others, and
to intrude ourselves among these who are chiefest in account. Whence doth
our unmercifulness and rigidity towards other men proceed, but from this
fountain, that we allow so much licence and indulgence to ourselves, that
we can have none to spare for others, and that we do not consider that we
ourselves stand in need of more mercy from God, and cannot endure a
mixture of judgment in it? Therefore we have judgment to others without
mercy, James ii. 13. And is not this self pleasing humour the fountain of
that contentious plea after the pre-eminence, and censorious liberty of
judging others, and usurping authority over them? James iii. 1, “My
brethren, be not ye many masters.” Truly this is the root of all
contentions and strifes. It is this which rents all human and Christian
society. This looses all the pins of concord and unity. This sets all by
the ears, and makes all the wheels reel through other. The conceit of some
worth beyond others, and the imagination of some pre-eminence over them,
even in the best creatures—he best, and he best, that is the plea, he
greatest, and he greatest, that is the controversy. As bladders puffed up
with wind, they cannot be kept in little room, but every one presses
another, but if the wind were out, they would compact in less room, and
comply better together. The apostle implies this, when he puts every man
in mind of his own failing, “in many things we offend all,” and if this
were considered, it would abate our security, and cool our heat and
fervour, and moderate our rigour towards others. There would not be such
strife about places of power and trust, if we were not swelled in our own
apprehensions to some eminency. And is not this the very fountain which
sends out all these bitter streams of the tongue, these evil speakings one
of another, these sharp and immoderate censures of our neighbours? Truly
this is it, every man accounts himself to be wiser and more religious than
his brother, to have more knowledge, and so he cannot endure any
difference in opinion, to have more holiness, and so he cannot bear any
infirmity in practice. But the way to help this, would be to humble
ourselves before God, James iv. 10. Lowliness and meekness are the ground
stones of these Christian virtues which preserve Christian society, Eph.
iv. 2, 3. And is not this, I pray you, the foundation of wars, strifes,
contentions, and jealousies? “From whence come wars and fightings among
you?” Is it not from these imperious lusts which war in our members? Only
from pride cometh contention, Prov. xiii. 10. The head spring of all envy,
also issues out from pride, and this divides, in many streams and waters,
all our courses and ways, with putrified and pestilent corruptions. While
every man hath this opinion of himself, all is done in strife, no
condescendence, no submission one to another, Phil. ii. 3. While all make
themselves the centre, it cannot otherwise happen, but designs, courses,
thoughts, and ways, must interfere and jar among themselves. Self-seeking
puts all by the ears, as you see children among themselves, if an apple be
cast to them. Any bait or advantage of the times yokes them in that
childish contention, who shall have it? All come, strive, and fight about
it, and it is but a few can have it, and these that get it cannot keep it
long. Others will catch it from them. Now what vain things are these,
which can neither be gotten, nor kept, but by strife? Oh that we could
seek better things, which may be both sought and kept, without emulation
or strife!

Now the other thing is, that the misapprehension of that wherein true
excellence consists is the ground of many evils. “Who is a wise man?” &c.
You all affect the title, and ye seek the thing, as ye suppose. But alas!
ye mistake that wherein it consists. Truly there is in all men (ever since
we tasted of the tree of knowledge of good and evil) a strange innate
desire of knowledge, and affectation of wisdom, and desire of excellence.
But since the first endeavour in paradise succeeded ill, there hath
nothing gone well since. We weary ourselves to catch vanities, shadows,
and lies. “How long, O ye sons of men, will ye love vanity, and follow
after lies?” That divinely taught prophet could not but pity the children
of men. And as Paul speaks to the Athenians of another purpose, “Him whom
ye ignorantly worship, we show unto you,” so he declares unto men that
which they ignorantly and vainly seek elsewhere. This I assure you
consists in this, that ye show out of a good conversation your works with
meekness and wisdom.

All our mischief proceeds from this, that we misapprehend and mistake that
which we would gladly have. And so once being in the wrong way, that
cannot lead to our purposed end, the faster we run, the farther we go from
it. The more we move in affection and diligence, the less we indeed
promove in reality to the attaining what we seek. How greatly have we
fallen! I might instance this in many things, but I shall be content with
these two. There is a desire in all men after happiness, but there is a
fundamental error in the imagination supposing it to consist in the
enjoyment of temporal pleasure, honour, advantage, or the satisfaction of
our own natural inclinations. Now this leads all mankind to a pursuit
after these things. But how base a scent is it? And how vain a pursuit is
it? For the faster they move in that way, the further they are from all
solid and true contentment. Again, in all godly men, there is something of
this rectified, and they suppose religion to be the only true wisdom, and
this wisdom the only true happiness. But oftentimes there are even
mistakes in that too. As many of the world call sweet bitter, and bitter
sweet, because of the vitiated and corrupted palate; so the godly, being
in some measure distempered, call that which is not so sweet sweetest, and
that which is not so bitter, bitterest. They change the value of things,
and misplace them out of that order in which God hath set them. One great
mistake is this. We impose a great deal of weight and moment upon these
things in religion, which are but the hay and stubble, or pins in the
building, and we esteem less that wherein the foundation and substance of
true religion consists. We have an over-apprehension of a profession, and
an undervaluing thought of practice. We overstretch some points of
knowledge, and truth of the least value;(436) and have less value for the
fundamental statutes of the gospel, faith and love, mercy and judgment.
This our Saviour reproved in the Pharisees. “I will have mercy (says God)
and not sacrifice.” A ceremony of opinion in some particulars of the time
hath more necessity with us than the practice of true godliness: and this
is the root of the most part of these vain janglings, strifes of words,
and perverse disputings of men, whereof cometh envy, strife, malice, evil
surmisings, and no edification in faith and love, which were so frequent
in the primitive times, and so often hammered down by Paul. This is it, a
misapprehension of the value of them. Fancy imposes a worth and necessity
upon them. But Paul doth always oppose unto them true godliness (1 Tim.
vi. 3, chap. iv. 7), and prescribes that as the cure, that true godliness
in practice of what we know, and charity towards our brethren, may be
bigger in our apprehension, and higher in our affection. Would ye then
know, my brethren, wherein true religion consists, and wherein genuine
Christianity stands? It is in showing out of a good conversation, our
works with meekness and wisdom. I reduce it to these two words, in joining
practice to knowledge, and meekness to both; and this makes our religion
to shine before men, and glorify our heavenly Father.

Wherein then do ye think this mystery of wisdom which the gospel reveals
consists? Not in the profound and abstracted speculations of God, or the
secrets of nature,—a work about which learned men have racked their
inventions, and beaten their brains to no other purpose, than the
discovery of the greatness of man’s ignorance. It doth not consist in the
sounding of the depths of divinity, and loosing all these perplexing knots
of questions, and doubts, which are moved upon the scripture, in all which
men really bewray their own ignorance and misery. “The world by wisdom
knew not God.” Living right is the first point of true wisdom. It costs
many men great expenses to learn to know their own folly, to become fools,
that they may become wise, 1 Cor. iii. 18. Man became a fool by seeking to
become wiser than God made him; and that is all the result of our
endeavours after wisdom since, Rom. i. 22. But here is the great
instruction of Christianity, to bring man down low from the height of
presumption and self-estimation, and make him see himself just as he is by
nature, a fool, and a wild ass’s colt. Nebuchadnezzar had much ado to
learn this lesson. It cost him some years brutality to learn to know his
brutishness, and when that was known his understanding returned to him.

Now this is the first and hardest point of wisdom. When it is once learned
and imprinted on the heart, O what a docility is in the mind to more! What
readiness to receive what follows! It makes a man a weaned child, a little
simple child, tractable and flexible as Christ would have all his
disciples. A man thus emptied and vacuated of self-conceit, these lines of
natural pride being blotted out, the soul is as a _tabula rasa_, “an
unwritten table,” to receive any impression of the law of God that he
pleases to put on it; and then his words are all “plain to him that
understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge,” Prov. viii. 9.
Then I say it is not difficult to understand and to prove what is the good
and acceptable will of God, Rom. xii. 2; Eph. v. 10-17. It is not up unto
heaven, that thou shouldest say, who shall ascend to bring it down?
Neither is it far down in the depth, that thou shouldest say, who shall
descend and bring it up from hence? But it is near thee, “in thy mouth,
and in thy heart,” &c. Rom. x. 6, 7, 8.  “He hath showed thee, O man, what
is good, and what is required of thee, but to do justly, to love mercy,
and to walk humbly with thy God,” Micah vi. 8. There is the plain sign of
Christian wisdom, the abridgment of all that is taught in the school of
Christ. Here is the course of moral philosophy, “The grace of God hath
appeared, to teach us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this world.” And when the scholar is
brought along by these degrees, he is at length laureated(437) in that
great day of our Saviour’s appearance. Then he hath the degree of glory
and immortality conferred upon him. He is a candidate of immortality and
felicity, Tit. ii. 12, 13.

We are in the Christian school like many scholars who labour to know so
many things, that indeed they know nothing well; as the stomach that
devours much meat, but digests little, and turns it not into food and
aliment, incorporates it not into the body. We catch at many great points
of truth, and we really drink in none of them; we let none sink into the
heart, and turn into affection and practice. This is the grand disease of
the time, a study to know many things, and no study to love what we know,
or practise any thing. The Christian world is all in a flame, and the
church is rent asunder by the eager pursuit and prosecution of some points
of truth, and this is the clamour of all men, who will show us our light?
Who will discover some new thing unto us? But in the mean time we do not
prove the unquestionable acceptable will of our God; like a fastidious
squeamish stomach, that loathes what it receives, and always longs for
something else. Thus the evil is vented here. Who is a wise man, do ye
think? Not he who knows many things, who hath still a will to controversy,
who hath attained some further light than others of them; not he,
brethren, but he that shows out of a good conversation, his works with
meekness of wisdom, he that proves and practiseth as well as knows, the
good will of God. “For hereby do we know that we know him, if we keep his
commandments. He that saith, I know him, and keeps not his commands, is a
liar, and the truth is not in him,” 1 John ii. 3, 4. This proves that
knowledge is not in the head, but in the heart, and that it is not
captivated and shut up in the mind, but that a man is delivered up as a
captive to the truth, Rom. vi. 16.

All men complain of the want of light and knowledge, though perhaps none
think they have much. But is the will of God so dark and intricate? Is it
so hard to understand? Truly it is plain, “He hath showed thee what is
good,” he hath showed thee what to do; but that thou neglectest to do, and
therefore men know not what to do further. Do ye not all know that ye
should walk soberly, righteously, and piously, and humble yourselves to
walk with God, and in lowliness of mind each should esteem another better
than himself? Ye should forbear and forgive one another, as God for
Christ’s sake hath forgiven you. Ye should not seek great things for
yourselves, especially when God is plucking up what he hath planted, and
casting down what was built. Ye should mind your country above more, and
live as sojourners here. Are not these words of wisdom all plain and
obvious to the meanest capacity?  Now, my beloved, with what face can ye
seek more knowledge of God, or inquire for more light into his mind, when
you do not prove that known and perfect will of his? When you do not
occupy your present talent, why do ye seek more?  “To him that hath shall
be given.” Truly it is the man that fears and obeys as far as is revealed,
to whom God shows his secret, and teaches the way he should choose, Psal.
xxv. 12. I know not a readier way to be resolved in doubtful things, than
to study obedience in these things that are beyond all doubt. To walk in
the light received, is the highway to more light. But what hope is there
of any more light from the Lord, when our ways and courses, and
dispositions and practices, even in our endeavours after more knowledge,
cannot endure the light of that shining will of God, that is already
revealed?  In ordering our conversation, we catch at the shadow of our
points of truth, and lose the substance that was in our hands, lowliness,
meekness, charity, long suffering, sobriety of mind and actions, and
heavenly mindedness.  All these substantial we let go, that we may get
hold of some empty unedifying notions.  We put out our candle that is
already enlightened, that is, the knowledge of good conversation that we
may seek more light, and that is the way to find darkness and delusion.
Because they received not the truth in love, that they might be saved, God
gave them up to strong delusions and the belief of lies, 2 Thess. ii. 10,
11.  There is the ground of delusions, truth received, but not loved or
obeyed, many things known, but the stamp and seal not impressed on the
heart we express in the conversation.  Therefore God is provoked to put
out that useless light of truth and deliver that man captive to delusions,
who would not deliver his soul a captive to truth.  And is not this
righteousness, that he who detained the known truth in unrighteousness of
affection and conversation, be himself detained and incarcerated by strong
delusions of mind and imagination?

As a good conversation and good works should be joined to knowledge, and
meekness must be the ornament of both, this meekness of wisdom is the
great lesson that the wisdom of the Father came down to teach man.  “Learn
of me, for I am meek.”  And truly the meekness of that substantial wisdom
of God Jesus Christ, is the exact pattern and copy, and the most powerful
motive and constraint to this kindness of Christian wisdom.  Our Saviour
did not cry nor lift up his voice in the streets.  He made little noise,
nor cried with pomp, he was not rigorous, nor rigid upon sinners.  Though
he was oppressed and afflicted yet he opened not his mouth, being reviled
he reviled not again, being cursed, he blessed.  Though he could have
legions of angels at his command, yet he would show rather an example of
patience and meekness to his followers, than overcome his enemies.  If
many of us, who pretend to be his disciples, had the winds, rains,
heavens, and elements at our commandment, I fear we would have burned up
the world.  We would presently have called for fire from heaven, to devour
all whom we conceived enemies to him, or ourselves, and that under the
notion of zeal.  Zeal it is indeed, but such as is spoken of in the next
verse. “If ye have bitter envying (the word is bitter zeal) in your
hearts, glory not, nor lie against the truth.”  Christ’s zeal was sweet
zeal. It might well consume or eat him up within, but it did not devour
others without. “The zeal of thy house (says he) hath eaten me up.”  But
our zeal is like the Babylonian furnace, that burnt and consumed these
that went to throw the pious children into it.  At the first approaching
it gets without the chimney, and devours all around it.  If the meekness
or gentleness of a person who received the greatest injuries that ever any
received, and to whom the greatest indignities were done, and who endured
the greatest contradiction of sinners, if his calm composed temper do not
soften our spirits, mitigate our sharpness, and allay our bitterness, I
know not what can do it. I do not think but if any man considered how much
long suffering God exercises towards him, how gentle and patient he is,
after so many provocations, how Jesus Christ doth still forgive infinite
numbers of infinite wrongs done to his grace, how slow he is to wrath, and
easy to be entreated, surely such a man would abate much of his severity
towards others, he would pursue peace with all men, and esteem little of
wrongs done unto him, and not think them worthy of remembrance, he would
not be easily provoked, but he would be easily pacified.  In a word, he
could not but exercise something of that gentleness and meekness in
forbearing and forgiving, as Christ also forgave him and truly there is no
ornament of a man like that of a meek and quiet spirit, 1 Pet. iii. 4.  It
is both comely and precious, it is of great price in God’s sight.  It is a
spirit all composed and settled, all peace and harmony within.  It is like
the heavens in a clear day, all serene and beautiful, whereas an unmeek
spirit is for the most part like the troubled sea, tossed with tempests,
winds, and dashed with rains, even at the best, it is but troubled with
itself.  When there is no external provocation, it hath an inward unrest
in its bosom, and casts out mire and dirt.  Meekness is so beseeming every
man, that it is even humanity itself.  It is the very nature of a man
restored, and these brutish, wild and savage dispositions put off.
Meekness is a man in the true likeness of God. But passion, and the evils
which accompany it, is a man metamorphosed and transformed into the nature
of a beast, and that of a wild beast too. It hath been always reckoned
that anger is nothing different from madness, but in the continuance of
it. It is a short madness. But what is wanting in the continuance is made
up in the frequency. When spirits are inclined to it, there is a habitual
fury and madness in such spirits. It is no wonder then, these are
conjoined, meekness and wisdom, for truly they are inseparable. Meekness
dwells in the bosom of wisdom. It is nothing else but wisdom, reason, and
religion ruling all within, and composing all the distempered lusts and
affections, but anger rests in the bosoms of fools, it cannot get rest but
in a fool’s bosom, for where it enters, wisdom and reason must go out,
Eccles. vii. 9. “A fool’s wrath is presently known,” Prov. xii. 16. For if
there were so much true and solid wisdom as to examine the matter first,
and to consider before we suffer ourselves to be provoked, we would
certainly quench anger in the very first smoking of an apprehension of a
wrong. We would immediately cast it out, for there is nothing so much
blinds and dimmeth the eye of our understanding, and when this gross
vapour rises out of the dunghill of our lusts, nothing so much uncovers
our shame and nakedness. “A prudent man covereth shame,” but hastiness and
bitterness takes the garment off our infirmity, and exposes us to mockery
and contempt, Prov. xii. 16. There is not a greater evidence of a strong
solid spirit, than this, to be able to govern this unruly passion, whereas
it is taken far otherwise. Meekness is construed by some to be simplicity
and weakness, and many imagine some greatness and height of spirit in the
hotter natures, but truly it is far otherwise. “For he that is slow to
anger, is better than the mighty, and he that ruleth his own spirit, than
he that takes a city.” Wrath is an impotency and weakness. It hath no
strength in it, but such as ye would find in madmen. But this is true
magnanimity, to overcome thyself, and “overcome evil with good.”

As there is nothing which is a greater evidence of wisdom, so there is
nothing a better help to true wisdom than this. For a meek spirit is like
a clear running fountain, that ye see the bottom of, but a passionate
spirit is like a troubled fountain, the shadow of truth cannot be seen in
it. A glass that is pure and cleanly, renders the image lively, but if it
be besmeared with dust, you can see nothing, so is a composed mild spirit
apt to discern the truth without prejudice. And indeed it is the meek whom
God engages to teach his ways, Psal. xxv. 8, 9. He that receives with
meekness the ingrafted word, is in the readiest capacity to receive more.
When the superfluity of naughtiness is cast out, and all the faculties of
the soul composed to quietness and calmness, then his voice will best be
heard, and himself readiest to receive it. Our affection keeps a continual
hurry within the tumultuous noise of our disordered lusts, that are always
raging and controlling the voice of God, so that we cannot hear his
teaching. A passionate temper of spirit is very indocile. There are so
many loud sounds of prejudices within, that the truth cannot be heard. But
a meek spirit hath all quietness and silence, as Cornelius and his house
had waiting for the mind of the Lord. And such he delights to converse
with most, and reveal most unto, for it gets readiest entertainment. Let
me tell you, beloved in the Lord, you disoblige the Lord (if I may speak
so) and hinder him to reveal any more of his mind to you, ye disengage him
to teach you his way in those dark and untrodden paths, because ye do not
study this meekness in the wisdom and knowledge ye have already, nor his
meekness and moderation in seeking further knowledge. And it is no wonder
he be provoked by it, to choose your delusions, because it is certainly
these graces of meekness, charity, patience, gentleness, long suffering,
humbleness of mind, and such like, which go always in a chain together.
These are an ornament of grace upon the head, and a crown of glory, and
that chain about the neck, Solomon mentions, Prov. iv. 9. Now when you
cast off your crown of glory, your noblest ornament, your chain of
dignity, should he give such precious pearls to swine? When you trample
under foot the greater commandments of mercy, judgment, sobriety,
humility, meekness, and charity, should he reveal lesser commandments, or
discover his will in lesser matters? Consider the manner of expression
here, “Let him show forth out of a good conversation,” &c. Truly it is
good works with meekness of wisdom, it is a good conversation, with a true
profession, that shows forth a Christian, and shows him most before men.
“Let your light (says Christ) so shine before men.” What is the shining
beauty of Christian light? It is the works of piety, charity, equity, and
sobriety. These glorify the Father, and beautify all his children. You may
easily conceive what that is, that chiefly commends religion to the
ignorant world. Is it not the meekness of Christian wisdom? Is it not this
harmless simplicity, that divine-like candour, that shines in every true
Christian? Will rigidity, severity, passion, blood, violence, persecution,
and such like, ever conciliate the hearts of men? Have such persons any
beauty, any light in them, except a scorching consuming light? The light
of a good Christian is like the light of the sun, of a sweet, gentle, and
refreshing nature, conveying influence to all, doing good to the household
of faith. Peter will tell you what that is, that will most engage the
hearts of the world, to a reverend esteem of true religion, 1 Pet. ii. 12.
It is a conversation honest, and void of offence, giving to every one
their own due, honouring all men, loving the brotherhood, not using our
liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, and not overstretching it, to the
loosing of other natural or civil bands. When men see Christianity making
us do that really and cheerfully, which even nature itself teacheth all to
do that makes the light of it shining and beautiful. Are not these higher
mysteries of faith, than some conceive? It is not other points of truth
and profession, that are either above natural reason, or seem something
opposite to it, that can engage natural beholders, and far less the
prosecution of a temporal worldly interest of the people of God, to the
destruction of all opposite to it, at least to the diminishing of all
other men’s gain and advantage, the engrossing of all earthly privileges
into the hands of saints. That is such a thing that never entered into the
heart of the shining lights of the primitive times. O how doth the stream
of their exhortations run cross to this notion! I am sure there is nothing
in its own nature, such a stumbling block to the world or represents
religion so odious and abominable to other men, as when it stands in the
way, and intercepts all these natural immunities or privileges of life, or
estate. This makes natural men to hate it, even at a distance, and become
irreconcilable enemies unto it. Since it will not let them live by it,
they are engaged not to let it live by them. I wish indeed all the places
of power and trust in every nation, were in the hands of godly men, not so
much for the interest of the godly as for the public interest, because men
fearing God, and hating covetousness, can only rule justly and
comfortably. But to monopolize all power and trust to such a particular
judgment and way (as it is now given out) is truly, I think, inhuman and
unchristian. These deserve not power and trust who would seek it, and
engross it wholly to themselves.(438) But there is another thing which
savours greatly of the flesh, at least of that spirit which Christ
reproved in his disciples, to take away men’s lives, liberty, and
livelihood given by their Creator, upon every foot of opposition and
enmity to our way and interest. Is this to love our enemies, blessing them
that curse us, or praying for them that despitefully use us, or persecute
us? Let us remember we are Christians, and this is the rule of
Christianity, that stops even the mouth of adversaries. But some still
find an evasion for this. They will say they are God’s enemies, and not my
particular enemies only. But I pray you were not the enemies of Christians
in these days more properly enemies to Christ than now? For they had
nothing then to persecute them for, but the very profession of that name.
And truly I confess in our days we make more particular enemies, by
particular injuries and disobligements, than either our profession or
practice of religion make. But to put it out of all doubt, we learn that
they are persecutors, and do all manner of evil against us, for Christ’s
name sake. I have said this because I know nothing that more darkeneth and
obscures religion nor such worldly and temporal interests, so eagerly
pursued, and nothing makes it more to shine among men, than a good
conversation with meekness of wisdom.




Sermon V.


    James iii. 14.—“But if ye have bitter envying,” &c.


The cunning of Satan, and the deceitfulness of our own hearts, are such
that when a grosser temptation will not prevail with conscience in some
measure enlightened, then they transform themselves into angels of light,
and deal more subtilely with us. And there is no greater subtilty of
Satan, nor no stronger self deceit, than this, to palliate and cover vices
with the shadow of virtue, and to present corruptions under the similitude
of graces. It is common unto all temptations to sin, to have a hook under
their bait, to be masked over with some pleasure or advantage or credit.
But when such earthly and carnal pretences do not insinuate strongly unto
a believing heart that has discovered the vanity of all that which is in
the world, so dare not venture upon sin for all the pleasures which attend
it, then he winds about and tarries and changes his likeness unto light,
conscience, and duty, presents many works of darkness and corruption under
the notion of duty and honesty, according as he finds the temper of a
man’s spirit to be. I can give no instance more pregnant, and even common,
than this which is given here, viz., contentions and strivings among
brethren, bitter envying, maligning and censuring one another, which are
very manifest works of the flesh, and works of darkness, fitter for the
night than the day, and for the time of ignorance, nor the time after the
clear light hath shined. Now if Satan were about to persuade a church or a
Christian of this, how do ye think he would go about it? Would he present
some carnal advantage to be gained by it, some more profit or preferment
from it? May be that might be very taking with some more unconscientious
self seeking spirits, and I fear it be too much taken with many. But sure
it will not relish with every man. It will not entice him that hath the
fear of God, and the love of Jesus stirring within him. Therefore he must
seek about, and find some false prophet, that may come out in the name of
the Lord, and disguise himself, and by such means he will do it. Let a
point of truth or conscience come in debate, let a notion of religion, and
one far off from an interest in Christ be in the business, and then he can
take advantage to make a man overreach himself in it. He will present the
truth as a thing of so great weight and consequence, that he must contend
for it, and empty all his wit and power and parts for it. This good
intention being established, he raises up men’s passions under a notion of
zeal, and these be promoved under that pretence for such an end.
Whatsoever mean may be sought, profitable for that end, all is chosen and
followed without discretion or knowledge of what is good or evil. It is
apprehended that the good principle of conscience, of duty, and the good
intention, may justify all. And by that means he hath persuaded the
churches of Christ, and the Christian world, unto more rigidity, severity,
cruelty, strife, contention, blood, violence, and such works of darkness,
than readily have been found in the times of ignorance. Is Christendom a
field of blood, rather than any other part of the world? Truly this is the
reproach of Christianity. By this, God’s name is daily blasphemed. Here
our apostle sets himself to unmask this angel of light, and to decipher
him in his own proper nature and notion. He takes off the vizard of
religion and wisdom, and lets you see the very image of hell under it.
“But if ye have bitter envying and strife, glory not.” Ye glory as if ye
had the truth, you glory in your zeal for it, you boast that ye are the
wise men, the religious men, and so you take liberty upon the account of
envy, to malign, despise, and contend with others. Glory not, if you
cherish such strifes and contentions, to the breach of Christian peace and
concord. You are liars against the truth, which you profess. Do not think
these proceed from true zeal, nay, nay, it is but bitter envy, and bitter
zeal. Do not flatter yourselves with an apprehension of wisdom, or
knowledge, or religion. That is wisdom indeed, but mark of what nature. It
is earthy, sensual, and devilish. And indeed, that is a foolish wisdom, to
say no worse of it.

You see, then, what need we have of the exhortation of the apostle (Eph.
vi. 11), “Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil.” Truly we may stand against his darts, and
violent open thrusts at our conscience; when we,(439) being ignorant of
his devices, and not acquainted with his depths (2 Cor. ii. 11, Rev. ii.
24) will not be able to stand against his ways. For we have a great and
subtile party to wrestle with, principalities and powers, and spiritual
wickedness in high places, or heavenly things (as some render the word).
He exercises much wickedness, spiritual invisible wickedness in heavenly
and religious things, in which it is hard to wrestle, unless we be endowed
with faith, knowledge, and righteousness, and shod with the gospel of
peace, the peaceable gospel reducing our spirits to a peaceable temper. I
conceive there is nothing the world hath been more abused with, than the
notion of zeal, justice, and such like, and there is nothing wherein a
Christian is more ready to deceive himself than this. Therefore I conceive
the Holy Ghost has undeceived us in this, and hath of purpose used the
word zeal as often in a bad sense as in a good one, and usually chooses to
express envy and malice by it, though another word might suit as well, and
be more proper. So here bitter zeal, ζηλος φρενος, is reckoned among the
works of the flesh, Gal. v. 20. And we are exhorted to walk honestly as in
the day, not in strife and envy, or zeal. And therefore the apostle
rebukes sharply the Corinthians: “Are ye not carnal, and walk as men,
whereas there is among you envying, or zeal, and strife,” 1 Cor. iii. 3.
Zeal is a vehemency of affection in any earnest pursuit, or opposition of
a thing, and to make it good, it must not only be fixed upon a commendable
and good object, but must run in the right channel, between the banks of
moderation, charity, and sobriety. If it overflows these, certainly that
excess proceeds not simply and purely from the love of God, or the truth,
but from some latent corruption or lust in our members, which takes
occasion to swell up with it. I find in scripture the true zeal of God
hath much self denial in it. It is not exercised so much concerning a
man’s own matters, as concerning the matters that are purely and merely
concerning God’s glory. It is the most flexible, condescending, and
forbearing thing in those things that relate to ourselves and our own
interests. Thus Moses is commended as the meekest man, when Aaron and
Miriam raise sedition against him, Num. xii. 3. He had not affections to
be commoved upon that account. But how much is he stirred and provoked
upon the apprehension of the manifest dishonour of God, by the people’s
idolatry? How many are lions in their own cause, and in God’s as simple
and blunt as lambs? And how much will our spirits be commoved when our own
interest lies in the business, and hath some conjunction with God’s
interest, but if these are parted, our fervour abates, and our heat cools?
I lay down this, then, as the fundamental principle of true zeal, it is
like charity that seeketh not its own things.

But to make the nature of it clear, I give you three characters of it,
verity, charity and impartiality. I say it hath truth in it, a good thing
for the object, and knowledge of that good thing in the subject, for the
principle of it: “It is good to be zealously affected always in a good
thing,” Gal. iv. 18. Zeal is an evil thing, hath something of the
impatient and restless nature of the devil in it. There is nothing we
should be more deliberate and circumspect in, than what to employ or
bestow our affections upon. We should have a certain persuasion of the
unquestionable goodness of that which we are ardent and vehement to
obtain, else the more ardour and vehemency, the more wickedness is in it.
The Jews had a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge, and that is a
blind impetuous self will. For if a man take a race at his full speed in
the dark, he cannot but catch a fall.(440) The eager and hot pursuits of
men are founded upon some gross misapprehensions.

Secondly, There must not only be a goodness supposed in the object, but
some correspondence between the worth and weight of that goodness and the
measure of our desires and affections, else there wants that conformity
between the soul and truth which makes a true zeal of God. I mean this,
the soul’s most vehement desires should be employed about the chiefest
good, and our zeal move in relation to things unquestionably good, and not
about things of small moment, or of little edification. This is the
apostolic rule, that not only we consider that there be some truth in the
thing, but that we especially take notice, if there be so much truth and
goodness as requires such a measure of vehemency and affection. Therefore
in lesser things we should have lesser commotion, and in greater things
greater, suitable to them. Otherwise the Pharisees who exercised their
zeal about trifles, and neglected the weightier matters of the law, (Matt.
xxiii. 23.) would not have been reproved by Christ. And indeed this is the
zeal to which we are redeemed by Christ. Tit. ii. 14. Be ye zealous of
good works, of works that are unquestionably good, such as piety, equity,
and sobriety. There is nothing more incongruous than to strain at a gnat
and swallow a camel, to spend the vital spirits upon things of small
concernment to our own or others’ edification, and to have nothing to
spare for the weightier matters of true godliness. It is as if a man
should strike a feather or the air with all his might: He must needs wrest
his arms. Even so, to strike with the spiritual sword of our affections,
with such vehemency, at the lighter and emptier matters of religion,
cannot choose but to disjoint the spirit, and put it out of course, as
there is a falsehood in that zeal that is so vehement about a light
matter, though it have some good in it. For there is no suitable
proportion between the worth of the thing and the vehemency of the spirit.
Imagination acts in both. In the one it supposes a goodness, and it
follows it, and in the other, it imposes a necessity and a worth far
beyond that which really is, and so raises up the spirit to that height of
necessity and worth that hath no being but in a man’s imagination. I think
there is no particular that the apostle doth so much caveat. For I find in
1 Tim. i. 4 he takes off such endless matters that minister questioning
rather than godly edifying, and gives us a better subject to employ our
zeal upon, ver 5, the great end and sum of all religion, love to God and
man, proceeding from a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned,
from which we must needs swerve, when we turn aside to such empty and vain
janglings, ver 6. For truly we have but narrow and limited spirits, and it
must needs follow, when we give them very much to one thing, that they
cannot attend another thing seriously, as Christ declares, (Matt. vi. 24.)
“no man can serve two masters,” &c. And therefore there is much need of
Christian wisdom to single out and choose the most proper and necessary
object. For as much as we give other things that have not so much
connexion with that, we take from it as much; and the apostle counsels us,
(1 Tim. iv. 7.) rather to exercise ourselves unto true godliness, and to
the most substantial things in it, rather than vain things, and opposition
of science, chap vi. 3-5, 20. There he opposes the wholesome words of
Christ, and the doctrine that is according to godliness, unto questions,
and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, railings, evil-surmisings, and
perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds. And it is very observable
that he is pressing the duties of believing servants towards their
masters, whether believers or infidels, that the name of God be not
blasphemed, nor the gospel evil spoken of. For there is nothing so much
exposes it to misconstruction, as when it is stretched and abused unto the
prejudice of natural and civil duties, and doubtless there would be many
doubts and questions about it in these days, some contending for worldly
pre-eminence over the Pagans, and some for the levelling of all
Christians. But, says he, “If any man teach otherwise,” or contend about
this, “he is proud, knowing nothing,” &c. He hath forsaken the substance
of true godliness, which consists in good works shining before men, and
disabuses the notion of Christian liberty to the dishonour of Christ, and
hath supposed gain, a worldly carnal interest of the godly, to be piety,
and so pursues that fancy of his own. He renews this in the Second
Epistle, (chap. ii. 14-16.) showing that these strifes about words, albeit
they seem to be upon grounds of conscience at the beginning, yet they
increase unto more ungodliness, ver. 23. And unto Titus he gives the same
charge very solemnly, (Tit. iii. 8, 9.) “I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they who believe in God should be careful to maintain
good works. But avoid foolish and unlearned questions,” &c. For “this is a
faithful saying.” But again,

Thirdly, Zeal must have charity with it, and this all the scriptures cited
prove. It must be so tempered with love, that it vents not to the breach
of Christian peace and concord. Charity envieth not, or is not zealous.
When zeal wants charity, it is not zeal but envy. And hence it is that
there are so frequent and fervent exhortations to avoid such questions as
may gender strifes, and contentions, and malice. Now certainly there was
some truth in them, and something of conscience also in them. Yet he
dissuades entirely the prosecution of them to the rigour, as men are apt
to do, but wills us rather to have faith in ourselves. And truly I think
the questions that did then engender strifes, and rent the church, were as
much if not more momentous nor the most part of these about which we bite
and devour one another,—the questions of the law, the circumcision, and
eating of things sacrificed to idols, of things indifferent, lawful, or
not lawful. Yet all these he would have subordinated unto the higher end
of the commandment, charity, 1 Tim. i. 4, 5. And when he exhorts the
Corinthians to be zealous for spiritual gifts, he would yet have them
excel in these things which edify the church, 1 Cor. xiv. 1-12. “Covet
earnestly the best gifts,” says he, and yet he shows them a more excellent
way, and that is charity, (1 Cor. xiii. 1.) to do all these things for the
good and edification of the church, rather than of our own opinion, 1 Cor.
xii. 3; chap. xiv. 12. I find where the word zeal is taken in a bad sense
it hath these works of darkness attending it, wrath, strife, malice, &c.
Gal. v. 20; 1 Cor. iii. 3; Rom. xiii. 13. It is accompanied with such a
hellish crowd of noisome lusts. Let me add a differential character of it.
It is uncharitable, contentious, and malicious. It can do nothing,
condescend to nothing, and is conversant about nothing, but what pleases
our own humour, for the peace and unity of the church. It is a self-willed
impetuous thing, like a torrent that carries all down before it. But truly
right zeal runs calmly and constantly within the banks; it will rather
consume its own bowels within with grief, than devour others without.




Sermon VI.


    Matth. xi. 28.—“Come unto me, all ye that labour, and are
    wearied,” &c.


It is the great misery of Christians in this life, that they have such
poor, narrow, and limited spirits, that are not fit to receive the truth
of the gospel in its full comprehension; from whence manifold
misapprehensions in judgment, and stumbling in practice proceed. The
beauty and life of things consist in their entire union with one another,
and in the conjunction of all their parts. Therefore it would not be a fit
way to judge of a picture by a lineament, or of an harmony by a
discrepant, nor of the world by some small parcel of it; but take all the
parts together, all the notes and draughts, as conjoined by art in such an
order, and there appears nothing but beauty and consent. Even so it falls
out in our conceptions of the gospel. The straitness and narrowness of our
spirits takes in truth by parcels, disjointed from the whole, looks upon
one side of it, and sees not the other. As for example, sometimes there
appears unto us our duty and strait obligation to holy walking and this
being seen and considered alone, ordinarily fills the soul with some fear,
jealousies, and confusion. Another time, there rises out from under the
cloud, the mercy and peace of Christ in inviting, accepting, and pardoning
sinners, by his blood, that cleanses from all sin; and in that view (such
is our weakness and shortness of sight) there is nothing else presented
but pardoning grace; and hence there is occasion given to the corruption
of our hearts, to insinuate secretly and subtilely unto us some
inclinations to more liberty, and indulgence to the flesh. Thus you see
what stumbling in practice, and disorder in walking, this partial way of
receiving the truth occasioneth. But it hath no less influence upon the
many controversies and differences in doctrine and opinion, about grace
and works. For from whence arise these mistakes on both hands, but from
the straitness of our apprehensions, that we do not take the truth of God
in its full latitude, but being eager upon one part and zealous of it, we
almost lose the remembrance, and sometimes fall, in wrangling with the
other? Many that proclaim the free grace of the gospel, their fault is,
not that they make it freer than it is, for truly it is as free of any
Antinomian can apprehend it, but rather because they take it not in its
entire and full complexion, which best declares the freedom of it, as
comprehending both the pardon of sin and purity from sin, grace towards us
and grace within us; and so, while they only plead for the one, they seem
at least to oppugn the other. And, in like manner, others apprehending the
necessity, beauty, and comeliness of holiness and new obedience, are much
in pressing and declaring this in opposition to the other way; in which
there may be some mistake, not in making it more meritorious than it is,
but at leastwise(441) in such a manner it may be holden out, as may
somewhat obscure the freedom of God’s grace. The occasion of both these
misapprehensions may be from the scattering of these diverse parcels of
truth, as so many pearls in the field of the scripture; one is found here,
and one takes it up, as if there were no more; here is repentance, and
away he goes with that, without conjoining these scattered pieces into one
body. But yet our Saviour sometimes gives us complete sums and models of
the gospel, in which he presents all at one view at once, and especially
in these words now read. The sum of all the gospel is contained in two
words, “Come unto me,” and “take my yoke upon you.” All the duty of a
Christian, and all his encouragement is here. His duty is to believe in
Christ, and to give himself up to his obedience, and become his disciple,
and to follow his example; and his encouragement is the rest promised,
rest to his soul,—which is the only proper seat, of rest or disquiet. It
is most capable and sensible of both,—and this rest includes in its bosom,
not only peace and tranquillity of mind here, which all the creatures
combined cannot give, but all felicity besides; that eternal rest from all
the labours of this life, and complacency in the fruition of God for ever.
You see, then, what is the full invitation of the gospel. It is nothing
else but come, and have rest. “Take on an easy yoke, and ye shall find
rest. Come and be happy. Come and receive life. That which you seek
elsewhere, both ignorantly and vainly, here it is only to be found. Come
(says Christ), and I promise to give it unto you. Wait upon me by
obedience, and you shall at length find by experience, that rest which I
am willing to give you.”

I desire you may consider both the order and the connexion of these
integral parts of the gospel. The order of the gospel is a great part of
the gospel. In some things method is arbitrary, and it matters not which
go before, or which follow after, but here they become essential, and so a
great part of the matter itself. There must be first coming to Christ, and
then taking on his yoke; first believing, then obeying his commandments.
This is as essential an order, as is between the fruit and the root, the
stream and the fountain, the sun-beam and the sun. Will any man expect
fruit till he plant? There must then first be the implanting of the soul
into Christ by faith, and then in due season follow the fruits of
obedience by abiding in him. The perverting of this order makes much
disorder in the spirits and lives of Christians. But how can it choose but
all must wither and decay, if the soul be not planted by this river, whose
streams gladden the city of our God, if the roots of it be not watered
with the frequent apprehension and consideration of the grace of Christ,
or the riches of God’s mercy? The way and method of many Christians is
just opposite to this. For you labour and weary yourselves, how to attain
some measure and satisfaction in the latter, before you adventure the
first, to have the heart humbled by godly sorrow, and the soul inflamed by
love to God, and the yoke of his obedience submitted unto; while in the
mean time you deliberately suspend the exercise of faith, and apprehension
of the pardoning grace of Christ. Now, how this can consist either with
sound reason or religion, I do not see. For were it not a point of madness
to seek fruits from a tree that is lying above ground, and to refuse to
plant it till it give some experience of its fruitfulness in the air? And
what can be more absurd, than to imagine to have the Spirit of Christ
working in the heart godly sorrow, or Christian love, and so renewing it
again to his image, and yet withal Christ not received into the heart by
faith? Do you not know that this is his first entrance into the soul? He
enters there by the door of faith, and a soul enters into him at the door
of the promise by faith. How then do ye imagine he shall work in you,
before you will admit him to come in to you? Besides, either you apprehend
that you may attain to such gracious qualifications by your own industry
without Christ, which is blasphemous to his name and office; for if you
may, what need have you of him? Or, if you believe that he is the only
treasure of all grace and wisdom, and that all things are delivered to him
of the Father, then how do you seek these things without him? It must be
wretched folly to seek them elsewhere, and not come to him. And indeed it
is observable, that this exhortation to come unto Christ is subjoined unto
ver. 27, “All things are delivered unto me by the Father.” And therefore,
seeing all grace, and life, and happiness is enclosed in me, seeing
without me there is nothing but a barren wilderness, in which you may toil
and labour, and weary yourselves in fruitless pursuits, come hither where
it is originally and plentifully seated, and you cannot miss your end, nor
lose your labour. And for the farther illustration of this subject, I
shall only add that,

Secondly, There is another woful mistake possesses your minds who take up
this way, for certainly you must think that there is some worth or dignity
in it, whereby you intend to recommend yourselves unto Christ. For to what
purpose is that anxious and scrupulous exaction of such previous
qualifications, if it be not to give some more boldness and confidence to
thy mind, to adventure to believe the promises and come to Christ, because
thou thinkest thou canst not come when thou art so unclean and so
unworthy? And therefore thou apprehendest that thou canst so purge thyself
from sin and adorn thyself with graces, as may procure some liking, and
procure some favour at Christ’s hand, which is indeed very opposite to the
tenor of the proposal of free grace in the gospel in which there is
nothing upon the creature’s part required as a condition or qualification
to make them the more welcome in coming to Christ.

Let this word then abide with you: “Come unto me, and take my yoke upon
you, and learn of me,” which in substance is this, Come and cast your
burdens on me first, and then take my burden upon you. O it is a blessed
exchange! Cast your heavy burden upon my back, and take my light burden on
yours. For what is it to invite them that labour and are ladened to come,
but to come and repose themselves for rest upon him? And that is directly
to lay over that which burdens and ladeneth them upon him. There is an
unsupportable burden of sin, the guilt of sin, and there is an intolerable
weight of wrath. “Mine iniquities are gone over mine head (Ps. xxxviii.
4.) and as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me.” And when the wrath
of God is joined to this burden, the name of the Lord burning with anger,
how may you conceive a soul will be pressed under that burden, which is so
heavy, that it will press the mountains into valleys, make the sea flee
out of its place, and the earth tremble? Now here is the invitation. Is
there any penitent soul that feels the burden of the weight of sin and
wrath? Let them come and disburden their souls of care, fear, and anxiety,
in this blessed port of rest and refuge for poor sinners. Is there a yoke
of transgressions wreathed about thy neck, and bound by the hand of God,
(Lam. i. 14) a yoke that neither men nor angels are able to bear? Then, I
beseech you, come hither, and put over your yoke upon Jesus Christ. Tie it
about him for God hath laid upon him the iniquities of us all, and he bore
our sins. He did bear the yoke of divine displeasure, and it was bound
about his neck with God’s own hand, with his own consent. Now, here is the
actual liberty and the releasement of a soul from under the yoke, here is
its actual rest and quiet from under the pain of this burden, when a soul
is made to consent unto, and willingly to put over that burden upon
Christ. And this freedom and vacancy from the unsupportable yoke of guilt,
will certainly dispose the soul, and make it more capable of receiving the
easy and portable yoke of his commandments. I or you may easily perceive
how easy love maketh all things, even difficulties themselves. Let once a
soul be engaged that way to Christ, (and there is no possibility of
engaging it in affection without some taste and feeling, or believing
apprehension of his love and sufficiency for us,) and you will see that
the rough way will be made plain and the crooked way straight, heavy
things light, and hard things easy. For what command can be grievous to
that soul who apprehends that Christ hath taken the great weight of wrath
off it, and carried away the intolerable pain of its guiltiness, which
would have pressed and depressed it eternally, without any hope of
relaxation or ease? Hath he borne a yoke bound on by the majesty of God,
and fastened with the cords of his displeasure? And can it be so heavy to
a believing soul to take up that obedience which is fastened with the
cords of love? And besides, how much will faith facilitate this, and make
this yoke to be cheerfully and willingly submitted to, because it delivers
the soul from those unsufferable cares and fears, which did quite enervate
its strength, and take away its courage? For, I pray you, what is there in
a soul under the fear of wrath, that is not totally disabled by that heavy
pressure for any willing or cheerful obedience? The mystery(442) of the
spirit is spent that way, the courage of the soul is defeated, the heart
is weakened, and nothing is suitable to the yoke of Christian love and
obedience. But when once a soul apprehends Christ, this is a reposition of
all his cares and burdens, and comes to exoner(443) his soul in him, and
cast his burthen upon him. Then the soul is lightened as it were for this
journey, then he may walk in the ways of obedience, without the pressing
fear and pushing anguish of the dread of condemnation of the law. To
conclude this head, nothing will make you take up this yoke willingly, or
bear it constantly, except you be delivered from the other yoke that was
so heavy even to Christ, and that made him cry, “My soul is exceeding
heavy and troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour.”

Now, these who are here in the text invited to come unto Christ,—you see
them described to be labouring and heavy laden persons. “Come unto me, all
ye that labour,” &c. At least it seems to hold forth a previous
qualification and condition of believing, without which we may not venture
to come unto Christ. Indeed it is commonly so taken, and mistaken. Many
conceive that the clause is restrictive and exclusive, that is to say,
that this description of burdened and wearied sinners is a limitation of
the command of believing, and that it circumscribes the warrant of coming
to Christ, as if none might lawfully come unto him but these that are thus
burdened, and thus it is supposed to be a bar, set upon the door of
believing at which sinners must enter in to Christ, to hold out, and shut
out all those who are not thus qualified for access, which I truly
conceive is contrary to the whole strain and current of the dispensation
of the gospel. Therefore I take it to be rather declarative, or
ampliative, or both. I say, it is partly for declaration, not of the
warrant to come, but of the persons who ordinarily do come to Christ. It
declares not simply and universally who should come, but those who
actually do come unto Christ. Take it thus then. All persons who hear the
gospel are invited to come unto our Saviour without exception, the blind,
the lame, those on the highways, not only the thirsty and the hungry,
(Isa. lv. 1.) but those who have no thirst or hunger for righteousness,
but only for things that do not profit (ver. 2), not only the broken
hearted, that desire to come near to righteousness, but even the stout
hearted that are far from righteousness. Such are commanded to hearken,
and incline their ear, Isa. xlvi. 12, lv. 2, 3. Now, this command that
reaches all, gives an immediate actual warrant and right to all to come,
if they will. For what is required previous to give warrant to obedience,
but the command of obedience? And therefore the Jews were challenged,
because they would not come to Christ that they might have life. Now then
there is no bar of seclusion set upon the door of the gospel, to keep out
any soul from entering in. There is no qualification or condition
prescribed by the gospel, and without which if he come, he is actually
welcomed and received by Christ, whatsoever you suppose he wants. It is
true, men’s own security and unbelief will exclude them from Christ, but
that is no retraction on the gospel’s part. It is a bar set on a man’s own
heart, that shuts him up from coming to the patent entry of the gospel.

Therefore I take it thus, that though all ought to come to Christ, and
none that are indeed willing are debarred for the want of any supposed
condition, yet none will actually and really come, till they be in some
measure sensible of the weight of their sins, and the wrath of God, till
they are labouring under the feeling of their own misery and desperate
condition. And whatsoever be the measure of this, if it give so much
uneasiness to a man that he can be content with rest and ease in Christ,
he may, and certainly ought, to come unto Jesus, and cast all his burdens
upon him. I think then, that way that is in so frequent use among
Christians, to sit down, and essay to bring our hearts to some deep
humiliation, and so to prescribe and order it, as we will deliberately
delay, and suspend the thoughts of believing, till we have attained
something of this,—I say, this way crosses the very intention of Christ in
uttering these words, and such like. For certainly he meant to take away
impediments, and not to cast delays in our way. And therefore I said the
word was rather for ampliation, that is, rather to encourage these who
accounted themselves excluded, than to exclude any who desire to come.
“Come unto me, every one, but especially you that labour, ye should make
the greatest haste. Come unto me even though ye apprehend the wrath of God
to be intolerable, and have foolishly wearied yourselves in seeking rest
by other ways. Ye that are most apprehensive of your sins, and so are apt
to doubt of any acceptation,—you that think yourselves worse than any, and
so to have least warrant to come to me,—yet come, and I will by no means
cast you out, but give rest to your souls.” So that it is not intended to
exclude those who are most ready to think themselves excluded, because
they see so much sin in themselves.

Therefore, my beloved, without further disputing about it, let me exhort
you in the name of Jesus Christ, who here invites and commands you, that
you would at once put a period to this, and bring it to some conclusion.
Since you are diseased and disquieted in yourselves, and cannot find rest
in your own bosoms, I beseech you come here, where it is most likely to be
found, and it is most certain, if you come you shall find it. Do not
continue wrangling and contesting about the matter; for what is that but
to increase your labour, and vexation, and add to your heavy burden? It
will be so far from giving you any ease in the result of it, that it will
rather make your wounds more incurable, and your burdens more intolerable,
which is both opposite to the intention of the gospel and the nature of
believing. Here then is your rest, here is your refreshing rest. Here it
is in quiet yielding to his gracious offers, and silent submitting to the
gospel, not in bawling or contending with it, which is truly a contending
against ourselves. Isa. xxviii. 12. This is the rest, wherewith you may
cause the weary to rest. It is nowhere else, not in heaven or earth, for
there is no back that will take on this burden or can carry it away from
us. There is no disburdening of a sinner of guilt and wrath, in any other
port or haven, but in Christ, who is the city of refuge. Wheresoever you
think to exoner yourselves besides this, you will find no refreshing, but
a multiplication of burdens and cares. Your burden shall be rolled over
upon you again with double weight. Therefore, my beloved, if you will not
hear this, consider what follows, viz. you shall refuse this rest and
refreshing and restlessly seek another rest. You may go and be doing, but
you shall fall backward, and be broken and snared. Your burden shall fall
back upon you, and you shall fall and be broken under it. That which the
Lord said to Israel when they would flee to Egypt, is most true in this
case. “In returning, and in rest ye shall be saved, in quietness and
confidence shall be your strength;” but alas! they would not, that is a
sad close.




Sermon VII.


    Matt. xi. 20.—“Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me,” &c.


Self love is generally esteemed infamous and contemptible among men. It is
of a bad report every where, and indeed as it is taken commonly, there is
good reason for it, that it should be hissed out of all societies, if
reproaching and speaking evil of it would do it. But to speak the truth,
the name is not so fit to express the thing, for that which men call self
love, may rather be called self hatred. Nothing is more pernicious to a
man’s self, or pestilent to the societies of men than this, for if it may
be called love, certainly it is not self love, but the love of some baser
and lower thing than self, to our eternal prejudice. For what is
ourselves, but our souls? Matt. xvi. 26, Luke ix. 25. For our Lord there
shows that to lose our souls, and to lose ourselves, is one and the same
thing. But what is it to love our souls? Certainly it is not to be
enamoured with their deformed shape, as if it were perfect beauty? Neither
can it be interpreted, any true love to our souls, to seek satisfaction
and rest unto them, where it is not at all to be found, for this is to put
them in perpetual pain and disquiet. But here it is that true self-love,
and soul love centereth, in that which our Saviour propounds, namely, to
desire and seek the everlasting welfare of our souls, and that perpetual
rest unto them, after which there is no labour nor motion any more.
Therefore, to draw unto himself the souls of men the more sweetly, and the
more strongly too, he fasteneth about them a cord of their own interest,
and that the greatest, real rest; and by this he is likely to prevail with
men in a way suited to their reasonable natures. “Come unto me, all ye
that labour and are wearied, and I will give you rest.” Self interest is
ordinarily exploded, at least disowned and disclaimed in men’s discourses,
as a base, wretched, sordid thing, which, though all men act by it, yet
they are all ashamed to profess. But yet, if the interest be so high as
indeed to concern self, and that which is truly our self, then both
nations and persons count it the most justifiable ground of many of their
actions, self preservation. But yet there is a higher interest than that,
that relates to the eternal interest of our souls. And truly to own and
profess, and prosecute that interest of soul preservation, of eternal rest
to our souls, is neither ignoble, nor unbeseeming a Christian; neither is
it any way inconsistent with the pursuance of that more public and
catholic interest of God’s glory, in respect of which all interests, even
the most general and public, are particular and private. For this is the
goodness of our God, that he hath bound up his own honour and our
happiness in one bundle together; that he hath knit the rest of our
precious souls, and the glory of his own name inseparably together, not
only to condescend to our weakness, but to deal with us suitably to our
natures. He proposes our own interests chiefly, to draw us to himself, and
allows this happy self seeking in which a man loses himself, that he may
be found again in Christ. Seeing then it is thus, that elsewhere,
wheresoever you turn yourselves, within or without, there is no rest, but
endless labour, and fruitless toil, (you find this already by experience,
you who apprehend the weight of your sins, and the greatness of divine
wrath,) that there is an intolerable pressure upon your souls already, and
that this is nothing diminished, but rather augmented, by your vain
labours and inquiries after some ease and peace,—your endeavours to
satisfy your own consciences, and pacify God’s wrath some other way,
having filled you with more restless anxiety, and seeing there is a
certain assurance of true rest and tranquillity here, upon the easiest
terms imaginable, that is, “come to Jesus Christ, all ye who are
disquieted and restless, and he will give you rest,”—O should not this be
an invincible and irresistible attractive to your hearts, to draw them to
our Redeemer over all impediments? The rest is perfect happiness; and yet
the terms are easy. Only come and embrace it, and seek it nowhere else.
There is a kind of quietness and tranquillity in the seeking and attaining
this rest. All other rests are come to by much labour and business. Here
Christ would have you,—who have laboured in vain for rest, and lost your
toil and your pains,—to come at it, by ceasing from labour, as it were,
that which you could not attain by labour, to come by it, _cunctando_ (by
keeping quiet), which you could not gain _pugnando_ (by fighting). There
is a quiet and silent way of believing promises, and rolling yourselves
upon Christ offered in them, which is the nearest and most compendious way
to this blessed rest and quietness, which, if you think to attain by much
clamour and contention of debate or dispute, or by the painful labour and
vexation of your spirits, which you call exercise of mind,—you take the
way about, and put yourselves further off from it. Faith has a kind of
present vacancy and quietness in it, in the very acting of it. It is not a
tumultuous thing, but composes the soul to quietness and silence, to a
cessation from all other things but the looking upon Christ holden out in
the gospel, and this in due time will give greater rest and tranquillity.
Consider what the Lord speaks to the people that would take a journey upon
them to Egypt, (Isa. xxx. 15). “In returning and rest shall ye be saved,
in quietness and confidence shall be your strength.” Their peace was near
hand, but they would travel abroad to seek it, and they find trouble.
Their strength was to sit still and be quiet, and trust in the Lord. Nay,
but they would not sit still, but flee and wander abroad to their old
house of bondage, and therefore, says the Lord, you shall flee. Now, may
not this represent the folly and madness of souls that are under the fear
of wrath and sense of sin, and be as it were a type of it? Our rest is in
resting on a Saviour, our peace is in quiet confidence in him, it is not
far off, it is in our mouth. “The word is near” (says Paul), it is neither
in heaven above, nor in the depth below. We need not go abroad and search
for that happiness we want. It is nigh at hand in the gospel, but while we
refuse this, and give ourselves to restless agitation and perplexity about
it, sometimes we apprehend that we are eased in our travels and
endeavours, but it shall prove to us no better than Egypt a house of
bondage. Wheresoever we seek shelter out of Christ, we will find it a
broken reed, that not only will fail under us, but in the rent will split
our hand, and pierce us through with many sorrows. To conclude then this
head, coming to Christ with our burdens is a motion towards rest. For he
adds, “I will give you rest.” But moreover, there is a kind of rest in
this motion. It is an easier, plainer, and pleasanter motion, than these
troubled and laborious windings and wanderings of our hearts after vanity.
He persuades you to walk in this path of pleasantness and peace, and you
shall find a great rest at the end of it, “receiving (says Peter) the end
of your faith the eternal salvation of your souls.”

Now the next thing in the text is, having come to Jesus, and found rest
and happiness in him, we must take his yoke upon us. And this is the other
integral part of the gospel, of which I desire you to consider these few
particulars, that occur in the words,—The order in which it is to be taken
on,—The nature of this yoke,—And the most ready and expeditious way of
bearing it.

The method and order in which Christ’s yoke is to be taken upon us, is
first, To come unto our Saviour, and give over the yoke of our
transgressions to him, and then to take up the yoke of his commandments
from him, to believe in his promises, and rest our souls on them, and to
take up the yoke of his precepts, and proceed to motion, and walking in
that rest. Now this method hath a double advantage in it, for the real
receiving and carrying of Christ’s yoke. It gives vacancy and room for it,
and it gives strength and furniture(444) for it. It expels that which
would totally disable you to bear it, and brings in that comfortable
supply, which will strengthen and enable you to bear it. Consider what
posture a soul is put into, that lives under the terror of God, and is
filled with the apprehension of the guilt of sin and the greatness of
God’s wrath. I say, such a soul, till he have some rest from that grievous
labour, is fit for no other more pleasant labour, until he be something
disburthened of that which is like to press him down to hell. He is not
very capable of any new burden, until the yoke of his transgressions that
is wreathed about his neck be taken off. Do ye think he can find any
vacant room for the yoke of Christ’s obedience? When a soul is under the
dominion of fear and terror, under the power of grief and anguish, do ye
think he is fit for any thing, or can do any thing, but groan in that
prison of darkness, under these chains? Such a soul is in bondage, under
servitude, and can neither take up this yoke of liberty nor walk in it.
The strength and moisture of the spirit is drunk up by the poison of these
arrows, and there remains neither attention, affection, nor spirit for any
thing else. Therefore here is the incomparable advantage that redounds
from this way of coming first to Christ, and exonering our cares and fears
in his bosom, and in disburthening our sins upon him, who hath taken them
on, and carried them away, as that scape goat sent unto the wilderness on
which they laid the sins of the people. By this means, I say, you shall
have a vacancy for the yoke of Christ and liberty to all your faculties,
your understanding, will, and affections, (which are no better than slaves
and captives, _non sui juris_, while they are under these tyrannous
passions of fear and horror,) to attend the obedience of Christ and the
drawing of his yoke. This will relieve your souls out of prison, and then
you will be fit for employment. Besides this, there is furniture and help
brought into the soul, which enables it to this; and without which, though
it were not pressed under a burden of sin and wrath, yet it would neither
be able nor willing. There is that supply and strength that faith brings
from Christ, which arises from our mystical implantation in him, from
hence flows that communication of his grace to a believer. The law came by
Moses, but grace and truth by Jesus Christ, John i. 16, 17. Now this
efficacy and virtue that is in Christ the head, is transmitted unto the
members of his body by believing in him. Indeed the very apprehension of
such a Saviour may have some quickening virtue in it, but certainly the
great influence of life is annexed to it by his gracious promises,
“Because I live, ye shall live also,” John xiv. 19. “As the living Father
who sent me, lives in himself, and I have life by the Father, so he that
believes on me, shall live by me,” John vi. 57. “Abide in me, and I in
you, and ye shall bring forth much fruit.” He hath graciously appointed
the derivation of that life to us, to be conjoined with our right
apprehensions, and believing meditations of him, making, as it were, faith
the opening of his house, to let in his fulness to us. Now, besides this
more mysterious and supernatural furniture and supply, there is even
something that is naturally consequent to it, some enabling of the soul
for holy obedience, flows naturally from the love of Christ. And when ever
a believer apprehends what he has done for him, finds some rest and
relaxation in him, it cannot but beget some inward warmth of love to him
who so loved us. “Faith worketh by love,” says Paul. The way it goes to
action is by affection. It at once inflames that, and then there is
nothing more active and irresistible. It hath a kind of indefatigable
firmness in it, it hath an unwearied strength to move in the yoke all the
day long. In a word, nothing almost is impossible or too hard for it, for
it is of the nature of fire to break through all, and over all
impediments. Nothing is so easy but it becomes uneasy to a soul under
fear, and nothing so difficult but it becomes easy to a soul wherein
perfect love has cast out fear. For love makes a soul to move
supernaturally in divine things, as a natural or co-natural agent, freely,
willingly, and constantly. If they be not suitable to our natures as
corrupted, and so, grievous to love, then, as much as it possesses the
heart, it makes the heart co-natural to them, and supplies the place of
that natural instinct that carries other creatures to their own works and
ends, strongly and sweetly. 1 John v. 3, Psal. cxix. 165, Neh. vii. 10,
Col. iii. 15. Now you may judge whether or not you can possibly expect so
much advantage in any other method or way you take. This I leave to your
own consideration and experience.

And so I come to the next thing proposed, _secondly_, To consider what
this yoke is, and what is the nature of it. And may I not upon this head
justly enough distinguish a twofold yoke, of doctrine and discipline, that
is, the yoke of Christ’s commandments and laws, which both, in his love
and wisdom, he hath imposed upon us, for the regulation of our lives? And
this we are to take on by an obedience cheerful, willing, and constant.
But there is another yoke mentioned in scripture, namely, the yoke of his
chastisements and correcting, such a one as Ephraim (Jer. xxxi. 18) was
tried with, and was long or he could learn to bear it. It is good for a
man to bear this yoke in his youth, Lam. iii. 27. Now whether or not this
be meant here, I do not contend. The first is the chief intent, and it is
not needful to exclude this altogether, since it is not the smallest point
of Christianity to take up the one yoke by submission, as well as to take
up the other by obedience. How ever it be, obedience must be taken so
largely, as it cannot but comprehend the sweet compliance, and submission
of the will to God’s will in all cross-dispensations, which is no little
probation of the loyal and obedient temper of the heart. Both yokes must
be taken up, for so Christ speaks of his cross, “If any man will be my
disciple, he must take up his cross and follow me,” Matt. xvi. 24, 25. It
must be lifted up upon our shoulders, as it were, willingly, and
cheerfully, we actually concurring, as it were, to the bearing of it, and
the receiving it. But there is this difference between the one yoke and
the other, the one cannot be imposed upon us, neither can we bear it,
except we actively and with our own consent and delight take it up. Though
God may impose laws upon us, and give us righteous and faithful
commandments, which indeed lay a strait obligation and tie upon us under
pain of disloyalty, and rebellion, to walk in them, yet it never becomes
our yoke, and is never carried by us, until there be a subsequent consent
of the soul, and a full condescension of the heart, to embrace that yoke
with delight. Till we yoke ourselves unto his commandments, by loving and
willing obedience, we have not his yoke upon us. “Thy people shall be made
willing in the day of thy power.” It is not terrors and constraints, but
the bands of love will bind us to this yoke. It must be bound upon us by
the cords of love, not of fear. He is a true king, not a tyrant, he loves
_imperare volentibus_, “to rule every man with his own consent,” but a
tyrant “rules every man against his will,” _nolentibus imperat_. But as to
the other yoke of his discipline, his cross, whether it be for his sake,
or whether it be the general cross of our pilgrimage here, and the
vicissitudes and changes of this life, it is not in our arbitrament to
bear a cross, or have a cross or not. Have it we must, bear it we must,
whether we choose or refuse it. There is no man can be exempted from some
yoke of this kind. No man can promise himself immunity from some cross or
other, if not in poverty, yet in abundance, if not in contempt and
reproach yet in honour and greatness. There is nothing of that kind that
will not become weighty with itself alone, though nothing be superadded to
it. So then, since every man must have a yoke, he hath only the advantage
who takes it up, and bears it patiently. For if he thus sweetly comply and
yield to God’s will, he will not so much bear his cross, as his cross will
bear him. If thou take it up, it will take thee up and carry thee. If thou
submit and stoop willingly to God’s good pleasure, thou wilt make it a
more easy yoke, and light burden. _Ducunt volentem fata, nolentem
trahunt._(445) If thou be patient, his dispensation will gently and
sweetly lead thee to rest, but an impatient soul is dragged and drawn
after it against the hair, and yet he must follow it. There is this mighty
disadvantage in our impatient unsubjection to God’s will, that it makes
that a yoke which is no yoke, no cross a cross, an easy yoke hard, and a
light burden heavy, and yet notwithstanding we must bear it. A yoke, a
cross, we cannot escape, whithersoever we go, whithersoever we turn
ourselves, because we carry ourselves about with us, and our own crooked
perverse apprehensions of things which trouble us more than the things
themselves. Now consider the reasonableness of taking on the yoke of
Christ’s obedience. Should we not with David, offer ourselves willingly,
and present ourselves even before we are called? “Lo I come, to do thy
will, O God. I delight in thy law, it is in my inward part,” Psal. xl. 8.
There is no yoke so reasonable, if you consider it as imposed by Christ
our King and Lawgiver. Hath he not redeemed us from the house of bondage,
from the vilest and basest slavery, under the most cruel tyrants, Satan,
and death, and hell?  Heb. ii. 15. Hath he not asserted and restored us
into the true liberty of men, and of the sons of God? The Son hath made us
free, (John viii. 32) when we were under the most grievous yoke of sin and
wrath, and the eternal curse of God. He hath put his own neck under it and
become a curse for us, that he might redeem us from the curse of the law,
and so he hath carried away these iron chariots, these yokes of brass and
iron, whereby Satan kept us in subjection, and now been established our
careful King, not only by the title of the justest and most beneficial
conquest that ever was made, but by God’s solemn appointment upon the hill
of Zion, Psal. ii. 6. And being exalted a Prince to give us salvation,
were it not most strange if his kingdom should want laws, which are the
life and soul of republics and monarchies? Ought not we to submit to them
gladly, and obey them cheerfully? Should not we absolutely resign
ourselves to his will, and esteem his commandments concerning all things
to be right? What command should be grievous to that soul, which is
delivered from the curse of all the commandments, and is assured never to
enter into condemnation?  If there were no more to say, were it not
monstrous ingratitude to withdraw ourselves from subjection to him, or
yield obedience to any other strange lords, as our lusts are? Would it not
be an unexemplified unthankfulness to requite rebellion to him, for so
much unparalleled affection? Since we are not our own, but bought with a
price, we are not _sui juris_,(446) to dispose of ourselves. All reason
should say, that he who payed so dear for us should have the use of us.
And that is nothing but glory he seeks from us, that we offer and
consecrate soul and body to him, to come under his yoke. As for the gain,
it redounds all to ourselves, and that as the greater gain too.

Now a word to the last thing proposed, for I can only hint at it. The most
excellent and ready way of bearing this yoke, is to learn of him, to
present him as our pattern, and to yield ourselves to him, as his
disciples and scholars, not only to learn his doctrine, but to imitate his
example and practice, “to walk even as he walked.” And herein is great
moment(447) of persuasion, Christ puts nothing upon you, but what he did
take upon himself. There is so much more reason for you to take it up,
that it is his own personal yoke, which he himself carried, for he
delighted to do the Father’s will. It was his meat and drink to work in
that yoke. Now there are two things especially wherein he propones himself
the exemplar or pattern of our imitation, viz., his humility and meekness
of spirit. He was “meek and lowly in heart.” And these graces have the
greatest suitableness to capacitate and dispose every man for taking, and
keeping the yoke of Christ. Humility and lowliness bows his back to take
on the least of his commands. This makes him stoop low, and makes his
shoulders fit for it, and then meekness arms him against all difficulties
and impediments that may occur in it.




Sermon VIII.


    Matt. xi. 29.—“Take my yoke upon you,” &c.


Christianity consists in a blessed exchange of yokes between Christ and a
pious soul. He takes our uneasy yoke, and gives his easy yoke. The soul
puts upon him that unsupportable yoke of transgressions, and takes from
him the portable yoke of his commandments. Our burden was heavy, too heavy
for angels, and much more for men. It would crush under it all the
strength of the creatures, for who could endure the wrath of the Almighty?
Or, “what could a man give in exchange for his soul”? Nay, that debt would
drown the whole creation, if they were surety for it. Notwithstanding,
Christ hath taken that burden upon him, being able to bear it, having
almighty shoulders, and everlasting arms for it. And yet you find how
heavy it was for him, when it pressed out that groan from him, “Now is my
soul sore amazed, very heavy, and exceeding sorrowful even unto death, and
what shall I say?” That which carried it away from us, hath buried it in
his grave, whither it pressed him down. It gets him very low under it, but
he hath got above it and is risen again, and whereas in vain there was a
stone put above him, and sealed, he hath rolled a stone above that yoke
and burden, that it cannot be able to weigh down any believing soul to
hell; for that weight which depressed his spotless soul, would have
depressed the sons of men to eternal darkness. Now for his burden, we
observe that it is of another nature, to speak properly, than other
burdens. It is not a heavy yoke or burden, but a state of liberty, an
ornament, a privilege. It is a chain of gold about a saint’s neck, to bind
Christ’s laws about them, every link of that chain is more precious than
rubies or diamonds. If there be any burden in it, it is the burden of
honour, the burden of privilege, and incomparable dignity, _honos_ not
_onus_ or _onus honoris_.(448) This is that which he puts upon us, or
rather that which a believer receives from him. Now I will not have you so
to take it, as if Christ did not propose the terms thus, “If you will be
willing to take on the yoke of my laws, I will take on the yoke of your
sins and curses.” Nay, it is not such an exchange as is thus mutually
dependent; for it hath pleased the Father without consulting us, and the
Son without our knowledge or consent, to conclude what to do with the
heavy and unsupportable burden of sinners. The Father “laid upon him the
iniquities of us all, and he” of his own accord “hath borne our griefs,
and carried our sorrows,” (Isa. lii. 4-6) and that burden did bruise him;
yea, “it pleased the Lord to bruise him,” and it pleased himself to be
bruised. O strange and unparalleled love, that could digest so hard
things, and make so grievous things pleasant! Now I say, he having thus
taken on our burden already, calls upon us afterward, and sends forth
proclamations, and affectionate invitations, “Come unto me, all ye poor
sinners, that are burdened with sin, and wearied with that burden; you who
have tired yourselves in these byways, and laboured elsewhere in vain, to
seek rest and peace: you have toiled all night and caught nothing, come
hither, cast your net upon this side of the ship, and you shall find what
you seek. I have undertaken your yoke and burden, why then do you laden
yourselves any more with the apprehension of it? The real and true burden
of wrath I have already carried away, why then do ye weary yourselves with
the imagination of it? Only come to me, and see what I have done, and you
shall find rest and peace.”

Now this being proponed absolutely unto sinners, and they being invited to
consent to that which Christ has done in their name, in the next place he
comes to impose his easy yoke upon us, not at all for any recompence of
what he hath done, but rather for some testimony of gratitude and
thankfulness on our part, and for the manifestation of grace and love on
his part. I do indeed conceive, that the imposition of the yoke of
Christ’s laws upon believers, is as much for the declaration of his own
love and goodness, as the testification of our thankfulness. If you
consider the liberty, the beauty, and the equity of this yoke, it will
rather be construed to proceed from the greatest love and favour, than to
tend any way to recompence his love. Herein is perfect liberty, Psal.
cxix. 32, 45. It is an enlargement of heart, from the base restraint and
abominable servitude of the vilest lusts, that tyrannize over us, and keep
our affections in bondage. O how narrow bounds is the liberty of the
spirits of men confined unto, that they serve their own lusts! Sin itself
and the lusts of the flesh, are a grievous yoke, which the putting on of
this yoke looses them from: and when the heart is thus enlarged with love
and delight in Christ, then the feet unfettered, may walk at liberty, and
run in the way of God’s commandments. “I will walk at liberty,” when I
have a respect to thy ways, Psal. cxix. 45. O how spacious and broad is
that way in reality, which to our first apprehension and the common
construction is strait and narrow! The truth is, there is no straitness,
no bondage, no scantiness, but in sin. That is the most abominable
vassalage, and the greatest thraldom of the immortal spirit; to be so
basely dragged by the flesh downward, to the vilest drudgery, and to be so
pinched and hampered(449) within the narrowness of created and perishing
things. To speak properly, there is no slavery but this of the spirit; for
it is not so contrary to the nature and state of the body, (which by its
first institution was made a servant,) to be under the dominion of men,
and further we cannot reach. Yea, it is possible for a man, while his body
is imprisoned, to be yet at greater freedom than those who imprisoned him.
As his mind is, so he is. But to be a servant of sin and unrighteousness,
must totally degrade the soul of man. It quite defaces that primitive
glory, and destroys that native liberty, in which he was created.
Therefore to have this sin taken off us, and the yoke of Christ’s
obedience put on us, to be made free from sin, and become the servants of
righteousness, that is the soul’s true liberty, which sets it forth at
large to expatiate in the exceeding broad commandments, and in the
infinite goodness of God, where there is infinite room for the soul.

When, then, I consider how beautiful this is for a reasonable spirit, to
be under the law of him that hath made it and redeemed it, I cannot but
think that Christ doth rather beautify and bless, than burden. The beauty
of the world consists in that sweet order, and harmonious subordination of
all things, to that law God hath imposed upon them, or engraves upon their
natures. If we should suppose but one of the parts of the world to swerve
from the primitive institution, what a miserable distraction would ensue?
How deformed would this beautiful and adorned fabric become? How much more
is it the beauty, grace, and comeliness of an intelligent being, to be
under the law of him that gave him a being, and to have that written in
his heart,—to be in a manner transformed by the shining glory of these
laws, to be a living law? What is it, I pray you, deforms these fallen
angels, and makes them devils? Why do we paint a good angel in a beautiful
and comely image, while the devils are commonly represented in the most
horrid, ugly, and monstrous shape and visage? Is it not this that makes
the difference, that the one is fallen from a blessed subordination to the
will of God, and the other keeps that station? But both are equal in
nature, and were alike in the beginning.

Add unto this, the equity of Christ’s yoke. There is nothing either so
reasonable in itself, or yet so suitable to ourselves. For what is it that
he puts upon us? Truly no new commandment; it is but the old command
renewed. It is no new law, though he hath conquered us, and hath the right
of absolute dominion over us; yet he hath not changed our fundamental
laws. He changes only the present tyrannical yoke of sin: but he restores
us, as it were, to our fundamental liberty we formerly enjoyed, and that
sin forced us from, when it conquered us. Christ’s yoke is not a new
imposition. It is but the ancient yoke that was bound upon man’s nature by
God the Creator. The Redeemer doth not invent or contrive one of his own;
he only looses off the yoke of iniquity, and binds on that sweet yoke of
obedience and love to God. He publishes the same laws, many of which are
already written in some obscure characters upon our own minds; and he
again writes them down all over in our hearts. There is nothing superadded
by Jesus Christ, but a chain of love to bind this yoke about our necks,
and a chain of grace and truth to keep his laws. And truly these make the
yoke easy, and take away the nature of a burden from it. O what mighty and
strong persuasions! O what constraining motives of love and grace doth the
gospel furnish, and the rarest cords to bind on Christ’s yoke upon a
reasonable soul,—cords of the most unparalleled love!

I shall only add unto all this, that as herein Christ hath expressed or
completes the expression of his love upon his part; so upon our part it
becomes us to take on his yoke, in testimony of our thankfulness. We owe
our very selves unto him. What can be more said? We owe ourselves once and
again; for we are twice his workmanship, first created by him, and then
renewed or created again unto good works. We are bought with a price, we
are not our own. Can there be any obligation imagined beyond this? Let us
therefore consecrate ourselves to his glory. Let all who believe the
gospel dedicate themselves to its obedience, not so much for salvation to
themselves, as their obligation to their Saviour. We are not called so
much to holiness and virtue that we may be saved, as, because we are
saved, to be blameless before God in love. O how gracious and honourable a
disposition of this kind would it be, to serve him more out of gratitude
for what he hath done, than merely for the reward that he will give!




Sermon IX.


    Rom. xv. 13.—“Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace
    in believing,” &c.


It is usual for the Lord in his word to turn his precepts unto promises,
which shows us, that the commandments of God do not so much import an
ability in us, or suppose strength to fulfil them, as declare that
obligation which lies upon us, and his purpose and intention to accomplish
in some, what he requires of all: and therefore we should accordingly
convert all his precepts unto prayers, seeing he hath made them promises.
This gives us ground, as it were, to retort his commands by way of
requests and supplications. The scripture here gives us a precedent, and
often elsewhere hath made his command a promise. It is then in the next
disposition, and nearest capacity, to be turned into the form of a
supplication. The joy promised in the preceding verse is elsewhere
commanded; and this immediately disposes the sinner to receive a new form
of prayer, from a believing heart, and that not only for himself, but for
others. You see how frequently such holy and hearty wishes are interjected
in his writings. And indeed such ejaculations of the soul’s desires,
whether kept within, or vented, will often interrupt the thoughts and
discourses of believers, but yet they break no sentence, they mar no
sense, no more than the interposition of a parenthesis. Such desires will
follow by a kind of natural resultance upon the lively apprehension of any
divine excellent thing, and secret complacency in it, and a stirring of
the heart to be possessed with it, will almost prevent deliberation. Such
an attractive power the excellency of any object hath in the heart, that
it draws it and engages it almost before any consultation be called about
it. Now there is something of this in these objects which we are naturally
delighted with. All at least that they want the apprehension supplies, and
this draws the heart forcibly after them, as it were, with out previous
advisement. Yet because of the limitation, emptiness, and scarcity of
these things, commonly the desires of men are contracted much within
themselves, and run towards a monopoly of those things. They are so poor
and narrow, that they cannot be enjoyed of more, without division, and the
dividing them cannot be without diminution of each man’s contentment, and
therefore men’s wishes ordinarily are stinted within their own
satisfaction and possession, and cannot without some restraint of reason
extend further to other men. But this is the vast difference between
spiritual things and bodily, eternal things and temporal, that there is no
man possessed of spiritual good, but he desires a community. It is as
natural upon the apprehension of them to enlarge the soul’s wishes to
other men, because there is such excellency, abundance, and solidity
discovered in them, as that all may be full, and none envy or prejudge
another. They are like the light that can communicate itself to all, and
that without diminution of its splendour. All may see it without prejudice
one to another. They are such an ocean that every one may fill their
vessel, and yet nothing less for them that come after. And therefore the
soul that wishes largely for itself, will not find that inward discontent
at the great abundance of another, which is the inseparable shadow of
earthly and temporal advantages. It is cross to men’s interest, that love
gain or preferment, or any such thing, that others grow rich, or are
advanced high in the world, for it intercepts what they desire. But it is
not at all the interest of a godly soul that others be worse than himself,
but rather the salvation and happiness of all men is that interest which
alone he espouses.

Now for this, my beloved, before we proceed further, you may find how the
pulse of your souls beats, and what your temper is, by considering what is
the ordinary unrestrained and habitual wishes of your hearts. Certainly as
men are inclined so they affect, and so they desire, and these
unpremeditated desires that are commonly stirred up in the hearts of men,
argue much the inward temper and inclination of the heart, and give the
best account of it. I think if men would reflect upon themselves, they
will find that earthly things are vain, while they put on another beauty,
and have a more magnificent representation in their minds, and so draw
after them the choicest of their affections, that they cannot spare much
real affection for spiritual things, which are apprehended more slightly
and darkly, and make the lighter and more superficial impression. But
certainly this will be the most natural beating of a holy heart and the
ordinary breathing of it, to desire much of this spiritual treasure for
themselves and others. You know what the thoughts and discourses of
merchants turn most upon. It is to have good winds, fair weather, good
markets, and all things that may facilitate gain, and husbandmen wish for
good seasons, timely showers, and dry harvests, that there may be plenty.
And generally what men’s hearts are set upon, that they go abroad
fervently and incessantly in longing desires after. Now truly this is the
Christian’s inward motion, and this is his salutation, wherewith he
congratulateth others. “The God of hope fill you with all peace and joy in
believing.” His gain lies in another airth.(450) His plenty is expected
from another field, and that is from above, from the God of hope, the
sweetest name (if all the rest be answerable) to be dealt withal, either
for gain or plenty, for it is hope that makes labour sweet, and if it
answer expectation then all is well. Therefore, in the sowing the seed of
prayers and supplications, with tears, for this harvest of joy, and in
trafficking for this treasure of peace, it is good that we have to do with
the God of hope, who cannot make us ashamed; for he that soweth must sow
in hope, 1 Cor. ix. 10. And therefore, though we sow in tears, yet let us
mingle hope therewith, and the harvest shall be joy, and the plenty,
affluence of peace in the Holy Ghost. Now if we believed this, would not
our sorrows be deep, and our labours sweet?

In the words you have read, there is the highest wish of a holy heart for
himself and them he loves best; that one desire, if he had no occasion
ever to present himself to God, but once, that he would certainly fall
upon, or some such like, to be filled after this manner with all peace and
joy in believing. These are the fruits of the Spirit he desires to be
filled with, and feed upon,—peace as an ordinary meal, and joy as an
extraordinary desert, or as a powerful cordial; and to supply what here is
wanting at present, the hope of what is to come, and that in abundance.
This is even an entertainment that a believer would desire for himself,
and these who have his best wishes, while he is in this world. He would
despise the delicacies of kings, and refuse their dainties, if he might
sit at this table that is spread on the mountain of God’s church, a full
feast which fills the soul with peace, joy, and hope, as much as now it is
capable of. Now these precious fruits you see in the words show the root
that brings them forth, and the branch that immediately bears them. The
root is the God of hope, and the power of the Holy Ghost. And a soul being
ingrafted as a living branch by faith into Christ, receives virtue to
bring forth such pleasant fruits, so that they grow immediately upon the
branch of believing, but the sap and virtue of both come from the Holy
Ghost, and the God of hope. Or to take it up in another like notion. This
is the river which gladdeneth the city of God with its streams, that
waters the garden of the Lord with its threefold stream. For you see it is
parted in three heads, and every one of them is derived from another. The
first in the order of nature is peace,—a sweet, calm, and refreshing
river, which sometimes overflows like the river Nilus, and then it runs in
a stream of joy, which is the high spring tide but ordinarily it sends
forth the comfortable stream of hope, and that in abundance. Now this
threefold river hath its original high, as high as the God of hope, and
the power of the Holy Ghost, but the channel of it is situated low, and it
is believing in Christ.

To begin then with the first of these. Truly there is nothing can be
spoken that sounds more sweetly in the ears of men than peace and joy.
They need nothing to commend them, for they have a sufficient testimonial,
and letters of recommendation written upon the affections of all men. For
what is it that all men labour and seek after but this? It is not any
outward earthly thing that is desired for itself, but rather for the peace
and contentment the mind expects in it. And therefore, this must be of
itself the proper object or good of the soul, which, if it can be had
immediately, without that long and endless compass about the creatures,
certainly a man cannot but think himself happy, and will have no missing
of other things, as if a man could live healthfully and joyfully without
meat, and without all appetite for it, no doubt but he would think himself
the happiest man in the world, and would think it no pain to him to want
the dainties of princes, but rather that he were delivered from the
wearisome necessity others laboured under. Just so is it here, there is
nothing would persuade a man to travel, and toil all his lifetime, about
the creatures, and not to suffer his soul to take rest, if he did believe
to find that immediately without travel, which he endures so much travel
for. And therefore the believing Christian is only a wise man, who is
instructed where the things themselves, true peace and joy, do lie, and so
seeks to be filled with the things themselves, for which only men seek
other things, and not as other men who catch at the shadows, that they may
at length find the substance itself, for this were far about, and labour
in vain.

Peace is so sweet and comprehensive a word, that the Jews made their usual
compellation, “Peace be unto you,”(451) importing all felicity, and the
affluence of all good. And indeed our Saviour found no fitter word to
express his matchless good-will to the well-being of his disciples nor
this (Luke xxiv. 36.), when he saluted them after his resurrection, “Peace
be unto you,” which is as much as if he had wished absolute satisfaction,
all contentment and happiness that themselves would desire. Now this peace
hath a relation to God, to ourselves, and our brethren. I will exclude
none of them from the present wish; for even brotherly concord and peace
suits well with the main subject of this chapter, which is the bearing of
our neighbours’ infirmities, and not pleasing ourselves, and such like
mutual duties of charity. But certainly the other two relations are most
intrinsic to happiness, because there is nothing nearer to us than the
blessed God; and next to him, there is nothing comes so near us as
ourselves. The foundation of all our misery, is that enmity between man
and God, which is as if heaven and earth should fall out into an
irreconcilable discord, and upon that should follow the suspension of the
light of the stars, and the withdrawing of the influences of heaven, and
the withholding the refreshment of the early and latter rain. If such
dissension fell between them, that the heavens should be as brass to the
earth, and would refuse the clouds when they cry for rain, or the herbs
and minerals when they crave the influences from above, what a desolate
and irksome dwelling-place would the earth be? What a dreary habitation
would we find it? Even so it is between God and men. All our being, all
our well-being, hangs upon the good aspect of his countenance. In his
favour is all our life and happiness; yet since the first rebellion, every
man is set contrary to God, and in his affections and actions denounces
war against heaven, whence hath flowed the sad and woful suspension of all
these blessings, and comfortable influences, which only beautify and bless
the soul of man. And now there is nothing to be seen but the terrible
countenance of an angry God, the revengeful sword of justice shaken in the
word; all above us as if the sun were turned into blackness, and the moon
into blood, and behold trouble and darkness, and dimness of anguish.

Now whenever a soul begins to apprehend his enmity and division in sad
earnest, there follows an intestine war in the conscience. The terrors of
God raise up a terrible party within a man’s self, and that is the bitter
remembrance of his sins. These are mustered and set in order in
battle-array against a man, and every one of these, as they are thought
upon, strike a dart into his heart. They shoot an arrow dipped in the
wrath of God, the poison whereof drinketh up his spirit, Job vi. 4. Though
the most part of souls have now a dead calm, and are asleep like Saul in
the field in the midst of his enemies, or as Jonas in the ship in the
midst of the tempest, yet when they awake out of that deep stupidity, God
will write bitter things against them, and make them to possess their
iniquities; and they shall find that he hath numbered their steps, and
watched over their sin, and sealed it as in a bag, to be kept in record.
Then he will renew his witnesses against them, and put their feet in the
stocks, and they shall then apprehend that changes and war are against
them, and that they are set as a mark against God, and so they will be a
burden to themselves, Job vii. 20.  What a storm will it raise in the
soul! Now to lay this tempest, and calm this wind, is the business of the
gospel, because it reveals these glad tidings of peace and reconciliation
with God, which can only be the ground of a perfect calm in the
conscience. Herein is the atonement and propitiation set forth, that which
by its fragrant and sweet smell hath pacified heaven, and appeased
justice; and this only is able to pacify the troubled soul, and lay the
tumultuous waves of the conscience, Eph. ii. 13-20; Col. i. 19-22. This
gives the answer of a good conscience, which is like the sweet and gentle
breathing of a calm day after a tempest, 1 Pet. iii. 21. Now it is not so
much God reconcileable to sinners, as God in Christ reconciling sinners to
himself, 2 Cor. v. 19. Though some men be always suspicious of God, yet
they have more reason to suspect their own willingness. For what is all
the gospel but a declaration of his love, and laying down the enmity, or
rather, that he had never hostile affections to his elect, and so was all
this while providing a ransom for himself, and bringing about the way to
kill the enmity? And having done that by the blood of Christ, he will
follow us with entreaties of reconcilement, and requests to lay down our
hostile affections, and the weapons of our warfare; and for him we have no
more ado but to believe his love, while we were yet enemies. This, I say,
carried into the heart with power, gives that sweet calm and pleasant rest
to the soul, after all its tossings. This commands the winds and waves of
the conscience, and they obey it. It is true that many find no trouble
within, and some, upon terrible apprehensions of sin and wrath, find ease
for the time in some other thing, as a diversion to some other object, and
turning aside with Cain to build cities, to worldly pleasures, or
employments, or company, that the noise of them may put the clamours of
their conscience to silence. Some parleys and cessations men have, some
treaties of this kind for peace with God; but alas! the most part make no
entire and full peace. They are always upon making the bargain, and cannot
close it, because of their engagements to sin, and their own corrupt
lusts. And therefore many do nothing else than what men do in war, to seek
some advantage, or to gain time by their delays: but O the latter end will
be sad, when he shall arm you against yourselves! Were it not better, now
while it is to-day, not to harden your hearts? Now, joy is the effect of
peace, and it is the very overflowing of it in the soul, upon the lively
apprehension of the love of God, and the inestimable benefit of the
forgiveness of sins. It is peace in a large measure, pressed down, and
running over, breaking without the ordinary channel, and dilating itself
to the affecting and refreshing of all that is in man: “My heart and my
flesh shall rejoice.” This is the very exuberance and high sailing-tide of
the sea of peace that is in a believer’s heart. It swells sometimes upon
the full aspect of God’s countenance beyond the ordinary bounds, and
cannot be kept within in gloriation and boasting in God. When a soul is so
illustrated with the Holy Ghost, as to make a kind of presence and
possession of what is hoped for, that makes the soul to enlarge itself in
joy. This makes the inward jubilation, the heart as it were to leap for
joy. Now, truly this is not the ordinary entertainment of a Christian. It
is neither so universal nor constant as peace. These fruits so matured and
ripe, like the grapes of Canaan, are not set down always upon the table of
every Christian, nor yet at all to some. It is enough that he keep the
soul in that healthful temper, that it is neither quite cast down or
discouraged through difficulties and infirmities. It is sufficient if God
speak peace to the soul, though it be not acquainted with these raptures
of Christianity. This hath so much sense in it, that it is not meet to be
made ordinary food, lest we should mistake our pilgrimage for heaven, and
fall upon the building of tabernacles in this mount. For certainly the
soul would conclude it good to be here, and could not so earnestly long
for the city and country of heaven, if they had any more but some tastes
of that joy to sharpen their desires after the full measure of it. It is a
fixed and unchangeable statute of heaven, that we should here live by
faith, and not by sense. And indeed, the following of God fully, in the
ways of obedience, upon the dim apprehensions of faith, is more
praiseworthy, and hath more of the true nature of obedience in it, than
when present sweetness hath such a predominant influence. Besides, our
vessel here is weak and crazy, and most unfit for such strong liquor as
the joys of the Holy Ghost. Some liquors have such a strong spirit in them
that they will burst an ordinary bottle; and as our Saviour says, “No man
puts new wine in old bottles, for they will burst,” Matt. ix. 17. Truly
the joy of heaven is too strong for our old ruinous and earthly vessels to
bear, till the body “put on incorruption,” and be fashioned like unto
Christ’s own glorious body; for it cannot be capable of all the fulness of
this joy. And yet there is a kind of all fulness of peace and joy in this
life, “fill you with all joy and peace.” Indeed the fulness of this life
is emptiness to the next. But yet there is a fulness in regard of the
abundance of the world. Their joys and pleasures, their peace and
contentation in the things of this life, are but like “the crackling of
thorns under a pot,” that makes a great noise, but vanishes quickly in a
filthy security, Eccles. vii. 6. It is such, that like the loudest
laughter of fools, there is sorrow at the heart, and in the end of it is
heaviness, Prov. xiv. 13. It is but at the best a superfice, an external
garb drawn over the countenance, no cordial nor solid thing. It is not
heart joy, but a picture and shadow of the gladness of the heart in the
outward countenance; and whatever it be, sorrow, grief, and heaviness
follow at its heels, by a fatal inevitable necessity. So that there is
this difference between the joys and pleasures of the world, and dreams in
the night; for the present there is more solidity, but the end is hugely
different. When men awake out of a dream, they are not troubled with it,
that their imaginary pleasure was not true. But the undivided companion of
all earthly joys and contentment is grief and vexation. I wonder if any
man would love that pleasure or contentment if he were assured to have an
equal measure of torment after it, suppose the pain of the stone, or such
like. But when this misery is eternal, O what madness and folly is it to
plunge into it! “I said of laughter, It is madness, and of mirth, What
doth it?” But the Christian’s peace and joy is of another nature. Yet as
no man knoweth the “hidden manna,” the “new name,” and the “white stone,”
but he that hath it, (Rev. ii. 17) so no man can apprehend what these are,
till he taste them and find them. What apprehension, think ye, can a beast
form of his own nature? Or what can a man conceive of the angelical
nature? Truly this is without our sphere and that without theirs. Now
certainly the wisest and most learned men cannot form any lively notion of
the life of a Christian, till he find it. It is without his sphere and
comprehension, therefore it is called “the peace of God which passes all
understanding,” (Phil. iv. 7), a “joy unspeakable and full of glory,” 1
Pet. i. 8. Suppose men had never seen any other light but the stars of the
firmament, or the light of a candle, they could not conceive any thing
more glorious than the firmament in a clear night. Yet we that have seen
the sun and moon, know that these lights are but darkness unto them. Or,
to use that comparison that the Lord made once effectual to convert a
nobleman, if a man did see some men and women dancing afar off, and heard
not their music, he would judge them mad, or at least foolish, but coming
near hand, and hearing their instruments, and perceiving their order, he
changes his mind. Even so, whatever is spoken of the joy of the Spirit, or
the peace of conscience, and whatsoever is seen by the world of abstaining
from the pleasures of the world, the natural mind cannot but judge it
foolishness, or melancholy, because they do not hear that pleasant and
sweet harmony, and concert of the word and Spirit, in the souls of God’s
children. Else if they heard the sweet Psalmist of Israel piping, they
could not but find an inward stirring and impulse m themselves to dance
too.

Now the third stream is hope, “that ye may abound in hope,” because this
is not the time nor place of possession. Our peace and joy here is often
interrupted, and very frequently weakened. It is not so full a table as
the Christian’s desire requires. Our present enjoyments are not able to
mitigate the very pain of a Christian’s appetite, or to supply his
emptiness. Therefore there must be an accession of hope to complete the
feast and to pacify the eagerness of the soul’s desire, till the fulness
of joy and peace come; and if he have spare diet otherwise, yet he hath
allowance of abundance of hope, to take as much of that as he can hold,
and that is both refreshing and strengthening. Truly there is nothing men
have, or enjoy, that can please, without the addition of hope unto it. All
men’s eyes are forward to futurity, and often men prejudice themselves of
their present enjoyments, by the gaping expectation of, and looking after
things to come. But the Christian’s hope being a very sure anchor cast
within the vail, upon the sure ground of heaven, it keeps the soul firm
and steadfast, though he be not unmoved, yet from tossing or floating;
though it may fluctuate a little, yet his hope regulates and restrains it.
And it being an helmet, it is a strong preservative against the power and
force of temptations. It is that which guards the main part of a
Christian, and keeps resolutions after God untouched and unmaimed.

Now, my beloved, would you know the fountain and original of these sweet
and pleasant streams? It is the God of hope, and the power of the Holy
Ghost. There is no doubt of power in God, to make us happy and give us
peace. But power seems most opposite to peace, especially with enemies and
it seems whatsoever he can do, yet that his justice will restrain his
power from helping us. But there is no doubt but the God of power, as well
as hope, both can and will do it. He hath this style from his promises and
gracious workings, because he hath given us ground of hope in himself. He
is the chief object of hope, and the chief cause of hope in us too.
Therefore we would look up to this fountain, for here all is to be found.

But I haste to speak a word of the third thing proposed, viz.: The channel
that these streams run into. It is believing, not doing. Indeed this
stream once ran in this channel. But since paradise was defaced, and the
rivers that watered it turned another way, this hath done so too. It is
true, that righteousness and holy walking is a notable mean to preserve
this pure, and unmixed, and constant. For indeed the peace of our God will
never lodge well with sin, the enemy of God, nor can that joy, which is so
pure a fountain, run in abundance in an impure heart. It will not mix with
carnal pleasures and toys. But yet the only ground of true peace and joy
is found out by believing in another. Whatsoever ye do else to find them,
dispute and debate never so long about them, toil all night and all day in
your examinations of yourselves, yet you shall not catch this peace,—this
solid peace, and this surpassing joy, but by quite overlooking yourselves
and fixing your hearts upon another object, that is, Jesus Christ. “Peace
and joy in believing,” and what is that believing? Mistake it not. It is
not particular application at first. I delight rather to take it in
another notion, for the cordial absent and consent of the soul to the
promises of the gospel. I say but one word more, viz.: meditation and deep
consideration of these truths is certainly believing, and believing brings
peace, and peace brings joy.




Sermon X.


    Matth. xi. 16.—“But whereunto shall I liken this generation?”


When our Lord Jesus, who had the tongue of the learned, and spoke as never
man spake, did now and then find a difficulty to express the matter herein
contained. “What shall we do?” The matter indeed is of great importance, a
soul matter, and therefore of great moment, a mystery, and therefore not
easily expressed. No doubt he knows how to paint out this to the life,
that we might rather behold it with our eyes, than hear it with our ears,
yet he uses this manner of expression, to stamp our hearts with a deep
apprehension of the weight of the matter, and the depth of it. It concerns
us all, as much as we can, to consider and attend unto it.

Two things are contained here. The entertainment Christ gets in the world,
of the most part, and, the entertainment he gets from a few children, of
whom he is justified. I say, it concerns you greatly to observe this,—for
Christ observed it very narrowly,—what success both his forerunner and
himself had. Christ begins here to expostulate with the multitudes, and
with the scribes and Pharisees about it. But ere all be done he will
complain to the Father. He now complains unto you, that he gets not ready
acceptance amongst you, if it be possible that you may repent of the great
injury done to the Son of God, no not so much to Christ, as your own
souls, for “all who hate me love death, and he that sinneth against me
wrongeth his own soul,” Prov. viii. 36. Wo unto your souls, for you have
not hurt Christ, by so much despising him. Ye have not prejudiced the
gospel, but ye have rewarded evil to yourselves, Isa. iii. 9. I say,
Christ now complains of you to yourselves, if so be you will bethink
yourselves in earnest, and return to yourselves, but if ye will not, he
will at length complain to the Father. When he renders up the kingdom, and
gives an account of his administration unto God, he will report what
entertainment ye gave his word. For he will say, “I have laboured in vain,
and spent my strength for nought with such a man. All threatenings, all
entreaties would not prevail with him to forsake his drunkenness, his
swearing, his covetousness, his oppressions,” &c. You know Christ’s last
long prayer, John xvii. He gives an account in it what acceptance he had
among men, when he is finishing his ministry. These are the men he now
speaks unto in the text, “Whereunto shall I liken this generation?” Thus
he speaks of them to his Father. “O righteous Father, the world hath not
known thee, but I have known thee.” Well then, this is not so light a
matter as ye apprehend. Ye come to hear daily, but know ye not that ye
shall give an account of your hearing? Know ye not that there is one who
observes and marks all the impressions which the word makes on your
consciences? He knows all the blows of the sword of the word, that returns
making no impression on your consciences. Christ says to the multitudes
here, “And what went ye out for to see?” I pray you what went ye out to
see, seeing ye have not believed his report? Why went ye out unto the
wilderness? Know ye who spake, or in whose authority? May we not speak in
these terms unto you, when we consider the little fruit of the gospel?
What do you come to see, and what do ye come to hear every Sabbath, and
other solemn days? I pray you ask at your own hearts, what your purpose
is. Wherefore do ye come together so often? Men are rational in their
business. They do nothing but for some purpose. They labour, and plough,
and sow, in order to reap. They buy and sell to get gain. They have many
projects and designs they still seek to accomplish. And shall we be only
in matters of salvation and damnation so irrational? Shall we in the
greatest thing of the greatest moment, because of eternal concernment be
as perishing brutish beasts, that know not what we aim at? Christ will in
the end ask you, what went ye out of your own houses so often to hear?
What went you out to see? I pray you what will ye answer? If ye say, we
went to hear the word of the Lord, then he shall answer you, and why did
not ye obey it? Then why did ye not hear it as my word, and regard it
more? If ye shall say, we went to hear a man speak some good words unto us
for an hour or two, then is Christ also engaged against you, because he
sent him, and ye despise him, for he says, “He that despises me, despises
him that sent me,” so ye shall be catched both the ways. If ye think this
to be God’s word, I wonder why ye do not receive it, with the stamp of his
authority in your hearts. Why do ye not bow your hearts to it, for it
shall endure for ever, and judge you? Why do you sit(452) so many fair
offers, so many sad warnings? Are not the drunkards warned every day by
this word, that the curse of the Lord shall come upon them? Is not every
one of you, according to your several stations and circumstances, warned
to forsake your wicked ways, and your evil thoughts, to flee from the
wrath to come, before the decree of the Lord pass forth, and before his
fury burn as an oven? And if ye think these to be the true words of the
eternal God, and the sayings of the Amen, the faithful and true witness,
and the truth itself, if ye believe it as ye profess to do, why do ye not
get out of the way of that wrath, which continues upon these sinners
daily? Shall ye escape the judgment of God? Shall not his word overtake
you though ministers that speak unto you will not live for ever? But these
words they speak will surely take hold of you, as they did your fathers,
so that ye shall say, “Like as the Lord of hosts hath said he will do unto
us, so hath he done,” Zech. i. 6. If ye do not think this is God’s word, I
beseech you, why do you come hither so oft? What do ye come to hear? Why
take ye so much needless pains? Your coming here seems to speak that ye
think it to be God’s word and yet your conversation declares more plainly
that ye believe it not. Yet Christ takes notice of you and O that ye,
beloved, would search yourselves that so ye might hear the word as in the
sight of the all seeing God, and in his sight, who will judge you
according to it; a sermon thus heard, would be more profitable than all
that ever ye heard. Now to what purpose speak we of these things unto you,
and why do we choose this discourse, when ye expect to hear public things?
I will tell you the reason of it. Because I conceive this is the great sin
of the times, and the most reprehensive and fountain sin, the root of all
our profanity and malignity, even this which Christ points out in this
similitude. The great blessing and privilege of Scotland is the gospel. Ye
all must grant this. Now, then, the great misery and sin of this nation
is, the abuse and contempt of the glorious gospel, and if once we could
make you sensible of this, ye would mourn for all other particular sins.

The words are very comprehensive. Ye shall find in them the different
manifestations of God in his word, reduced to two heads. The Lord either
mourns to us to make us mourn, or joys to us to make us dance. A
similitude and likeness is the end of all the manifestations of himself,
that we be one with him. Therefore when he would move our affections in
us, he puts on the like, and clothes himself, in his word and
dispensation, with such a habit as is suitable. So ye have both law and
gospel. He laments in the one, he pipes in the other. Both sad and glad
dispensations of his providence may be subordinate to these; the one, I
mean his judgments, representing that to our eyes which his law did to our
ears, making that visible of his justice, which we heard; the other, I
mean mercies, represents that to our eyes, which the gospel did to our
ears, making his good will, his forbearance, and long suffering, and
compassion visible, that men might say, “As we have heard so have we seen
in the city of our God.” Now these should stir up suitable affections in
men. This is their intendment and purpose, to stir up joy and grief,
sorrow for sin, on the one hand, and joy in the Lord’s salvation on the
other hand; hatred of sin by the one, and the love of Christ by the other.

But what is the entertainment(453) these get in the world? Ye shall see it
different. In some it meets with different affections, or it makes them,
and moves them, and these do justify wisdom. The accomplishment and
performance of God’s purposes, in the salvation of souls, justifies his
word. They justify Christ by believing in him; Christ justifies us, by
making us to believe in him, and applying his own righteousness to us. He
that believes justifies the word, and Christ in the word, because he sets
to his seal that God is true; and Christ likewise justifies the believer,
by applying his righteousness unto him. The believer justifies wisdom, by
acknowledging it as the Father’s wisdom; Christ justifies the believer by
making him and pronouncing him righteous, and a son of God. But in others,
and in these a great many, it generally meets with hard hearts, stupid and
insensible, incapable of these impressions. You know music is very apt to
work upon men’s spirits, and doth stir up several passions in them, as joy
or grief. Now Christ and his ministers are the musicians that do apply
their songs to catch men’s ears and hearts, if so be they may stop their
course and not perish. These are blessed Sirens(454) that do so, and pipe,
day and night, in season and out of season, some sad and woful ditties of
men’s sin and God’s wrath, of the day of judgment, of eternal punishment,
that if it be possible, men may fore-apprehend these ills, before they
fall into them without recovery. These are the boys in the market places
that strive to sadden your hearts, and make you lament in time, before the
day of howling, and weeping, and gnashing of teeth. These also have as
many joyful and glad ditties, sweetening the sad. It may be, diverse men
have diverse parts of this harmony. John had the woful and sad part,
Christ took the joyful and glad part; so the one answered the other, and
both made a complete harmony. It may be, one man in one spring mixes these
two, and makes good music alone. The one part is intended to move men to
grief, and mourn once, that they may not mourn for ever; the other to
comfort in the meantime these that mourn, to mix their mourning with their
hope of that blessed delivery in Jesus Christ. Now what is the
entertainment these get from the most part? They can neither move men to
one affection nor another; they will neither mourn nor dance. As the
children complain of some rude and rustic spirits, that are uncapable of
music, and cannot discern one spring(455) from another, so does Christ
complain of a generation of men, they can neither repent nor believe, they
care for none of these things. His threatenings and denunciations of wrath
are a small thing to them, and his consolations appear also to be
inconsiderable. Then souls are otherwise taken up, that they have no sense
to discern the transcendent excellency of eternal things. We would then
press upon your consciences these three things. First, That the word of
God comprehending the law and gospel, contains both the saddest ditties
and the most joyful and sweet songs in the world. Next, We would discover
unto you the great sin, and extreme stupidity of this generation, of which
ye are a part, that ye may know the controversy God hath with the land.
And then at length, we would labour to persuade you to the right use of
this gospel, and justifying of wisdom, if ye would be his children.

The law is indeed a sad song and lamentation, it surpasses all the
complaints and lamentations among men. Ye know the voice in which it was
given at Sinai. It was delivered with great thunders, great terrors
accompanied it. The law is a voice of words and thunder, which made these
that heard it entreat that it should not be spoken to them any more; for
they could not endure the word that was commanded, Heb. xii. 18, 19. Ye
would think if they were holy men, they would not be afraid of it, but so
terrible was that sight, and that voice, that it even made holy Moses
himself exceedingly fear and quake. It made a great host, more numerous
than all the inhabitants of Scotland, to tremble exceedingly. And why was
it so sad and terrible? Even because it was a law that publishes
transgression, for “by the law is the knowledge of sin.” If there were no
fear of judgment and wrath, yet I am sure there is none that can
reasonably consider that excellent estate in which he was once, that
throne of eminency above the creatures, that height of dignity in
conformity and likeness to God, that incomparable happiness of communion
with the supreme Fountain of life; none I say, none can duly ponder these
things, but they will think sin to be the greatest misery of mankind. They
must be affected with the sense of that inestimable treasure they lost.
And how sad a consideration is it to view that cloud of beastly lusts, of
flesh and earth, that was interposed between the Sun of righteousness, and
our souls, which hath made this perpetual eclipse, this eternal night and
darkness! How sad is it to look upon our ruin, and compare it with that
stately edifice of innocent Adam! How are we fallen from the height of our
excellency, and made lower than the beasts, when we were once but a little
lower than the angels! But then if ye shall consider all that followed
upon this the innumerable abominations of men, so contrary to that holy
law and God’s holiness, that hath flowed from this corrupt fountain, and
hath defiled so many generations of men, that they are all bruises and
putrified sores, and in nothing sound from the head to the foot,—the soul
within becomes the sink of all pollution, the members without the conduits
it runs through, and weapons of unrighteousness against our Maker. And
what a consideration is this alone, how vile and ugly doth that holy and
spiritual law make the most refined and polished civilian? He that hath
poorest naturals,(456) most extracted from the dregs of the multitude, oh
how abominable will he appear in this glass, in this perfect law of
liberty! So that men would despise themselves, and repent in dust and
ashes, if once they did see their own likeness. Ye would run from
yourselves as children that have been taken up with their own beauty, but
are spoiled with the small pox. Let them look unto a glass, and it will
almost make them mad. But if we shall stay, and hear out the trumpet which
sounds louder and louder, there will be yet more reason of trembling. For
it becomes a voice publishing judgment and wrath, for therein is the wrath
of God “revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness
of men,” Rom. i. 18. It speaks much of all men’s sins “that every mouth
may be stopped,” but the voice waxed louder and louder, the spring grows
still sadder, that “all the world may become guilty before God,” Rom. iii.
19. It publishes first the command, and then follows the sad and weighty
curse of God. “Cursed is every one that abides not in all things which are
written in the law,” (Gal. iii. 10) as many curses as breaches of the law.
And what a dreadful song is this! Ye shall be punished with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power? If
he had said, ye shall be eternally banished from God, what an incomparable
loss had this been? Men would lead an unpleasant life, who had fallen from
the expectation of an earthly kingdom, but what shall it be to fall from
the expectation of a heavenly kingdom? But when withal there is an eternal
pain with that eternal loss, and an incomparable pain with incomparable
loss, everlasting destruction from God’s presence, joined with this,
always to be destroyed, and never to be made an end of! It is the comfort
of bodily torments, and even of death itself, that it shall be quickly
gone, and the destruction ends in the destruction of the body, and so
there is no more pain. But here is an eternal destruction,—not a dying,
and then a death, but an eternal dying without tasting death. Now consider
(if ye can indeed think) what it is to have a law of enmity, and a hand
writing of ordinances against us, as many curses written up in God’s
register against us, as there were transgressions of the law multiplied
and God himself engaged to be against us, to have no mercy on us, and not
to spare us! Could any heart endure, or any hands be strong, if they would
duly apprehend this? Would the denunciation of war, the publishing of
affliction, the sentence of earthly judges, would they once be remembered
beside this? If ye would imagine all the torments and rackings that have
been found out by the most cruel tyrants against men, all to be centred in
one, and all the grief and pain of these who have died terrible deaths, to
be joined in one, what would it be to this! It would be but as a drop of
that wrath and vexation that wicked souls find in hell, and are drowned
into, and that everlastingly without end.

But we must not dwell always at mount Sinai. We are called to mount Zion,
the city of the living God, to hear a sweet and calm voice of peace, to
hear the sweet and pleasant songs of the sweet Psalmist of Israel, and of
our glorious Peacemaker, Christ Jesus, the desire of all nations, and the
blessing of all the families of the earth. His song is a joyful sound, and
blessed are they that hear it. I am come, says Christ, “to seek and to
save that which was lost.” I am come to save sinners, and the chief of
sinners. Let all these who find their spirits saddened by the terrible
law, or who find themselves accursed from the Lord, and cannot be
justified by the law of Moses, come unto me. Cast your souls upon me, and
ye shall find ease to them. Are ye pressed under the heavy burden of sin
and wrath? Come unto me, and I will give you ease. Put it over upon me. Do
ye think yourselves not wearied nor burdened enough, and yet ye would be
quit of sin and misery? Do your souls desire to embrace this salvation?
Come unto me, and I will not cast you out. Whoever comes, on whatsoever
terms, in whatsoever condition, I will in no case cast you out. Do not
suppose cases to exclude yourselves. I know no case. Ye who cannot be
justified by the law of Moses, come unto me, and ye shall be justified
“from all things from which ye could not be justified by the law of
Moses.” Ye who have no righteousness of your own, and see the
righteousness of God revealed with wrath against you, now come to me, I
have a righteousness of God, beside the law, and will reveal it to you. Ye
have a band of enmity, and handwriting of ordinances against you, but come
unto me, for I have cancelled it in the cross, and slain the enmity, so it
shall never do you any harm. In a word, this is the messenger whose feet
are beautiful, that publishes glad tidings of peace. This is the Mediator,
who reconciles us unto God. The whole gospel and covenant of grace is a
bundle of precious promises. It is a set of pleasant melodious songs, that
may accompany us through our wearisome pilgrimage, and refresh us till we
come unto the city, where we shall all sing the song of the Lamb. What a
song is liberty to captives and prisoners, light to them that sit in
darkness, opening of the eyes to the blind, gladness of spirit to those
who are heavy in spirit! Ye would all think salvation and remission of
sins a sweet song. But if ye would discern it, ye would find nothing
sweeter in the gospel than this redemption from all iniquity, from sin
itself, and from all kind of misery. How lovely and pleasant a thing is
that! When Christ hath piped unto you the remission of all sins in his own
blood, then he plays the most sweet spring, the renunciation of sin, and
dying to this world, by his death and resurrection. Many listen to the
song of justification, but they will not abide to hear out all the song.
He is our sanctification and redemption, as well as our righteousness.
Always to whomsoever he is pleasant, when he puts his yoke upon them, he
will be more pleasant in bearing it. Whosoever gladly hears Jesus singing
of righteousness and holiness, they shall also hear him sing of glory and
happiness. Those who dance at the springs of righteousness and
sanctification, what an eternal triumph and exultation waits on them, when
he is singing the song of complete redemption!

Are these things so? Is this the law, and this the gospel? Do they daily
sound in our ears, and what entertainment, I pray you, do they get from
this generation? Indeed, Christ’s complaint hath place here, whereunto
shall our generation be likened? For he hath lamented to us and we have
not mourned; he hath piped to us, and we have not danced. We will neither
be made glad nor sad by these things. How long hath the word of the Lord
been preached unto you, and whose heart trembled at it? Shall the lion
roar, and the beasts of the field not be afraid? The lion hath roared
often to us. God hath spoken often, who will not fear? And yet who doth
fear? Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, in congregations every day,
that terrible trumpet of Mount Sinai that proclaims war between God and
men, and yet will not the people be afraid? Amos iii. 6, 8. Have not every
one of you heard your transgressions told you? Are ye not guilty of all
the breaches of God’s holy law? Hath not the curse been pronounced against
you for these, and yet who believes the report? Ye will not do so much as
to sit down and examine your own guiltiness, till your mouth be stopped
and till ye put it in the dust before God’s justice. And when we speak of
hell unto you, and of the curses of God passed upon all men, you bless
yourselves in your own eyes, saying, peace, peace, even though ye walk in
the imagination of your own hearts, add sin to sin, and “drunkenness to
thirst,” Deut. xxix. 20. Now, when all this is told you, that many shall
be condemned and few saved, and that God is righteous to execute judgment
and render vengeance on you, ye say within yourselves, For God’s sake, is
all this true? But where is the mourning at his lamentations, when there
is no feeling or believing them to be true? Your minds are not convinced
of the law of God, and how shall your hearts be moved? Christ Jesus
laments unto you, as he wept over Jerusalem, “How often would I have
gathered thee, and thou wouldst not!” What means he? Certainly, he would
have you to sympathize with your own condition. When he that is in himself
blessed, and needs not us, is so affected with our misery, how should we
sympathize with our own misery! God seems to be affected with it, though
there be no shadow of turning in him. Yet he clothes his words with such
affections, “Why will ye die?” “O that my people had hearkened unto me!”
He sounds the proclamation before the stroke, if it be possible to move
you to some sense of your condition, that concerns you most nearly. Yet
who judges himself that he may not be judged? The ministers of the Lord,
or Christians, may put to their ear, and hearken to men in their retiring
places, but who repents in dust and ashes, and says, “What have I done?”
Jer. viii. 6. But every man goes on in his course without stop. The word
ye hear on the Sabbath day against your drunkenness, your oppressions,
your covetousness, your formality, &c., it doth not lay any bands on you
to keep you from these things. Long may we hearken to you in secret, ere
we hear many of you mourn for these things, or turn from them. Where is he
that is afraid of the wrath of God, though it be often denounced against
him? Do not men sleep over their time, and dream of escaping from it?
Every man hath a refuge of lies he trusts in, and will not forsake his
sins.

Again, on the other hand, whose heart rejoices within them to hear the
joyful sound? Because men do not receive the law, and mourn when he
laments, they cannot receive the gospel. It cannot be glad news to any but
the soul that receives sad tidings, the sentence of death in its bosom.
Therefore Christ Jesus is daily offered and as often despised, as a thing
of nought, and of no value. Ye hear every day of deliverance from eternal
wrath, and a kingdom purchased unto you, and ye are no more affected, than
if we came and told you stories of some Spanish conquest, that belonged
not unto you. Would not the ears and hearts of some men be more tickled
with idle and unprofitable tales, that are for no purpose but driving away
the present time, than they are with this everlasting salvation? Some men
have more pleasure to read an idle book, than to search the holy
scriptures, though in them this inestimable jewel of eternal life be hid.
The vain things of this present world have a voice unto you of pleasure,
and profit, and credit. They will pipe unto you, and ye will listen unto
their sound, but ye know not that the dead are there, and that it is the
way to the chambers of hell. These indeed are Sirens(457) that entice
passengers by the way with their sweet songs, and having allured them to
follow, lead them to perishing. Here is the voice that is come down from
heaven, the “Word that was with God,” and he is “the way, the truth, and
the life.” He is gone before you, and undertakes to guide you. He comes
and calls upon simple men. The Father’s Wisdom calls the simple ones to
understand wisdom, to find life and peace. Will ye then so far wrong your
own souls as to refuse it? And yet the most part are so busied with this
world and their own lusts, that the sweetest and pleasantest offers in the
gospel sound not so sweet unto them as the clink of their money, or the
sound of oil and wine in a cup. Any musician would affect them more than
the sweet singer of Israel, the anointed of the God of Jacob. Always(458)
these souls that have mourned and danced according to Christ’s motions,
and whose hearts have exulted within them at the message and word of
reconciliation,—blessed are ye. Ye are of another generation, children of
wisdom, ye who desire to hear his voice. “Let me hear thy voice.” O thou
that dwellest in the gardens, the companions hear thy voice, “for thy
voice is sweet, and thy countenance is comely.” If this be the voice of
thy heart, blessed art thou. Thou mayest indeed dance, who hath rejoiced
in his salvation, or who hath mourned at his lamentation, thy dancing is
but yet coming, for his piping is but yet coming. When all the companies
of wisdom’s children shall be gathered together in that general assembly
of the first born, Christ Jesus, the head of all principalities, and in
special the head of the body the church, shall lead the ring, and there
shall be eternal praises and songs of those that follow the Lamb. They
shall echo into him, who shall begin that song of the hallelujah,
Salvation, blessing, honour, glory, and power to the Lamb, &c.

Now, whereunto shall this generation be likened, that are not affected
with these things? What strange stupidity and senselessness is it, that
men are not affected with things of so great and so near concernment? It
would require the art of men to express the obstinacy of some Christian
professors, or rather a pen steeped in hell. He would be thought unnatural
that would not grieve at his friend’s death or loss. And what shall they
be called that will not sympathize with themselves, that is, their souls?
If we speak to you of corporal calamities, and ye could not be moved, it
were great stupidity. But what stupidity is it, that men will not consider
their own souls? What shall ye profit, if ye lose your precious souls, and
be cast away? It is the greatest loss that is told you, and the greatest
gain. Your affections are moved with perishing things, every thing puts
them up or down, and casts the balance with you. What deep ignorance and
inconsideration is it, that ye who can mourn for loss of goods, of
children, of health, of friends, that ye cannot be moved to sorrow for the
sin of your soul, for the eternal loss of your soul! Other sorrows cannot
profit you, but this is the only profitable mourning. If ye were told your
sin and misery, to make you despair and mourn eternally, ye had some
excuse to delay, and forget it as long as ye can. But when all this is
told you, that you may escape from it, will ye not consider it? When ye
are desired to mourn, that ye may be comforted for ever, will ye not
mourn? We would have you to anticipate the day of judgment, that ye may
judge yourselves, and then ye shall not be judged. What folly and madness
is this to delay it till endless, irremediless mourning come, a day that
hath no light mixed with darkness! Those that now mourn at that law, and
for their sin, and dance at the promises of the gospel, may well be called
children of wisdom, and O how may this generation be said to be begotten
of foolishness, as their father, and wildness, as their mother! For is
there any such folly as this, to lose a man’s self absolutely and
irrecoverably, for that which they cannot have always? Is there any such
folly as to refuse this healing medicine, for the little bitterness which
is in it, and then to incur eternal death?

Now what should we do then? What doth the word of God call you to do? This
is it, to mourn and rejoice, and this is to justify wisdom. These two are
the pulse of a Christian. According as he finds his grief and joy, so is
he. All of you have these affections, but they are not right placed. They
are not pitched upon suitable objects. The worldling hath no other joy but
carnal mirth, no other grief but that which is carnal, these are limited
within the bounds of time. Some loss, or some gain, some pleasure or pain,
some honour or dishonour, these are the poles all his affections turn
about on. Now then we exhort and beseech you, as ye would flee from the
wrath to come, consider it now and fear it. As ye would not partake with
this untoward generation in their plagues, so be not like them in their
stupidity.

Ye are called to consider your sins and God’s wrath, that ye may turn unto
the Lord, and then you will hear the voice of peace crying unto thee, “Be
of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee.” If ye submit unto the
justice of God, or unto the holiness and righteousness of his law in
condemning you, you justify wisdom in part, but ye who have justified
wisdom thus far, do not condemn wisdom after it. Justify the gospel, in
believing upon Jesus Christ. Receive it as a true and faithful saying with
your hearts, and this shall justify you. And if ye justify the wisdom of
God in prescribing the righteousness of Christ unto you, ye will also
justify wisdom in prescribing a rule of holiness and obedience unto you,
and count all his paths pleasantness and peace. Ye must dance at the
commandments, as well as the promises, because all God’s precepts are
really promises. Ye have nothing to do but to believe them as the way, and
then to dance until ye all sing the song of the Lamb with the saints
above.

Now if ye believe his law and gospel, and be suitably affected with these,
ye are led also to sympathize with all the dispensations of his
providence. Doth God lament to you in his works as well as his word? O
then, Christians, we exhort you to mourn. Yet mourning because of his
lamentable providence, should be joined with rejoicing in his word. “God
hath spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice.” We are a stupid generation,
that can neither see, nor hear, neither can we be affected with what we
see, nor hear. Do not his judgments go forth as a lamp that burneth, yet
who considers? Doth not the lion roar, but who is afraid? Is there not a
voice publishing affliction? Hath not God’s rod a loud voice, and yet who
hears it? Who fears? We do not receive agreeable impressions of the Lord’s
dealing with us, but every man puts the day of evil far from him. He will
not apprehend public rods, till they become personal, and therefore they
must become personal. If ye were mourning in a penitent manner, as a
repenting soul laments, would not our fast days have more soul affliction
attending them? If ye did dance as God pipes in his providence, would not
our solemn feasts have more soul rejoicing, and heavenly mirth? Alas for
that deep sleep that has fallen upon so many Christians! How few stir up
themselves to take hold upon God, though he hides his face, and
threateneth to depart from us? For the Lord is with you while ye are with
him; if ye seek him, and feareth for him with all your heart, you will
find him, but if ye forsake him he will forsake you.




Sermon XI.


[It is extremely probable that this was one of the probationary discourses
which the author delivered before the Presbytery of Glasgow, previous to
his ordination. The following is an extract from the Record of that
Presbytery: “Dec. 5, 1649. The qlk daye Mr. Hew Binnen made his popular
sermon 1 Tim. i. ver. 5 ‘The end of ye commandment is charity.’—Ordaines
Mr. Hew Binnen to handle his controversie this day fifteen dayes, De
satisfactione Christi.”—_Ed._]


    1 Tim. ii. 5.—“Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a
    pure heart, and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned.”


In this chapter the apostle, after the inscription of this epistle,
repeats a former commandment that he had given to Timothy, how he should
both teach himself, and by authority, committed unto him by an
extraordinary commission, see that other ministers teach so also. Paul
almost in all his epistles, sets himself against legal preachers, and
false teachers. It was a common error in the primitive times, to confound
the law and grace, in the point of righteousness, or to make free
justification inconsistent with the moral law. Therefore our apostle makes
it his chief study to vindicate the doctrine of the gospel. He preaches
the gospel, and yet is not Antinomian. He preaches the law, and yet is no
legal preacher. He exalts Christ more than the Antinomian can do, and yet
he presses holiness more than the mere legalist can do. He excludes the
law in the point of justification and pardon, and then brings it in again
to the justified man’s hand. If these words were rightly understood, and
made use of, it would put an end to the many useless controversies of the
present time, and reform many of our practices.

There are as many practical abuses among Christians concerning the law and
the gospel, as there are speculative errors among other sects. In the
former verse, he more particularly directs him what to take a care of,
that men may neither spend their own, or their neighbour’s time, in
foolish, unnecessary, or impertinent questions, that tend nothing to the
edification of the body of Christ, or in building them up in our most holy
faith, the doctrine of Christ Jesus, and faith in it. And in this verse,
he shows the true meaning and purpose of the law, and commandment, when he
meets these doctors, and draws an argument against them from their own
doctrine. They boasted of the law, and were counted very zealous of it,
but as it is said of the Jews, they had a zeal of God, but not according
to knowledge, because they did not submit unto the righteousness of God.
They were also zealous for the commandment, but neither God nor the
commandment would give them thanks. Why? Because they wholly mistake and
pervert the meaning and purpose of the law. As long as they make the law
inconsistent with the gospel, or would mix it with it, in the point of
justification, they do it not unto edification in faith (as it is read),
and as they ought to do, verses 4, 5, 6. We think this evangelic sentence,
but rawly,(459) yea, legally exponed by many, when they look upon the
words as they lie here, “the end of the commandment is love,” for love
worketh no evil, and is the fulfilling of the whole law, and this love is
described to be pure and sincere, by the following properties. But we
conceive the main business is not to describe love, or to oppose this unto
their contentions about trifling questions. We choose rather to understand
the text another way, according to the order of nature, which also the
words themselves give ground for, “The end of the commandment is love out
of a pure heart,” out “of faith unfeigned.” So then, according to the
phraseology and meaning of the words, love is not first, but faith must be
first, and primarily intended, so that the sense of the words is this, The
end of the commandment is unfeigned faith, from whence flows a good
conscience, a pure heart, and love, or the end of the commandment is
faith, which is proved unfeigned by these effects, that it gives the
answer of a good conscience, it purifies the heart, worketh by love, the
effect of faith which is love, being to our knowledge more sensible than
faith itself. We think it then more native(460) to make a pure heart, and
love, marks of unfeigned faith, than faith and a good conscience the marks
of love. This exposition is yet more confirmed by parallel places, Rom. x.
4, “The end of the law is Christ for righteousness, unto them that
believe.” This is most principally intended, and even before love. Now it
is all one to speak of faith as to speak of Christ. For faith and Christ
are inseparably joined, and faith comes not as a consideration in the
gospel, abstracted from Christ the object of it, as some enemies of Christ
affirm. It justifies us not as an act or work, but as an instrument,
whereby we apprehend Christ and his righteousness. For faith abstracted
from Christ is but an empty notion, and among the dung and loss that Paul
would quit to be found in Christ, Phil. iii. 7-9. Now this sense only fits
the scope and purpose, and leads on strongly against the false teachers.
When Paul brings his argument from the law, which they defended against
the gospel, they made the commandment to contradict the gospel. Paul makes
the commandment to contradict them, and agree with the gospel, and to be
so far from disagreeing with it, that it hath a great affinity with it as
the mean to the end as that which is unperfect, without its own complement
and perfection. Faith in Jesus Christ alone for salvation, quieting a
man’s conscience, is the very intent of the law, and the command was never
given since Adam, to justify men by obedience to it, but to pursue men
after Christ. And to satisfy you more fully, and clear it up he says,
though the end of the command be not to justify, but to pursue a man from
it to Christ, yet the command suffers no prejudice by this means, but
rather is established by faith, the end of it, because this faith
persuades the heart, and makes a man obey out of love to God, whereas
before it should never have gotten any obedience, while men sought
salvation by it.

You see then, there is an admirable harmony and consent between these
things that are set at variance, both in the opinion and practice of the
times. For what seems more contrary than the cursing commanding law, and
the absolving promising gospel? Yet here they are agreed. Doth not justice
go cross to mercy in the ordinary notion? Yet here there is a friendly
subordination of justice to mercy, of the law to the gospel. Behold how
faith is environed with the law, commanding and cursing on the one hand,
and obedience to the command on the other hand, how faith is the middle
party. A good conscience could never meet with the command since Adam’s
fall. A pure heart, and the obedience of love, had casten out(461) with
the command, but here is the union, the meeting of old friends. Faith is
the mediator, as it were, and the gospel comes between them, and so they
dare meet again. Christ Jesus, who is our peace to make two one, comes in
the middle, and takes away the difference. The law never meets with an
obedient servant, or friend, till it meet first with Christ. It can find
none righteous in all the world, none upright. Here you have the law’s
command and curse reconciled with the gospel’s promise, and absolution
reconciled with new obedience unto the command, the command leading to
Christ, and Christ leading the man just back again to the command, the
command serving Christ’s design, and Christ serving the command. And this
is the round that the believer shall go about in, until sin shall be no
more. He shall be put over from one hand to another, till Christ shall be
all in all. The command shall put him to Jesus, and Christ shall lead him
back again, under a new notion, to his old master.

We may consider in the text a twofold relation that faith stands in, the
relation of an end, and of a cause. Faith hath the relation of an end unto
the commandment, of a cause unto a good conscience and a pure heart, and
love, for these are said to be out of faith, which notes this dependence
of a cause and fountain. The command is for faith, and a pure heart and
love are from faith. We shall use no other division but consider the
method of these effects that flow from faith. There is an order of
emanation and dependence. There is a chain here. The first link nearest
faith is a good conscience. The second link is a pure heart. The third is
love, the hand follows the heart, and the heart follows the conscience.

We need not be subtile in seeking our purpose on these words, we think
there is more in the plain words than we can speak of. We shall only
resolve the verse in these propositions, without more observations.
_First_, Faith in Jesus Christ is the end of the commandment, or law.
_Secondly_, There is a faith feigned, and a faith unfeigned, a true and a
false faith. _Thirdly_, Unfeigned faith gives the answer of a good
conscience. _Fourthly_, Faith purging the conscience, purifies the heart.
_Fifthly_, Faith purifying the heart, works by love. Here then is the
substance of all the gospel, and all this makes up an entire complete end.
Faith purifying the heart, purging the conscience, and working by love, is
the end of the commandment.

_First_, The end of the commandment or law (for a part is put for the
whole) is faith in Christ or Jesus Christ apprehended by faith, which is
all one. For ye cannot abstract faith from Christ, for the whole gospel is
a shadow without him. Grace and glory is but a beam of the Sun of
righteousness, that if ye come between it and Christ, it evanishes
presently, Rom. x. 4, “Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to
every one that believes.” And if Christ be the end of the law, then faith
is the end of it, because faith is the profession of Christ, and union
with him. But consider, I. That the end is not taken here for the
consumption or destruction of a thing. Christ is not the end of the law in
that sense, though indeed, if the Antinomian speak ingenuously, his sense
would be this, Christ makes an end of the law, contrary to Christ’s own
express meaning, “I came not to destroy the law but to fulfil it,” Matt.
v. 17. II. The end is either the intention or scope of a thing, the
original word imports both. III. There is an end principally and directly
intended in the thing, or work itself, and an end adventitious, and of the
work. We may speak either of the end the law, of its own nature, is
ordained unto, or the end of the Lawgiver in promulgating the law. These
may be different. Next, concerning the law, consider, I. That the law may
be taken strictly in a limited sense, as it comprehends only the command,
and the promise of life, and the curse on the breach of it, and in this
sense, it is frequently taken in Paul’s epistles to the Romans, and
Galatians, and opposed to faith and the gospel, as the gospel contains
promises of salvation to penitent sinners. Or, II. It may, or useth to be
so extended, as to comprehend all the administrations made under Moses, or
all God’s mind revealed under the Old Testament; now, in this sense, it
comprehends the gospel, and covenant of grace in it, as we shall hear.
Faith in Christ is the intention and scope of the law. Indeed, faith in
Jesus is not the intention of the law itself, as it is only made up of
commandments, promises, and curses. For the law as it commands, hath
nothing to do, but to be a rule and obligation to men, and as it curses,
it condemns men, and speaks nothing of Jesus Christ, or a way to make up
the breach of the law. The gospel is not contained in the law, but rather
accidental to it. For Jesus Christ comes with the gospel, as if some
unexpected cautioner would come in, when the Judge is, as the angel that
held Abraham’s hand,—when he was to slay his son, and offer him up a burnt
offering,—giving sentence to deliver him. It is an exception from the
curse.

But Christ is directly intended and pointed out by the law. If ye consider
the whole administration of Moses, that is, the law and covenant of works,
though it was preached after the fall, yet it was never preached alone
without the gospel, and so if ye consider the whole administration of
God’s mind and ordinances, Christ is principally aimed at. For, 1. The
doctrine Moses delivered in mount Sinai contained a covenant of grace. If
you look to the preface of the ten commandments, it is even the chief
gospel promise, and article of the covenant. For how could God come to
terms with men after sin, but in terms of grace? and on no other terms can
man stand before God, nor God be his God. And likewise, seeing the gospel
was preached in paradise, and afterwards to Abraham, God could not be
false in his promise made to Abraham, neither could the promulgation of
the law that followed make that null which went before, Gal. iii. 17. What
meant all the ceremonial law? It shadowed out Jesus Christ, the only
sacrifice and propitiation. And this is the sum of the gospel salvation to
penitents believing in Christ, and looking through the sacrifices unto
him, and thus David’s righteousness was the imputation of righteousness,
and not inherent holiness, Psal. xxxii. 1, 2; Rom. iv. 5. But 2. It used
to be a question, whether the law delivered upon mount Sinai was a
covenant of works or not. Some say, that the law which was delivered upon
mount Sinai was indeed a covenant of works, though they confess it was
preached with the covenant of grace, and not delivered to them to stand by
it or of intention to get righteousness by it, but to be subservient to
the covenant of grace. Others speak absolutely that the law upon mount
Sinai was a covenant of grace. We conceive this is but a contention about
words. The matter is clear in itself, (1) That neither is now the gospel
preached without the law, as ye may see in Christ’s sermon upon the mount,
and his sermon to the young man, (Matt. chapters v., vi., vii., Mark x.
17,) nor yet was then the law preached without the gospel, as ye may see
in Exod. chap. xx. The preface to the commandments, and the second command
contains much of the gospel in them. Deut. xxx. 6, 7, &c., compared with
Rom. x. 6, &c., where Paul notes both the righteousness of faith and of
the works of the law. (2) Those who say the law on mount Sinai was a
covenant of works, do not assert that God gave it to be a covenant of
works, out of intention that men should seek salvation thereby, but they
make it only a schoolmaster to lead us unto Christ, and to discover our
sinful condition; and those who say it was a covenant of grace, consider
it in relation to God’s end of sending it, and as it takes in all the
administration and doctrine of Moses. So there needs be no difficulty
here. The matter seems clear, that the covenant of works was preached by
Moses, and so it was by Paul, (Rom. x., Gal. iii.) and that neither Paul
nor Moses preached the covenant of works, but as a broken covenant; not as
such that men could stand unto, or be saved by. No man can preach the
gospel, unless he preach the covenant of works; not because both concur to
the justification of a sinner, but because the knowledge of a man’s own
lost condition under the one, presses him to flee to the other.

Now I say, Christ Jesus, or faith in him, is the scope and intention of
the law. It is the scope and intention of the lawgiver, in giving out the
law. God hath never given a command or curse since Adam’s fall, but for
this end, to bring sinners unto Christ. This is the end revealed, and
appointed by him in his word. This we shall clear from some texts of
scripture, because it is very material, Rom. v. 20, 21. It might be
questioned from the former words, since death hath reigned before Moses,
for sins against nature’s light, what means the new entry of the written
law? What was the end of the promulgation of it on mount Sinai? He
answers, “the law entered that sin might abound;” that is, the world knew
not sin, the letters of nature’s light were worn out and rusty; men
thought not of their miserable condition by nature, and did not charge
themselves before God; therefore a new edition and publication of the law
must be given, that all men may know how much they owe, and how they were
guilty in a thousand things they never dreamed of. But wherefore serves
this? That grace might superabound where sin had abounded. The Lord would
have sin abounding in men’s knowledge, and their charge to be great and
weighty, that God’s pardoning grace might be more conspicuous, and the
discharge more sweet. We also learn, (Gal. iii. 19.) that the same
question was moved, “Wherefore then serves the law? Seeing the covenant of
grace was preached to Abraham, what meant the publishing of a covenant of
works upon mount Sinai?” He answers, “It was added because of
transgression, till the seed should come, to whom the promise was made;”
and as it is said, Rom. v. 13, “For until the law sin was in the world.”
It abounded in all places of the world before the law came; but men did
not impute it unto themselves, nor condemn themselves as guilty. Therefore
the law was added to discover many hidden transgressions, and to show them
the curse they deserved. Now this law is not against the promise or
covenant of grace, (ver. 21.) which it behoved to be if it were not given
of intention to drive men to Christ. But the 22d verse speaks out clearly
the end of it, “the scripture hath concluded all men under sin,” and under
the curse both. To what end? That the promise by faith in Christ might
come, or be given to believers. And ver. 24, “The law” was a
“schoolmaster” and teacher, to lead us unto Christ. The very doctrine of a
command impossible for man to keep, was, as it were, a proclamation of
Christ Jesus to him, a complete teaching of the necessity of some other
way of salvation. The law exacted obedience rigorously, even such as we
could not perform, and cursed every degree of disobedience. This, if there
were no more, speaks that a man cannot stand to such terms, and therefore
he must flee to Jesus Christ, who mends the broken covenant.

Again, the apostle, 2 Cor. iii. 13, 14, while he speaks of the excellency
of the ministry of the gospel beyond the ministry of Moses,
notwithstanding all the material glory that accompanied that ministration,
as the shining of Moses’ face, &c., now opens up a great mystery
here,—Moses’ face shining while he was with God upon the mount. This holds
forth the glory of the law as in respect of God. By counsels and
inventions they saw no more but temporal mercies in it, and were not able
to fix their eyes on that glory; the carnal Israelites did not break
through the ministry of the law and death, to see Jesus there, because a
vail was upon their hearts. They thought God had been dealing with them in
the terms of a covenant of works, and they would stand to all God had
said, and undertook indeed very fairly, “All which God hath commanded, we
will do, and be obedient.” But though(462) they perverted God’s meaning of
the law, and did not see Jesus intended; for they did not look steadfastly
to the end of that mystery. Now what was it the vail hid them from? For
the same vail is yet on them to this day, while they read Moses and the
prophets, and when they shall be converted it shall be done away in
Christ, they shall then see him in Moses’ law. So then, the end of this
ministry of the law was Jesus Christ, and this they could not behold.

Now from all this it is very clear, that Jesus Christ, or faith in him,
was the great purpose and end of the law, and covenant of works. The world
was lying in sin, and none sought God, no not one; neither knew they well
what sin was. Therefore God sends his gospel from mount Sinai, and
publishes his law in a terrible manner, that they might know the way and
manner of the God they served, and see that their obligation was
infinitely beyond their ability or performance. But, poor souls! they
clearly mistake the matter, and stand to the terms of the covenant of
works, as if they were able to perform them. But God did not leave them
so. For he adds a ceremonial law, and sacrifices, to shadow out Christ
Jesus. Now, says God, though ye have undertaken so well, yet I know you
better than ye do yourselves. Ye will never keep one word of what you say.
Therefore, when ye sin bring a sacrifice, and look to my Son, the Lamb
that is to be slain and offered up, and ye shall have pardon in him.

II. Christ Jesus apprehended by faith, is the accomplishment and
perfection of the law. 1. Because Christ Jesus, or faith laying hold upon
him, accomplishes the same end that the law was ordained for of itself.
The law was appointed to justify men, that it might be a rule of
righteousness according to which men might stand before God and live. Now
when the law was weak through the flesh, and could not give life, (Rom.
viii. 3; Gal. iv. 21.) and the law ordained to life, wrought more death,
and made sin exceeding sinful, (Rom. vii. 10-13.) therefore Jesus Christ
came in the flesh, to do what the law was unable to do, and to bring many
sons unto glory, that the just might live by faith, Gal. iii. 11. The law
should never have gotten its end, no man should have stood before God, but
the curse only would have taken place, and the promise would have been of
no effect. Therefore, Jesus comes, and gives obedience to the law, and
delivers men from the curse of it, and by faith puts men in as good, and
even in a better condition, than they would have been by the promise; so
that the justified sinner may come before God, as well as innocent Adam,
and have as great confidence and assurance, and peace by faith, as he
could have had by inherent holiness. Imputed righteousness comes in as a
covering over the man’s nakedness, and doth the turn(463) of perfect
inherent holiness.

2. Christ, or faith laying hold on him, is the end or accomplishment of
the law, because faith in Christ fulfils the righteousness of the law, in
respect of a believer’s personal obedience. Although the believer gave not
perfect obedience, and so cannot stand in terms of justice, yet he gives
sincere and upright obedience, which the law should never have got. The
command wrought sin and death, by occasion of corruption, and never would
any point of it be fulfilled by men. For as long as the curse was
standing, no obedience could be acceptable till justice was satisfied, and
though that might have been dispensed with, yet there is none that are
righteous, none seek after God. No good principles of obedience were in
us, but all are corrupt, and have done abominable works, and all our
righteousness is as a menstruous cloth; and though upright obedience could
have been yielded, yet the law exacted perfect obedience. But now faith in
our Redeemer absolves a man from the curse of the law, so that now he is
not looked upon as an enemy, but a friend; and then it puts a man upon
obedience to the command from new motives and principles: and thus the
righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us, who walk after the Spirit,
Rom. viii. 4. And that imperfect obedience is accepted of God, and
received off his hand, by virtue of the sacrifice and atonement of Christ.
The law would accept of no less, no not of nine commandments, if the tenth
was broken. But now God in Christ accepts of endeavours and minting,(464)
and so is the law in some way or other accomplished. And faith leads a man
on till he be perfected. He walks by faith from strength to strength, till
he appear before God, and be made holy as he is holy. Faith in Christ is
the end of the law.

3. Because whatever faith wants of perfect and personal obedience, it
makes up in Christ’s obedience, and thus is the law thoroughly
accomplished, for what it wants in the believer it gets in Christ. Paul
would have the Romans take this way, Rom. vi. 11: “Likewise reckon ye
yourselves dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ.”
Ye may gather by good consequence, that since Christ hath died to sin as a
public person so ye should die with him unto sin, and mortify sin with
him. And thus may ye have consolation against your imperfect personal
mortification. Ye were thoroughly mortified in Christ. So the believer may
look unto Jesus, as one who hath given obedience even unto the death, and
that, not in his own name but for us, that the imperfect holiness and
obedience of every sound believer, may have his complete righteousness to
cover it, and come next the Father’s eye. And thus is the law fulfilled,
and this way doth faith not make void, but establish the law, Rom. iii.
31. And as the law got better satisfaction in the sufferings of Christ,
who became a curse for us, than in all the punishment we could endure, so
it gets more satisfaction to the command by his obedience than if our
personal had been perfect. Christ was “made under the law, that we might
receive the adoption of sons,” (Gal. iv. 4) and the Son’s being made under
the law is of more worth than all our being under it. Now faith puts that
obedience of God Man in the law’s hand. When we do God’s will, he brings
out Christ Jesus, “Lo, (says he) I come, I delight to do thy will,” Psal.
xl. 7-9. In a word, faith in Jesus accomplishes the law, in the commands,
in the promise, in the curse, as might be easily shown, if your time would
allow.

(1) In the curse, because it lays hold upon Christ, who was “made a curse
for us,” (Gal. iii. 13) and so gives complete satisfaction to the Lord’s
justice in that point. It holds up the sacrifice and propitiation of our
Saviour, and justice says, I am satisfied. It holds up the ransom, (Job
xxxiii. 24) and therefore Christ says, “Deliver them from going down to
the pit, for I have found a ransom.” Again we also observe, (2) That faith
in Christ also fulfils the commandments of the law, because it is the
fountain of new obedience unto the law. It hath a respect unto all God’s
righteous judgments. It purifies the heart into the obedience of them, and
it works by love, and so it is the end of the law for righteousness. It
not only gives the answer of a good conscience unto all challenges and
curses from Christ’s blood, but daily derives virtue out of Jesus Christ,
to bring forth fruit unto God. What it cannot reach by doing, it supplies
by believing, and laying hold upon Christ’s obedience. And this is the
righteousness of the law fulfilled in us. Let us also,

(3) Look upon the promise of life, and it is accomplished also by faith in
Christ. For the law could not have given life, and so the promise would
now be in vain; but Christ by faith justifies the sinner, and he lives,
yea, hath eternal life in him, and so all the three are strengthened and
established. Faith is the most comprehensive commandment, 1 John iii. 22,
23. It is put for all the commandments, (1) By acknowledgment of the
breach of all, and so it magnifies the law, and makes it honourable, and
subscribes to the sentence of justice and the authority of the command;
(2) By satisfaction, because it gives a price for the breach of it, and
puts the Cautioner(465) in the craver’s hand; (3) By obedience, because
after this, it hath a respect to all God’s laws, and endeavours after new
obedience to every one of them.

The improvement of all this is extremely plain. It may serve to discover
unto us how we disappoint God of his end in giving unto us the command.
And the law was given for the best purposes. But, the most part of men
have no end, no use of the law. God hath given it for some end, but they
know it not. They live without God, and without rule in the world. Men
walk as if there was no law, nor command, nor curse. There are but two
ends the command was ordained for, the first instituted end which it
naturally tends unto is life, (Rom. vii. 10) and the second end for which
God hath appointed it since the first is missed, is to pursue men to Jesus
Christ, and convince them of sin, to make them once die that they may
live, Rom. vii. 9. But the most part know neither of these ends. A carnal
profane generation will not seek life by the righteousness of the law;
their iniquities testify against them even to their face, and their sin is
found hateful. There is not so much as an endeavour among too many
Christian professors, either to approve themselves unto men, or their own
consciences in their outward walking. They walk without any regard of a
command, or rule, as it were by guess. Their own rule is what pleases them
best. What suits their humours, and crosses God’s word, that they will do,
as if they knew not the curse, or were afraid of the sentence of
condemnation. They walk in peace, and have no changes, they walk in the
imagination of their vain hearts. They cannot say, and none will say for
them, they seek life by the law, their contempt of it is so palpable, and
yet no other end of it they know so it is to them as if God had never
appointed it. Again,

2. There are many wrong and false ends, or uses of the law, when we make
it the immediate mean to life and righteousness, and seek justification by
it. And this was the end that these false teachers would have made of it.
This is the end that the Israelites looked to. “All that the Lord hath
commanded, will we do.” O that was a great undertaking! Poor men, they
knew not what they said. They thought upon no other thing but obedience to
the command, and so made it a covenant of works. Thus did the people that
followed Christ, John vi. 28. And the young man that came to Christ said,
“What good thing shall I do, to inherit eternal life?” Here doing was
preferred to living by faith, Rom. x. 1-23. The Jews did so, and missed
the right way. And few of you will take(466) with this, that ye seek to be
justified by your own works; and yet, it is natural to men, they will not
submit to God’s righteousness. There is need of submission to take Christ.
O would not any think all the world would be glad of him, and come out and
meet him bringing salvation? Would not dyvours(467) and prisoners be
content of a deliverance? Were it any point of self denial for a lost man,
to grip a cord cast unto him? Yet here must there be submission to quit
your own righteousness. It were of great moment to convince you of this,
that ye are all naturally standing to the terms of a covenant of works, ye
who are yet alive, and the commandment hath not slain you, with Paul, Rom.
vii. 9, 11. Ye are yet seeking life by the law, if ye have not applied the
curse unto yourselves. After application of yourselves to the command, ye
are yet seeking life by it. Ye adorn yourselves with some external
privileges, in some external duties of religion, some branches of the
second table duties, and come to God with these. Some think to satisfy God
for their faults, with an amendment in time to come. Some think God cannot
punish some faults in them, because they have some good things in them.
Ask many men the ground of their confidence, and in all the world they
know not how to be saved, unless their prayers do it, or their keeping the
kirk.(468) But this is not the end that God hath sent out the law for. Ye
cannot now stand to such a bargain. The law is now weak through the flesh,
and it is now impossible for it to give life. Though you would pray never
so much, all is but abomination. And would not many of you think ye were
in a fair venture for heaven, if no man living could lay any thing to your
charge, but were you unblameable in all the duties of the first and second
table? [Could you say,] though you know nothing as by yourselves, that you
were frequent and fervent in prayer, reading, and meditation; and as far
advanced as Paul, or David, or Moses, or Job, sure ye would think
yourselves out of doubt of heaven? Nay, but in this, ye may see ye are
seeking righteousness by the law. Though ye were so far advanced, yet God,
who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, would look to your sins, and
pass by your righteousness, and all that would be as menstruous rags
before him; and therefore Paul was much wiser, who said, “though I know
nothing by himself, yet am I not hereby justified.” 3. Many make the law
an end, when God hath only made it a mean. God hath appointed the law for
some other use, namely, to be subservient to Christ and the gospel. But
oftentimes we make the law the end of all God’s speaking to us, and so
conclude desperate resolutions from it, (Rom vii. 9). “When the law came,
sin revived, and I died.” Here the man is slain by the commandment, and
not yet come to the healing Physician at Gilead. We use to gather
desperation of the command, when it presses so perfect and exact
obedience, such as we cannot yield. When it craves the whole sum, without
the abatement of a farthing, we sit down under the sense of an
impossibility to obey, and will not so much as mint(469) at obedience.
Because we cannot do as we ought, we will not do as we can. Because we
cannot do in ourselves we conclude nothing can be done at all. This is to
make the command the last word, and the end of God’s speaking. Doth not
the child of God frequently sit down and droop over his duty, while he
looks upon the Egyptian taskmaster, the command, charging the whole work
and portion of brick, and giving no straw to work upon? So are many in
duties. While the aim and eye is upon some measure according to the
perfect rule, the hands fall down feeble, and none is wrought at all, and
they do not look if there be another word from God posterior to the
command, a word of promise. We use also to gather desperate conclusions of
the curse, and make the law according to which we examine ourselves, the
end of God’s manifesting his mind unto us, and do not look upon it as a
way leading to some other thing. When ye have tried yourselves, and
applied your own ways and state unto the perfect rule, God’s verdict of
all men’s condition is true in you, “all have sinned, and come short of
the glory of God,” “there is none righteous, no, not one,” and so if
necessitated to apply the dreadful sentence of the judgment to yourselves,
ye stay there, and sit down to lodge with the sentence of condemnation, as
if that were God’s last word to sinners. Is not this to make the law the
end, which is but appointed for another end? The curse is not
irrepealable. Why then do ye pass peremptory conclusions, as if there was
no more hope, but it were perished from the Lord?

II. To discover unto us the right end and use of the law, the great design
and purpose of God in making such a glorious promulgation of the law on
mount Sinai, and delivering it by the ministry of angels, in the hands of
a mediator. The end which God hath been driving at these six thousand
years, is this only, that men may come to Jesus Christ and believe in him.
The end wherefore the covenant of works hath been preached since Adam’s
fall, is only this, to make way for a better covenant of grace, that men
may hearken to the offer of it. Now faith in Jesus Christ hath two special
actings, either upon Christ for justification of the person, and eternal
life and salvation, or for sanctification of the person and actions, in
the fruits of new obedience. And in the text, unfeigned faith is described
from both these, and gives the answer of a good conscience, that is, of
absolution from the curse, by the blood of Jesus, and makes him as quiet
as he had never sinned. And then it purifies the heart, and worketh by
love.

Now the law is a mean appointed of God, and instituted to lead to both
these, and Christ in these. The law is appointed to lead a man to faith in
Christ, for salvation and righteousness, and the suitableness of it to
that end, we comprehend thus: 1. It convinces of sin; “The law entered
that the offence might abound,” and “was added because of transgressions,”
Rom. v. 20, Gal. iii. 19. This is the end of God’s sounding the trumpet,
and declaring our duty, “that every mouth may be stopped” before God, and
that none may plead innocence before his tribunal. While men are without
the law, they are alive, and think well of themselves, but the entering of
the commandment in a man’s conscience, in the length, breadth, and
spirituality of it, makes sin to appear exceeding sinful. Sin was in the
house before, but was not seen before, and now when the bright beam of a
clear, spiritual, holy law, carrying God’s authority upon it, is darted
into the dark soul, O what ugly sights appear! The house is full of motes.
Ye cannot turn the command where it will not discover innumerable
iniquities, an universal leprosy. For all the actions that were called
honest, civil and religious before, get a new name, and they being seen in
God’s light, are called rottenness, and living without the law, Rom. vii.
9 &c. Think ye, but the woman of Samaria knew her adultery, before Christ
spake to her? Nay, but Christ speaks according to the law and makes it a
mean of faith. He tells her all that ever she did. He tells her indeed
what she knew before, but in another manner. Men know their actions, but
the Lord discovers the sinfulness of them, as offensive to God’s holy
majesty, and pure eyes. It will force a man to give his sin the right
name, it will take away all excuses and shifts, and aggravate sin, that it
may become exceeding sinful. But further, 2. This is not the last end of
it. Not only is it ordained to stop all mouths, but to make all flesh
guilty before God, “For by the deeds of the law shall no flesh be
justified,” Rom. iii. 18, 19. It convinces of an impossibility to stand
before God, and so it kills a man. And now the man asks, “What shall I do
to be saved?” He cannot stand before God in terms of justice, where none
can stand, and so either must some other delivery come, or he is gone. Now
here he is put from making satisfaction, “Who can abide with everlasting
burnings?” He sees himself standing under the stroke of justice; and where
can he go from God’s presence? If he go to heaven, he is there, if to
hell, he will find him out, the light and darkness are alike to him, Psal.
cxxxix. 7-11. Not only the cries of sinful man, but of wretched and
miserable man, are heard from him! Now these are the steps the law
proceeds by. But it must not stay there, or else it is not come to the end
of it. It must put a man within the doors of the covenant of grace. The
law is a messenger sent to pursue a man out of his own house of self
confidence and security, he was like to perish in, and not to know it. Now
by discovering his sinful and cursed condition, it brings him out of
himself, and out of all created things. But the end is not yet attained,
till it put him in Christ’s hand, and enter him in the border of the city
of refuge and this is the end of the abounding of sin by the law, that
grace may superabound, Rom. v. 20. And this is the end of the concluding
him under sin, and making him guilty before God, that the promise of faith
may be given him, and another righteousness revealed by faith, Rom. iii.
20, 21, Gal. iii. 23. And now he is at peace, being justified by faith,
and rests as a stone in its own place (Rom. v. 1, 2 ), and the law hath
nothing to do with him; he is out of its jurisdiction. 3. Now when it hath
pursued him unto Christ for salvation, yet the command is still useful,
and appointed yet for faith in Jesus, in performing new obedience. The
Christian’s daily walking is but the turning of the old round, as the sun
doth this day go about the compass it did the first day, so his life is
but a new conversion still. When he is now settled on Jesus for salvation,
he must yet be put by(470) the command. It discovers his dally sins, and
so he is put to Jesus, the open Fountain for all sin and uncleanness. And
the command comes out in perfection, and discovers his shortcoming and
inability, and therefore he is put to Jesus for strength. And this is the
end of the perfect rule upon believers, that they, comparing duty with
their ability, may be forced to make up their inability for duty by faith
in Christ.

III. We may know from this what great encouragement we have to believe,
and how great warrant, since not only God commands faith itself (1 John
iii. 23.), but he hath appointed faith to be the end of all other
commands, and hath given the whole law for this end. For “without faith it
is impossible to see God.” Faith is that which God loves best in all
obedience. What is it that makes faith so precious? Certainly not the act
itself, but the precious object of it, Jesus Christ, in whom the Father is
well pleased. Faith glorifies God in his justice and mercy most, and
abases the creature. Now what an obligation lies on us to believe? It is
usual to question a right and warrant of faith, when we have no doubt of
other commands. But, in all reason, any command might be questioned before
faith. There is no duty admits of less disputing. Hath not God put it out
of all controversy? What warrant have ye to pray, or to sanctify the
Sabbath? Is it not because God commands these duties? And do ye not go
about them in obedience to God, notwithstanding of the sense of your own
inability? How comes it then that ye make any more scruple of this? Hath
not the same authority that gave the ten commands, given also this new
command? And shall not disobedience be rebellion, and worse than
witchcraft?(471) But when besides all this, it is the appointed end of all
the commands, so that ye may say, it is commanded in all the commands and
the whole law,—command and curse is a virtual kind of commanding
faith,—then what shall disobedience be? When ye break one command, ye are
guilty of all. Much more here, not only because of God’s authority stamped
upon all, but because it is the common end of all. If ye could once come
to believe that ye had as good warrant to believe in Christ as to abstain
from cursing God’s name, and as great obligation, what could ye answer for
disobedience?

IV: This is a point of great consolation also. What more terrible than the
law? Nothing in all the world. Nothing in all the word so dreadful as the
trumpet on Sinai, sounding louder and louder. The judge and law gives
voice. Yet if ye could look to the end of it and if the vail that was on
the Jews’ heart be not upon yours, O how comfortable shall it be! Doth not
a command and curse form a dead sound in an awakened man’s ears, and
strike unto his heart like a knife? But if he knew this, it would be a
healing medicine. Would not many sinners wish there would be no such thing
in the Bible as a condemning law, when they cannot get it escaped? But
look to the end of it, and see gospel saving doctrine in the very
promulgation of it. When it was published, it made the Jews all to tremble
and cry out, and even holy Moses himself was afraid. But there is more
consolation than terror here. This condemning law is delivered in a
Mediator’s hand, even Jesus Christ, Gal. iii. 19, 20. Who was he that
spake out of the cloud, and fire, and came and set down his throne on
Sinai, accompanied with innumerable angels? Deut. xxxiii. 2, Acts vii. 53.
It was Jesus Christ that spoke to Moses in the mount, and in the bush
also, Acts vii. 35, 38. Is it then the Mediator’s law, whose office it is
to preach glad tidings, and the day of salvation? Sure then it needs be
dreadful to no man. For if he wound, he shall heal, and he comes to bind
up the broken hearted. Ye may look on the command and curse as messengers
sent by mercy, to prepare you, and make his way straight before his face.
The end of the law is not to condemn you, to stop your mouth, and make you
guilty. That is not the last work it is appointed for, but the Mediator
hath another end, to bring you to the righteousness of faith, to save you
without yourselves. Therefore ye may more willingly accept the challenge,
since it comes in so peaceable terms. What should be terrible to you in
all God’s word and dispensation, since the ministry of condemnation and
death is become the port(472) of heaven and life? What must all his other
dealings be? Surely there is nothing in the world, but it must lead to
this end also. Prosperity and adversity, the end of them is faith,
conviction and challenges. Be not then as men without hope, when you are
challenged, for the challenge comes from a Mediator who would have you
saved.

V: You may see hence how injurious they are to grace who cry down the law.
The Antinomian cannot be a right defender and pleader for faith (the end
of the command), when he opposes the command that leads to that end. He
can not exalt Christ aright, or lead men to him, when he will not come
under the pedagogue’s hand to be led to Christ. The law, even as a
covenant of works, is of perpetual use to a believer, because it lays a
blessed necessity upon him to abide with Christ. It is a guard put before
the door, to keep him, as it was a schoolmaster to bring him to Christ,
and makes a man subordinate to the gospel as a mean to the end, and so it
ought to be used. So then it is against the truth [to say] that the
Israelites were under the law, and not Christians. The law came not to be
a mean of life and righteousness unto them, but that the offence might
abound, that so grace might superabound. The law was not intended, but
Christ was intended, and this end they could not fix their eyes upon, by
reason of the hardness of their hearts. It is also false, that Christian
believers are wholly exeemed(473) from the command and law. No, he hath
use of all that leads to Jesus Christ, and the law itself becomes gospel
under that notion. The command stands in its integrity, that he may be
convinced of shortcoming and inability, and so may believe in Christ. The
curse also stands, and condemns him for new sins, that he may believe in
Christ, who justifies the  ungodly. Again, it is not truth, that the law
is no mean of conversion, though not in its own virtue and power, but as
it is delivered in a Mediator’s hand, and applied by the Spirit of grace
and the gospel.

Use VI: We exhort you not to disappoint God of his end, and if he hath
given the law for this end, never rest till ye be at the end. Let the law
enter into you once, or enter ye into it. Ye cannot come to Jesus unless
it lead you. Let it enter into your consciences, with God’s power and
authority as his law, and examine yourselves by it, else ye shall never
believe in Christ. 2. Accept all the challenges of the law, let it enter
till your mouth be stopped. Read your obligation well, that ye may see how
much ye owe. 3. Let faith be the issue and result of all the applications
of the law to yourselves. Ye go in the law’s hand to Christ, but sit not
down with it, or else you will not go free till ye have paid the last
farthing. Make faith in Christ the end of the curse condemning you, that
he may absolve you, the end of the command, commanding, that he may give
strength and fulfil in you the righteousness of the law. God never sent a
condition to you, but that you may believe, and be established. 4. Let it
be your exercise to travel between an impossible command, and Christ Jesus
by faith, through whom all things are possible. Write always down how much
ye owe, that ye may see grace superabounding. Sit not down to examine the
duty, or go not about it in your own strength. Be not discouraged though
ye find no strength. Ye are called in such a case to believe. Nay, in a
word, what is all the Christian’s employment? Faith exhausts it all. Look
on the command, and it calls for believing. Look upon the curse and it
calls also for believing.




Sermon XII.


    1 Tim. i. 5.—“Now the end of the commandment,” &c.


We come now, as was proposed, to observe, _Thirdly_,(474) That faith
unfeigned is the only thing which gives the answer of a good conscience
towards God. Conscience, in general, is nothing else but a practical
knowledge of the rule a man should walk by, and of himself in reference to
that rule. It is the laying down a man’s state, and condition, and actions
beside the rule of God’s word, or the principles of nature’s light. It is
the chief piece of a man. The man is as his conscience is. It is a man’s
lord. As a wing to a bird, or as a rudder to a ship, so is conscience to a
man in all his ways. The office of conscience is ordinarily comprehended
in three styles it gets. It is a law or rule, a witness, and a judge, or a
light, a register, and a recorder, and an executioner. For the conscience
its first act is some principle of nature’s light, obliging it as a rule
to walk by, or some revealed truth of God, whereof the conscience is
informed. Now the conscience, in the second place, comes to examine itself
according to the rule, and there it bears witness of a man’s actions or
state, and faithfully records and depones.(475) And at length the
conscience pronounces the sentence upon the man, according as it has found
him, either accusing or excusing, condemning or absolving. Now a good
conscience is diversely taken in scripture, I. A good conscience is an
honest clean conscience, bearing testimony of integrity and uprightness in
walking, such as Paul had, 2 Cor. i. 12, “Our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, we
have had our conversation in the world.” Heb. xiii. 18, “We trust we have
a good conscience, in all things willing to live honestly.” Acts xxiv. 16,
“Herein do I exercise myself in having a conscience void of offence,
towards God and man.” 1 Pet. iii. 16, “Having a good conscience, that
whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they may be ashamed that
falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.” II. A good conscience is
a conscience calmed and quieted, that hath gotten an answer to all
challenges, the blood and resurrection of Jesus, 1 Pet. iii. 21. And this
we take to be meant here. The good conscience is the conscience that is
sprinkled with Christ’s blood, from dead works, to serve the living God,
Heb. ix. 14. For the guilty man that comes to Christ, and washes in the
fountain opened for sin, hath no more conscience of sins, Heb. x. 2. And
therefore it is called a pure and clean conscience, 2 Tim. i. 3, “I thank
God, whom I serve from my forefathers, with a pure conscience,” &c.; the
stain of guilt is taken away. Now I say, faith only gives the answer of a
good conscience. The man that comes to Christ hath an ill conscience, when
he hath examined himself according to the law, and given out faithful
witness of his own state and condition, and accordingly pronounced
sentence,—a sentence condemnatory. He finds himself lying under God’s
curse, and so the conscience from a judge turns a tormentor, and begins to
anticipate hell, and prevent(476) the execution of wrath. All the world
cannot answer this challenge, or absolve from this sentence, until faith
come and give a solid answer, that may be a ground of peace. And its
answer is good and sure, because it dips the conscience in the blood of
the Son of God. For the blood of bulls and of goats could not do it, the
redemption of the soul was precious. Faith puts the soul over head and
ears in the fountain opened, and it comes out like snow, or wool, though
it were like scarlet or crimson. The law condemned, and the conscience
subscribed itself sinful, and concluded itself lost in sin; but faith in
Christ pleads before mercy’s throne, where judgment and justice also sit.
It pleads its cause over again, and gets the former sentence repealed. The
conscience gave in the charge against the man, but faith sits down and
writes the discharge; and so he is as free as if all his debt was paid, or
never contracted. Faith puts the Cautioner in the creditor’s hand, and
goes free. As the law writes down a charge of sin and curses, faith sets
against it as many sufferings in Christ, as many blessings in the Blessing
of all nations. And when the conscience that condemned itself by faith
again absolves itself, O what a calm, what a perfect peace is it then kept
in! What a continual feast doth it enjoy! Prov. xv. 15. Make him never
such a great man in the world, he would utterly despise it, and count
himself more blessed in the pardon of sin, and the friendship of God, than
all the enjoyments of this world. He is better in some respect than if he
had never sinned, for his sin is, as it were, not before God. And withal
he hath got not only acquittance from guilt, but acquaintance with Jesus
Christ, the Blessing of the nations, and the Desire of all the families of
the earth. Now may he triumph and boast in Christ Jesus. Who shall
condemn? It is God that justifies, it is Christ that died, and is risen
again. He may say with David, “I will not fear, though my iniquities
compass me about;” and with Job, “If he cause quietness, who can give
trouble?” We observe then that,

I. Before a man come to Christ, he has an ill conscience; for either he is
at peace with himself, and absolves himself, saying, I shall have peace,
though I walk in the abominations of my heart, Deut. xxix. 19; or he also
says, “Because I am innocent,” therefore God will turn away his wrath,
Jer. ii. 35. He cries peace, peace, when there is no peace, (Ezek. xiii.
10.) and that is but a desperate condition, and a bad conscience, if any
can be so called. This is the secure and seared conscience, that either
doth not judge itself, because a man hath beaten it flint hard, or is
constantly absolving itself upon false grounds. That is the conscience
that in all the creation is nearest the desperate conscience, that shall
never have a good answer. His sin is but lying at the door like Cain’s,
and shall enter in when judgment comes. He is but flattering himself in
his own eyes, till his iniquity be found hateful, and till sudden
destruction comes as an armed man. Look upon Deut. xxix. 20, and see such
a man’s case. There is no peace for him, the Lord will not pity nor spare
him, but pour upon him all the curses of the law, even when he blesses
himself in his own eyes. In short, he is such as is awakened to see where
he is, and condemns himself according to the word; and that is a better
and a more hopeful conscience than the former, yet it is but an ill
conscience. Conscience doth act its part aright, and in so far it is good,
but the man is but in a miserable condition. Withal it gives such a wound
to the soul, as none can bear it. All the sad affections which take up
men’s spirits come in, and this is the worm which never dies in hell, and
the fire which shall never be quenched. Anger, grief, hatred, despair,
always dwell with an ill conscience. This is both the resemblance of hell,
and the sparks which come from that devouring fire. But, II. When the
troubled conscience, tossed up and down, and looking upon all hands for
help, and all refuge failing them, and no person caring for their soul,
when it gets once a look of Jesus, and roweth unto his shore, O what a
change! He commands the winds to calm, and the waves to cease, and says
unto him, Son, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven. Faith finds in
Jesus ample grounds of answering all challenges, of silencing all
temptations, of overcoming all enemies, and commands the soul to go into
its place of refuge. “Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord hath
dealt bountifully with thee,” &c. Psal. cxvi. 7-9.

We shall now shut up all with the application in some uses. Use I. We may
learn hence how few have a good conscience. Faith is a rare thing, but a
good conscience is much rarer. And here we may notice, 1. That the
conscience which is dead and sleeping, is not a good conscience: every
quiet and calm conscience is not a good one. Ye may dream over your days
with the foolish virgins, and take rest in a pleasing delusion, and cry
peace, peace, and yet the end of it will be worse than the beginning. A
conscience that acts not at all, nor judges itself, is, as it were, no
conscience; either ignorance hath blinded it, and keeps it in the dark, or
wickedness hath stopped its mouth. You think your conscience good because
it tells you few of your faults, it troubles you not; but that conscience
must once speak, and do its office, it may be in a worse time for you. 2.
It is not a good conscience that always speaks good, and absolves the man.
God may condemn when it absolves. When ye walk according to false
principles and grounds, and either take a wrong rule, or know not how to
apply the rule to yourselves, shall God approve of false judgment? Your
conscience is erring and deludes you. But, 1. The good conscience is not
only a quiet conscience, but a quieted conscience. It not only hath peace,
but peace after trouble. Ye then that have no peace, but what ye had all
your days, it is but a mere fancy. The answer of a good conscience quiets
the distempered mind, it comes by the sprinkling and washing of Christ’s
blood. He that hath peace on solid grounds with God, hath once taken up
his enmity against him. 2. The good conscience hath been once an evil
conscience, when it met with the command. The man has once been under the
law, before he came to faith, and examined himself, and his conscience
condemned him as not righteous, and out of Christ. Ye then that never
examined your state, according to the perfect and holy law, and never
judged yourselves, ye cannot believe in Jesus, and so can have no good
conscience. 3. The good conscience flows nearest from faith answering the
challenges of the law. Some have had sore distempers of conscience, and
puddling exercises of terror. But how they were eased or quieted they
cannot tell, but their spring-tide ebbed, and they bubbled no more. It
went away at will, and did wear out with time. This is not a good
conscience, that knows not distinctly the grounds of faith to oppose to
the law’s condemnation. Some turn to build cities with Cain, and pass the
time pleasantly, or in some business, that they may beguile their
challenges. But this is not the conscience that faith makes good. Now, set
apart all these who do not examine themselves at all, nor judge
themselves, but live in a golden dream, who have never been arraigned
before God’s tribunal, or summoned by his deputy to appear before his
judgment-seat; and join unto these all persons who, judging themselves,
take other rules of absolution than the word gives, who after trial
absolve themselves, and withal those, who, condemning themselves, yet flee
not unto this city of refuge, this blood of sprinkling, to get a solid
answer in the word to all their challenges, and O how few are behind! It
is but as the gleaning after the vintage. Nay, many believers have not a
good conscience, though they have a right to it, because they settle not
themselves on the grounds of faith, and go not on from faith to faith.
There must be some sense of faith, before faith answer rightly, and give
peace to the mind.

Use II. Ye see the way to get a good conscience. Believe much, and
maintain your faith.    It is as simple and poor a mistake as can befall a
soul.   Ye think because ye have not peace after your believing, therefore
it was not unfeigned and true faith: and therefore ye will not believe,
because ye cannot get peace. But believe that ye may have a good
conscience. Would ye know your sins are pardoned before ye believe? How
precious should faith be unto you, when by faith ye may not only overcome
the world, but, as it were, overcome God in judging, that the soul may be
justified when it is judged? Ye will not get challenges(477) answered by
your own integrity and uprightness, or by your performing of duties. No,
no, these cannot be sufficient grounds of your peace. Lay down the solid
and satisfying grounds of faith, of imputed righteousness, and of
salvation by Jesus Christ, and this shall be a foundation of lasting
peace. Sense makes not a good conscience, there is much lightness and
vanity in it, and the rule it proceeds by is changeable, but faith
establishes the soul, and makes it not ashamed.




Sermon XIII.


    1 Tim. i. 5.—“Now the end of the commandment,” &c.


Fourthly, Faith purging the conscience purifies the heart (Acts xv. 9.),
and hope also purifies the heart (1 John iii. 3.), which is nothing else
but faith in the perfection and vigour of it. This includes, I. That the
heart was unclean before faith. II. That faith cleanses it, and makes it
pure. But “who can say, I have made my heart pure (Prov. xx. 9.), I am
clean from my sin?” Is there any man’s heart on this side of time, which
lodges not many strange guests? In answer to this we may observe, that
there is a legal purity, and a gospel purity. A legal purity is a sincere
and full conformity to God’s holy will and command, in thought,
affections, inclinations, and actions, and, in this sense, who can say, I
have made my hands clean? The old corruption sticks to the heart and
cannot be thoroughly scraped out, there are many lurking holes for
uncleanness to be hid in. Corruption is engrained in him, and it will not
be the work of one day to change it. The whole head is sick, and the whole
body full of sores. All the corners of the heart are full of filthiness
and idols, and though the house be now sweeped and garnished, and all
things look better in it, yet there are many hidden places of rottenness
undiscovered, and it is the soul’s continual exercise to purify itself as
he is pure. But evangelical purity and cleanness is that which God
reconciled in Christ takes to be so, and that which in Christ is accepted,
and is a fount of his clean Spirit dwelling in the heart. The heart
formerly was a troubled fountain, that sent out filthy streams, as a
puddle. Corruption was the mud among the affections and thoughts, but now
a pure heart is like a clear running water, clean and bright like crystal.
Now this purity consists in the washing of regeneration, and
sanctification by the Spirit of holiness. Jesus Christ came both by water
and blood, 1 John v. 6. He came by blood, to sprinkle and purge the
conscience, that it might have no more conscience of sins, Heb. x. 2, ix.
14. And he also came by water, that is, the washing and cleansing virtue
of the Spirit of grace, to purge and cleanse us from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit. There are two things in sin that Jesus came to destroy,
the guilt and offence of sin, whereby the sinner is bound over to
condemnation, and lies under the Judge’s curse, and the spot of sin, which
also Christ came to destroy. He did both in his own person, and he is to
perfect this in us personally, who were judicially reckoned one with him,
Rom. vi. 3-12, 1 John iii. 5. Now Jesus Christ hath come with blood to
sprinkle the conscience from dead works, and give it a good answer to the
challenges of the law, and an ill conscience. And he hath come likewise
with water, to wash and cleanse us from the spots, and filth, and power of
sin. The first removes the guilt, the latter removes the filth of sin, and
both are done by faith, which is our victory over the world, and this is
the way how faith overcomes the world by the water and blood. 1 John v.
4-6. The blood of Jesus Christ is holden by faith with a twofold virtue of
cleansing, from the guilt, and from the filth of sin, and thus cleanses us
from all unrighteousness, 1 John i. 7. According to the promise of the
covenant (Ezek. xxxvi. 25, 26.), the application of the blood of
sprinkling hath two effects. One is for justification, “ye shall be
clean,” another is, “from all your filthiness and idols will I cleanse
you,” that is sanctification. I. Now this purity consists in this, that
the pure heart regards not iniquity in the inward man, nor delights in
sin, Psal. lxvi. 18. He sets not up his idols in God’s place, Ezek. xxxvi.
25. The cleansing of the heart is from idols. Although he cannot get
himself purified as Christ is pure, and though iniquity be in his heart,
yet he regards it not. He looks not upon it as a guest approven and
accepted. Sin may be an intruding guest, but sin is not welcomed with all
his heart. He dare not take that pleasure in sin that another man would
do. He hath a worm that eats up his pleasure when he departs from God, or
his thoughts go a-whoring from him. The unbelieving man’s heart is a house
full of idols, but the entry of faith by God’s Spirit makes their Dagon to
fall. But, II. The pure heart hath much of the filthiness taken away that
filled it before, and so it is denominated from the best part. It is
washed and cleansed from a sea of corruption, and the body of sin that did
reign within the heart was formerly like an impure fountain, that sent out
nothing but rotten stinking waters. Unto him were all things unclean, for
his heart and conscience was defiled, Tit. i. 15. Nothing was pure to him,
it ran continually in a stream of unclean thoughts and affections. But now
he is purified, and to the believer “all things are pure:” the ordinary
strain and current of his thoughts and affections run more clearly free of
the earthly quality they had, more sublimated, more spiritualized, and he
is named by that. Though, it may be, temptation may trouble the fountain,
and make it run unclean and earthly, yet it will settle again, and come
into its own posture, and the dreg fall to the bottom, and the clean water
of the Spirit be the predominant. But a standing puddle will run foul as
long as it runs, corruption goes through all. It is not a corner of the
heart, but the whole heart.

III. A pure heart is like a running fountain, if it be defiled, it is
always casting out the filth, and is about returning to a right state. But
an impure heart is like a standing puddle that keeps all it gets. If by
temptation the pure heart and affections be stirred, and the filth that is
in the bottom come up to the brim, it hath no rest nor peace in that
condition, but works it out again, and it hath this advantage, that it is
purer and clearer after troubling nor(478) it was before. For much of the
filth would run out that had been lying quiet before. But an impure heart
keeps all, and vents none. If ye trouble it, ye will raise an ill smell,
and when it settles, it falls but to the bottom again, and there is as
much to work upon the next time. In a word, the believer when he sins, and
his heart goes wrong, he weeps over his heart, and has no peace till it be
cleansed. He washes in the fountain of Christ’s blood. When a natural
transgression gets up, he sets himself against it and the root of it both,
and bears down the original corruption, which is the fountain of all sin
(Psal. li. 5), and at every descent he brings away something of that
puddle. He is upon the growing hand by the exercise of faith and
repentance. Look upon him after he has seen and been sensible of his sins,
and ye would say it is not the man ye saw. He hates sin more than he did
formerly. We also notice,

IV. That purity is sincerity and uprightness (James iv. 8), “Purify your
hearts, ye double minded.” Hypocrisy is filthiness and abominable to God.
He then is a sincere man, that hath any honesty of heart toward God. When
his actions are not right, his heart doth not approve them, Rom. vii. When
he cannot come up to his duty, his desire comes before performance. A
sincere man hath a respect to all God’s commandments.

V. The pure man is still purifying himself “even as God is pure.” As he
who hath called him is holy, so he is holy in all manner of conversation.
He never thinks he is clean enough, and so he aspires after greater
purity, and is named a saint, rather from his aim and endeavour, than from
his attainment. He cries, unclean, unclean, am I, and holy, holy, Lord
God, art thou. He hath taken up his lodging near the opened fountain, and
dwells there, never to remove thence, till he have his robes clean and
white in the blood of the Lamb. No unclean thing can enter into heaven,
and he is trimming himself against that day, and setting apart all
superfluity of naughtiness, and filthiness, and still all his
righteousness is as menstruous rags. He is cleansing his house, every day
casting out something, searching out all the corners of it, lest the
unclean thing, and the Babylonish garment be hid. His pattern is to walk
even as Christ walked, 1 John ii. 6.

Now faith and a good conscience have influence on this purifying the
heart. I. Because faith lays hold upon the cleansing virtue of Christ’s
blood. It applies Jesus Christ who came by water and blood, and his blood
purges the conscience from dead works, to serve the living God. The blood
that was offered up by the eternal Spirit, of how great virtue must it be
when applied to the heart and conscience, Heb. ix. 14. No wonder it makes
that like wool which was formerly like scarlet. Now faith in Jesus Christ
applies that blood. It is the very hand that sprinkles it. Faith takes up
house beside the opened fountain, and dwells there. Faith takes Jesus for
sanctification as well as justification, 1 Cor. i. 30. Faith looks upon a
judicial union with Christ crucified, and sees his perfect offering once
offered to sanctify all, and therefore makes continual applications with
David, “Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall
be whiter than the snow.” II. Faith purifies the heart, because it lays
hold on the promises, and makes use of the word, 2 Cor. vii. 1. Faith
having such promises, cleanses the man from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit. The proper order of faith is the word, and the word is the
truth by which we are sanctified and made clean, John xvii. 17. There are
many precious promises of sanctification and holiness, and faith draws the
virtue of purifying the heart out of the promises, and applies the promise
to his impure heart, and it is purged. III. Faith purifies the heart also
by provocation and upstirring, in as far as it gives the answer of a good
conscience. For the man who hath gotten a solid answer to all his
objections in Christ’s blood, and hath the continual feast of joy and
peace in believing, O how will he abhor himself, and repent in dust and in
ashes! Faith takes up God’s holiness and purity, and loathes itself with
Job, and cries, unclean. The believer will thus reason and conclude,—shall
I any more delight and live in sin, since I am dead unto it by Jesus
Christ? Rom. vi. 1, 2. He falls in with the beauties of holiness, and so
cannot abide his own. Faith begets hope, and hope purifies the heart.
Shall then the man who expects to see God, and be a citizen of the new
Jerusalem, where no unclean thing can enter, shall he walk in his former
lusts, like the wicked world, and not make himself ready for the
continuing city he goes to, and adorn himself for the company of the
blessed God and angels?

Let us now conclude, by applying all which hath been said in some uses.
Use I. We may see from what hath been hinted, how little faith is among
you. Faith purifies the heart, but if ye examine yourselves, your hearts
will be found unclean, and such as the Holy Ghost cannot dwell in. The
temple in which God’s Holy Spirit resides must touch no unclean thing, 2
Cor. vi. 16, 17. Are not many men’s corruptions rank and lively? Unclean
hands are an infallible demonstration of an unclean heart, James iv. 8.
These things which proceed out of the heart may teach you what is within
the heart. The streams may let you know what is in the fountain Mark vii.
15-22, James iii. 11, 12. What need ye any more proof of yourselves?
Sinners, look to your hands, and your outward man, and learn from them to
know your hearts. These things proceed out of the heart and defile the
whole man. The profanity of the most part of men’s practices, cursing and
swearing &c., is a bitter stream that cannot proceed from a good fountain.
It is a wonder how the world satisfy themselves with a dream of faith.
What influence hath your faith had upon your heart and conversation? Are
ye not as earthly and worldly as ever, as unclean as ever? Ye think your
hearts good, but if your conversation be not good, your hearts are not
good. Will any person think his sins are pardoned, when he wallows in
them? Do they believe they shall obtain the remission of these sins they
are not purging themselves from? No, no, the blood and water must go
together and the Spirit’s sanctifying with Christ’s justifying.

Use II. The children of God may hence gather the ground and reason of
their little progress in sanctification. Why are your hearts so unclean,
and why is there so much corruption yet living in your thoughts and
affections, that it cannot keep within the heart, but, as a full fountain,
must run out in streams of external actions? It is even this, ye do not
believe much, and though this be told you, yet ye will not believe it; ye
take ways of your own to purge out your corruptions, and it will not do.
All your resolutions, prayers, sad experiences, &c., are of no more virtue
than the blood of bulls and goats. Ye must then apply the blood of the Son
of God, which was offered up by the eternal Spirit. It is but a poor fancy
to suspend believing till ye see a pure heart. How shall ye get a pure
heart? Is it not folly to forbear planting till ye see fruits, or to pluck
up your tree because it bears not the first day? Abide in Christ, and ye
shall bring forth much fruit. Believe, and believe, and believe again,
till faith be answered by a good conscience, till that sweet echo be given
unto the Lord’s comforting voice, “Thy sins, which are many, are forgiven
thee.” Be much in laying hold upon the precious promises, and then your
heart shall fall out of love with this present evil world, and shall
relish spiritual things. But who will believe this report? Ye go away
convinced that this is the only way to purify yourselves, and yet ye
continue puddling in your old way. May God persuade your hearts to do
better.




Sermon XIV.


    1 Tim. i. 5.—“Now the end of the commandment,” &c.


Fifthly, Faith purging the conscience, and purifying the heart, works by
love. Love is the fruit of faith. Love is the stream that flows out of a
pure heart and a good conscience. By love, we mean principally love to
God, or Jesus Christ, and then love to the saints next to our Saviour.
This is often mentioned in scripture, “Hope maketh not ashamed, (Rom. v.
5) because the love of God is shed abroad in your hearts by the Holy
Ghost.” This love is the consequence of the peace which a justified man
obtains by faith, Rom. v. 1, 2; 2 Cor. v. 14. The constraining love of
Christ flows from this ground, that a man judges Christ to have died for
him, from faith’s taking up of Christ in that noble expression of his
love, (John v. 40, 42.) “And ye will not come unto me that ye may have
life. I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you.” Faith works by
love. Love is faith’s hand put out in action for Christ, and as the mind
commands the outward man, whether it will or not, so doth faith command
love, Eph. iii. 17. The rooting and building up in love is a fruit of
Christ’s dwelling in the heart by faith. Love is the branch that grows in
faith’s root. These are often joined together, and comprehend the
substance of the law and gospel, 1 Tim. i. 14, 2 Tim. i. 13. Faith fulfils
the obedience to the gospel, and love is the fulfilling of the whole law,
(Rom. xiii. 10) so that faith leads a man back again to the command, that
he fled to faith from. Faith hath reconciled them and taken up the
difference. We shall then show how faith and a good conscience and a pure
heart contribute to love.

First, Faith is the eye and sense of the soul to take up Jesus Christ.
Nothing is loved but as it is known and apprehended to be good. The
affections of themselves are blind, and cannot go forth but as led by the
direction of faith. Faith is the mind to present love’s object. The world
sees no beauty nor form in the commands, that they should desire them.
Even Jesus Christ himself is but foolishness to a natural mind, he neither
knows his need of him, nor Christ’s suitableness to his need. But faith is
the first opening of the eyes, when we are turned from darkness to light,
and from the power of sin and Satan unto God, Acts xxvi. 18. Christ
becomes the believer’s wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, 1 Cor. i. 30. The day spring from on high visits them who sit
in darkness, to guide their feet in the way of peace, Luke i. 78, 79. The
light of the knowledge of the glory of God shining in the face of the Sun
of righteousness, doth arise and shine into their hearts. The man sees
himself in a dangerous condition, and says, Oh I where am I? And faith
discovers, on the other hand, all things in Christ Jesus suitable to such
a case.  He sees nothing but vanity, emptiness, and misery, sin, and
condemnation in the creature, he sees grace, mercy, holiness,
righteousness and free salvation in Christ.  Set these beside one another,
and judge ye if the soul cannot choose to run out in affection and longing
desire.  Oh! says he, to be one with him.  Faith presents all the motives
and attractives of the heart, and then there needs no more to make it
love.  Faith discovers a man’s self unto himself, and lets him see all
misery within, complete woe within doors, and it holds forth bread without
the ports(479) for the saint, and salvation for the lost.  It brings in an
amiable person, who is fairer than the children of men, who is all love,
and hath no spot in him.  Is it not a sweet word, a Redeemer to captives,
a Saviour to sinners? And will not the soul rise up, and go forth out of
itself? And will it not choose to flit(480) unto him who is the desire of
all nations? Will it not go unto him for food and clothing? Love then is
the soul’s journey and motion towards Jesus, whom faith hath brought in
such a good report of.  But,

Secondly.  When faith hath given the answer of a good conscience, and
brought Jesus nearer hand to the soul, or the soul nearer unto him, then
love is stronger, and grows like a fire that many waters cannot quench.
It is like jealousy, that is cruel as the grave, many floods cannot drown
it.  Union is the ground of love, union in nature, or sympathy, or
likeness, is the ground of affection.  According as faith brings Christ
nearer to the heart, the flame increases.  All things are desired and
loved as good, but more desired, as not only good in themselves, but good
unto us.  Gold in the Indies will not much move the heart, but bring it
hither, and ye shall see who loves it.  The first act of faith puts a man
in great need of a Saviour, and discovers a possibility of redemption
through Jesus, and in so far he is loved. But when once faith has gone
that length as to make a good conscience, and to calm and silence the woes
of a troubled mind, by the actual application of that desired possible
redemption, and when it can particularly apply the common salvation, O
then what burning affection! “Who is a God like unto thee, who pardoneth
iniquity, and passest by the transgression of his heritage, because he
delights in mercy?” “Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none
upon earth that I desire besides thee.”  “I will love the Lord, because he
hath heard my voice, I will call upon him so long as I live,” as if it had
never loved before.  They will love much to whom much is forgiven.  Love,
without such a faith, is full of jealousies and suspicions, but when faith
hath brought in Christ to dwell in the heart, then it is rooted and built
up in love, (Eph. iii. 17) and then perfect love casts out fear, 1 John
iv. 18. Love before such an assurance, is but a tormenting love, and hath
much fear in it, saying, “Oh I may want him, and then I will be more
miserable than if I had not known him.” But faith, giving the answer of a
good conscience, casts out horror and fear, and then perfects love, and
the soul then closes with Christ as a Mediator and friend, and closes with
God as a merciful Father, now reconciled unto him through Christ, and not
any more as a stern or severe Judge.  But,

Thirdly.  When faith hath purified the heart, and cleansed the affections,
then the soul burns with a purer flame of affection and zeal to God, and
is, as it were, delivered from the earthly weight put upon it.  When the
heart is purified, love is like the flame, whereas, if he be not so
purged, there may be some heat and fire latent in the ashes, covered with
corruption. But a pure heart is a spiritual heart, and minds spiritual
things, (Col. iii. 1) and it is a heart going back unto its own place,
Christ hath touched it with his own heart, and with his salvation, and it
looks aye(481) sure to him in the heavens.  The love of the world is
inconsistent with the love of the Father, 1 John ii. 15.  The love of the
world plucks the heart downward, and the lusts of the flesh are so many
weights upon the believer, that he can not mount up in a spiritual cloud
of divine affection to Jesus Christ.  But the pure and spiritual heart is
now more refined, and delivered from these impediments, and it is like a
pure lamp of oil burning upward.  When a man’s heart is engaged to any
thing of this world, love cannot be perfect.  For love is a man’s master,
and no man can serve two masters.




Sermon XV.


    Matt. vi. 33.—“But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his
    righteousness,” &c.


This is a part of Christ’s long sermon. He is dissuading his disciples and
the people from carnal carefulness and worldly mindedness. The sermon
holds out the Christian’s diverse aspects towards spiritual and external
things. What is the Christian’s disposition in regard to the world, how
should he look upon food, raiment, and all things necessary in this life?
“Be careful for nothing.” “Take no thought for your life, what ye shall
eat, or drink,” &c. “Seek them not as your chief good.” But what is his
disposition towards spiritual and eternal things, and how ought ye to look
upon them? “Seek them, set your heart upon them, look upon them as your
treasure, and where your treasure is, let your heart be there also.” So
then you see here two callings and employments of a man in the world,—two
universal callings that comprehend all men, one natural to us, and
unlawful, the other divine, and lawful, the one paganish, the other
Christian. What is the employment of all men out of Christ? There are many
different callings and employments among men. One spends his time and
thoughts one way, and another another way, but all of them agree in one
general, whatever they are: Their heart is here. The thoughts they have
are bounded and circumscribed in this present world. They are careful for
nothing else but what concerns their back and belly,(482) or their name
and credit. Take the best of them, whose employment seems most abstracted
from the common affairs and distractions among men, yet their affections
run no higher than this present world. On the other hand, what should be
the exercise and employment of a Christian? It is even this, whatever he
be, or whatever his occupation be among men, he drives a higher trade with
heaven, that should take him up. The world gets but his spare hours. He is
upon a more noble and high project. He aspires after a kingdom. His heart
is above where Christ is, and where his treasure is. And these things
exhaust his affections and pains. Christ Jesus once takes the man’s heart
off these baser things, that are not worthy of an immortal spirit, let
be(483) a spirit who is a partaker of a divine nature. But because the
creature cannot be satisfied within itself, its happiness depends upon
something without itself, (and this speaks out the vanity of the creature,
and something of God, that is peculiar to him, to be self sufficient,)
therefore Christ changes the object of the heart, and fixes the spirit
upon a nobler and divine exercise. Since the spirit of a man cannot abide
within doors without starving, it must run out upon something, therefore
Jesus Christ hath described its bounds and way, its end and period.
Before, a man sought many things, because not one was satisfying, that the
want of one might be supplied by another; and therefore he was never near
the borders of contentment and happiness, because still a thousand things
are wanting. But now, Christ puts the soul upon a satisfying and self
sufficient object. And here the streams of affection may run in one
current, and need not divide or go contrary ways.

_First_: We have here then the Christian’s calling and employment in this
world, opposed to the carefulness and worldly mindedness of the men of
this world, “Seek ye the kingdom of God.” _Secondly_: His encouragement
and success in two things, one is expressed, the other implied. That which
is expressed, is seeking the kingdom of God, of grace and glory. If ye
seek this kingdom, all temporal things shall be laid to your hand, all
these things that ye need “shall be added unto you.” The other imported
is, ye shall get the kingdom who seek it. For the words, “added unto you,”
suppose the first and principal intent to be gotten. Then the Christian’s
success and encouragement is this, ye shall have the thing ye seek and
more also. It was said to Solomon, “Because thou hast sought wisdom,
therefore thou shalt get all other things.” Because, O Christian, thou
sought the kingdom of God, and not this present world which Satan is
prince of, therefore thou shalt get according to thy word, and thou shalt
also get what thou asked not, 1 Kings iii. 11-13. He hath success in the
main business, and there is a superplus besides, some accession to his
portion, that comes of will, so to speak. The kingdom of God in the New
Testament is sometimes restricted to the elect, the word of the gospel,
and the administration of it, by the Spirit of grace in the hearts of his
people. This is frequently called “the kingdom of heaven,” and “of God,”
Matth. xiii. 33. Sometimes the kingdom of God is taken for the state of
grace, a new principle of spiritual life, that grows up to the perfect
day, and this kingdom is within us, Luke xvii. 21. It is taken also for
heaven, the kingdom of glory, Luke xxii. 16. Both these must be sought
after, (Luke xii. 31.) and received, (Luke xviii. 17.) and must suffer
violence, Matth. xi. 12. The righteousness thereof may be taken for the
righteousness of God by faith, Rom. x. 3, chap. iii. 21, 22, 2 Cor. v. 21,
Rom. iv. 11, 13, Rom. ix. 30, chap. x. 6, Heb. xi. 7, Phil. iii. 9.

We would observe here: I. That the Christian his name and occupation is to
be a wanter and a seeker. II. The great exercise and employment he should
have in this world, that which should swallow up his affections, thoughts,
and endeavours, should be the kingdom of God and his righteousness, which
is clearly expressed in three things: 1. His first and chief care should
be to be at peace with God, and to be adorned with Christ’s righteousness;
2. To have the kingdom of God within him, a throne of judgment erected for
Christ to rule the whole man, by his Spirit according to the word; 3. To
be made an heir here, and a possessor hereafter, of the everlasting
kingdom of glory; 4. No man can either be a subject of God’s gracious
kingdom here, or his glorious kingdom hereafter, without the imputed
righteousness of the Son of God, and whoever seeks righteousness must also
seek the kingdom of God. These are joined together, and there is a great
opposition between seeking of the world, and seeking grace and glory.
Whoever is careful in these things cannot be diligent here. But rather
seek the kingdom of God (Luke xii. 31) also implies, 5. That whatever a
man be, or his profession be, except he seek this way of righteousness,
and yield himself unto God’s kingdom of grace, and unless Christ rule in
him, he is but a pagan, or infidel Gentile, in God’s account. We return to
the first of these, namely:

1st. That the Christian is a seeker. This is the ordinary description of a
child of God, Psal. xxiv. 6, Psal. xxvii. 8. Many, at this time, call
themselves Seekers.(484) They profess they seek a true church, and seek
ordinances purely dispensed, but find none. But the child of God, the good
Christian that seeks according to Christ’s appointment, seeks not these
things as if they were not, but he seeks God in ordinances, he seeks
Christ in the church, he seeks grace and glory, honour and immortality,
and eternal life. He is in the church, he hath the ordinances rightly
administered, yet he wants the most part, till he find Jesus Christ in all
these. Many seek corn, wine, or any worldly good thing, saying, “Who will
show us any good?” Fie upon such a lax and indifferent spirit, that hath
no discretion or sense of things that are good, that sees not one thing
needful, and no more good than is necessary. But the child of God is a
seeker different from these also, he seeks the favour and countenance of
God, Psal. iv. 6, 7. He seeks wisdom above all things, Prov. ii. 4. He
seeks but one good thing, because there is but one good thing necessary.
The seeking Christian is a wanter, one that hath nothing, and finds it so.
He wants, and knows he wants, else he would never seek. What wants he?
Nay, rather ask, what hath he? It may soon be told what he hath, but it is
hard to tell what he wants. Look what he hath, and ye find little or
nothing, and therefore ye may conclude he wants all things. The text tells
what he wants: (1) He wants righteousness; (2) He wants grace; (3) He
wants glory, and hath no right to it.  Men seek not what they carry from
the womb.  Therefore all men have come into the world with three great
wants. (1.) Ye want righteousness. Ye cannot stand before God in the terms
of strict justice.  There is nothing ye have, or can do, but it is a
menstruous cloth, Isa. lxiv. 6. All your religion and prayers will never
commend you to God’s holy justice. The scripture hath passed this sentence
upon you all, “There is none righteous, no not one,” Rom. iii. 10. The
righteousness that the law of God requires is perfect, and complete, and
exact. Either lay down the whole sum, or if it want a farthing it is no
payment. Keep all the nine commands, but if ye break the tenth the nine
will not suffice. Now all of you have sinned and corrupted your ways, and
it is impossible to make up the want. As the redemption of the soul is
precious and ceases for ever, so the broken and dyvour(485) man having
become a bankrupt, shall never make up or pay his debt to all eternity. He
hath once broken the command, and all your keeping afterwards will not
stand for the obedience ye should always have given to it.  Therefore
sinners of the posterity of Adam, and wretched men by nature, see this
great want and impossibility to recover it in yourselves. (2.) Ye likewise
want all grace by nature. There is no delusion more ordinary than this,
that the world thinks grace is very common.  But believe it, Sirs, that
all men came from the womb without grace, get it as ye will.  Look what
the scripture speaks of the whole race of Adam, “There is no fear of God
before their eyes,” Rom. iii. 18.  They are without Christ, without hope,
and without God in the world, aliens from the covenants of promise, Eph.
ii. 1-3, 12.  Let grace be as common as can be, yet all of you once wanted
it.  Ye have it not by birth, nor by education, nor by baptism.  Ye think
perhaps a baptized soul cannot be graceless, but know it for a truth that
ye have neither legal righteousness nor evangelical holiness.  All of you
have wofully fallen from righteousness, and therefore ye lie, with Adam’s
posterity, without hope in the world Grace and truth must come from above
by Jesus Christ Grace and glory are the gifts of God. (3.) The sinner also
comes short of the glory of God, Rom. iii. 23.  All sinners are born heirs
of hell and wrath, without the hope of happiness.  There is none born with
a title to the kingdom of heaven, or any right to it.  Man in his fall
lost his right to eternal life and immortality, and hath purchased a
doleful right to the Lord’s wrath and to hell fire.  Ye think it strange
that any christened or baptized person should be damned, but the scripture
knows no difference.  “Neither circumcision nor uncircumcision availeth
any thing, but a new creature, and faith which worketh by love.”  Neither
to be a member of the visible church nor a pagan avails any thing, “for
all have sinned and come short of the glory of God.”  Now what have ye
since ye want righteousness?  Ye want grace and ye want glory, and in the
place of these ye have unrighteousness, all sin, all God’s curses and
wrath, and this makes up complete misery.  In a word, ye want God and
Christ, and this is all, and enough for all, Eph. ii. 12.  Ye have, by
nature, more sibness(486) with Satan, and nearer relation to him, than to
God, and if ye want God, what can ye have beside?  Your abundance is want.
As all things are theirs who are Christ’s, so nothing is theirs who are
not God’s.  In short, there is not in all the creation such a miserable
creature as man, whom God hath magnified and exalted above the angels, and
the rest of the works of his hands.  Now all men want these, but no man
knows this but the Christian, whose eyes Christ hath opened, and to whom
he hath given eye salve.  Laodicea was blind and saw not, but she thought
she was rich enough, when she had nothing, Rev. iii. 17, 18.  The man, who
will discourse well on all the miseries of this life, and human
infirmities, may be ignorant of these things.  There is no man but knows
some want.  But what is it he misses?  Nothing but what concerns his
present being and well being in this world, and so the world may supply
it.  But the Christian wants something this vain world will not make up.
“Whom have I in heaven but thee?  And there is none upon the earth I
desire beside thee,” says the soul that hath found God. And whom want I in
heaven but thee? (Psal. lxxiii. 25, 26) says the soul that seeks God.  He
wants God’s favour, and the light of his reconciled countenance, Psal. iv.
6.  If ye ask him, what seek ye, what want ye in all the world?  He
answers, “And now. Lord, what wait I for?”  My heart and “my hope is in
thee,” Psal. xxxix. 7.  None needed ask at Mary, “Whom seekest thou?” Any
body that knows her, knows her want.  It is he, the Christ Jesus, and she
thinks all the world should want him, and seek him with her, and thinks no
body should be ignorant of him; for she speaks to the gardener, as if
there had been no other in the world, John xx. 15.  But,

2dly. His wants put him to seeking, to diligence.  He misses something,
and O it is a great something, infinitely more than he is worth in the
world!  He wants being and well being.  He thinks himself as good as lost,
and he comes at length to some point of resolution, with the lepers of
Samaria, (2 Kings vii. 3, 4.) “Why sit we here till we die?  If we enter
into the city there is famine, if we sit still we perish, if we go out we
may find bread.” And so the poor soul, with Mordecai and Esther, comes to
this conclusion, “If I perish, I perish;” nothing but perishing as I am, I
will go and seek salvation in Jesus Christ, and it may be I will find it.
Who knows but he may turn again?  Resolution is born a man at first, a
giant. It goes out to the utmost border of want the first day.  Wanting
makes desire, and desire, attended with some hope, makes up resolution and
purpose, and when the soul is thus principled, then in the third
room,(487) it comes forth to action.  Desire and hope give legs to the
soul for the journey, and now the wanting Christian ye shall find with his
hand in every good turn, his feet in every ordinance.  Ye shall find him
praying, reading, and hearing.  It is true, resolution is born a man, and
practice is born but a child, and scarcely will come up in many years to
the stature of resolution.  Always(488) diligence and violence is the
qualification of his practice, (Heb. xi. 6, Matth. xi. 12) and this is
written upon his using of means, “How love I the Lord!  I am sick of
love.”  The Christian’s diligence in the use of means proclaims his
earnest desire to obtain, whereas many a man’s practice speaks but a
coldrife and indifferent spirit. That is a neutral who cares not whether
he obtain or miss.  Some Christians have some missings of God, and
spiritual things, but alas! their want, and sight of want, makes them
twice miserable, because it puts not their hand to action.  The slothful
and sluggard’s desire slays him, because his hands refuse to labour, Prov.
xxi. 25.  O!  but he finds many difficulties in the way.  Though he have
half a wish, or a raw(489) desire after Christ, yet it never comes farther
than a conditional wish. A beggar may wish to be a king.  He comes to no
purpose in it and therefore his way is called a hedge of thorns.  Whereas
a seeking Christian finds a plain path where he goes, Prov. xv. 19.  The
sluggard says, “There is a lion in the way, and a lion in the streets.”
He concludes upon the means and duties of religion before ever he try
them, Prov. xxii. 13, Prov. xix. 24.  How lazy is he!  He will not bring
his hand out of his bosom, when he hath put it in.  Thus the lazy and
secure Christian is a brother to a great waster, his desire consumes him.
He hath no more religion than a spunk(490) of desire; and he sits down
with this spark of his own kindling, and the life of religion thrives not
upon his hand, Prov. xviii. 9, 12. His seeking must have violence with it,
Matth. xi. 12.  But we may also observe concerning the Christian, that he
is,

3dly. Defined on this side of time as a seeker.  In heaven he is an
enjoyer, and he seeks no more; for how can the ox low over his fodder?  He
sits down to eat the fruit and sweat of his labour, and well may he
triumphantly say, as the ancient philosopher said, “I have found, I have
found.”(491) But here he is a seeker still.  Whatever he miss, he is still
a seeker, and whatever he find, he is yet a seeker. He is named not from
his finding, but his seeking, not from his enjoyment or attainment, but
from his endeavour and aim. Though he find righteousness in Jesus, and
remission of sins, yet he is a seeker of grace; though he be justified,
yet he seeks holiness. There are many who would seek no more of God than
pardon of sin. Let him deliver them from hell, and they will trouble God
with no more requests. Doth not some of your own consciences speak, that
ye would seek no more from Christ than to be saved from an ill hour, and
to be found in him; whereas Paul was not content with this, but made an
holy gradation, as we read, Philip iii. 8, &c. He desired to know the
power of Christ’s resurrection, and to be made conformable to him by any
means; and now, when he is found in Christ, and justified, he counts not
himself well, or perfect and complete, or to have attained that which he
struggled earnestly for. Would not many be content with a Saviour, but
they love not to hear of a king to rule over them, nor of his laws to
regulate their lives by? They love an imputed holiness, as well as
righteousness. But the true seeker seeks grace within him. Though he be
justified, or freed from guilt and condemnation, and have the
righteousness of Christ to cover him, and though he should never come into
condemnation for sin, yet he seeks the death and destruction of it in his
soul, and the life of holiness implanted and perfected in his inward man.
Though he is sure of heaven, yet he would have God’s image upon his
spirit, and whole man.

4thly. Whatever degree of grace he have or attain, yet he is still a
wanter, and still a seeker. He counts not himself to have attained, or to
be already perfect, but presses forward to gain the mark and prize of
God’s high calling, Phil. iii. 13, 14. He stands at no pitch, but forgets
what is behind, and overlooks it, he thinks it not worthy to come in
reckoning. There is still so much before his hand, that he apprehends it
to be lost time to reckon what is passed. His aim is to perfect holiness
in the fear of God. He endeavours to be holy as God is holy, who is the
completest pattern of unspotted purity and uprightness, and to be holy in
all manner of conversation. He goes from strength to strength, till he
appear blameless before God; he seeks grace for grace, Psal. lxxxiv. 5-8.
And truly the man who seeks the exact copy or pattern, Jesus Christ, who
is gone before his people into heaven, and he who knows the spiritual
command in all its dimensions, he will not say “I have found,” but will
still want more than he hath, and seek what he wants. There are some
professors who have attained some pitch and degree, as it were, the first
day, and never advance further. They have gotten a gift of prayer, some
way of discharging duties, some degree in profession, and they want no
more. Look on them some years after, and ye would say, they have sought no
more. And truly he who seeks no more shall never be able to keep what he
hath already, as a fire must soon die away if ye add not new fuel to it.
Christians are not green in old age, because they have come to a pitch in
their religion, and stand there. No, religion should not come to its
stature hereaway.(492) This is but the time of its minority. Grace should
be still on the growing hand. The grace of God is but a child here. Heaven
and eternity make up the man. Glory is the man, who was once the child
grace.

5thly. The good Christian is still a seeker till Christ be all in all,
till he apprehend that for which he is apprehended. As long as he is in
this world he is a seeker. Whereof, ye will say? Not only of more grace
here, but of glory hereafter. Here he hath no continuing city, but he
seeks one to come, Heb. xiii. 14. He is a pilgrim on earth, embracing the
promises afar off, and seeking his country, even heaven itself, Heb. xi.
13, &c. All your present enjoyments in this world, your own houses and
lands, would not make you think yourselves at home, if ye were Christians
at the heart. Ye would miss consolation, ye would want happiness in the
affluence of all created things. And therefore, Christians, do ye want
nothing when all things go according to your mind? Is there no hole in
your heart that a world cannot fill up? This is not well. Ye ought to seek
a city, while ye are in your own country, and ye should never think
yourselves at home till ye be in heaven. The Christian gets some taste of
the fruits of the land, some clusters in the wilderness and house of his
pilgrimage, and this makes him long to be there. This inflames the soul’s
desire, and turns it all in motion to seek that which was so sweet. If
hope be so sweet, what shall the thing possessed be? If a grape brought a
savour and taste so refreshful, what must the grapes plucked from the tree
of life be, and the rivers of pleasures, which are at God’s right hand,
for evermore be? Sit not down then, Christians, upon your enjoyments,
whether they be worldly or spiritual, but aspire to high things.




Sermon XVI.


    Matth. vi. 33.—“But seek ye first the kingdom of God,” &c.


II. The Christian’s chief employment should be to seek the kingdom of God,
and the righteousness thereof. “Seek first,” &c. Upon this he should first
and chiefly spend his thoughts, and affections, and pains. We comprehend
it in three things. _First_, He should seek to be clothed upon with
Christ’s righteousness, and this ought to take up all his spirit. This is
the first care and the chief concern. Did not this righteousness weigh
much with Paul, when he counted all things but loss and dung, that he
might be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness, but the
righteousness which is by faith in Jesus Christ? Phil. iii. 8, 9. Now this
righteousness is of more concernment than all the world beside. For it is
God’s righteousness, (Rom. x. 3, 4; 2 Cor. v. 21.) and this holds out a
threefold excellence in it. (1.) It is God’s righteousness, because he
alone devised it, and found it out. All the world could not have imagined
a way possible to save lost mankind, or ever one sinner of that wretched
number. Satisfaction to justice was needful, and there was none righteous
among Adam’s posterity. But here God himself in his everlasting counsel
hath found it out, and all hath flowed from his love. The mission of Jesus
Christ to be the propitiation for our sins, comes from this blessed
fountain, 1 John iv. 9, 10; Rom. iii. 24, 25. God hath been framing this
righteousness from all eternity, and even this world seems to be made for
this end. All God’s dispensation with Adam, his making a covenant of works
with him, his mutability and liableness to fall, and so governing all
things in his holy providence that he should fall from his own
righteousness, and involve all his posterity in the same condemnation with
himself,—all this seems to be in respect of God’s intention and purpose,
even ordained for this end, that the righteousness of Jesus Christ might
be commended to you, far more than all the dispensation of the law upon
Sinai, more than the curse and the command, the thunder and the lightning.
The very condemnation of the scripture was all in God’s own mind and
revealed will also, as the means appointed to lead sinners to this
righteousness, Rom. x. 4. Therefore, how precious should that be to us,
that God keeps and preserves the world for?

(2.) By this righteousness alone, we can stand before God, and therefore
it is termed God’s righteousness; and is not this enough to make it lovely
in the eyes of all men? This is the righteousness without the law, though
it was witnessed both by the law and the prophets. This is the only
righteousness that justifies, when all men are found guilty before God,
Rom. iii. 19, &c. Now, what is it in this world can profit you, if ye want
this? Condescend(493) upon all your pleasures and heart-wishes, let you
have them all, and now, poor soul, pray what hast thou? Though thou hast
gained the world, thou losest thy soul, that thou should use the world
with? Let you then get what you so eagerly pursue in the world, what will
ye do when your soul is required by the hand of justice? “Then whose shall
these things be?” Luke xii. 20, 21. By all these things, a man neither
knows love nor hatred, as Solomon speaks of external enjoyments, Eccles.
ix. 1. But hear the way, O men! how ye may stand before God; here it is
only. Will it profit you to enjoy the world, and bless God? And when all
these things leave you, and ye leave them, what will ye do,—for riches
will not go to the grave with you? All that is here cannot help you in
that day, when ye must stand before the Judge of all flesh. If a man be
not found in Christ he is gone, and if he be found in him, then the
destroying angel passes by, death hath a commission to do him good, God is
become his friend in Jesus. If ye could walk never so blamelessly in this
world, all this will not come as righteousness in God’s sight, nor stand
before him. It is only the righteousness of Christ that can be a covering
to sinners.    But,

(3.) This is God’s righteousness, because it is the righteousness of
Christ who is truly God, and so it is divine. This is the most excellent
piece in all the creation, that comes from Jesus Christ his life, death,
and resurrection. And let all men’s inherent holiness blush here and be
ashamed. Let all your prayers, good wishes, your religious obedience be
ashamed, let them evanish as the stars before the sun. The righteousness
of Christ is the bright sun that makes all the dim sparkles of nature,
civil honesty, and even religious education, disappear. Let even angels
blush before him, for they are not clean in his sight, but may be charged
with folly. Innocent Adam was also a glorious creature, but the second
Adam, the life-giving Spirit and the Lord from heaven, hath an infinitely
transcendent and supereminent excellency and prerogative beyond him, and
all the creation of God. Look then upon this Jesus how he is described, as
the “brightness of the Father’s glory and the express image of his
person,” (Heb. i. 1-3; Col. i. 15, &c.) and wonder that such a glorious
one should become our righteousness, that he should take our sins upon
him, (2 Cor. v. 21; 1 Pet. ii. 24) and make over his righteousness to us.
This is the righteousness of the saints in heaven, Rev. xix. 8. This is
the glory of the spirits of just men made perfect. Think ye, my friends,
that the glorious saints shall wear their own holiness upon their outside
in heaven? No, no, the righteousness of Christ shall cover them, and that
shall be the upper-garment that all the host of heaven must glory in. Now
this is the thing that the child newborn, if he had the use of reason,
should first cry for, before he ever get the breast, to be reconciled to
God in Christ. Would ye then spend your time and thoughts upon other
things, if ye knew what need ye have of his righteousness, and how
suitable it were to your need? Should not the beggar seek food and
clothing? Should not the sick man seek health, and the poor man riches?
Here they are all in Christ’s righteousness. Ye are under the curse of
God. This righteousness redeems from the curse. Ye are sinners, and none
of you righteous, no not one. But Christ was made sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. O sinners, wonder at the
change! Hath Christ taken on your sins, that his righteousness might
become yours, and will ye not do so much as seek it? But many a man
beguiles his own soul, and thinks he seeks this righteousness in the
gospel. Therefore ye would know what it is to seek his righteousness. If
ye seek it, ye want your own righteousness. And who of you have come this
length, to judge yourselves that ye be not judged? It is a great
difficulty to convince the multitude of sin. That general notion, that we
are all sinners, is but the delusion that many souls perish in. Never any
will deny themselves to seek another righteousness, till they be beaten
and driven out of their own. There is need of submission to take and
receive this righteousness, let be to seek it, And now tell me, can ye say
that ye have seen all in yourselves as dung and dross, that ye count all
things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus,
(Phil. iii. 8, 9.) that ye have seen all your own privileges and duties
loss, and are ye even sensible that prayer will no more help you than the
cutting off a dog’s neck? Ye that lay so much weight upon your being
baptized, and upon outward privileges, are ye void of righteousness? No,
ye seek to establish your own, and do not submit to the righteousness of
God. In a word, all who are ignorant of this righteousness of God in
Christ, ye all seek to establish your own. There needs more. But not one
of twenty of you can tell what this is, it is a mystery. Ask at any of
you, how ye shall be saved, ye will say, by prayer to God, and the mercy
of God. Ye cannot tell the necessity of Christ’s coming into the world.

_Secondly_, Ye must see an impossibility to attain a righteousness, or to
stand before God another way. When ye miss this righteousness and are
convinced of sin, it is not the running to prayer will help or mend it.
When ye see the broken covenant, ye fall upon doing something, to mend
your faults, with some good turns, and some will make a few good works
answer all the challenges of sin. Alas! this is a seeking of your own
righteousness. Many a poor broken man seeks to make up his fortune. Poor
wretched sinners are building up the breach of the old covenant, putting
up props under an old ruinous house, seeking to establish it, and rear it
up again. But ye will never seek Christ till ye cannot do better, till ye
be desperate of helping yourselves without him. Now I appeal to your
consciences. Who among you was ever serious in this matter, to examine
your own condition, whether you were enemies or friends? Ye took it for
granted all your days. But never a man will betake himself to an imputed
righteousness, but only he that flies, taking with(494) his enmity, and is
pursued by the avenger of blood, and flies in to this righteousness as a
city of refuge.

_Thirdly_, Ye must seek this righteousness, and what is it to seek it? It
is even to take it and to receive it. It is brought to your door. It is
offered. And the convinced sinner hath no more to do but hearken, and this
righteousness is brought near unto him. Prayer to God, and much dealing
with him, is one of the ways of obtaining this righteousness. But coming
to Jesus Christ is the comprehensive short gate,(495) and therefore it is
called “the righteousness of faith,” and “the righteousness of God by
faith.” Now shall ye be called seekers of Christ’s righteousness, who will
not receive it when it is offered? Ye who have so many objections and
scruples against the gospel and the application of it, ye in so far are
not seekers, but refusers of the gospel, and disobedient. Christ’s
righteousness should meet with a seeker not a disputer. Any thing God
allows you to seek, certainly he allows you to take and receive it, when
it is brought unto you. And therefore, whoever have need of Jesus Christ,
not only refuse him not, but stay not till they find him come to them.
This is a noble resolution, I will give myself no rest till I be at a
point in this. Seek him as a hid treasure, as that which your happiness
depends upon.

(1) The kingdom of grace is worthy of all your affections and pains. That
despised thing in the world called grace is the rarest piece of the
creation, and if we could look on it aright, we would seek grace, and
follow after it. Grace extracts a man out of the multitude of men that are
all of one mass. Grace separates him from the rest of the world, and to
this purpose are these usual phrases in scripture, “Such were some of
you,” “Once ye were darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord,” “Among
whom ye had your conversation in times past, fulfilling the desires of the
flesh.” All men are alike by nature and birth, there is no difference.
Grace brought to light by the gospel makes the difference, and separates
the few chosen vessels of glory and mercy from the world, and now “they
are not of the world, as I am not of the world.” All the rest of men’s
aims and endeavours cannot do this. Learning makes not a man a Christian.
Honour makes not a man differ from a Gentile or Pagan. Riches make you no
better than infidels. Speak of what ye will, you shall never draw a man
entirely out of the cursed race of Adam, never distinguish him from
Gentiles before God, till the Spirit of regeneration blow where he
listeth. And this is grace’s prerogative, beyond all other things. All
other excellent gifts, even the gift of preaching, praying, all these are
common, so to speak, and in a manner befall to all alike. Your external
calling is but common, but he gives grace to all his chosen ones. But (2)
Grace puts a man in a new kingdom. It draws a man out of Satan’s kingdom,
and makes him a king, who before was a subject. The man was led captive by
sin and Satan at their pleasure. He served his own corrupt lusts and the
prince of this world. Sin reigneth in his mortal body, whatever his
passion and corruption did put him to, he could have no bridle, but as a
horse went on to the battle. And ye may see daily that there is scarce one
of an hundred that is master of himself. He is a servant of sin, but grace
makes him a priest and a king, Rev. i. 6, chap. v. 8, 10. He can now
command himself. Sin reigned before unto death, but now grace reigns
through righteousness unto eternal life, Rom. v. 20, 21. And O! but this
victory over a man’s self is more than a man’s conquering a strong city.
This victory is more than all the triumphs and trophies of the world’s
conquerors. For they could not conquer themselves, the little world, but
were slaves to their own lusts. Some men talk of great spirits that can
bear no injury. Nay, but such a spirit is the basest spirit. The noble
spirit is that spirit which can despise these things, and be above them.
Grace puts men upon a throne of eminence above the world. The Spirit of
God makes a man of a noble spirit. (3) Grace translates a man from Satan’s
kingdom to God, and makes him a subject, a free born subject, of God or
Christ’s kingdom, and therefore Christ is the “King of saints,” Rev. xv.
3. Our Lord and Saviour hath an “everlasting kingdom,” 2 Pet. i. 11. We
were subjects of the powers of darkness, but grace makes the translation
into the kingdom of God’s own dear Son, Col. i. 13. Now what an
unspeakable privilege is this, to be one of Christ’s subjects, who is our
dear Saviour and King! Surely we must all be great courtiers. David, the
great king of Israel, had this for his chief dignity, his style of honour,
“the servant of the Lord,” as kings use to write down themselves; and this
was his title, “servant of God.” Paul gloried much in this, “Paul, an
apostle and servant of Jesus Christ.” And surely all the families of
heaven and earth may think it their highest honour to get liberty to bow
their knees to Jesus, the “King of kings, and Lord of lords,” the
first-born of God’s creation. The converted man is turned from the power
of Satan to God. Mark but the emphasis of these two terms. Mark the whence
or from,—that it is from Satan, the great destroyer of mankind, the first
transgressor and deceiver. And how great is his power, tyranny, and
dominion! He had us all in chains reserved for the day of judgment. But to
what a happy change grace turns us, _from_ him! But the term _to_, which
is more admirable, it is to God, to Christ, to true religion, to God
himself most High. And O! but this must be a more wonderful and excellent
change than our conversion from darkness to light, from hell to heaven.
These are but shadows of this glorious conversion. (4) Grace makes a man
likewise a “partaker of the divine nature,” 2 Pet. i. 4. This is the image
and glory of God. This is the imitation and resemblance of God’s spotless
holiness and purity, “Be ye holy, as I am holy,” 1 Pet. i. 15, 16. Every
creature hath some dark characters of God. Some things speak his power,
some things his wisdom, but this he hath called his own image. And so the
Christian is more like unto God than all the world beside. This is the
magnifying of a man, and making him but “a little lower than the angels,”
Psal. viii. 3, 4. Therefore God loves grace better than all the creation.
Holiness is a great beauty, and God requires to be worshipped in the
beauties of it. Albeit grace be often clouded with infirmities, and
sometimes is reckoned despicable, because of the vessel it is in, yet it
is precious as the finest gold, and more precious than any rubies. It is
like gold in ashes, not the less excellent in itself, though it appear not
so. But sin is the devil’s image and likeness, and therefore Satan is
called the father of sinners. “Ye are of your father the devil, and the
lusts of your father ye will do.” O but sin hath an ugly shape! It is the
only spot in the face of the creation which God’s soul abhors. For he
loves righteousness, and hates iniquity, Psal. xlv. 6, 7. But there is one
thing more, (5) That may commend grace to all your hearts. Grace is the
way to glory. It gives title and right to, or at least declares it. It is
inseparably joined with it. Grace is glory in the bud, and glory is the
flower of grace, grace is young glory, and glory is old grace. Without
holiness it is impossible to see God’s face in peace. No man can come unto
heaven without grace. Glorification is the first link of the chain, Rom.
viii. 30. But sanctification must intervene first. No unclean thing can
enter into heaven, but he that gives grace, gives glory, Psal. lxxxiv. 11.
Heaven cannot receive many of you, because ye have not holiness. But it
may commend holiness unto you, that it ministers an abundant entrance
“into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.” As
much as eternity is beyond the poor span of your time, so much is grace
and holiness, whereon depends your everlasting condition, preferable to
all things of this present vain world. O! but the children of men have
many vain pursuits of the creature, that when it is had is nothing and
vanity. Ye labour to secure an inch of your being, and to have contentment
here in this half day, and never look beyond it to many millions of ages,
when ye are to continue.  Your honour, your pleasure, your gain, your
credit, many such things like these can have no influence on the next
world. These cannot go through death with you. Only grace and holiness,
begun here, are consummated in glory, and make the poor man, that was
miserable for a moment, eternally happy.




Sermon XVII.


    Matth. vi. 33.—“But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his
    righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.”


The perfection even of the most upright creature, speaks always some
imperfection in comparison of God, who is most perfect. The heavens, the
sun and moon, in respect of lower things here, how glorious do they
appear, and without spot! But behold, they are not clean in God’s sight!
How far are the angels above us who dwell in clay! They appear to be a
pure mass of light and holiness, yet even these glorious beings cannot
behold this light without covering their faces. These God may charge with
folly. “God is light,” saith the apostle, 1 John i. 5. This is his
peculiar glory, for “in him there is no darkness at all.” Is there any
thing more excellent and divine than to seek God, and find him, and enjoy
him? Yet even that holds forth the emptiness of the creature in its own
bosom, that cannot be satiated within, but must come forth to seek
happiness. Nay, even the greatest perfection of the creature speaks out
the creature’s own self indigence most, because its happiness is the
removal from itself unto another, even unto God the fountain of life.

Now the enjoyment of this “kingdom of God” mentioned in the text, holds
forth man’s own insufficiency for well being within himself. But seeking
this kingdom declares a double want, a want of it altogether. Not only
hath he it not in himself, but not at all, and so must go out and seek it.
God is blessed in himself, and self sufficient, and all sufficient to
others. Without is nothing but what has flowed from his inexhausted
fulness within, so that, though he should stop the conduit, by withdrawing
his influence, and make all the creatures to evanish as a brook, or a
shadow, he should be equally in himself blessed. “Darkness and light are
both alike to thee,” says David in another sense, Psal. cxxxix. 11, 12.
And indeed they are all one in this sense, that he is no more perfected
and bettered, when all the innumerable company of angels, and the spirits
of just men made perfect, follow him with an eternal song, nor(496) before
the mountains and hills were, when nothing was brought forth. Many
thousand more worlds would add nothing to him, nor diminish anything from
him. It is not so with man, he is bounded and limited, he cannot have well
being in his own breast. He was indeed created with it in the enjoyment of
God, which was his happiness, so that he had it not to seek, but to keep,
he had it not to follow after, but to hold it still fast. But now, alas!
he hath lost that, and become miserable. Once all Adam’s posterity were
void of happiness. By catching at a present shadow of pleasure, and
satisfaction to his senses, he lost this excellent substance of
blessedness in communion with God. Now, how shall this be recovered again?
How shall this pearl of great price be found?

Certainly we must agree upon two principles, and according to them walk,
ere we come within reach of this. It is a great question that is of more
moment than all the debates among men,—how shall man’s ruin be made up,
and the treasure be found? If ye think it concerns you, I pray you hearken
to this, and condescend(497) upon these two grounds, that the question may
be right stated. One is, we have all lost happiness, fallen from the top
of our excellency into the lowest dungeon of misery. We are cast down from
heaven to hell. There needs not much to persuade you of the truth of this
in general.     But alas! who ponders it in their hearts? And until ye
think more seriously upon it, ye will never be serious in the search for
reparation of it. All of you by your daily experience find that ye are
miserable creatures. Ye have no satisfaction nor contentment. Ye are
compassed about with many infirmities and griefs. But this is but an
appendix of your misery. All the calamities of this life are but a
consequent, a little stream of that boundless ocean of misery that is yet
insensible to you. Therefore enter into your own hearts, and consider what
Adam once was, and what ye now are, nay, what ye will all quickly be, if
God prevent it not. We are born heirs of wrath and hell. It is not only
the infinite loss of that blessed sight of his face for evermore, which an
eternal enjoyment of creature pleasures could not compensate the want of,
one hour; but it is the kingdom of darkness, and the devil that we are all
born to inherit. Let this then once take root in your heart, that ye are
in extreme misery, and that a remedy must be provided, else ye must
perish. Now when this principle is established, ye must agree upon this
also. “But out of myself I must go. Blessedness I must have. It is not in
me. While I look in, there is nothing but all kind of emptiness, and,
which is worse, all kind of misery. Not only the common lot of creatures
(that none is sufficient to its own well being) is incident to me, but I
have lost that being which I had in another, which was my well being, and
do now possess, or shall shortly possess, all misery.” Now, are ye settled
upon these two? I am not happy, I must go out of myself to find it. It is
not in me, in my flesh dwells no good thing, in my spirit and flesh both,
is nothing good. Ask then this great question, Whither shall I go? What
shall I do to find it? All men know they must seek it. But Christ tells
where they shall seek it, and whither they shall go. The word of the
gospel is for this very purpose to answer this question. If we were
sensible that we had lost happiness, certainly we would be earnest in this
question, where shall it be recovered? What shall I seek after? And no
answer would satisfy but the gospel itself, that directs unto the very
fountain of life, and holds “forth the kingdom of God” as the true
happiness of men to be sought. “Seek ye first,” says Christ, “the kingdom
of God,” and the righteousness thereof. Here only is a solid answer. Seek
me, for I am eternal life, I am the life and the light of men. Oh! that
your souls answered, with David, “Thy face, Lord, I will seek.” Peter had
sought and found, and thought himself well, so that he answers Christ with
great vehemency, when he said unto his disciples, “Will ye also leave me?”
Peter saith, Leave thee, Lord, “to whom should we go but unto thee, for
thou hast the words of eternal life? And we believe and are sure, that
thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God,” John vi. 66, &c. It were
all the absurdity in the world to leave thee, or to go to any other thing
for life itself. Shall not death be found, if I leave life? It were
madness not to seek thee, but what shall it be called to leave thee, when
I have found and tasted thee to be so good? Every man misses happiness and
justification within himself, and so is upon the search after it. But is
it not strange, that all the experiences of nations and generations
conjoined in one, cannot hold forth even a probable way of attaining it?
Gather them all in one, the sum and result is, “We have heard the fame
thereof with our ears,” but “it is hid from the eyes of all living,” as we
read more fully, and should apply, what Job said of wisdom, to the true
happiness of man, Job xxviii. 12, to the end of that chapter. Certainly
there is some fundamental and common mistake among men. They know not what
was once man’s happiness, and so it is impossible they can seek the right
remedy. Look upon us all, what do we seek after? It is some present thing,
some bodily and temporal thing, that men apprehend their happiness lies
in, and so whether they attain it or not, or being attained, it doth not
answer our expectation, and thus still are we disappointed, and our base
scent becomes a vain pursuit, whether we overtake it or not. Every man
proposes this within himself as the principle of his life and
conversation, what shall I seek after? What shall I spend most of my time
and affections upon, to drive at? And alas! all men, save those whose eyes
the Spirit openeth, err in the very foundation. One man propones honour to
himself, another pleasure, and a third riches, and the most part seek all
of them, some accommodation and satisfaction in a present world. And
almost every man conceives he would be blessed, if he had that which he
wants, and sees another have.

Now while men’s designs are thus established, all must be wrong. The ship
is gone forth, but it will never land on the coast of happiness. And thus
we see men seek many things. They are divided among many thoughts and
cares, because no one thing is found that can satisfy, and so we have put
ourselves upon an endless journey to go through all the creatures. Neither
one nor all together have what we want, and neither one nor all can be had
or possessed with assurance, though we had it. But the gospel comes to lay
a right foundation, and frame a right principle within us. “Seek ye first
the kingdom of God.” Here is the principal design that should be driven at
and if men would make it, and follow it, O how should they be satisfied
with the fulness of that kingdom, the vast dimensions of it, the
incorruptibleness of it!

Now there is one of two you must fall upon, either many things, or one
thing. All that a man can seek after is here ranked. On the one side is
many things, “all these things,” that is, food, raiment, honour, pleasure,
and such like, that concern the body, or men’s condition here in this
world, and these things a man hath need of, verses 31 and 32, “Therefore
take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, what shall we drink? or,
wherewithal shall we be clothed? (for after all these things do the
Gentiles seek) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of these
things.” Nay, there is but one thing that is set up against all these many
things, namely, “the kingdom of God and his righteousness.” Now without
all controversy the more unity be, there will be the more satisfaction. If
all other things be equal, it is a kind of torment to have so many doors
to go to for help. If a man could have all in one, he would think many
things a great vexation and burden. If any one thing had in it as much as
to answer all our necessities, that one thing would be of great price,
beyond many things, having but so much virtue among them all. I shall
suppose then, that there were real satisfaction and happiness to be found
in the affluence and conjunction of all created things here, that there
was some creature that could answer every necessity of men, yet, I say,
would ye not exchange all that variety and multitude, if ye could find one
thing that did all that to the full, that so many did but no more? Then
certainly ye would choose a variety in one thing beyond the scattered
satisfaction in many things. But when it is not to be found in all these
things, and though it were, yet all these are not consistent together,
then of necessity we must make another search. I say then, in the name of
Jesus Christ, that if ye seek satisfaction in this present world, ye shall
be disappointed. Ye may be all your days sowing and ploughing, but ye
shall not see the harvest. Ye shall never reap the fruit of your labour,
but in the end of your days shall be fools, and see yourselves to have
been so, when ye thought yourselves wise. I shall also suppose that ye
have attained what ye have with so much vexation toiled for, that ye had
your barns and coffers full, that all the varieties of human delights were
still attending you, that ye were set upon a throne of eminency above
others, and in a word, that ye had all that your soul desired, so that no
room was left empty for more desire, and no more grief entered into your
hearts. Are ye blessed for all that? No certainly, if ye do but consider
that with all ye may lose your own souls, and that quickly, and that your
spirits must remove out of that palace of pleasure and delight into
eternal torment, and then count, are ye blessed or not? What gained ye? It
is madness to reckon upon this life, it is so inconsiderable when compared
with eternity. A kingdom, what is it, when a man shall be deprived for
evermore of the kingdom of God, and inhabit the kingdom of darkness under
the king of terrors? Do ye think a stageplayer a happy man that for an
hour hath so much mirth and attendance, and for all his lifetime is kept
in prison without the least drop of these comforts? Will not such a man’s
momentary satisfaction make hell more unsatisfying, and add grounds of
bitterness to his cup? For it is misery to have been happy.

Nay, but this is a fancied supposal. All this, how small soever it be, was
never, and never shall be, within the reach of any living. Ye may reckon
beforehand, and lay down two things as demonstrated by scripture and all
men’s experience. One is,—all is vanity and vexation of spirit under the
sun. All that ye can attain by your endeavours for an age, and by sweating
and toiling, will not give you one hour’s satisfaction, without some want,
some vexation, either in wanting or possessing. Nay, though you had all,
it could not give you satisfaction. The soul could not feed upon these
things. They would be like silver and gold, which could not save a
starving man, or nourish him as meat and drink doth. A man cannot be happy
in a marble palace, for the soul is created with an infinite capacity to
receive God, and all the world will not fill his room. Another is,—that it
is impossible for you to attain all these things. One thing is
inconsistent with another, and your necessity requires both. Now then, how
shall ye be satisfied when they cannot meet? I think, then, the spirits of
the most part of us do not rise very high to seek great things in this
world, we are in such a lot among men. I mean that we have not great
expectation of wealth, pleasures, honours, or such like. Oh then so much
the more take heed to this, and see what ye resolve to seek after! Ye do
not expect much satisfaction here. Then I pray you hearken to this one
thing, seek the kingdom of God.

This kingdom of heaven and righteousness are equivalent unto, nay they
exceedingly surpass, all the scattered perfections and goodness among
these many things, or all things that God hath promised to add to them in
the text. Why should I say equivalent? Alas, there is no comparison. “For
I reckon (says Paul, Rom. viii. 18, 19) that the sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed in us. For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for
the manifestation of the sons of God.” What this kingdom is in itself, is
beyond our conception, but all these things which God will add thereunto,
are to be considered only as an appendix to it. Is not heaven an excellent
kingdom? All that ye are now toiling about, and taking thought for, these,
“all these things” (as a consequent to itself), food and raiment, and such
like, “shall be given you” as your heavenly Father judges fit. “For
godliness (says the apostle, 1 Tim. iv. 8), is profitable unto all things
having the promise of this life,” as well as of “the life to come.” I
think then, if all men would but rationally examine this business, they
would be forced to cry out against the folly and madness of too many men,
who have their portion only in this life, Psal. xvii. 14. What is it ye
seek? Ye flee from godliness as your great enemy. Ye think religion an
adversary to this life, and the pleasures of it. Nay, but it is a huge
mistake, for it hath the promise of this life, and that which is to come.
Ye cannot abide to have Christ’s kingdom within you. Ye will not have him
to rule over you. Ye will not renounce self, and your own righteousness.
But consider, O men, that here is that which ye should seek after. Here is
wealth, and honour, and long life, and pleasures at God’s right hand for
evermore. Ye seek many things first, and ye will not seek this one thing
needful, Luke x. 41, 42. But here is the way to get what ye seek more
certainly and solidly, “Seek first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness,” and all these other things will come of will. Ye need not
seek them, for your heavenly Father knows best what ye need. Behold what a
satisfying portion this kingdom is. When the pitch and height of men’s
attainments in this world is but a consectary, an appendicle of it, what
must this kingdom be in itself, when all these things follow as
attendants? Here then is one thing, worth all, and more than all, even
Jesus Christ, who is all in all, Col. iii. 10, 11. Ye speak of many
kingdoms, nay, but here is one kingdom, the kingdom of grace and glory,
that hath in it eminently all that is scattered among all things. It
unites us to Jesus Christ, “in whom all the fulness of the Godhead dwells,
and ye are complete in him, who is the head of all principality and
power,” Col. ii. 9, 10. In his house is fatness, and ye shall be satisfied
with this, and drink of these rivers of everlasting pleasures that are at
his right hand, Psal. xxxvi. 8, 9, xvi. 11. When the pious Psalmist was
over-charged with the very forethought and apprehension of this, he says,
“How excellent is thy loving kindness, O God! therefore the children of
men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings,” Psal. xxxvi. 7. “O how
great is thy goodness, which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee,
which thou hast wrought for them that trust in thee,” Psal. xxxi. 19, 20.
When the sight of it afar off, and the taste of it in this wilderness, is
of so much virtue, what shall the drinking of that wellhead be, when the
soul shall be drowned in it?

As these things are divided,—on the one side, many things, and on the
other, one kingdom more worth than all, so are men divided accordingly. On
the one hand are the nations and Gentiles, on the other a poor handful. Ye
my disciples, “Seek ye,” says Christ, “first the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things,” what ye shall eat, and what ye shall
drink, or wherewithal ye shall be clothed, “shall be added.” For after all
these things the Gentiles seek, and your Father knoweth that ye have need
of them. “Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father’s good pleasure to
give you the kingdom,” Luke xii. 29, 31. Now this division hath been
always in the world. “For many say, (Psal. iv. 6, 7), Who will show us any
good?” But they who have their affections gathered in one channel toward
one thing, are as it were but one man. But, Lord, “lift thou up the light
of thy countenance upon us, thou hast put gladness in my heart more than
in the time that their corn and wine increased.” Here then is even the
course of the world, the way of the multitude. They have their way
scattered, their gain lies in many arts. Many things they must seek,
because they forsake the one thing necessary. When they forsake the one
fountain of living water, they must dig up, and hew out to themselves many
broken cisterns, that can hold no water, no one to help another. This is
even proclaimed by the conversation of a great part of the world. Do ye
not declare this, by your eager pursuit of this world, and the things of
it, and your careful thoughts of it, that ye have no mind(498) of
eternity, or the kingdom to come? Ye seek nothing but things here, and
these do not descend after you. Be persuaded, I beseech you, be persuaded
of this, that when ye have your hearts below, that ye are no better, the
most part of you, than pagans. Ye have this pretence, that it is necessary
to live and follow some calling. It is true indeed. But is it not more
necessary to live for ever after death than for a moment? Godliness will
not prejudge this life or thy calling, but ye seek after these things, as
if ye were to live eternally in this vain world. Ye could toil no more,
take no more thought for a million of ages, than ye do now for the morrow.
This prejudges and shuts out all thoughts of heaven or hell. Ye are called
to a kingdom. This is offered unto you. Will ye be so mad as to refuse it,
and embrace the dunghill, and scrape it still together? We declare unto
you in his name, who is truth itself, that if ye will be persuaded to be
Christians indeed, ye shall have these outward things ye have need of,
without care and anxiety, which now ye are tormented for. And for
superfluities, what need ye care for them? A reasonable man should despise
them, and much more a Christian. If ye would not be as pagans without the
church, ye must be sober in these things, mortified and dead unto them.
There shall be no real difference between thee and a heathen, in the day
of appearing before Christ’s tribunal, O Christian, except thou hast
denied and despised this world, and sought principally the things that are
above. Is Christianity no more, I pray you, but a name? Ye would all be
called Christians. Why will ye not be so indeed? For the name will never
advantage you, but in the day of judgment it shall be the greatest
accession and weight unto your guiltiness, and also to your judgment. Ye
would all now be accounted Christians, but if ye be not so in truth, and
in deed, the day will come that ye shall wish from your soul ye had wanted
the name also, and had lived among these Gentiles and pagans whose
conversation ye did follow. For it shall be more tolerable for the
covetous worldly pagan in that day, than the covetous Christian.

Oh that ye were once persuaded that there is an inconsistency in them, who
seek these many things, and this one kingdom. “But seek ye first the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness,” in opposition to the Gentiles
seeking of many things. Ye may seek the world, but if ye seek it, seek it
as if ye sought it not, if ye use it use it as if ye used it not, or use
the world as those who do not abuse it, knowing that the fashion thereof
passes away. Certainly ye cannot with all seek grace and glory, 1 Cor. ii.
29, 32. Therefore Christ says to enforce his exhortation, (Matth. vi. 24)
“No man can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one, and love
the other, or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other; ye
cannot serve God and mammon.” I fear many of you conceive that this
belongs not to you. Those who are not naturally covetous and greedy, who
are not still in anxiety and perplexity about the things of the world,
will possibly conceive themselves free. Nay, but look upon the division
that Christ makes. Was there not many a heathen man among the nations, as
free of that covetousness noted among men? Were there not as gallant
spirits among them, that cared as little for riches as any of us,—nay, men
every way of a more smooth and blameless carriage than the most part of us
are? Yet behold the construction that Christ puts on them, “after all
these things do the nations seek.” I think many of them have declaimed
more against the baseness of covetous spirits,(499) than many Christian
preachers, and in the very practice of it have outstripped the most part
of the Christian world. Yet in the scripture sense, even all these who
have cried down the world, are but lovers of it, and of themselves too.
How can this be? It is certain every man is composed of desires and
breathings after some thing without himself. Some men’s desires are more
shallow and low than others. One man hath honour in admiration, and may
despise riches. Another follows his pleasures and may neglect both these.
Nay, possibly a man may be moderate in all these things, so that none can
challenge him, and yet he is but a lover of the world. It is the master he
serves, and the idol he worshippeth, because no man wants one, or many
idols, something to take up his affection and desires. Now though such a
man seems moderate in these, in comparison of others whose hearts run more
after them, yet, because there is no other thing, that does take up his
heart so much as these, he is but in Christ’s account among the heathen
nations. Some of you are not in great expectations, ye have but mean
projects, ye seem content with few things, ye are not vexing yourselves as
others do, but let the world come and go as it pleases, without much
disquiet. This, I say, may be the temper of some natural spirits, yet I
ask such of you, is there any thing else ye seek more after, or spend more
time and thought upon, and what is that? Is there any other thing ye are
more taken up with, than your present ease and accommodation in this life?
No certainly, ye cannot say so, however your projects be mean and low, yet
they are confined within time and things present, and the kingdom of grace
and glory comes not much in your mind. Then, I say, thou art but a lover
of the world. Mammon is thy god. Thou seekest not the kingdom of heaven,
and shalt not obtain it. For that which the nations seek after is thy
predominant.

Will ye then, I beseech you, gather in your hearts to consider this. Is it
a light matter we speak of, life or death? Doth it not concern you as much
as you are worth? Therefore consider it as seriously as if you were going
hence to be no more. Many of you will not grant worldly mindedness a sin.
When ye make it a god, and sacrifice unto it, ye fancy that ye are seeking
heaven. I pray you do not deceive your souls. Give them as good measure as
ye would do your bodies in any thing. Would ye say ye were seeking after
any thing, I suppose to find such a friend to speak to, would ye, I say,
think that ye earnestly desired to see that friend, and sought him, if ye
did all the day take up your time with other petty business that might be
done at any time? How can ye imagine ye seek not the world but heaven,
when, if ye would look back upon the current and stream, both of your
affections and endeavours, ye would find they have run this way toward
your present ease and satisfaction? Ye do not give one entire hour to the
thought of Jesus Christ and his kingdom, it may be, in a whole week.

Are ye then seekers of the kingdom? If ye did but examine one day how it
is spent, ye might pass a judgment upon your whole life. Do ye seek that
first which is fewest times in your thoughts, and least in your
affections, and hath least of your time bestowed on it? Alas, do not
flatter yourselves. That ye seek first which is often in your mind, which
uses to stir up your joy or grief, or desire most. It is this present
world only, and this present world is your portion. Ye shall lose the
kingdom of heaven by seeking to make the world sure. As for the children
of God, ye who will be his disciples, (to such he speaks here,) it becomes
not you to be like the heathens. Ye ought, most of all, to adorn your holy
profession, your high calling to a kingdom above. If then ye seek these
things below, as if ye sought them not, ye ought to make religion your
main business, else ye are not indeed religious. If Christianity take not
up a man, he hath not the thing, but the name. “Seek first,” that is,
chiefly, principally, and above all, “the kingdom of God and his
righteousness.” Nay, this is more strange, it is a first that hath no
second. Seek this first, so as if ye sought nothing else, and all things
necessary here shall be superadded to the seeking and finding of this
kingdom.

This is that which I would have engraven on all our hearts, that there is
a necessity of making Christianity our calling and trade, our business and
employment, else we must renounce it. It will take our whole man, our
whole time, not spare hours, and by thoughts. Ye have a great task to
accomplish, a great journey to make. If ye give not all diligence to add
to your faith, virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness,
brotherly kindness, and charity, ye are certainly blind, and see not afar
off, and have not been purged from your old sins, 2 Pet. i. 5-11. This
imports that those who make not religion their great comprehensive study,
do neither know eternity, nor see into it. Oh, how may this word strike
into the hearts of many Christians, and pierce as a sword! Is our lazy,
indifferent, and cold service at some appointed hours, “all diligence”?
Or, is it diligence at all? Is there not more diligence and fervour in
other things than this, to add grace to grace? Who is covetous of such a
game? Are not many more desirous of adding lands and houses to their lands
and houses, and money to their stock, than to add to their faith virtue?
&c. Who among you is enlarging his desires, as the grave, after conformity
to Jesus Christ, and the righteousness of his kingdom, that this treasure
of grace may abound? Alas, we are poor mean Christians, because we are
negligent! For “the hand of the diligent maketh rich,” Prov. x. 4. But we
become poor in grace, because we deal with a slack hand. Is there any
great thing that is attainable without much pains and sweating?
_Difficilia quæ pulchra._(500)

Think ye to come to a kingdom by sleeping through some custom of
godliness? “Seest thou a man diligent in his business? that man shall
stand before kings, he shall not stand before mean men,” Prov. xxii. 29.
This advances him to be a courtier. And is not this business of
Christianity more considerable to be diligent about when it advances a man
into the court of heaven, into his presence in whose favour is life, and
whose loving kindness is better than life? And not only so, but if ye be
diligent here ye shall obtain a kingdom. “Seek first the kingdom of God.”
“The hand of the diligent shall bear rule but the slothful shall be under
tribute,” Prov. xii. 24. If ye make this your business, and spend your
spirits in it, ye shall be kings and priests with God in the kingdom
above, that may suffer many partakers without division or emulation. It is
he that overcomes, that shall have the new name, the white raiment, the
crown of life, and all the glorious things which are promised to them that
overcome in the second and third chapters of the Revelation. O what glad
tidings are these! This is the gospel of peace. This is the joyful sound
that proclaims unto us so great, so excellent things as a kingdom, the
kingdom of God, an everlasting kingdom like God, a kingdom glorious as he
is, a kingdom suitable to his royal Majesty, and the magnificence of his
palace above. Are we called into this by the gospel, and would ye know
what is the sum thereof? It is this. Ho! every one that will have great
things, ho! every one that will be a king to God, and to bear rule over
kings in the great day, come, here it is, overcome yourselves here in the
Lamb that hath overcome, follow Jesus the captain of your salvation, who
for the joy and glory which was set before him, despised all the glory of
this world, and the pains and shame of the cross, Heb. xii. 1, 2. “Why do
ye spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labour for that
which satisfieth not?” Isa. lv. 1, 2, 3. All ye toil about, what is it?
Children’s fancies. Such houses and kingdoms as they build in the sand.
Why spend ye your time and labour upon earthly things that are at an end?
Here is a kingdom worthy of all men’s thoughts, and affections, and time.
The diligent shall have it. Gird up the loins of your mind, and seek it as
the one thing needful. Many of you desire this kingdom, but alas! these
are sluggard’s wishes, ye have fainting desires after it. Your desires
consume and waste you. But ye put not forth your hand, and so ye have
nothing. “The soul of the sluggard desireth and hath nothing, but the soul
of the diligent shall be made fat,” Prov. xiii. 4. Do ye see any growing
Christian, but he that is much in the exercise of godliness, and very
honest in it? See ye any fat souls, but diligent souls? Our barrenness and
leanness hath negligence written upon it. Do ye not wonder that we are not
fat and flourishing, as palms and cedars in the courts of our God?
Certainly it is no wonder. Is it not a wonder that our sleeping away
secure, keeps so much as the leaves of a profession upon us? Therefore
Christians, let this be your name, Seekers, but seekers of what? Not of
any new religion, but of the good old kingdom of God, proponed to us in
the gospel. And remember that the seeker must seek diligently, if he think
that which he seeks worthy of finding. “He that comes to God must believe
that he is, and that he is the rewarder of them that diligently seek him,”
Heb. xi. 6. Your seeking will proclaim your estimation of what ye seek. It
will be written on it, what your desires are. Many men’s unfrequent and
lazy prayers have this written upon them in legible characters, I care not
whether God grant or not. Diligence speaks affection, and affection
principles(501) diligence. And if ye be seekers, ye must be so still, till
ye find, and have no more want. When ye have done all, ye must stand, Eph.
vi. 10, 16. When ye have found all, ye must seek. Ye do but find in part,
because the kingdom of God is but coming in the glory and perfection of
it. Nay, I believe the more ye find, the more ye will seek, because
tasting what this kingdom is, can best engage the affection and resolution
after it. Seeking is an exercise suitable to a Christian in this state of
pilgrimage. Enjoyment is for his own country, heaven. And shall not the
bitterness and pains of seeking, sweeten the enjoyment of this kingdom
when it is found? This will endear it and make it precious. Yet it needs
no supereminent and accessory sweetness, it is so satisfactory in itself.
Christians, remember your name. When you have attained all, still seek
more. For there is more to be found here than ye have yet found. It is
sitting down on our attainments that makes us barren and lean Christians.
Desires and diligence are the vital sap of a Christian. Enlarge once your
desires as the grave, that never says I have enough. And ye have good
warrant so to do, because that which ye are allowed to desire is without
bounds and measure. It is inexhaustible, and when once desires have
emptied the soul, and made it capable of such a great kingdom, then let
your study be henceforth to fill up that void with this kingdom. Let your
diligence come up to desires, and at length ye shall be what ye would be,
ye shall find what ye sought.




Sermon XVIII.


    Matt. vi. 33.—“But seek ye first the kingdom of God,” &c.


O “seekest thou great things for thyself,” says God to Baruch, (Jer. xlv.
5) “seek them not.” How then doth he command us in the text to seek a
kingdom? Is not this a great thing? Certainly it is greater than those
great things he would not have Baruch to seek after, and yet he charges us
to seek after it. In every kind of creatures there is some difference,
some greater, some lesser, some higher, some lower; so there are some men
far above others in knowledge, understanding, strength, and such like. Yet
such is the order God hath made, that the lowest angel is above the
highest man, so that in comparison of these, the greatest man is but a
mean worm, a despisable nothing. Among things created, some are greater,
some lesser. “When I consider the heavens, the work of thy fingers,” says
David, “the moon and stars which thou hast ordained: What is man, that
thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou visitest him?” Psal.
viii. 3, 4. But when all these are compared with God, then the difference
of greater and lesser disappears. In the night there are different lights,
the moon and stars, “and one star,” says Paul, “differeth from another in
glory.” Some are of the first, some of the second, and most of them the
third magnitude. Nay, but let the sun arise—and all these are alike, they
are all darkness when compared with the sun’s brightness. What then are
angels and men to God, who is a light inaccessible and full of glory, whom
no eye hath seen or can see? “All nations before him are as nothing, yea,
they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity,” Isa. xl. 12-19; 1
Tim. vi. 15, 16. The sun himself shines not before him, and the moon gives
not her light. Now is it not so proportionably here? If we stay within the
sphere of temporal and worldly things, some are great, some small, some
things of greater, some things of less consequence, greater or smaller in
their appearance to us, and in men’s fancies. But if we go further and
look into eternity, then certainly all these will appear small and
inconsiderable. This earth seems very spacious, and huge in quantity unto
us who dwell upon it. We discern mountains and valleys, sea and land, and
do make many divisions of it. But if one man were above where the sun is,
and looked down upon the earth, he would consider it but as one point
almost invisible, that had no proportion to the vast dimensions of heaven.
Even so it is here, while men abide within their own orb, their natural
understanding, and do compare time only with time, and temporal things
with temporal, riches with poverty, honour with disgrace, pleasure with
pain, learning with ignorance, strength with weakness, pleasant lands and
goodly houses with wildernesses and wild deserts where none do well. It is
no wonder, I think, that those who compare themselves with some that
commend themselves, are not wise, 2 Cor. x. 12, 13. There is but one
perfect pattern they should look to, if they would not be deceived. While
ye stay your thoughts within these bounds, ye apprehend in yourselves
great odds between one thing and another. But if once the Spirit of God
enlightened your eyes, and made you to see far off, if ye were elevated
above your own station, to the watch-tower of the holy scriptures, to
behold off(502) these, by the prospect of saving faith, things that are
afar off, such as heaven and hell, eternity, salvation and condemnation, O
how would all these differences in a present world evanish out of sight,
in the presence of these vast and infinite things! Food and raiment are
great things to the most part of men, therefore do they toil so much about
them, and take so much thought for them, how to feed, and how to be
clothed, how to have a full and delicate table, and fine clothes! Again,
many others apprehend some greatness and eminency in honour and respect
among men; others in pleasure and satisfaction to their senses, even as a
beast would judge. Others apprehend some worth and excellence in great
possessions, in silver and gold beside them, and have a kind of
complacency in these. But if once this kingdom of God entered into your
heart, if ye saw the worth of it, the vast dimensions of it, the pleasure,
honour, and profit of it, then certainly all other things would appear to
be mean and low, not worth a thought beforehand. Advantage and
disadvantage would be all one to you. Honour and dishonour, evil report
and good report, pleasure and pain, would have no distance from one
another; this gain, this honour, this pleasure of the kingdom of God,
would so overmaster them, so outshine them.

Nay, I may say, if ye but knew your immortal souls, or your own worth
beyond the rest of the creatures, such as silver, gold, lands, houses,
&c., I am confident ye would fall in your esteem of them. They would
appear but low, base things in regard of the soul. Suppose even this world
came in competition, (the gain of it now seems great gain,) but I pray
you, if ye laid all that world in the balance with your soul, what would
weigh most? Christ holds it forth to a rational man, to judge of it; “What
shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul, or be cast away?” Would ye account yourselves gainers, when ye have
lost yourselves? Matt. xvi. 26; Luke ix. 25. Is not a man better than
meat? Are not your souls more precious than the finest gold? When you lose
your souls, whose shall these be? “What shall a man give in exchange for
his soul?” And if there be no one more to possess or use, what profit is
it? This then that we have in hand is one thing of greatest moment and
concernment in the world. Let me then beseech you to weigh these things in
the balance of the sanctuary,—your souls, and this world, the kingdom of
God, and many temporal things, such as food and raiment. Ye never enter
into the comparison of these things in your mind. If ye did, would ye not
see to which side the balance would turn? Therefore we would have you look
upon these words of our Saviour, which are the just balance of the
sanctuary. Behold how the question is stated, how the comparison goeth. It
is not whether I shall want food and raiment, and other necessary things
here, or the kingdom of God hereafter? It is not thus cast—in the one
balance, the present life and its accommodations, in the other, the life
to come and God’s kingdom. Indeed if it were so, without all controversy
this kingdom would carry it. I say, if there were an inconsistency
supposed between a life here, and a life hereafter, suppose no man can be
godly, except he be miserable, poor, naked, afflicted, extremely indigent,
yet I say the balance thus casten, would be clear to all men that judged
aright. Would not eternity weigh down time? Would not an immortal soul
weigh down a mortal body? What proportion would the raiment of wool, or
gold, or silk have to the white and clean linen, the robes of
righteousness, the robes of saints, and to the crown of glory that fadeth
not away? What proportion would our perishing pleasures have to the rivers
of pleasures, pure, unmixed, undefiled pleasures at God’s right hand for
evermore? Would ye thus rate this present span, inch, and shadow of time,
if ye considered the endless endurance of eternity? I am sure reason
itself might be appealed unto, though faith were not to judge.

Though it would hold well enough so, yet our Lord Jesus Christ states the
controversy otherwise, and holds out another balance, that it may be the
more convincing and clear, if it were possible even, to overcome natural
consciences with the light of it. And it is this, in the one hand you may
see food and raiment, things that belong to this life; and, on the other
hand, you may behold the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, grace, and
glory; and, besides that, even all these other things that ye did see in
the other hand, food, raiment, &c., “all these things shall be added.”

Wisdom, in the Proverbs, uses such a device to catch poor, foolish, and
simple men: “Happy,” says Solomon, “is the man that findeth wisdom, and
the man that getteth understanding. For the merchandise thereof is better
than the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. She
is more precious than rubies: and all the things thou canst desire are not
to be compared unto her.” Here is the weight of wisdom in itself. See how
ponderous it is of itself; so heavy that it may weigh down all that come
within the compass of desire, and certainly its compass is infinite. But,
he adds, “Length of days are in her right hand, and in her left hand
riches and honour. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths
are peace. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her.” She is a
tree of life in herself, though she had no accession of other things, “and
happy is every one who retaineth her,” Prov. iii. 13-19.

Now, O men, if ye will not be allured with the beauty and excellency of
the princess, wisdom herself, then, I pray you, look what follows her.
That which now ye are pursuing after with much labour and pains, and all
in vain too, is here in her train. Look how the comparison is stated.
Christ Jesus would catch us with a holy guile, and, if it had success, O!
it would be a blessed guile to us. Ye have large and airy apprehensions of
temporal things, which ye call needful, and ye cannot behold eternal
things. Ye know not the worth of this kingdom. Ye conceive that godliness
is prejudicial unto you in this life, that the kingdom of grace will make
you miserable here; and that ye cannot endure. Ah, be not mistaken, come
and look again. If godliness itself will not allure you, if the kingdom
itself will not weigh with you, then, I pray you, consider what an
appendix, what a consectary these have. Consider that the sum is added to
the principal, which ye so much seek after. But ye refuse the principal,
the kingdom. Ye have not right thoughts of godliness, “for godliness is
profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that now is,
and that which is to come,” 1 Tim. iv. 8. Now, is not this “a faithful
saying?” If ye believe it so to be, is it not “worthy of all acceptation?”

Ye may have things necessary here, food and raiment. And if ye seek more,
if ye will be rich, and will have superfluities, then ye shall fall into
many temptations, snares, and hurtful lusts, which shall drown you in
perdition, 1 Tim. vi. 8-11. Nature and reason might check such
exorbitances, for nature is content with few things. Therefore believe
that “godliness with contentment is great gain.” Ye are now only seeking
temporal gain, but that is neither great gain, nor gain at all, when ye
lose your soul. For that is an irrecoverable and incomparable loss. Ye may
have these outward things, God’s blessing, and peace with them, and heaven
too if ye choose this kingdom before all things, and above all things. But
if ye give these other things the pre-eminence, it is uncertain if ye will
get what ye seek, and ye shall certainly be eternal losers beside. If
there were no more but this kingdom alone, it might weigh all down. If
heaven and earth were laid in a balance, would not heaven, if it were
ponderous according to its magnitude, weigh down the earth exceedingly out
of sight? Would it not evanish as a point? Even so, though this kingdom of
grace and glory were alone, in opposition to all these things that ye take
thought for, it would weigh them down eternally. Look what the weight of
glory was to Paul, when he says, 2 Cor. iv. 17, “For our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory, while we look not at the things which are seen, but at
the things which are not seen, for the things which are seen are temporal,
but the things which are not seen are eternal.” The weight of glory is
eternal, and far exceeds any thing temporal. The one scale of the balance
goes up, as it were, eternally out of sight, out of thought, the one goes
up for lightness and vanity, and the other goeth down, for weight and
solidity, out of sight, and out of the thought and imagination. If ye
looked upon these things which are invisible and eternal, as Paul did, it
would be so with you also.

But when withal the earth and its fulness is in the scale with God’s
kingdom and righteousness, will not these, with that accession, weigh down
the earth alone? Is it food and raiment that ye seek? Then I say, food and
raiment is on this kingdom’s side also. And ye shall be more sure of these
things, because ye have God’s promise for them. The wicked have not his
word and promise for prosperity, even not so much as to answer their
necessities, but only they may sometimes prosper in the world, in his
providence. But God’s people shall have him engaged in their need for
their temporal being here in this world. “O fear the Lord, ye his saints,
for there is no want to them that fear him. The young lions do lack and
suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing,”
Psal. xxxiv. 9, 10. Godliness hath the promise of this life. Now, then, ye
are more assured of temporal things by these means than any monarch can
be. The world’s stability depends only upon a command. But your food and
raiment here is grounded upon a promise, and though heaven and earth
should fail and pass away, yet not one jot of truth shall fail. God indeed
may change his command if he pleases, but not his promises. Now, then, let
all the world judge, come and see this balance, how on the one hand are
food, raiment, and all things needful for this present life, on the other
hand, these same thing necessary for our bodies, and well being here, and
that more solidly and sweetly flowing from God’s love, grounded on a
promise,—I think this weighs down already, if we should say no more. But
then behold what more is on his right hand. There is a kingdom of God
beside, an eternal kingdom, and this weighs down eternally. All this world
is but an accession and addition to it. The promises of this life are not
your portion and inheritance, they are but superadded to your portion, so
then we have as much beside, an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled,
as the world have for their inheritance, yea, and more sure and more sweet
beside. We might with reverence change that verse which Paul has on this
consideration, “If we had hope only in this life, we were of all men most
miserable,” 1 Cor. xv. 19. He speaks thus because of afflictions and
persecutions. But on this consideration we might say, If we have hope in
Christ only in this life, we were _not_ of all men most miserable, but
most blessed, because we have all these things added to us, without toil
and vexation, without care and anxiety, by divine promise and providence,
with God’s blessing and favour, what the world takes thought for, rendeth
their hearts for, toils their bodies for, and yet are not sure of success,
or if they get them, they get a curse with them.

Now when the balance is thus presented, what is your choice? What will ye
seek after? Will ye seek this present world, and lose the kingdom of
heaven? Or will ye choose to “seek first the kingdom of God and his
righteousness,” and then ye shall have in this world what is good for you?
The choice is soon made in men’s judgments. Ye dare not any of you deny,
but it ought thus to be. But who seriously ponders these things till their
minds affect their hearts? Who will sit down to meditate upon them, and
pass a resolute and well grounded choice upon deliberation? Remember what
Christ says, “No man can serve two masters.” Ye may indeed have both these
things, and the kingdom. But ye cannot seek them both, they are not so
consistent. “But seek first the kingdom of God,” and then all these things
shall be given you.

Now there is no more need of any second seeking. For “all these things
shall be added” as an accessory to the first. O see then, ye whose
projects and thoughts are towards present things,—ye spend the prime and
flower of your affections, and time upon them,—ye cannot also seek the
kingdom of heaven. Unless ye seek them as if ye sought them not, ye cannot
seek this blessed kingdom. If ye seek not this kingdom as the one thing
necessary, and your seeking proclaim that ye account it so, ye do not seek
it aright. If ye be careful and troubled about many things, ye proclaim
that ye do not think there is but one thing needful, ye do not, like Mary,
choose the good part which shall not be taken from you, Luke x. 41, 42. If
ye would abandon the distracting care of the world, and let all your
anxiety and care vent itself here upon the kingdom of God, all these
things would be added besides the kingdom itself. “Seek the kingdom of God
_and his righteousness_.” I conceive this is added to make us understand
the better what it is, and what is the way to it. The kingdom of God is
the kingdom of grace, in which he rules in us by his Spirit. For Jesus
Christ is come for this end, and made grace to superabound over the
abounding of sin, that as sin reigned unto death, so grace might reign
through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord (Rom. v.
21), that as sin had a throne in us, so grace might have a throne, and
subject the whole man, rendered obedient to that rule of righteousness
that he here holds forth in his word. But this kingdom of God also
includes the kingdom of glory, wherein these who overcome this world by
faith in the Son of God, reign as kings set upon thrones with God the
Father of all. Now because the most part, when they heard of the kingdom
of God, dreamed of nothing but a state of happiness in heaven, and passed
over the way to it, which is holiness, and they thought not upon the
kingdom of grace, which is preparatory unto, and disposes us for the
kingdom of glory, therefore Christ exhorts us also to seek his
righteousness, opposite to the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees,
who satisfied themselves with a mere walk before men. This was man’s
righteousness but not God’s. This righteousness may be also opposed to the
rags of our own righteousness, that we seek to cover ourselves with, Isa.
lxiv. 6. The apostle says of the Jews, Rom. x. 3, 4, “For they being
ignorant of God’s righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God.
For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believeth.”

Now here is the business, and I would have you to conceive it right. The
gospel calls you to a kingdom. This is certainly more than all earthly
kingdoms. But how shall ye come to it? Not at the nearest hand, not _per
saltum_.(503) No, believe it, ye must come and enter this way, before ye
compass the end, and the way to this kingdom is by another kingdom, namely
righteousness. It is the kingdom of grace within us, and the fruit of it
is this. Deny thyself, and follow me, Matt. xvi. 24-26. Overcome
yourselves, and your corrupt lusts, and ye shall be more than conquerors.
Kingdoms are gotten by conquest. But here is the greatest conquest and
triumph in the world, for a man to overcome himself. He that rules himself
and his own spirit, is greater than he that taketh a city, Prov. xvi. 32.
Other conquerors but overcome men like themselves, and yet are overcome by
themselves, and their own passions, and so are but slaves indeed. But if
ye deny yourselves, and resign yourselves to Jesus Christ, ye shall be
more than conquerors, Rom. viii. 37. This then is the kingdom ye must seek
first, and it is the first step to the throne of glory. If ye would have a
throne after this life, you must have a throne of grace in your hearts.
“If the Son shall make you free, then shall ye be free indeed.” They truly
are kings who are most subject to God above themselves, and free from the
bonds of creatures. This is the glorious liberty of the children of God,
to have liberty from him to make sin a captive. It is a righteous kingdom,
a kingdom of righteousness. Therefore ye must here study righteousness and
holiness, “for the grace of God that hath appeared to all men, and
bringeth salvation, teacheth us, that denying all ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ,” &c. Tit. ii. 11, &c. All men
love the salvation it brings. But do ye love the lessons it teaches you?
Ye would all be glad to have that blessed hope, and obtain the salvation
which the saints look for, when Christ shall appear again in glory. But
how few learn and practise what the gospel teacheth, to mortify and deny
your corrupt lusts, and live daily in the practice of sobriety, equity,
and piety! O if this were engraven upon your hearts, that ye might study
to do that in this present world, which this precious grace and gospel
teaches us to do in it! Know ye not, brethren, that all your pains in
seeking heaven, are not about heaven itself immediately, but the way to
it, which is holiness? Without this, no man shall see the Lord, ye need
not seek the kingdom of glory, hope for it, and look for it. But seek
grace and righteousness in this world, and if ye obtain them, ye have not
much to do, but to look for the blessed hope and Christ’s glorious
appearance to judgment. For if ye have sought and got grace here, Christ
will come with grace and glory at the day of his revelation. Will ye
consider that ye are redeemed by Christ? But from what is it? From hell
only, and eternal death only? No, no, for we are redeemed from all
iniquity, as well as the curse of the law and the wrath to come, Matt. i.
21, Tit. ii. 14. This deliverance from sin is the greater and best half of
our redemption. Consider also to what ye are redeemed. Is it to happiness
and glory only? No certainly, but unto grace also. For Christ “gave
himself for us, that he might purify us unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works.” These things should ministers teach and exhort,
and above all things press them upon men’s consciences. We are redeemed
from all our enemies to serve God without fear, in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life, Luke i. 74, 75. Yea, glory is not
glory, except it be complete grace, so we must call the kingdom of glory.
If ye believed that it was nigh you, ye would look then for the perfection
of grace. And will ye not love the beginning of it here?

But this is not all. There is yet more here to comfort us. Seek the
righteousness of God. There is a righteousness of God by faith, manifested
in the gospel for lost sinners, who have nothing to cover them. Now I say
ye must so seek inherent grace, as ye may not make it your covering, and
the only foundation of your confidence. Sinners, the thing which ye first
seek and find, is to be clothed with God’s righteousness, that he may see
no iniquity within you, and then let it be your daily study henceforth to
be adorned and made all glorious within, with grace and holiness. Ye must
first renounce all your own righteousness, and then be clothed with the
robes of God’s righteousness, ye must still renounce it, that grace may
appear as the gift of God, and not yours; as his beauty, not your
ornament. If ye be imperfect in your own righteousness, comfort yourselves
in the righteousness of God made yours by faith, that worketh by love and
purifies your hearts, for, says the apostle, Gal. ii. 16, 17, Though we
are not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Christ, yet
we must keep ourselves from every wicked thing, and perfect holiness in
the fear of God, for if while we seek to be justified by Christ, and we
ourselves be found sinners, impenitent and impure, is therefore Christ the
minister of sin? God forbid.




Sermon XIX.


    Matt. vi. 33.—“Seek first the kingdom of God,” &c.


It may seem strange, that when so great things are allowed, and so small
things are denied, that we do not seek them. The kingdom of God and his
righteousness are great things indeed, great not only in themselves, but
greater in comparison of us. The things of this world, even great events,
are but poor, petty, and inconsiderable matters, when compared with these.
Yet he graciously allows a larger measure of these great things relating
to his kingdom and righteousness, than of those lesser things he hath
promised to give his people, and he commands us to seek after these
greatest things. “Seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
and all these things shall be added unto you.”

This indeed is most suitable to his Majesty, and to us also. It is most
becoming his loyal Majesty when he is to declare his magnificence, and to
vent his love, to give such high and eminent expressions of it. A kingdom
is a fit expression of a king’s love and good will. Kings cannot give
empires, unless they unking themselves. But Christ is the “King of kings,”
and hath prepared a kingdom for them that love him. It is a glorious
declaration of God’s excellent name, that he is good to all, kind even to
the evil and unthankful. His tender mercies are over all his works. The
whole earth is full of his riches, and the wretched posterity of Adam have
the largest share of his goodness, even since the first defection from
him. Nay, but there are other things prepared and laid up for them that
seek him, O how great is that goodness! How excellent is that loving
kindness! Psal. xxxi. 19, 20, Psal. xxxvi. 5, 10. These things have not
yet entered into the heart of men to consider. If ye could speak the mind
of it, then the tongue could express it. If ye could apprehend the wonders
of it, then the heart could conceive it, but this the scripture denies,
Isa. lxiv. 4. “For since the beginning of the world, men have not heard
nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O God, besides thee,
what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him,” or as Paul writes,
“Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard neither have entered into the heart of
man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God
hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit, who searcheth all things, even
the deep things of God,” &c., 1 Cor. ii. 7-14. Is not a kingdom a gift
suitable to such a Giver? And is not this kingdom of God every way like
himself? These things are prepared by Christ, and there is no more to do,
but to give to him that asks, and he that seeks shall find. This
righteousness, divine and human, is it not wholly of God’s finding out? Is
it so glorious, so excellent, as to hide the greatest spots of the
creation from his spotless eyes? For even hell itself is naked before him,
and destruction hath no covering, even the heavens are not pure in his
sight, he chargeth his angels with folly, Job xxvi. 6, chap. iv. 17, 18,
19, chap. xv. 14-17. When all the creatures could not procure the
salvation of sinful men, when the depth said, it is not in me, and the sea
said, it is not with me, and the heavens and heights said so too,—even
angels could not redeem us,—the redemption of the soul was so precious, it
would have ceased for ever, if divine wisdom had not found it out, and
almighty power brought it to pass. “Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest
not, but a body hast thou prepared for me. Lo, I come, in the volume of
the book it is written of me, I delight to do thy will, O my God, yea thy
law is within my heart,” Psal. xl. 6, 7, 8, Heb. x. 5-11. All this was
with God, and he knew the way thereof. Christ framed this royal robe of
his righteousness, by suffering and death, which may cover all our
nakedness. He came and sought the human nature with all its infirmities.
He became in all things like unto us, sin only excepted. On him God laid
our iniquities.  For he himself “bare our sins in his own body,” when he
was slain upon the cross or tree, “that we, being dead unto sin, might
live unto righteousness,” 1 Pet. ii. 24, 2 Cor. v. 21.  Behold what a
wonder! Iniquities, and our iniquities, laid upon the immaculate Lamb,
Jesus Christ. Our Redeemer hid his divinity, his holiness, and his
innocence, as with a vail and covering from the eyes of God’s awful
justice. He smites the Shepherd, his beloved Son, as he did the rebel
creature. It pleased the Father to bruise him and put him to grief, when
his soul was made an offering for sin, Isa. liii. 4-11, Zech. xiii. 7.
Justice did not look through the covering to his innocence, but reckoned
and numbered him among transgressors, when he bore the punishment of our
sins, and made an atonement for them, Isa. liii. 11, 12, Gal. iii. 13, 14.

Now hence it is that the righteousness of Jesus Christ, which he learned
in the days of his flesh, and purchased by his death, is prepared for us,
to put on. “Who soever will, let him come and take it.”  Empty yourselves,
stripped naked of all kind of coverings but sin and unworthiness, that
which God’s holy eye cannot behold, and seek Christ’s righteousness to
adorn and cover you. Behold it shall hide all your sins and abominations,
of whatsoever nature and degree, from the pure and unspotted eyes of God’s
justice, which are as a flaming fire, to consume what it cannot look upon
without abhorrence. Put on this righteousness of God, and justice shall
not draw by the covering, to look under it. It shall look upon the sinner
as a righteous man on the slave of Satan as a child of God, on the heir of
hell as the heir of heaven, if he sincerely repent of, and forsake his
sins, believe in Christ and obey his gospel. “Behold all things are new,
and all things are of God, who hath reconciled the world unto himself by
Jesus Christ,” &c., 2 Cor. v. 17-19, Col. i. 19-24. Christ was no worse
dealt with for our sins, than we shall be well dealt with for his
righteousness. This is the gift of God. And is it not worthy to be sought?
Is it not a gift worthy of him to give?  Is it not also suitable for us to
ask?  “If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee,
Give me to drink, thou wouldst have asked of him, and he would have given
thee living water,” &c. John iv. 10-15. So say I to you, if ye knew the
gift of God, what this kingdom is, what this righteousness is, and who is
appointed by God to be the treasure house of all fulness, to be
communicated to us, ye would certainly ask of him the water of life. Ye
would surely seek this kingdom of God and his righteousness. He doth not
value other things. God only hath these things offered in the gospel, in
choice of many, therefore are they laid up for some few, whom he makes his
peculiar treasure and jewels, Mal. iii. 17, Exod. xix. 5, 6. If ye knew a
monarch that was a possessor of all this habitable world, and was about to
express his singular affection towards some persons, if his kingdom or the
half or whole of it was not sufficient, to be a token of it, but he had
found out some other thing, and laid it up for them, and distributed the
kingdom, the lands and cities among others, certainly ye would think that
behoved to be some strange thing of great price.  If the Lord was pleased
to give you abundance of all things here, make you all great, rich, and
honourable persons, then many would seek no other expression of his love.
They would think he did well enough to them. But alas! what is it all? He
esteems it so little that he often casts it to swine, the profane and
wicked world. He fills their belly with his hid treasure, Psal. xvii. 14.
He makes his sun to shine, and his rain to fall on the evil and the good,
Matt. v. 45. It is a demonstration that it is but a base thing, when it is
so common, I mean, in comparison of the portion of his saints. For though
these worldly things are good in themselves, yet they are not precious,
they are not pearls. Would he cast pearls before dogs and swine?  The
honourable man’s brutishness and ignorance of God may demonstrate to you
he cares not for it. “The Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and
giveth it to whomsoever he will,” and sometimes “setteth up over it the
basest of men,” Dan iv. 13-18. If God loved riches well, do ye think he
would give them so liberally, and heap them up upon some base covetous
wretches? Surely no. But here is the precious thing that is laid up and
treasured. The world and its gain seems great, and big in your eyes, ye
cannot imagine more, nor wish for more. But alas! how low and base spirits
have ye!  It is but as the dunghill that the swine feed on, or the husks
which the prodigal desired to feed his belly with, when he began to be in
want, Luke xv. 13-17. So are all men’s worldly pleasures, preferments, and
profits. But here are some particular things, that only deserve to be
called good, namely, “the kingdom of God and his righteousness.” And when
God had searched the whole world, (to speak with reverence of his glorious
Majesty, who needs not inquire into secret things,) when he had looked
through all the works of his hand, he sets these apart from all the rest,
to be given to the men whom the King shall honour. This kingdom is the
substance and accomplishment of heaven’s eternal counsel and purpose of
grace, which was given in Christ before the world, and it is the end of
the Son’s redemption of a sinful world, and his intercession for them at
God’s right hand. “Father,” says he, (John xvii. 24), “I will that those
whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold the
glory which thou hast given me,” and for other things he makes them as the
stones of the field.

Now I say, as this kingdom of God and his righteousness are suitable
expressions of his love, according to his magnificence, so they are also
suited to our condition and necessities. No question but he would permit
us to seek great things in this world, if these things were really great
and good, and if they did become such great immortal spirits as we have.
Your souls are above all these things. But this kingdom, and this only, is
above the soul. Now then, if ye go out to seek these earthly things, ye
must go down from the throne of eminency that God hath set your souls upon
by creation, and abuse your spirits by stooping to the very dust of your
feet, to embrace these things, and, which is worse, ye put yourselves out
of that high throne of dignity that ye are exalted to by Christ’s
redemption, which we may call a second creation. Jesus declared by the
infinite ransom he gave, when he offered himself a sacrifice without spot
to God, (Heb. ix. 14) and laid down his life for us, what the worth of
your souls was. “None of them,” saith the Psalmist, “can by any means
redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him, for the redemption
of their soul is precious, and it ceaseth for ever,” Psal. xlix. 6-10.
Call and assemble all the creatures in heaven and earth, summon gold,
silver, precious stones, houses, cities, kingdoms, places of trust and
dignity, great learning and parts, and every other thing ye can imagine,
let them all convene in a parliament, and consult how men shall be
ransomed. All of them combined together, though they make one purse,
cannot do it. They cannot pay the least farthing. The Lord Jesus Christ
then stepped in here, “Lo, I come,”—I give the body thou gave me, my life
for theirs, “I delight to do thy will, thy law is in my heart.”

Are your souls then exalted to such great dignity? Is such a price set
upon them, and will ye spend them, for that which could not pay the price
for them, “for that which profiteth not?” Ye must go out of yourselves to
seek happiness. Then I pray you, go not downward. It is not there, but
misery is there. And by going down to the creatures, ye have found it, and
cannot lose it to this day. But the kingdom of God is the only thing
above. Go up to it. “Seek these things that are above,” Col. iii. 1-4. “If
then ye be risen with Christ,” through the faith of God’s operation, “set
your affection on things above, where Christ sitteth at God’s right hand,
and not on things on the earth.” These things are but great in your
apprehension. If they are at all great indeed, it is only in evil. If then
ye seek great things for yourselves, ye may find evil things, ye shall
certainly find such evil things as shall drown you in everlasting
destruction. “They that will be rich” (in worldly things), who lay up
treasures for themselves, and are not rich towards God, “fall into
temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts which
drown men in perdition. For the love of money is the root of all evil,
which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows,” 1 Tim. vi. 9, 10. Great
things in this world are not always good. To seek them, makes them
certainly evil and hurtful. It is not so hurtful to have them, though very
dangerous, but it is hurtful, yea, present ruin to seek them. But here is
a kingdom that is great, and great in goodness, every way answerable to
our necessities. This is the kingdom we should seek above all things.

We would therefore beseech you to be wanters in yourselves, and seekers in
Christ, and seekers ye cannot be till ye be wanters, and finders ye cannot
be except ye seek in Jesus all satisfaction and remedy of your necessity.
This is even the very nature of a Christian, his chief exercise and
employment. What then is a Christian’s principal study, his great
business, his important calling, and what is his success in it? He is a
seeker by his employment, or calling here, and he shall certainly find
what he asks. But what puts him to seeking? The discovery of his own
emptiness, and God’s fulness. Therefore study these things most, if ye
would be Christians in truth and in deed. It is these two that ye must
still pass between, if ye keep them not both in your view at once, ye
cannot well perceive any of them, either comfortably, humbly, or
profitably.

This is even the sum of Christianity. Look what ye want in yourselves, and
make up that in God. Discover your own emptiness and fill it up with God’s
fulness. “The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that watereth, shall
be watered also himself,” Prov. xi. 25. Be not niggards here. Be liberally
minded, both in seeking and receiving, so shall ye please him best who
counts it his glory to give. “The instruments of the churl are evil, but
the liberal deviseth liberal things, and by liberal things he shall
stand,” Isa. xxxil. 7, 8. Seek answerable to your own necessity, and God’s
all sufficiency, and know no other rule or measure.

Now, Christians, this is your calling and employment here, to be seekers
of God’s kingdom and righteousness. But shall we come speed? Yes
certainly. It is so far put out of question here, that it needs not be
expressed. “Seek first the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be”
superadded to you. He thinks it needless to say, _and ye shall find the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness_, for it is supposed as a thing
unquestionable, and he adds these words, “and all these things shall be
added to you,” to answer the faithlessness of these who could not credit
him in temporal things, though they had concredited(504) to him their
immortal souls. Ye do not doubt, then, but ye shall have the kingdom of
heaven. Ye do indeed seek it. Many by seeking kingdoms lose here—by
seeking to make them more sure, they lose the hold they have. Many by
aspiring to greater things, lose these things they have, and themselves
too. But here is the man that is only sure of success,—the man that may
reckon upon his advantage before he take pains, if indeed he resolves to
take pains for it. This one thing is made sure, eternal life, if ye lay
hold on it here by faith, and quit your hold of present things that end in
death, Rom. vi. 21. We may well submit to the uncertainty of all other
things, as David, who held himself well satisfied with the everlasting
covenant God had made with him, which was well ordered in all things and
sure, 2 Sam. xxiii. 5. Though the kingdom and house go, it matters not, if
he keep this fast. If he take not away his loving kindness, this is all my
comfort, my joy, and my desire. Comfort yourselves with this, amidst the
manifold calamities and revolutions of times. Ye see no man can promise
himself immunity, or freedom from common judgments. Here ye have no
continuing city. Why then do ye not seek one to come, and comfort
yourselves in the hope of it? Your rights and heritable securities will
not secure your lands and riches for any considerable time. Therefore seek
an eternal and sure inheritance, sure mercies. Seek that which ye cannot
miss, and having found, cannot lose. Nothing here can you expect either to
find, or keep, until ye have found it.

But besides all this, there is an accession to the inheritance. All
needful things shall be added, ye shall want “no good thing,” Psal.
lxxxiv. 11. Will not all this double gain and advantage recompense, yea,
overcome all the labours of seeking? Shall it not drive away the
remembrance of them? Here then is the most compendious and comprehensive
way to have your desires in this life granted, to get your necessities
supplied. “Seek first the kingdom of God” and ye shall have them. But if
ye seek these things and not heaven, ye shall want this kingdom. I think
then it is all the folly and madness in the world, not to take this way,
for it is the way to be blessed here and hereafter. And if we choose any
other way, it brings no satisfaction here, and it brings eternal misery
hereafter. If ye would be well in this world, seek heaven. Do not think
that ye should have heaven, or seek God’s kingdom from this sordid
principle, that ye shall have all worldly things given you, which God
pleaseth to bestow. For now man can seek the kingdom of heaven aright, but
he that seeks it for itself. Yet if they were no more to proclaim the
madness of men, this would sufficiently suffice, all they can desire or
expect is promised with the kingdom, and yet they will not seek it.




Sermon XX.


    1 Pet. iv. 7.—“But the end of all things is at hand, be ye
    therefore sober and watch unto prayer.”


If ye would ask what ye should do till Christ come again, or what should
be your exercise and employment in this old age of the world, here ye have
it in a word, “be sober, and watch unto prayer.” When Christ was to go
away to his Father, and leave his disciples in this world, as he left them
not orphans, or comfortless, without the Comforter, so neither left he
them without counsel and direction. The word he left to them was, “Take
heed, watch and pray,” Mark xiii. 33. In this chapter, Peter is mindful of
his Lord’s directions, as Paul also was, 1 Thess. v. 6. The substance of
this chapter is to exhort Christians to a holy conversation, suitable to
their high calling. He presses mortification in general, from that which
should be of greatest force with a believer’s heart,—the strongest and
most convincing reason in the world,—union with Christ crucified, even as
Paul does, Rom. vi. And then, in the 3d and 4th verses, he argues from
their former conversation, ye have sinned enough already, all the rest of
your time is over little(505) to consecrate to God, according then as ye
have advanced Satan’s kingdom while under it, so advance Christ’s kingdom
when it comes to you, and take that noble revenge upon yourselves and
sins, so as to bring them both captive to the obedience of Christ. And
although the world may think it strange ye walk not with them, yet so much
the rather ought ye to aspire after a disconformity to the world. Be then
ambitious of being singular in the world. Ye would lay down such a
conclusion as this, I am a stranger, and will walk as a stranger. And ye
need not think yourselves miserable to be out of so much company, and to
be alone. No, if ye knew what was to come upon them, ye would get you out
from among them, lest ye be partakers of their plagues. The day of the
Lord is coming, and the world must give an account to the Judge of all
flesh. Ye may endure their mockings, and all the hard measure which ye get
her, for it shall be recompensed unto them. And your lot is the same that
other saints had, who now sleep in the Lord. The gospel was preached unto
them, and they had the same fruit of it before God, and got everlasting
life by it, yet they were judged in the world as well as you, and were
counted base and contemptible. Now, in this verse, he comes to particular
exhortations from the former reasons. This text hath two parts. I: An
exhortation to some special duties, which are so conjoined in this form of
speech that they seem all but one duty. “Prayer” is the duty, and sobriety
and watchfulness are means to it. II: There is a reason given, because
“the end of all things is at hand.” So, then, ye have here the posture the
world is in, and the posture a Christian should be in. This is the world’s
old age. It is declining, albeit it seem a fair and beautiful thing in the
eyes of them who know no better, and unto them who are of yesterday, and
know nothing. It looks as if it had been created yesterday, yet the truth
is, and a believer knows, it is near the grave. Gray hairs are here and
there upon it, though many know it not, and Jesus the Lord is at hand to
put an end to it. Now, what should be your condition in the meantime? What
should immortal souls do, that are to remain for ever, and outlive this
habitable world? How should they be employed? The spirit and soul is to
endure longer than the man’s possessions, goods, honour, and place. How,
then, should ye look upon these things? Here it is. Be sober in the use of
all things. Use the world as if ye used it not, watch unto prayer. Ye are
encompassed about with manifold temptations. Therefore watch, and be as
men on their way waiting for the Bridegroom. The bride’s exercise, since
Christ hath ascended unto heaven, should be to say, “Lord Jesus come
quickly.”

In discoursing upon this subject, I: We shall speak of these three parts
of a Christians duty severally.  II: Consider how they help one another,
and so jointly speak of them. And then, III: Of the reason and motive to
them all, and how it enforces such an exercise. As to be the first of
these, we observe, that sobriety is a duty becoming every Christian, that
is united unto Jesus Christ, and is separated by God’s holy calling from
the rest of the world. I add these two considerations because of the
preceding verse. For in the first and second verses he lays down an
excellent ground of all kind of mortification, viz. the believer’s union
with Christ crucified. Jesus Christ suffered and died for us, as a Common
Person, to sustain the guilt of our sins. He died as a Cautioner and
Undertaker for us and as our Head and King, and we by virtue of that, are
obliged to crucify sin also. In verses 3d and 4th, the other consideration
is set down. There ought to be a vast difference between a believer now,
and before his conversion. He should not be the same man, but as Paul,
say, “I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ liveth in me.” Gal. ii. 20. He should be separated from the world,
that all the world may wonder at him, and think it strange to see his
conversation. Now I conceive this exhortation is gathered from both these,
and the word of reference _therefore_ relates to the preceding verse, as
well as his reason in the words now read. Now therefore be sober. This
sobriety is not limited to meat, drink or apparel, the object of it is
more comprehensive in scripture. It uses sometimes to be expressed singly,
without making mention of any particular matter, evidently importing, that
sobriety ought to be in all things. That which we ought to be sober in is
certainly the “all things spoken of in the reason of sobriety, whose end
is at hand.” They are most distinctly expressed 1 John ii. 15-17, “All
that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the
pride of life,” all that perishes is not of the Father, but of the world,
that is, the world which wicked men frame to themselves. Here then is a
large commentary on “all things.” Therefore whatever is in the world is
the matter of sobriety. Whatever comes under the senses calls for
sobriety. Whatever comes under the object of the mind is the matter of
sobriety. Nay, whatever is corruptible and perishing, or whatever the last
day of the Lord a coming shall put an end to, in all these, there must be
sobriety exercised. There is a threefold sobriety: 1. Sobriety in the
mind, or sober mindedness, Rom. xii. 3. We ought not to think more highly
of ourselves than we ought to think, “but to think soberly,” 1 Cor. iv. 6,
7, Tit. ii. 6, Rom. xi. 20, 1 Cor. vii. 2. Sobriety of mind is that
excellent lesson that Christ Jesus both taught and practised in his humble
state. “Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart,” Matt. xi. 29.
Humility is not like Peter, who said, “Depart from me, for I am sinful
man, O Lord,” “Lord, thou shalt never wash my feet.” But humility is
rather like Mary, that sat down at Christ’s feet, and washed them with
tears. Sobriety of mind does not undervalue God’s gifts and graces,
neither doth it overvalue them. It thinks of itself according to the
measure of grace freely given, (Rom. xii. 3) and sobriety looks on all its
own gifts, and ornaments, as not its own but another’s, as free gifts, and
therefore it puffs not up a man against his neighbour, though he should
see a gift given beyond his neighbour. High mindedness is like the high
bending of a string of an instrument, which easily breaks in two pieces.
Sobriety walks with a low sail, and creeps through under the wind, but the
high mind is like the cedar, that moves with the wind, and falls when the
bowing twig stands still. Some will think the aspiring of the spirit a
sign of a better spirit than the humble mind, and so look down upon
others. But oh, if they walk safely, they will walk humbly with God.

2. There is also sobriety in the affections when they are moderate. The
objects of this world which come under the affections, are either sinful
and unlawful or in themselves lawful and allowable. Now sobriety towards
the first kind is simple abstinence, towards the second moderation. The
rule of the first is, “Abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the
mind” (1 Pet. ii. 11), and, as it was said in another sense, “Touch not,
taste not, handle not.” “Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness,” Eph. v. 11. As a man who would be clean should not touch pitch,
and he who would not be burnt should not carry coals in his bosom, so
ought the child of God, who walked formerly in the lusts of ignorance,
after the custom of this world, to abstain from all appearance of evil (1
Thess. v. 22.), not only from sin itself, but from all the occasions of
it, and inducements unto it, all that which hath any appearance of evil.
There is no measure of moderation here, a man must not think to give his
lusts part, and Christ part. No, he must have all or none. Ye should have
no quarters with sin, ye should be out of speaking terms with it. The
least motion of the affections and heart that way, is insobriety, and
inordinate affections. 3. But sobriety in things lawful is moderation,
when the spirit is kept within bounds, Col. iii. 1, 2. And the rule of
this is that which Paul prescribes, 1 Cor. vii. 29, “Use the world as not
abusing it,” knowing that the fashion of the world doth pass away. Love
this world as if ye loved it not. Every thing hath too much of the heart,
and Jesus Christ would have his royal palace his peculiar place here. He
may have suitable affections to God’s dispensations in this world, (for
the Christian wants none of his senses,) yet he ought not to be “greatly
moved,” as David speaks, Psal. lxii. 2. Now we consider this in three
things, (1) In seeking of any thing; (2) In enjoying of any thing; (3) In
losing or wanting any thing. That rule of Paul’s may be applied to all the
three, he should seek the world as if he sought it not. He should enjoy
the world as if he enjoyed it not. He should want or lose the world as if
he lost it not. This sobriety makes him want, in abundance, and abound, in
want,—to have nothing, and yet possess all things. All our time and pains
and affections are spent out upon these, and turn about on these three
points. Desire, attended with care and anxiety, goes out to fetch in any
thing that the mind fancies. When the soul hath gotten its desire, it
delights and rejoices in it, and when it is frustrated, disappointed, or
crossed, it grieves and torments itself. If ye find a Christian sober in
these, you find his pulse beat well. (1) Ye should then seek the world or
any thing, as if ye sought it not. We are given to idolize the creatures,
and dig broken cisterns, and forsake the fountain of living waters, to
seek the creature as if it were God, and the strength of affections uses
to be spent on it. Men have big and large apprehensions of the things of
this world, and are like foolish children amazed with pictures and dreams.
Fancy busks(506) up and adorns the object with all things suitable, and
thus the poor soul is put in expectation of some thing, and stretcheth out
itself, to the utmost of its ability, to purchase that, which being had
will not satisfy. The world promises fair to deluded minds that know no
better. But the child of God must be sober here. He ought to have a low
estimation of all created things, and conclude all under vanity and
vexation of spirit, Luke x. 41, 42. Sobriety so seeks, that it can want,
because it seeks a better thing that it cannot miss. But the poor
worldling seeks this world as his only thing, and if he want it, what hath
he more? He must have it, or else he hath nothing. The child of God should
seek as a rich man that is satisfied, and needs no more, so that he cares
not whether he obtain or not. The worldlings seek it as their portion,
their heart and affections are on it, but he seeks it not as his portion,
but as an accessory to his inheritance, Matt, vi. 33. Again we observe,
(2.) That the good man uses the world, and enjoys it, as if he enjoyed it
not. When riches increase, he sets not his heart on them. He is dead to
the world, and crucified to it. It is but an unpleasant thing to him, and
he to it. He can be refreshed with his meat more than another, because he
sees God and his love in it, yet he hath it not as his portion. He is not
excessive in gladness for any dispensation cast in the balance, one kind
of dispensation or another. That which would make another man think he was
half in heaven, or half in hell, it will not add much moment and weight to
such a spirit. It is but like the casting in of a feather in a great
balance, that will scarcely incline it to either side. (3) He loses or
wants(507) the world, as if he lost it not. That which would break another
man’s heart, sobriety will make him go light under, and not be much
disquieted for any thing. Why, what is the matter of it? Can it trouble
his peace or access to God? Can his portion be removed? What, then, should
ail him, for the light of God’s countenance is more recompense than all
the world? Proceed we now to apply this in some uses.

Use I. It discovers unto the most part of men how little they are advanced
in Christianity. Many are insober in the use of the world, and what must
their affections be? The works of darkness, that become not the children
of God nor the children of the day, are yet common in the visible church.
Insobriety in many is palpable, and written on their forehead. That
beastly sin of drunkenness abounds in many congregations. But II. We would
even convince the Lord’s own children of great short coming in this duty.
Although your carriage before men might pass free of censure of
insobriety, yet O! how many things will God put such a construction on!
There are many saints that cannot walk soberly in the use of this world.
They spend their time upon it, and this is insobriety. Scarce can prayer
and communion with God get an hour in the day from their calling, and when
ye have to spend, insobriety is written upon many passages of your
behaviour. Your meat, and drink, and clothing, should declare that ye are
waiting for a better inheritance. But O! how are your affections wedded
unto this present world! The current and stream of many of your thoughts
go this way, what shall I eat or drink, or what shall I put on for
clothing? And ye spend your spirits in projecting, and in following out
your projects. There are some evident demonstrations of insobriety in the
affections. For, (1) Most of your thoughts run upon temporal things and
certainly if your hearts were not in this world, your minds would follow
your hearts. Christians, too many amongst you spend whole days, and never
any object enters into your minds but one thing of the world after
another. Your minds are highways for the travellers of this world to come
through. It may be ye will steal an hour, or half an hour for prayer, but
the rest of your conversation is not in heaven, but void of God. According
as every hour furnishes new opportunities, so are your minds here, Phil.
iii. 20. And meditation upon spiritual things, that is the nerves and
sinews of religion, that is a rare thing. If your affections were not more
upon this world than upon Christ Jesus, would not our Saviour be uppermost
in your thoughts? Would not Christ interrupt your thoughts of the world?
Would not heaven come in the midst of your business, and get a spare look
and ejaculation? The world uses to interrupt your thoughts of God, and the
mind is given to wander in prayer. But put you upon something temporal, ye
can fix your heart as long as you please, and never wander. David was not
so. He awaked, and was still with God. He meditates upon him in the night
watches. He remembers him day and night, (Psal. lxiii. 8) and this made
him a lively Christian. But, (2) If ye be seeking any thing, ye seek it
so, as insobriety is stamped upon it. Your seeking of the world is
prejudicial to your seeking of God, and takes away much time for prayer.
Ye will be so eager in the pursuit of a momentary passing vanity, as ever
ye were in the seeking of God, Col. iii. 1, 2. Care and anxiety comes in
to be your provision, and ye put not prayer in the place of it, to make
your requests known unto God. Ye seek it as if it were your portion and
inheritance, surely this is insobriety. (3) Look upon your affections
toward present enjoyments, and are ye sober? Ye can delight in these
things, and take the sweetness of them, but the consolations of God are a
small thing to you. Any thing adds to your joy and lifts you up. Albeit ye
be not in good terms with God, yet ye can take your pleasure in the world.
Ye see not a worm and moth in your pleasures, ye are not afraid to fill
your belly with honey. Some think themselves made up when they get such a
lot. But saints, are ye sober when such a thing changes your condition? O
but the children of God look upon this world as David did in his fretting
condition, (Psal. xxxviii.) and in his prosperous condition, Psal. xxx. Ye
sit down and say, “My mountain stands strong, and I shall never be moved.”
Ye have more delight in your outward lot than ever ye had in Jesus Christ.
But, (4) When any outward thing goes cross to your mind, then your
insobriety appears. The taking(508) of a sad and cross dispensation will
evidence how ye sought the world. The taking away of a friend or idol,
will declare ye idolized it. As the saints have too longing desires for
the things of this world, and look upon them as the paradise of God, not
as Paul did, who thought the world a dead thing, so remove any thing that
ye enjoy, and your joy is taken from you. Give you something for which you
pray, your sorrow is away, and ye can no more mourn for sin; and take
something away, and your joy is gone, ye cannot delight in God. Ye vex and
disquiet yourselves in vain, and are weighed down with it. Are ye not then
under the feet of this present world, when it tramples upon you? Are ye
not servants unto it, when your condition altereth and changeth according
to the nod of outward things? Ye may know what puts you up and down that
commands you, and this is not sobriety. Ye are drunk with the creature.
The child of God should be like mount Zion, that can never be moved.
Therefore,

III. We would exhort all the saints to study more sobriety in this world.
We need no more exhortation than what Paul gives, 1 Cor. vii. 29. It is a
strange language, saints, “Set not your affections upon the things of this
earth, but on the things which are above,” Col. iii. 1, 2. “Love not the
world, nor the things of the world,” &c., 1 John ii. 15-17. Ye ought to
study such a walk abstracted from this world, that ye might be as
strangers at home, as sojourners in your own country. The child of God
should sit down in his own family among his children, as if he were
abroad, and he ought to be abroad, as if he were at home. Wherefore your
life is called a pilgrimage, and ye strangers. Engage not much your heart
to any thing of this world. Take but a standing drink and be gone, ye may
not lay down your staff and burden, that his may bear you right. (1)
Consider that insobriety is idolatry. Insobriety puts the creature in
God’s place, and sobriety puts all things in their own place. When a man’s
heart or affections are set on any thing, that is his idol and his master,
and Christ says, “Ye cannot serve God and mammon,” (Matt. vi. 24) these
two masters. Sure the worldling thinks not that he serves his riches, yet
Christ puts that construction upon his loving them well, Christ calls any
thing that is a man’s master his god. Now, any thing that the heart goes
after is a man’s master. That which commands a man’s affections commands
the whole man, for the affections are the man’s master, and they command
the man. If ye knew this, ye would be afraid of spending your hearts upon
vanity; ye put that vanity in the place of Jesus Christ, and so your heart
is a temple of idols, and the great gospel promise (Ezek. xxxvi. 25, 26)
hath not gotten place in you. The due place of the creature is to be
subservient to the Lord its Maker, to be only the footstool, that he may
have the throne. True insobriety puts the creature upon the throne, and
worships it. (2) Insobriety or love to the world hinders the love of God,
as much as is added to the one, is taken from the other, 1 John ii. 15. If
the love of the world have one gram weight of allowance more than Christ
speaks of, that is incompatible with the love of the Father. The creature
will suffer a parting of affection, and will be content with a share, like
the harlot and false mother that would be content with the divided child;
but God must have all or none, and will not share with the creature. Ye
may find it by experience when your hearts have been much set upon any
thing in this world, Christ Jesus has not been so pleasant to you, ye have
not so much delight in him. Affection must run in the channel, or it is
but weak, if once ye divide the streams. The love of the world makes the
heart carnal, it is the defilement of the whole soul, and a weight that
easily besets us, that it cannot mount up in a cloud of divine affection
to Jesus. Can the needle go to two contrary points both at once? Can it
move to the north and the south at the same time? Such an opposition is
there between the Father, and the things of the world. If then ye turn
your face on the creature, ye must turn your back upon God. Think not,
Christians, to keep love entire to God, and to set your affections on the
world. Solomon’s backsliding had this false principle, he thought to
retain his integrity, and his wisdom should abide with him, though he
would try folly and madness, Eccles. vii. 23. But did he not grow more
foolish? Did he retain his wisdom? Many have come down from their
excellence by this presumption. (3) Insobriety is the world’s sin. It is
the sin of the days of your ignorance, when ye walked after the lusts of
the Gentiles, and it is a shame for a child of God to be so. This
duty(509) is opposed to their former walking, verses 3d and 4th. There
should be a great distance between you and the world, that ye may seem men
of diverse countries. Though ye dwell in one city or in one house, ye
ought so to walk as men may think it strange, as it may be, a wonder in
the world. O but few Christians give the worldly men occasion to speak of
them for holiness, few give them any ground for wondering at and mocking
their conversation! Your conversation is so like theirs, that they need
not think any thing in it strange. Is it not a shame, saints, to be like
pagans? Christ uses such an argument with his disciples to dissuade them
from carnal carefulness, Matt. vi. 32. Sobriety is a work of the day
becoming a child of light, as Paul observes, 1 Thess. v. 4-9, importing as
much as if it were a shame for the Christian to be found much in love with
the world, as it is for a man to be drunk at nine in the morning and
staggering in the streets. There ought to be as great a difference between
you and the world, as there is between day and night, light and darkness.
Since the true light hath shined, to discover a more excellent happiness
than the world can give, and since it hath concluded all under vanity, ye
are not answerable to your holy calling to have it in any higher
estimation. Consider also, (4) That the world is not your portion. Your
life consists not in what you enjoy, your inheritance is above, reserved
in the heavens for you. Therefore be sober. If ye believed this, that one
day ye shall put on white robes, and be clothed with immortality, would ye
so pursue after the world? It is the world’s portion, and let them who
know no better seek it as their god, and love it as their inheritance; but
fie upon believers, that have a hope laid up in heaven, and fixed as an
anchor within the vail. Should ye cause your portion to be evil spoken of,
by your groping so much after this present world? If ye walked right ye
should torment the world, and oblige them to be convinced that ye seek a
city to come, and that ye despise all their enjoyments. But, (5)
Insobriety becomes not a reasonable soul and is very unbeseeming a
Christian, even so is it to every man. Are ye not better, says Christ,
than many sparrows? Is not the life more than meat? Matt. vi. 25, Luke
xii. 23, 24. So we may say, Is not the soul better than the perishing
creature? O it is the disgrace and debasement of an immortal spirit to be
put under the feet of a piece of clay, to be subjected to vanity, and to
the poor perishing things of the world. If a man but knew himself, and his
natural prerogative above the creatures, let be(510) his Christian
privileges, he would despise the world, and think all that is in it not a
satisfying portion for his spirit. He would count it a great disparagement
to lodge upon this side of infiniteness and divine fulness. Would ye not
think it a base thing to see a king’s son sitting down among beggars, and
puddling in the filth of the city? God made man to have lordship and
pre-eminence over the creatures, and his spirit shall outlive all these
things he sees, and looks to, and what a dishonour must it be to spend an
immortal spirit on vanity, to have no eye beyond the span of time? As
Christ said, “What hath a man gained, if he lose his own soul?” What gain
ye in this world, though all things should befall you according to your
contentment, what gain ye, since ye prostitute an immortal soul unto the
service of the world, and have made it, to the prince of the world and all
things, a servant and slave?




Sermon XXI.


    1 Pet. iv. 7.—“And watch unto prayer.”


“Watch.” A Christian should watch. A Christian is a watchman by office.
This duty of watchfulness is frequently commanded and commended in
scripture, Matt. xxiv. 42, Mark xiii. 33, 1 Cor. xvi. 13, Eph. vi. 18, 1
Pet. v. 8, Col. iv. 2; Luke xii. 37. David did wait as they that did watch
for the morning light. The ministers of the gospel are styled watchmen in
scripture and every Christian should be to himself as a minister is to his
flock, he should watch over himself. This imports the Christian’s
condition in this world, and expresses his exercise in it. Watching is a
military posture, and insinuates the Christian’s case in this world. He is
compassed about with enemies, and therefore he must be a soldier, 2 Tim.
ii. 3. “Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ.” The Christian hath a warfare to accomplish in this world, and
therefore the church here is militant, and in heaven triumphant, 1 Tim. i.
18. Every Christian should war a good warfare, holding faith and a good
conscience. What is the reason that when Christ triumphed upon the cross,
and conquered all his enemies, and is ascended on high, that he hath not
made all believers conquerors? Is the man that sits with Christ in
heavenly places, (Eph. ii. 6) and he who was dead with Christ, and also
risen with him, is he yet a soldier, when Christ hath overcome, and gotten
the crown? And the believer, hath he not the victory that Christ obtained?
Why then is he put to fight any more? Hath not Christ completely done it?
Yes indeed, Christ hath overcome by his own strength, (Col. ii. 15) and is
now on high, yet he will have the poor pieces of contemptible clay to
overcome the Archangel,(511) the immortal spirits. It was not so much for
the prince Gabriel,(512) the messenger of the covenant, the King of
saints, to overcome his own creature, but he hath drawn out a battle and
warfare to all his followers, that, in the strength of their victory in
him already past, they may be made more than conquerors, and that there
may be a perpetual song of triumph and victory in heaven, he hath made the
saints strong, and hath made the strong weak. He hath set the poor with
princes, and the kings on the dunghill. The Christian’s heart and grace
are like a besieged city, that is blocked up upon every hand, there are
enemies without, and false friends within. Its party is great
principalities and powers, &c. (Eph. vi. 12) and these go about
continually to spy a breach. In the city, what strength can do, what
policy can do, will not be wanting. All things of the world besiege the
heart, and every sense is a port to let the enemy in. All a man’s
negotiation and trading in the world, is as dangerous as the proclaiming a
public market in a town, for the country, while the enemy is about it.
There is a desperate wicked heart within, that hath deceived many
thousands, and would surrender the city upon any occasion. Here are
fleshly lusts which war against the soul, (1 Pet. ii. 11) temptation to
sin, and to unbelief. There is a heart within that can conceive and bring
forth sin, and needs no temptation, a heart within that can seduce
temptation itself, but it follows the tempter and when to all that a
foreign power is added, Oh then, who can stand? Christ himself was
tempted, but Satan found nothing in him, and had nothing in him, but when
Satan comes he finds all in us, and we are like powder to conceive flame.
We can even tempt ourselves, as well as be tempted by another. The
Christian keeps a house that the enemy surrounds, and if he sleep he will
enter, he is here a pilgrim, and is not yet come home, yet he hath a foul
and dangerous way to go through. He is like a servant that his lord hath
left, and given provision to, and is to come home when he pleases, Mark
xiii. 33, Matt. xxiv. 32. If his master find him sleeping, woe to him.
This is his case. What then should his exercise and posture be? He should
be a watchman. (1) Watching is opposed to security and sleeping, Matt.
xxiv. 42, Mark xii. 33. He must keep his eyes open, or else he is gone, (1
Pet. v. 8) be vigilant, lest the devil attack him. The sluggard’s
destruction comes as an armed man, because of his “little sleep” and
slumber, Prov. vi. 10, and Prov. xx. 13. Security is the Christian’s
night, when he ceases from his labour, and the adversary does with him
according to his pleasure. But the Christian is in a better condition when
he is wrestling with temptation, and getting sore blows. When he is at
peace and dwells securely, as the people of Laish, he troubles himself
with nothing, but dreams over his days, but that is a decaying condition.
(2) To watch, is to observe all things, 1 Sam. iv. 13, Luke vi. 7. This is
a special point of the watchman’s duty, to let nothing pass by without
observation, whatever object would come in, to ask at it from whence, and
whither. The heart is a highway side that all things travel through.  If
the Christian then be not exact in this to know what comes in, and what is
its errand, he may be surprised or he know. He should observe all the
motions of the enemy, and be well acquainted with all the subtleties of
temptations. He must know his own spirit, or his thoughts, he should also
observe all the Lord’s motions and dealings with his spirit. It concerns
him also to know what is his enemy or friend. Therefore the Christian
should get upon the watch tower of the word, and look through the
prospect(513) of faith round about him, that he may know what his
spiritual condition is.  But, (3) The watchman gives warning while it is
seasonable, and the enemy far off. He raises the alarm, and all must be in
readiness. So ought ye to be. Come to Jesus Christ with all ye observe,
inform the Captain of your salvation whose soldiers you are. It is best
dealing with temptation far off, and resisting the first motions of sin,
for when it comes near hand, it gets many friends within, and it is the
watchman’s part not to give his judgment of what he sees, but to report
only. Do not ye sit down to pass the sentence on any thing, whether it be
good or evil, sin or not, but come unto Jesus, and let him speak, for
oftentimes we reason according to flesh and blood. (4) There must be no
interruption in this watching. He must give diligent heed to it, Mark
xiii. 33, 1 Thess. v. 6. It is a very laborious exercise for a Christian
to watch, all his senses will be exercised by it. He must look up, and
that steadfastly, he must stand, and when he hath done all, to stand. When
he hath overcome he must yet watch, lest he enter into temptation. He is
in greater hazard after victory than before, Ezra vi. 13. He must watch
when he is come out of one temptation lest he enter into another. The
greatest disadvantage that armies have gotten hath been after some
victory, when they were secure. Therefore we ought to give all diligence,
and love not sleep, lest we come into poverty.

From what hath been said, (1) We see how few are in a warlike posture
against Satan. Many serve under Satan’s colours, and the strong man keeps
the house. They watch not against him, but for him, they fight for him,
and not against him. Do not many Christians, in profession, even watch for
their sin, how to encompass what they would be at?  Many wait on all
advantages to get their own heart’s desires, they watch against God’s
word, to hold out conviction. These are the children of darkness, in whom
the devil reigns. We also observe from this, (2) That even the children of
God are seldom found watching. There is much woful security among them and
this is the universal complaint, who of you walks as if you were among
enemies? Ye walk as if ye were in a peaceable city without gates, as the
people of Laish, who dwelt securely. Ye have no friend in all the world,
and yet what unspeakable negligence and sleeping is there among you? The
flesh is so weak, that ye cannot watch but one hour for Christ. And O! but
the intermission of one hour’s watching hath brought down many strong
ones. This made a breach upon David that could hardly be made up for ever
again. From the words, (3) We observe, that prayer is a part of a good
Christian’s exercise.  We may be ashamed to speak or hear of this duty.
It is true, indeed, our religion is all compendized in this duty. Yet this
duty is so little in practice, that our religion must be but little. We
would, then, speak somewhat of prayer, and observe,

1. That it is the distinguishing character of a Christian in scripture.
The child of God, and the man that calls upon God’s name, is all one and
the same thing. The wicked man’s name is one that calls not upon God, nor
seeks him, but the godly call upon their Maker, Acts ix. 11, 1 Cor. i. 2.
All the saints in scripture have been praying men. The wicked, or natural
man, is not an indigent man, he wants nothing, and therefore seeks nothing
from God, but the Christian is one who hath nothing in himself, a beggar
by birth, one that is cast out into the open field, and he is still
seeking to make up his losses.  Praying and wanting goes hand in hand
together. Prayer then is the first breathing of the new man. What sign of
life would ye know him by?  Motion is an infallible sign of life and this
is the motion of the new creature. Prayer is the stirring of the soul, and
going out of itself for bread, it is the sucking of the breasts of
consolation. Grace turns a man’s face God-ward and Christ-ward. 2. Prayer
is the pouring out of an indigent man’s heart in God’s bosom. It is the
emptying of the soul, and the landing of it on God’s lee shore, Psal. cii.
2, 1 Sam. i. 10, Psal. cxlii. 2, &c. When a pious heart is overwhelmed and
sore disquieted, it prays. Prayer emptieth the vessel, and brings the soul
above the water again. It is a present ease in the time of trouble. Care
and anxiety of spirit plunge the soul over the ears, but prayer brings it
again unto dry land, Phil. iv. 6. Care burns and drowns a man’s requests,
but prayer makes them known to God in every circumstance of life.
Therefore prayer is called a “making known our requests unto God,” and
“the lifting up of our souls unto God,” Psal. xxv. 1, 2. But, 3. Prayer is
the provision of a soul, for it is sufficient to do that which carefulness
and thoughtfulness undertake to do, and effectuate not, Phil. iv. 6.
Prayer does all a man’s business. He lives by prayer, as Paul lived by
Christ living in him, &c. Gal. ii. 20. He lived the natural life of a
Christian by faith. So David says, “I gave myself unto prayer,” he opposes
this unto all that his enemies do against him. Not only doth it ease the
spirit of the present burden, but prayer does all his business, because it
puts it over into a better hand, viz., the hand of him who cares for us, 1
Pet. v. 6. It is like a child who is under his father’s tutory,(514) and
he does nothing himself, but all is done for him, and he needs to do no
more but ask, and have, to seek, and find, to knock, and it shall be
opened unto him. Prayer hath the promise of all spiritual and valuable
blessings, and the promise is true. 4. Prayer speaks a life of indigence
and dependence in the creature, and also speaks out the attributes of God,
for the supply of all our need, sovereignty, bounty, and good will in God.
It is the travelling of the poor creature between his own emptiness and
God’s all sufficient fulness. It acknowledges that he hath nothing, and
that God hath all things he can desire to make him happy. Prayer is an act
of homage and subjection to our Creator, and it is also an act of love and
reverence, for prayer looks upon God, as a Lord, a Father, and a Master.
5. Prayer is the pulse of a Christian, and here ye may find him. If he be
vigorous and frequent here, he is well, a decay in this is a woful symptom
of a dangerous and dwining(515) condition. This is the fountain of the
spirit of life, and the Spirit’s breath. For the Spirit helps our
infirmities with groans which cannot be uttered, (Rom. viii. 26, 27) and
according as the Spirit of God dwells in a man, in so far is he a good
Christian. If, then, ye would ask how ye should walk here, and thrive in
true Christianity, we would only say this, pray fervently and without
ceasing. Pray and prosper, and daily be strong, and the Lord shall be with
you. He will never fail nor forsake you. Again, consider, 6. That prayer
is not so much a duty as a privilege, and if saints knew this, prayer
would not so often be a burden unto them. Is there any privilege like
this? For prayer is an admission into the secrets of God, it is an
emptying of the heart into his bosom. It is a great part of our
correspondence with heaven. It is a swift messenger sent thither, that
never comes back with ill news. It never returns empty, but accomplishes
its intent. Prayer is as it were speaking with God face to face, as a man
speaks to his friend, and is it not an honourable privilege, that
believers are admitted to him, and may boldly come to him under all their
necessities, and have such a sympathizing friend as Jesus? What is
wonderful in scripture is, that God hath put that honour upon prayer to be
instrumental in obtaining the greatest blessings. Did not the Lord, at the
prayer of Moses, dry up the Red sea? Did he not, at the prayer of Elias,
withhold and give rain? Did not the prayer of Joshua make the sun to stand
still, till he had vanquished his enemies? Wherefore was all this? Could
he not have done it unasked? Certainly, but the Lord would put that honour
and respect upon prayer in all ages, that it might be a demonstration to
all ages and generations, how ready and propense(516) God was to hear
prayer. Nay, to speak with reverence, God will submit his own omnipotence
to prayer. Command, ask of me, and command me, says the high and holy One,
Isa. xlv. 11. O but “the effectual fervent prayer” of the righteous avails
much, 1 James v. 16. It does a man’s business, and upon less expenses; it
gives a reward in the hand, and the hope of the things sought. Withal,
prayer is like Jacob’s getting that within doors, without much toil, which
careful Esau goes about all the fields for, and toils all day to obtain.
Prayer is the most compendious way of remedy of all things else. It always
makes up losses either of the same kind, or better; for if the loss be
temporal, if the want be bodily, prayer makes it up with access unto God.
It pays in gold. If it give not the same coin, yet it is better.

We have spoken something of prayer for this end, that your hearts may fall
in love with it. It is the property of a sincere upright man, that he
calls always upon God, whereas the hypocrite will not always do it. Count,
then, yourselves as much Christians as ye find of the spirit of prayer and
supplication in you; for those that call not on God, their portion is very
terrible. God will pour out his wrath upon them. God’s face is set against
such as do not pray. And I believe the multitude of this visible kirk have
this brand upon their face, they call not upon God. God hath taken this
character to himself, “the hearer of prayer,” and those who mock at it,
their judgment hasteneth, their damnation slumbereth not.




Sermon XXII.


    1 Pet. iv. 7.—“Be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer.”


We now come to consider the coherence and connexion these duties have one
to another. _First_, Prayer is the principal part of the Christian’s
employment, and sobriety and watchfulness are subordinate to it. “Be
sober, and watch unto prayer.” (1.) Prayer is such a tender thing that
there is necessity of dieting the spirit unto it. That prayer may be in
good health, a man must keep a diet and be sober, sobriety conduces so
much to its well-being, and insobriety makes prayer fail. Prayer respects
a wholesome Christian at his best estate. (2.) Because prayer that is well
in itself must have much divine affection in it, that may be the wings of
it to rise upon, the oil that may keep the flame, James v. 16. Now
insobriety is the moth of divine affection. The love of this world eats
out the love of God and spiritual things; as much as the one goes up the
other goes down, like the contrary points, 1 John ii. 15. Vehement desires
would be a cloud of incense to carry the petition up unto heaven; but the
love of this world scatters it, pours water upon the heart, and makes it
neither to conceive heat nor flame. To be carnally minded is death, both
here and hereafter, Rom. viii. 5-7. It is death to duties, it kills the
spiritual life of the soul. Insobriety is carnal-mindedness, and minding
of the flesh, so that a man hath no more taste of Jesus Christ than the
white of an egg. It quite distempers his taste, and makes that only
savoury which is like itself, and all other things bitter. But, (3.)
Prayer must have hope in it. For how shall a man pray if he hope not to
come speed? If he maintain not a lively hope, he will cool in his
petitions. Insobriety is not consistent with hope to the end, 1 Pet. i.
17. He that would hope to the end must lift up his garments that hang
side, and take a lick(517) of every thing by the way; he must not let them
hang down, but gird up his affections with the girdle of truth and
sobriety. We observe, (4.) That prayer must come out of a pure heart, and
God must be worshipped in spirit and in truth, John iv. 23, 24; 2 Tim. ii.
22. Insobriety makes an unclean heart; the lusts of the flesh, and the
love of the world defile the spirit, and makes it to send forth impure
streams. (5.) There cannot be lodging for the Spirit where there is much
love to the world. This grieves the Spirit, and makes him depart from us,
and so a man is best to express his own groans, or to have none at all,
which is worse. Where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty, and the
Spirit must have a clean house; ye must touch no unclean thing, if you
would have God to receive you into the holy adoption of his children. (6.)
Prayer cannot thrive where faith is not in a good condition. For faith
purifies the heart which sends out prayer, 1 Tim. i. 6; Acts xv. 9; 2 Tim.
ii. 22; and O! but insobriety makes an ill conscience; and faith and a
good conscience scarce sail in one bottom.(518) Both fall and stand
together. How then can the soul look that Holy One in the face whose eyes
are pure, and cannot look upon iniquity but with abhorrence? how can it
look upon his holiness, when it hath been going a-whoring after the world,
and forsaking the fountain of living waters? In a word, the heart that is
not dead to this present world, will neither pray much nor well; for the
heart is otherwise taken up, hath not many wants to spread before God, nor
room for spiritual things. The creature gives him no leave to come to God.
O but communion with God is a tender thing, and subject to many
alterations and changes of weather! A little more mirth than is needful
will indispose us for prayer. A little more sadness than is within bounds
will also indispose us for this duty. Carefulness and anxiety cannot pray.
Therefore it concerns all the saints to keep their hearts with all
diligence, to keep themselves unspotted from the world. If ye would keep
yourselves in speaking terms with God, ye must not entertain the creature
too much. Any excess in your affections will divert the current of them,
that they shall not run towards God. And next, ye see a solid reason why
ye are so little in prayer, and keep not a praying temper, because ye are
too liberal and lavish of your affections upon the world. Christians, how
can ye pray, when your affections are upon the things of the earth? Will
ye seek heavenly things, or care much for communion with God, when a
present world is so much in your eye? Prayer must be wersh(519) and
unsavoury when the world is sweet; and religion turns a compliment, when
your hearts are here. Prayer is a special point of your conversation in
heaven, and the love of this world keeps your hearts beneath heaven. Your
treasure is here, and your hearts can be nowhere else willingly. Ye must
then be mortified to the world before ye can pray aright. But we would
likewise consider,

_Secondly_, That sobriety is a great furtherance to watching, and
therefore they are usually joined together, 1 Pet. v. 8; 1. Thess. v. 6-9.
This is clear. For if a man be not sober, but drink too much of the
creature’s sweetness, or bitterness, till he lose his feet, he cannot
watch, and the enemy will make invasion when he sleeps. Sobriety is the
mother of security. A surfeit of any thing indisposes the body for any
action. When the mind goes without the bounds of moderation, and stretches
its Christian liberty beyond the bounds of edification, it cannot hold
waking, a little sleep and slumber overtakes, till poverty and destruction
come like an armed man. (2.) When a man hath drunk to excess of the
creature and hath his heart engaged to it, he is in an incapacity to
discern a friend from an enemy; whatever comes in with his predominant or
idol will get fair quarters; though it may be, it will betray him. The
love of the world when it stands centry at a man’s heart, will keep out
true friends. It will hold out Jesus Christ and spiritual things, all that
seems to come in contrary terms with itself, and will let in the enemy
that will destroy the soul. (3.) Insobriety entangles a man with the
snares of the world, and so he cannot be a good soldier of Jesus. I think
the conjunction here is expressed more fully, 2 Tim. ii. 2-4. The good
soldier of Jesus Christ that wars a good warfare, must not entangle
himself with the affairs of this life. He must be sober in the use of all
things, or else he cannot be faithful to his master; he will be about his
own business when he should be watching. He will not only labour to please
the Captain of his salvation, Jesus, but he has many other things to
please besides: and if any of his too kind friends come to speak with him,
he will leave his duty and go apart with them, the watchman’s office will
take him up nothing beside. But the insober man cannot give himself wholly
to it. Because his idols cry upon him, he will prefer his pleasures before
his credit and honesty. Therefore, as ye would not expose your souls and
all ye have, to the will of temptation, be sober. The devil hath gotten
his will of a man that he can force to lie down with the creature, and
sleep in its bosom. If once Satan can gild up the world in your eyes, and
represent it amiable, and cause high and big apprehensions of it, O, ye
are in the greatest hazard from the world of being overcome wholly by it!
That was the temptation Satan sought to prevail with Christ by, but he
found nothing in him. If the devil hath taken thee up to a mountain to see
the glory of the world, and make you fancy a pleasant life here-away,(520)
take heed of it, for ye will drink drunk,(521) and forget yourselves, and
will not discern between good and evil.

_Thirdly_. Prayer must be watched unto. We must not only pray, but
continue “instant in prayer,” Rom. xii. 12. We must “continue in prayer,
and watch in the same with thanksgiving,” Col. iv. 2. It is a strange
expression, and familiar in scripture, Eph. vi. 18. O what a strange word
is it! It is either very needless, or else imports the unspeakable
necessity of prayer. “Praying always,” what needed more? But we must pray
with all manner of “prayer and supplication in the Spirit;” and more yet,
“watching thereunto;” and to express the superlative degree of the
necessity of prayer, he adds “with all perseverance.” Since the words at
the first view do speak infinitely more than we practise, let many a
Christian express their own practice and set it down beside this verse,
and blush and be ashamed. The most part of you behoved to speak thus, I
pray sometimes morning and evening, when I have nothing to do. And is this
praying always, and watching thereunto with all perseverance? To watch
unto prayer we conceive speaks these things.

I. To observe all opportunities, occasions, and advantages of prayer,—to
be glad of getting any occasion to sit down and pray. It is to seek out
occasions and to be waiting for them. Too many use to excuse themselves
easily that their other employments take them up, and they think on this
account they may omit prayer with a good conscience, as ministers, busied
about their calling, and at their book, think it no omission that they
pray not often. But alas, is this watching unto prayer? Ye should be as
men lying in wait upon some good opportunity to take hold of it. Prayer
would hinder no business of that kind, but much further it. Prayer would
be the compendious way of it. Ye used not to be challenged when ye get not
a commodity(522) to pray; but do ye seek opportunity when it is not
offered? Do ye look after a retiring place, and withdraw from company,
when ye cannot pray with company? This were indeed watching unto prayer.
But watching unto prayer will make men sometimes uncivil (so to speak,
that which it may be would be called uncivility). It will be a very
pressing necessity that will draw away the time of prayer, no compliment
should hinder you to go to it. If ye got a corner alone, that would invite
a man that watches unto prayer. He even seeks it when he finds it not
offering itself. The watcher unto prayer will steal much of his time from
others, and other employments, and he will not spend time unnecessarily.

II. To watch unto prayer is to accept willingly of all occasions and
opportunities offered. O! if such a man find a corner, but it will be
seasonable and sweet unto him. If he have nothing to do, and knows not how
to pass his time, then he conceives he is called to prayer, and to keep
communion with God. But how many opportunities have ye, and what advantage
make ye of them? Ye have time and place convenient, all the day or much of
it, and yet ye content yourselves with an ordinary set diet. Sure this is
not watching. Watching unto prayer would make all emergent occasions
welcome, ye would not have any impulse of the Spirit and motion to pray,
but ye would follow it, and be led by the Spirit to your duty. Ye would
not hear of any rare passage of providence, or any of God’s dispensations
towards yourselves, and other saints, but you would think it a good call
to pray and make the right use and improvement of it.

III. To watch unto prayer is to observe all the impediments of prayer, all
the enemies of that precious thing prayer, that ye ought to keep as the
apple of your eye. Whatever ye find by experience prejudicial unto prayer,
mark that. What indisposes the spirit and makes it carnal, mark that. What
fills you with confusion and astonishment, and what hinders the liberty of
your delighting in God, and rejoicing in his promises, mark that; and set
yourselves against these. O but many Christians find liberal discoursing,
and much mirth, prejudicial to the Spirit’s temper, and yet who watches
against it?

IV. Watch over your hearts that ye may keep a praying temper, and be still
in speaking terms with God. And if ye would still keep a praying temper,
1. Be frequent and often in the meditation of God. Keep yourselves in his
presence, as before him, that ye may walk under the sight of his eye,
Psal. cxix. 168; Psal. cxxxix. 1-7. Stealing out of God’s sight makes the
heart bold to sin. The temper of the heart is but like the heat of iron,
that keeps not when it is out of the fire, or like the melting of wax. If
ye be out of God’s sight your hearts will close. But, 2. Let no object
come through your mind without examination of it. Let not your heart be a
highway for all. If a good motion enter, entertain it, and let it not die
out. Give it up to God, that he may cherish it. 3. Repel not any motion of
the Spirit, but entertain it. There are three things ye would watch over,
as, (1.) Yourselves, your own hearts, Prov. iv. 23, &c. ye must keep your
heart, and it keeps all. (2.) Watch over your duty, Luke viii. 18. (3.)
The time of Christ’s coming, his second coming to judgment, Matt. xxiv.
42; Mark xiii. 33. So did David wait and watch till the Lord should
return, Psal. cxxx. 5, 6. So did Job wait all the days of his appointed
time, till his change came. Now, Christians, where are ye? Is not your
practice your shame? It is one among a thousand professors that can be
noted for much praying. Who among you can get this commendation that the
Holy Ghost gives to Anna, she served God with fasting and prayer night and
day? Your morning and evening are the limits of your duty, and it is
almost an heresy to go beyond that. Is there any tender well-doing
Christian in scripture, but he prayed much? This made David so exemplary,
and hath not Jesus Christ gone before you, (Heb. v. 7.) to lead the way?
O! but Christ’s praying so often in the days of his flesh, and making
supplication with strong cries, is a crying witness against the sloth of
Christians in this generation. Both people and pastor, how should ye be
ashamed? Hath Jesus prayed so long and often, and should not the poor
followers, indigent beggars, be all in supplication? The Christian should
name himself as David did, “I gave myself to prayer.” Many a man sits down
to his employment and prays not much, because he hath gifts and abilities.
But so did not Christ, who was able to save, yet he prayed and went about
the Father’s work with dependence upon him. And O that ministers would
seek all from heaven immediately, and people seek it from heaven also!
Think ye that the Spirit will take twice a-day for praying always, and set
times for watching thereunto? No, no, we think there is little of this
practised in this generation.

Now we come to the reason that is added in the text, “the end of all
things is at hand;” that is, the day of the Lord is at hand. Christ Jesus,
who was once here offered for sins, shall again appear without sin, unto
salvation, unto them who look and wait for his appearance; and he shall
put an end to all these things, either to themselves, by consuming them,
or to the use of them. All that ye now dote upon is perishing, and it is
not far hence that ye shall see the world in a flame, and all that ye
spend your spirits on; and Jesus Christ shall bring salvation to his own
saints, therefore be sober and watch. But how is it that the end is said
to be at hand? Are not many generations passed since this word was spoken?
It is almost two thousand years since, and yet Peter spake of it, and
Christ spake of this day, as at hand. Sure it must be nearer us now than
it was then. The day of the Lord is at hand: I. Because if we would count
years as God doth, we would call the world but of one week’s standing, for
God counts a thousand years as but one day, 2 Pet. iii. 8, 9. The world
thinks he is slack concerning his promise, and asks, “Where is the promise
of his coming?” But believers, think not ye so, reckon years according to
the duration of the Ancient of days, and by faith see the Lord’s day at
your hand, as it were to-morrow still. But, II. It is not without special
reason that the New Testament speaks of all the time from Christ’s coming
to the end, as the last time, as it were but one age or generation
immediately preceding the great day, as if the day of judgment were to be,
or this generation of the earth would pass. It is of great use to us,
because the Lord would have believers in the last age of the world come to
some great pitch of mortification and deadness to the world, and hope of
immortality, than has been come to before. He would have them be as men
waiting for the Bridegroom, and this their exercise,—every one in his
generation standing with his loins girded, and his shoes put on ready for
the journey, and his lamp in his hand, Luke xii. 37; Mark xiii.; Matt.
xxv. He would have all walking as if the day of judgment were to-morrow,
as if the King of saints were now entering into the city, and all
believers should go out to meet him as their King bringing salvation.

This then is the posture of the world, all things are near run, the
fashion of this world passes away, 1 Cor. vii. 29: and the same
exhortation is here pressed. This then, I say, is the state all things ye
see are in, it is their old age. The creation now is an old rotten house,
that is all dropping through, and leaning to the one side. The creature is
now subject to vanity and groaning, Rom. viii. 21, 22. The day is not far
hence, that this habitable world must be consumed, and O! but many a man’s
god and idol will then be burnt to ashes. 2 Pet. iii. 10-12, “The heavens
shall pass away with a great noise,” &c. God hath suffered men to live
long in this world, that they might come to repentance, and he hath kept
it so long for the elect’s sake. If it had not been for them, the world
should not be unburied till six hours at night;(523) but when he hath
gathered in all the election, then shall an end be put to all the
administrations of kingdoms, all governments, all nations. Think ye that
God had so much respect to the world, or to the kings of it? No, he would
put an end to all the kingdoms of the world, and never let them make their
testament, if the elect were completed. If Christ were completed, there
would be no marrying or giving in marriage, no more food and raiment, no
more laws and government, all your fair lands and buildings must go to the
fire. Now ask the question that Peter asks, “Seeing all things shall be
dissolved, what manner of conversation ought ye to have?” And here it is
answered, “Be sober, and watch unto prayer.” Ask at Paul, and he will tell
you, (1 Cor. vii. 29, 30, 31.) “The time is short,” what remains then, but
that he that marries be as they who marry not, they that weep as they that
wept not, &c. So then here is the duty of those who look for Christ’s
second coming; Christ hath left it with you till he come again, and put an
end to all things: “be ye sober and vigilant.” But consider what strength
this reason hath to enforce this exercise, and how suitable this duty is
to them who look for Christ’s second coming. 1. In relation to sobriety it
hath a twofold force; for, (1.) It is all the absurdity of the world, that
ye should so eagerly pursue perishing vanities; that ye should fall in
love with the old decrepit world that is groaning under vanity, and very
near consumption. The day is coming that the soul shall see all these
things destroyed to ashes, and what will it then think of this idol? This
is the thing I lost my soul for, and it is gone. And O how tormenting a
thing will it be to the conscience! How have I been put by heaven for a
thing of nought, for a vanity! Be sober, for the world cannot be a portion
to an immortal spirit. Your spirit is immortal, and will continue after
these things are gone, and it will outlive this world. Your goods and good
name, your pleasures and profits, your lands and rents, all will have an
end, and your spirit shall continue after them. Why then will ye choose
that for your portion that will take wings and flee from you, or you will
leave it? When ye see all burnt up, where then will your god and your
portion be? (2.) Christian believers, ye have another portion; for Christ,
who comes to put an end to these things, shall appear in glory, and ye
shall appear with him in glory. He shall come with salvation to you, Heb.
ix. 28; Col. iii. 4. Your life shall appear with him. Your inheritance is
above. That sweet Saviour that came unto this world for saving lost
sinners, shall come again, and will not think himself complete without
you, and till he have all his members at his right hand. And therefore,
saints, be sober. While ye are in this world, ye need not any other thing
in the interim but the hope of eternal life, to keep your hearts, and hold
them up. O but ye will think yourselves well come to it ere it be long. Ye
may laugh at the poor, blind, demented(524) worldlings, who are standing
in slippery places, and like children catching a shadow, or labouring to
comprehend the wind in their fists. They are but dreaming that they eat
and drink, and behold when the great day of awakening comes at the
resurrection, they find their souls empty, though while they lived they
blessed their own souls, and men blessed them also. Your inheritance is
above, and what need ye more that have such a hope? May ye not purify
yourselves as he is pure, and purge your hearts from all corruptions, and
use this world as strangers, in your passage through it, that owns nothing
as their own? Ye have no propriety(525) here, and therefore ye may the
better live as strangers. But, 2. In relation to watching; Christ Jesus is
coming, and is near, therefore watch. This Christ himself presses
earnestly: Be as men that wait for the coming of their Lord, since he is
not far off. Therefore, Christians, ye ought to be upon your feet, and not
sit down with the creature. Ye should entertain this hope of his coming,
and comfort yourselves by it, and be kept at your duty by it. I may say,
there is nothing that is less known among Christians. Christ and his
apostles often pressed it, as it seems he would have it the one ever
running duty, through all generations. Ye ought then to be ready for
Christ’s coming, and not be found sleeping. 3. In relation to prayer; for
if the end of all things is at hand, and Christ will soon come again, then
the Spirit’s exercise, and the bride’s should be, “Come, Lord Jesus, come
quickly.” Pray Christ back again, and say, Why tarry his chariot wheels?
Pray him back with salvation, and hasten his return by prayer. He hath
left such a dependent condition, left such an employment for us, as speaks
dependence and necessity. This is the time of promises, and we ought to
pray for their accomplishment. In heaven there will be no prayer, for
prayer shall be swallowed up in praise, faith in vision, and hope in
possession. But prayer is a duty suitable to the time, and to the
Christian’s minority, to his banishment and sojourning. Dream not of an
eternity here-away. Learn wisdom to number your days, and apply your
hearts to religious wisdom; and if ye die thus, ye may rejoice that so
many of the number are passed, and cannot return again.






FOOTNOTES


    1 Baillie’s Letters and Journals, vol. iii. pp. 286-288, MSS in Bib.
      Col. Glas.

    2 “A Letter from Head Quarters in Scotland”

      “SIR, We came hither on Saturday last, April 19th. The ministers and
      townsmen generally staid at home, and did not quit their habitations
      as formerly. These ministers that are here are those that have
      deserted from the proceedings beyond the water, yet they are equally
      dissatisfied with us. And though they preach against us in the
      pulpit to our forces, yet we permit them without disturbance, as
      willing to gain them by love. My Lord General sent to them to give
      us a friendly Christian meeting, to discourse of those things, which
      they rail against us for, that (if possible) all misunderstandings
      between us may be taken away, which accordingly they gave us on
      Wednesday last. There was no bitterness nor passion vented on either
      side, with all moderation and tenderness. My Lord General the
      Major-Gen. Lambert, for the most part maintained the discourse, and
      on their part, Mr. James Guthrie, and Mr. Patrick Gelaspy. We know
      not what satisfaction they have received. Sure I am, there was no
      such weight in their arguments, that might in the least discourage
      us from what we have undertaken, the chiefest thing on which they
      insisted being our invasion into Scotland”—Sev. Proc. in Parl. May
      1, to 8 Cromwelliana, p. 102. See also Durham’s Comment on Revel.
      Life of the Author, p. xi.

    3 Nicoll’s Diary, pp. 68, 94.

    4 Along with Dr. John Owen, Joseph Caryl, John Oxenbridge, and
      Cuthbert Sydenham officiated as chaplains in the army of Cromwell in
      Scotland. Orme’s Memoirs of Dr. Owen, p. 128. Neal’s History of the
      Puritans, vol. iv. p. 490, Lond. 1822.

    5 Memoirs of Dr. Owen, p. 127.

    6 See note, p. 512.

    7 Annals of Scotland, vol. iv. p. 208.

    8 Baillie’s Letters, vol. iii. p. 200. MSS in Bib. Col. Glas.

    9 Memorials of English Affairs from the beginning of the Reign of
      Charles I. to the Restoration, pp. 444-446, Lond. 1682.

   10 Hist. of Eng. vol. vi. pp. 180, Lond. 1825.

   11 Memoirs of Dr. Owen, p. 126.

   12 Thurlow’s State Papers, vol. i. p. 189.

   13 Thurlow’s State Papers, vol. i. pp. 139, 160.

   14 Orme’s Life and Times of Richard Baxter, vol. i. pp. 140, 141.

   15 P. 520.

   16 “At Cathcart Kirk, 19th Oct., 1652

      “Mr. Robert Baylie renewed his protestation given in be him the last
      daye, against Mr. Hew Binnen moderating of the Presbyterie, in his
      own name and in the name of so many as would adhere to that
      protestation; and that upon the additional reason that Mr. Hew
      Binnen of his own accord, had gone in to hear an Englishman preach
      in his own kirk in the parish of Govan, who attended Colonel
      Overtoun’s regiment, and that the said Mr. Hew, be his example and
      counsel, had moved the people to do the like, and did maintain the
      lawfulness of this his action, in the face of the presbyterie as if
      the abstaining from this should have been a needless separatione
      upon his part, and the part of his people, though that having found
      that some took offence at it, he did no more countenance that man’s
      preaching”—(Records of Presbytery of Glasgow). At the previous
      meeting Bailie had protested against Mr. Binning’s appointment to
      the moderator’s chair because he maintained, another member of the
      presbytery had a greater number of uncontraverted votes.—Id.

   17 An Apology for the Clergy of Scotland, p. 45, London, 1692.

   18 Orme’s Mem. of Dr. Owen, p. 488.

   19 Christian Instructor, vol. xxi. p. 547; Biog. Presb., vol. i. p.
      131; Lorimer’s Eldership, p. 155.

   20 Neal’s History of the Puritans, vol. iii. p. 120.

   21 Id. p. 318. Mr. Herle, who came to Scotland with the Earl of
      Nottingham and the Earl of Stanford preached in the High church of
      Edinburgh on Sunday the 27th of February, 1648. Mr. Stephen Marshall
      not long after, at the request of Mr. George Gillespie one of the
      ministers of Edinburgh, preached in the same church, “he,” says
      Bishop Guthry “who being here four years ago professed to be a
      presbyterian, but since turned independent.”—(Memoirs of Bishop
      Guthry, &c., pp. 256-258, second edition). Fuller however says of
      Mr. Marshall that he died a presbyterian.—(Fuller’s Worthies, book
      2, p. 53; apud. Neal’s Hist. vol. iv. p. 134). And Baillie
      represents him to have been the best preacher in England.—(Letters
      and Journal, vol. i. p. 440.

   22 Pp. 360, 362.

   23 Miscellanea Scotica, vol. ii. p. 32.

   24 See p. 497 _note_.

   25 This was followed by a written controversy between the parties
      (Wodrow MSS. vol. ix. in 13th Ad.). The same person disputed
      publicly in the church of Cupar on two successive days, in 1652,
      with Mr. James Wood, professor of theology at St. Andrews.—Lamont’s
      Diary, p. 48.

   26 Wodrow’s Hist. of the Suf. of Ch. of Scot. vol. i. p. 165.  Glas.
      1829.

   27 See note, p. 512.

   28 Balfour’s Annals vol. iv. pp.  141-160. Brown’s Hist. of Glas. vol.
      i. p. 109. Peterkin’s Rec. of Kirk of Scot. p. 672.

   29 P. 489.

   30 Small quarto, pp. 51.

   31 Shields Faithful Contendings pp. 485-488. Faithful Witness Bearing
      Exemplified, _preface_, p. iv.

   32 Faithful Contendings, p. 66.

   33 Memoirs of the First Years of James Nisbet, one of the Scottish
      Covenanters, written by himself, Append. p. 287. Edin. 1827.

   34 Pp. 54-58.

   35 P. 486. See also Life of the Author, p. xliii. _note_.

   36 Verse 1193.

   37 Mr. Alexander Peterkin, the annotator of the Records of the Kirk of
      Scotland, before presenting his readers with a long extract from the
      “Whigs Supplication,” (ver 94-113) describing an armed body of
      Covenanters, gravely declares, it was “taken from a MS copy of a
      doggrel poem (by Cleland it is thought), which the editor presented
      some years ago to the Library of the Antiquarian Society of
      Edinburgh.” See Rec. of Kirk of Scot. p. 533.

   38 Baillie’s Letters, vol. ii. p. 360.

   39 Rec. of Kirk of Scot. pp. 627-633.

   40 Records of Presbyters of Glascow.

   41 P. xvii.

   42 Pp xxv, xxvi.

   43 “The sermons preached at conventicles, which are ordinarily
      circulated, are a very unsafe rule by which to judge of the talents
      of the preachers, and the quality of the discourses which they
      actually delivered. We have never been able to ascertain that one of
      these was published during the lifetime of the author, or from notes
      written by himself. They were printed from notes taken by the
      hearers, and we may easily conceive how imperfect and inaccurate
      these must often have been. We have now before us two sermons by Mr.
      Welsh, printed at different times; and upon reading them, no person
      could suppose that they were preached by the same individual.… We
      have no doubt that the memory of Mr. Peden has been injured in the
      same way. The collection of prophecies that goes under his name is
      not authentic; and we have before us some of his letters, which
      place his talents in a very different light from the idea given of
      them in what are called his sermons and his life.” (Review of Sir
      Walter Scott’s Tales of my Landlord written by Dr. McCrie, Christian
      Instructor, vol. xiv. pp. 127, 128)—We are cautioned not to judge of
      the talents of Samuel Rutherford as a preacher “from the sermons
      printed after his death, and of which it is probable he never
      composed a single sentence.” (Murray’s Life of Rutherford pp.
      221-223)—And says Patrick Walker, the simple compiler of the “Life
      and Death of Mr. Daniel Cargill,” “I have seen some of Mr. Cargill’s
      sermons in writ, but I never saw none as he spake them; and I have
      been much pressed to publish them, and other old sermons, which I
      dare not do, upon several considerations; knowing that sermons would
      have past then, and very edifying, which will not pass now, in this
      critic and censorious age, without reflections; not knowing how they
      were taken from their mouth, nor what hands they have come through
      since.” Biographia Presbyteriana, vol. ii. p. 53.

   44 The presbyterian clergy in Scotland were much offended when this
      silly yet mischievous book made its appearance, as they justly
      looked upon it as calculated not only to blacken their reputations,
      but to inflict a serious injury upon religion. (See “A Just and
      Modest Reproof of a pamphlet called The Scotch Presbyterian
      Eloquence,” pp. 36, 38. Edin. 1693.)—No one is more perseveringly
      held up to ridicule in it than the Rev. James Kirkton, whose
      character as a man of talents, and possessing a sound judgment, has
      been since sufficiently vindicated by the publication of his “Secret
      and True History of the Church of Scotland.” Kirkton takes notice of
      the Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence, and informs us that its reputed
      authors were “Mr. Gilbert Crockat and Mr. John Munroe,” adding
      “Truly one would think, a thinking man who reads this piece may
      wonder first, what conscience governs these men, who publish, to
      abuse the world, such stories, which they themselves know to be
      lies, as well as they whom they believe. Next, what wisdom is among
      them, who knew well enough there are thousands of honest people to
      refute their calumnies!” (p. 194)—Provoked by an insulting reference
      to the book under review, an able controversial writer of that
      period says “Thou hast, by the bye, mentioned the Presbyterian
      Eloquence. Every body knows that book to be a forgery out of the
      curates shop. But to give the world a true test both of the
      Presbyterian and the Episcopal eloquence, let us appeal to the
      printed sermons on both sides. Do thou take the printed sermons of
      the Presbyterians, and pick out of them all the ridiculous things
      thou ever canst. And if I don’t make a larger collection of more
      impious and ridiculous things out of the printed sermons of the
      Episcopalians, citing book and page for them, I shall lose the
      cause.” (Curate Calder Whipt, p. 11.)—In such a contest as is here
      proposed, religion must suffer, and truth be sacrificed. Lord
      Woodhouselee therefore, does not hesitate to pronounce both the
      Presbyterian Eloquence Displayed, and the Answer to it, to be
      “equally infamous and disgraceful libels.” Life of Lord Kames, vol.
      i. Append., p. 10.

   45 Granger’s Biog. Hist. of Eng. vol. i. part ii. p. 416. London 1769.

   46 Burnet’s Hist. of his own Times vol. i. p. 280. Oxford 1833.

   47 Life of Professor Wodrow, p. 61.

   48 Analecta, at present printing by Maitland Club, vol. i. pp. 277,
      300. Biog. Presby. vol. i. pp. 236, 237.

   49 Burnets Hist. of his Own Times vol. i. p. 279.

   50 Watts Works vol. v. 350.

   51 P. 213.

   52 Journals and Letters vol. ii. p. 385.

   53 Analecta, vol. iv. p. 171, vol. v. p. 342 MSS in Bib. Ad.

   54 “Their ministers generally brought then about them on the Sunday
      nights where the sermons were talked over, and every one women as
      well as men, were desired to speak their sense and their experience,
      and by these means they had a comprehension of matters of religion,
      greater than I have seen among people of that sort anywhere. The
      preachers went all in one track, of raising observations on points
      of doctrine out of their text, and proving these by reasons, and
      then of applying those, and shewing the use that was to be made of
      such a point of doctrine, both for instruction and terror, for
      exhortation and comfort, for trial of themselves upon it, and for
      furnishing them with proper directions and helps, and this was so
      methodical that the people grew to follow a sermon quite through
      every branch of it.” Barnet’s History of his own Times vol. i. p. 2.

   55 P. 600.

   56 P. 356.

   57 P. 131. See also p. 576.

   58 Gillespie’s Miscellany questions. p. 247. Edin. 1649.

   59 P. 135.

   60 P. 133.

   61 Hist. of his Own Times, vol. i. p. 348.

   62 Mede’s Works, _General Preface_.

   63 Heber’s Life of Bishop Taylor, p. 171.

   64 Pecock’s Works, vol. i., Life of the Author, p. 22.

   65 Manton’s Sermons, Life of the Author, p. v.

   66 Œuvres De Massillon, tome vi. p. 4; Essai Sur L’Eloquence de la
      Chaire, par le Cardinal Maury, tome ii. p. 231.

   67 Address to the Christian Reader.

   68 Memorial for the Bible Societies in Scotland, p. 91. See also pp.
      30, 90, 112.

   69 P. 5.

   70 Pp. 42, 48.

   71 P. 55.

   72 P. 303.

   73 P. 80.

   74 P. 279.

   75 P. 90.

   76 Pp.  301-303.

   77 P. 74.

   78 P. 36.

   79 P. 46.

   80 P. 165.

   81 P. 216.

   82 P. 76.

   83 P. 248.

   84 P. 657.

   85 P. 619.

   86 P. 217.

   87 [Mr. Robert Macward went to England as the secretary, or amanuensis,
      of the famous Samuel Rutherford, when the latter was appointed one
      of the commissioners to the Westminster Assembly (Murray’s Life of
      Rutherford, p. 233). When mentioning Macward’s institution, as
      Professor of Humanity in the old college of St. Andrews, in April,
      1650, Lamond says of him, that he was previously “servant to Mr. Sam
      Rutherford, m. of St. Andrews” (Diary, p. 16, Edin. 1830). Sir John
      Chiesley was, in the same sense, and at the same period, the servant
      of the celebrated Alexander Henderson, another of the commissioners
      (Kirkton’s Hist. of the Ch. of Scot., _note_, p. 71). It is justly
      remarked by Dr. M’Crie, when speaking of Richard Bannatyne, who was
      also called _the servant_ of Knox, “that the word servant, or
      servitor, was then used with greater latitude than it is now, and,
      in old writings, often signifies the person whom we call by the more
      honourable name of clerk, secretary, or man-of-business” (Life of
      Knox, p. 349. _Sixth edition_). Mr. Macward succeeded Mr. Andrew
      Gray as one of the ministers of Glasgow, in the year 1656, chiefly
      through the influence of Principal Gillespie (Baillie’s Letters,
      vol. ii. pp. 406, 407. Cleland’s Annals of Glasgow, vol. i. p. 128).
      A sentence of banishment was unjustly passed upon him for a sermon
      on Amos iii. 2, which he preached in the Tron Church, Glasgow, after
      the Restoration. As to what he said in that sermon regarding the
      conduct of the parliament, Baillie declares, that “all honest men
      did concur with him,” though he disapproves, at the same time, of
      Macward’s “high language,” and blames him, because “he obstinately
      stood to all,” and thereby provoked his persecutors (Letters, pp.
      453, 454). But it appears, from Wodrow (Hist. of the Sufferings of
      the Ch. of Scot., vol. i. p. 213, Glasg. 1829), that when Mr.
      Macward understood that what had given offence was the use he had
      made, in his sermon, of the words “protest” and “dissent,” he did
      not hesitate to explain he did not mean thereby a legal impugning of
      the acts, or authority of parliament, but “a mere ministerial
      testimony” against what he conceived to be sin. Macward retired to
      Holland.

      After repeated applications from Charles the Second, the States
      General, on the 6th of February, 1677, ordered Mr. Macward, and
      other two Scottish exiles, to withdraw from the Seven Provinces of
      the Netherlands (Dr. M’Crie’s Mem. of Veitch and Brysson, p. 367).
      That the States came to this determination with very great
      reluctance, will appear from the following passage in one of Sir
      William Temple’s Letters: “I will only say that the business of the
      three Scotch ministers hath been the hardest piece of negotiation
      that I ever yet entered upon here, both from the particular interest
      of the towns and provinces of Holland, and the general esteem they
      have of Mackand [Macward] being a very quiet and pious man” (Vol. i.
      p. 291). It is creditable to the good feeling, though not certainly
      to the firmness of the States General that at the time they
      determined to require Macward and his two friends to leave the Seven
      Provinces, they voluntarily furnished them with a certificate
      bearing that each of them had lived among them “highly esteemed for
      his probity, submission to the laws, and integrity of manners” (Dr.
      M’Crie’s Mem. of Veitch and Brysson, p. 368). He was afterwards
      permitted to return to Rotterdam, where he had been officiating as
      minister of the Scottish Church at the time he was ordered to remove
      out of the country. He died there in the month of December, 1681.
      Dr. Steven’s “History of the Scottish Church, at Rotterdam”, p.
      336.—_Ed._]

   88 [In his very interesting “History of the Scottish Church,
      Rotterdam,” Dr. Steven mentions (p. 72) that Mr. James Koelman was
      deprived of his charge at Sluys in Flanders, for refusing to observe
      the festival days and to comply with the formularies of the Dutch
      church. He appears to have been a very conscientious and pious man.
      Among the Wodrow MSS in the Library of the Faculty of Advocates
      Edinburgh (Vol. ix., Numb. 28) there is a copy of “A Resolution of
      the States of Zeeland anent the suspension of Thomas Pots and
      Bernardus Van Deinse, ministers of Vlissing, because of their
      suffering or causing Jacobus Coelman to preach, together with the
      Placinet (or proclamation) whereby the said Coelman is for ever
      banished out of the province of Zealand, Sept. 21, 1684.” Extract
      out of the Registers of the Noble and Mighty Lords, the States of
      Zeeland, Sept 21, 1684. It is set forth in this paper, that though
      Koelman had been suspended from his office by the States of the Land
      and Earldom of Zealand, in consequence of their “Resolution and
      penal discharge of the 21st of September, 1674, made by reason of
      his perverse opinions, and disobedience to his lawful high
      superiors,” he had notwithstanding “adventured and undertaken to go
      about private exercises within this province and also to preach
      twice publickly within the city Vliesing [Flushing] on Sabbath the
      3d of this instant moneth, September, and so hath rendered himself
      guilty of the punishment contained in our forementioned Resolution,
      and penal discharge, bearing that he should be banished the
      province, so be he happened to hold any publick or private exercises
      there.”

      Mr. Koelman, Mr. Macward and Mr. Brown of Wamphray, were the three
      clergymen who officiated at the ordination of Mr. Richard Cameron in
      the Scottish Church, Rotterdam, previous to his coming to Scotland
      in the beginning of the year 1680 (Biographia Presbyteriana, Vol.
      i., p. 197). It was Richard Cameron, when in the language of one of
      his friends, he was carrying Christ’s standard over the mountains of
      Scotland, who repeated three times that simple and pathetic prayer,
      before he was killed at Airs-moss, _Lord, spare the green, and take
      the ripe_ (Id. p. 203) From a letter written from Holland, 7th
      December, 1685, by Mr. Robert Hamilton of Preston, it may be seen
      how much Mr. Koelman interested himself in the affairs of the
      Scottish refugees (Faithful Contendings Displayed, pp. 203-205, 214,
      215). There is prefixed to a Dutch translation of Binning’s Common
      Principles of the Christian Religion, which was executed and
      published by Koelman at Amsterdam in 1678, a Memoir of the author.
      Koelman acknowledges he had derived all his information respecting
      Binning from a letter which he had received from Mr. Macward,
      through a mutual friend. This letter, or a copy of it, with some
      other of Macward’s MSS., was in the possession of the publisher of
      the duodecimo volume of the sermons of the author, printed at
      Glasgow, 1760 (Preface, pp. iv, xxv). Koelman concludes his Memoir
      of Binning, which contains some excellent pious reflections, but
      almost no facts with which the English reader is not already
      acquainted, with a feeling allusion to his ejection from his charge
      at “Sluys in Vlaanderen.” After this painful separation from his
      flock, besides writing many useful original works, he seems to have
      employed his leisure in translating into his native language some of
      the most esteemed practical writings of foreign divines, such as
      _Guthrie’s Great Concern, Rutherford’s Letters_, &c. Dr. Steven’s
      Hist. ut supra.—_Ed._]

   89 [Adverting to a sermon, which was preached by Mr. Matthew M’Kell, at
      a field meeting in the year 1669, Wodrow says, that he was “a true
      Nathanael, and a very plain dealer” (Hist. of the Suf. of Ch. of
      Scot., vol. ii. p. 127). After having been, on different occasions
      brought before the Privy council, and imprisoned, he was, on the 8th
      of January, 1674, upon his refusing to engage not to preach, ordered
      to confine himself to the parish of Carluke, and security was
      required from him that he would appear before the Council at their
      summons (Id. vol. i. pp. 371, 372, vol. ii. p. 248. See also History
      of Indulgence, p. 36). He died at Edinburgh, in March 1681 (Laws
      Memorialis, p. 183).

      Wodrow does not speak with much confidence, as to the degree of
      propinquity which existed betwixt Mr. Matthew M’Kail minister of
      Bothwell and Mr. Hugh M’Kail, the young licentiate who was executed
      at Edinburgh, 22d Dec, 1666, for being concerned in the insurrection
      at Pentland. But Colonel Wallace, who commanded the insurgents on
      that unfortunate occasion, styles “Mr. Hugh M’Kell son of Mr.
      Matthew M’Kell minister of Bothwell” (Wallace’s Narrative of the
      Rising at Pentland, in Dr M’Crie’s Memoirs of Veitch and Brysson, p.
      430). The unhappy father was allowed to see his son in prison, after
      his sentence. There is an affecting account in Naphtali (pp. 339,
      345) of this mournful interview, and of another which took place on
      the morning of the execution. The address of young M’Kail on the
      scaffold concluded with these sublime expressions—“Farewell, father
      and mother, friends and relations. Farewell the world, and all
      delights. Farewell meat and drink. Farewell sun, moon and stars.
      Welcome God and Father! Welcome sweet Lord Jesus the Mediator of the
      new covenant! Welcome blessed Spirit of grace, and God of all
      consolation! Welcome glory! Welcome eternal life! Welcome death!”
      (Id. p. 348 Edin. 1761). We are told by Kirkton that “when Mr.
      M’Kail died, there was such a lamentation as was never known in
      Scotland before, not one dry cheek upon all the street or in all the
      numberless windows in the market place” (Hist. of Ch. of Scot. p.
      249). It was discovered afterwards, that Burnet, archbishop of
      Glasgow, had in his possession at the time, a letter from the king,
      forbidding any more blood to be shed. But to the disgrace of his
      sacred profession, and of his feelings as a man, “Burnet let the
      execution go on, before he produced his letter, pretending there was
      no council day between”—Burnet’s Hist. of his own Times, vol. ii. p.
      435 Oxford, 1833.—_Ed._]

   90 [All accounts agree in stating that Mr. Hugh M’Kail, minister in
      Edinburgh, was uncle to the preacher of the same name who was
      executed. The minister of Bothwell, therefore, instead of being the
      father, must have been the brother of the minister in Edinburgh. In
      the years 1636, and 1637, when Mr. Samuel Rutherford was in
      Aberdeen, according to his own description of himself, “a poor
      Joseph, and prisoner,” with whom his “mother’s children were angry,”
      he wrote several letters to Mr. Hugh M’Kail, in answer to others
      which he received from him (Rutherford’s Letters, pp. 41, 247, 272,
      292 _Sixth edition_ Edin., 1738). The name of Mr. Hugh M’Kail is
      included in the list of ministers who, on the 19th of August 1643,
      were by the General Assembly appointed Commissioners for the
      Visitation of the University of Glasgow (Evidence of Royal
      Commissioners for Visiting the Universities of Scotland, vol. ii. p.
      261, London, 1837). Mr. Hugh M’Kail, minister at Irvine, was
      likewise one of the ministers commissioned by the Assembly, in 1644,
      to visit the church in Ulster (Dr. Reid’s History of the
      Presbyterian Church in Ireland, vol. ii. p. 57). As a further proof
      of the estimation in which he was held by his brethren, when it was
      proposed by the Assembly, in 1648, to recommend to the general
      session of Edinburgh six ministers, that they might choose four from
      these to fill their vacant churches, Mr. Hugh M’Kail was selected to
      be one of the number (Baillie’s Letters, vol. ii. p. 303). He was a
      Resolutioner (Id. p. 387). He died in 1660 (Lamont’s Diary, p. 121)
      The editor of Kirkton’s History of the Church of Scotland for the
      purpose of bringing ridicule upon the presbyterian clergy of that
      day, quotes a passage from the MS. sermons of Mr. Hugh M’Kail. We
      are much mistaken, however, if on reading that passage and after
      making some allowance for an antiquated style, and a certain degree
      of quaintness, one of the characteristics of the age,—the impression
      produced upon the mind of any candid person, who admires strong good
      sense, though presented in a homely dress, is not in a very high
      degree favourable to the character and talents of the author (See
      Kirkton’s History, pp. 227, 228). In the preface to Stevenson’s
      History of the Church and State of Scotland, reference is made to a
      manuscript, having this title, “A true relation of the Prelates
      their practice for introducing the Service book, &c, upon the Church
      of Scotland, and the Subjects, their lawful proceedings in opposing
      the same.” This manuscript, Mr. Stevenson observes, was believed to
      have belonged to “one of the Mr. Mackails, once famous ministers in
      this church”. Some information respecting it will be found in the
      Appendix (pp. 191, 192) to Lord Rothess’ Relation of Proceedings
      concerning the Affairs of the Kirk of Scotland, printed in
      Edinburgh, 1830. for the Bannatyne Club.—_Ed._]

   91 [It appears from the dedication prefixed to the “Theses Theologicæ,
      Metaphysicæ, Mathematicæ et Ethicæ, Preside Jacobo Darimplio, Glasg.
      Excudebat Georgius Andersonus, An. Dom. 1646,” that “Hugo Binningus”
      graduated “ad diem 27 Julii, Anno Domini 1646.” Under the ancient
      Statutes of the University, no student was entitled to receive the
      degree of master, till he had reached his twentieth year. But this
      rule was not always strictly adhered to (Report of the Royal
      Commission of Inquiry into the state of the Universities of
      Scotland, appointed in 1830, p. 220). Binning was not nineteen years
      of age at the date of his laureation. His distinguished
      contemporary, Mr. George Gillespie, took his degree in his
      seventeenth year.—_Ed._]

   92 [General Monk, who, for the part he took in the restoration of
      Charles the Second, was made Duke of Albemarle, encouraged most
      during the time he was in Scotland the _Resolutioners_, while
      Cromwell, on the other hand, befriended the _Protesters_ (Life of
      General Monk, by Dr. Gumble, one of his chaplains, who was with Monk
      in Scotland, p. 51, London, 1671). Monk professed to be a
      Presbyterian (“The Mystery and Method of His Majesty’s Happy
      Restoration,” by John Price, D.D., one of the late Duke of
      Albemarle’s chaplains. Baron Masseres, Tracts, pp. 723, 775). “In
      Scotland Mr. Robert Douglas [one of the ministers of Edinburgh] was
      the first so far as I can find, who ventured to propose the king’s
      restoration to General Monk, and that very early. He travelled, it
      is said, _incognito_ in England, and in Scotland engaged
      considerable numbers of noblemen and gentlemen in this project. From
      his own original papers, I find that when Monk returned from his
      first projected march into England, Mr. Douglas met him and engaged
      him again in the attempt”—Wodrow’s Hist. of the Ch. of Scot., vol.
      i. p. 59.—_Ed._]

   93 [Physiologia Nova Experimentalis, Lugd. Bat. 1686.—_Ed._]

   94 [The Appointment of Mr. James Dalrymple, as one of the Regents of
      the University of Glasgow, took place by “Id Martu 1641” (Annales
      Collegæ). He was then only twenty two years of age. In the year
      1635, a clause was introduced into the oath, which the Regents were
      required to take at their election, binding them to resign their
      situation in the event of their marriage. Accordingly, having
      married in 1643, Mr. Dalrymple vacated his charge, but was
      immediately afterwards re-elected. Sir Walter Scott has said of
      James Dalrymple, that he was “one of the most eminent lawyers that
      ever lived, though the labours of his powerful mind were unhappily
      exercised on a subject so limited as Scottish Jurisprudence, on
      which he has composed an admirable work.” It has been properly
      observed, that during the whole of the seventeenth century, not only
      at Glasgow, but in the other universities of Scotland, “the Regents,
      or Teachers of Philosophy (with very few exceptions), were young men
      who had recently finished their academical studies, and who were
      destined for the church. The course of study which it was their duty
      to conduct, was calculated to form habits of severe application in
      early life, and to give them great facility both in writing and in
      speaking. The universities had the advantage of their services
      during the vigour of life, when they were unencumbered by domestic
      cares, and when they felt how much their reputation and interest
      depended on the exertions which they made. After serving a few years
      (seldom more than eight, or less than four), they generally obtained
      appointments in the church, and thus transferred to another field
      the intellectual industry and aptitude for communicating knowledge,
      by which they had distinguished themselves in the university. It may
      well be conceived that, by stimulating and exemplifying diligence,
      their influence on their brethren in the ministry was not less
      considerable than on the parishioners, who more directly enjoyed the
      benefit of attainments and experience more mature, than can be
      expected from such as have never had access to similar means of
      improvement.” Rep. of Roy. Com. ut. supra, p. 221.—_Ed._]

   95 [About the same period Mr. Alexander Jamieson, who was afterwards
      minister of Govan, obtained the appointment of Regent in the
      University of St. Andrews, after engaging in a public disputation.
      The description of what took place on that occasion given by Mr.
      John Lamont of Newton, is not devoid of interest as a picture of the
      times—1649 Apr. 10, 11—“Ther were three younge men that did disputte
      for the vacant regents place in St. Leonard’s Colledge, Mr. David
      Nauee, (formerlie possessing the same, bot now deposed, as is spoken
      before), viz., Mr. Alex Jamesone, ane Edenbroughe man, having for
      his subject, _Syllogismus_, Mr. William Diledaffe, a Cuper man, his
      subject, _Liberum Arbitrium_, and Mr. James Weymes, a St. Androus
      man, he having _De Anima_ for his subject. All the tyme they had
      ther speeches, ther heads werre couered, bot when they came to the
      disputte, they were vncouered. Ther werre three of the five
      ministers forsaide present at the disputs, viz., Mr. Alexander
      Moncriefe, Mr. Walt. Greige, and Mr. Ja. Sharpe [afterwards
      archbishop of St. Andrews], wha had decisive voices in the electione
      of a Regent (thir werre the first ministers that ever had voice in
      the electione of a measter to ane of the colledges there, the
      custome formerlie, and of olde, was, that every colledge had
      libertie to chose thir owne measters) For Mr. Ja. Weymes he was the
      warst of the three, for in the disputs, he bracke Priscian’s head
      verry often, for Mr. Alex. James and Mr. Wil. Diled they werre
      judged _pares_ by the wholle meitting, so that after longe debeatte,
      they werre forcet to cast lotts, and the lott fell upon Mr. Alex
      Jamesone wha did succeide to the forsaide vacant regents place. Mr.
      Wil. Diled got a promise (bot with difficultie) of the next vacant
      place. Mr. Ro. Noue, professor of Humanitie in the said colledge,
      had no voice in the forsaide electione because, he was not present
      at all the meittings of the disputs.”—(Lamont’s Diary, p. 4, Edin.
      1830)

      The last instance of a public competition for a chair in the
      University of Glasgow, occurred towards the close of the seventeenth
      century soon after the Revolution. It is remarkable enough that in
      this case also, the result was ultimately determined by lot. “A
      programme was immediately published, and on the day appointed no
      less than nine candidates appeared to enter the lists in a
      comparative trial. All of them acquitted themselves so well during
      the whole course of a long trial that the electors were at a loss
      whom to choose. Setting aside some of the nine who were thought less
      deserving, they could not find a ground of preference among the
      rest. It was therefore resolved, after prayer to God, to commit the
      choice to lot. The lot fell upon Mr. John Law, and a present of five
      pounds stirling was given to each of the other candidates. One of
      the competitors was Mr. William Jamieson, a blind man known to the
      learned world by his writings. He was after some years chosen to
      give public lectures in the college upon Ecclesiastical History for
      which he had a pension from the Crown till his death.”—MS. History
      of the University of Glasgow, written by Dr. Thomas Reid, formerly
      Professor of Moral Philosophy.—_Ed._]

   96 [The day of his election was “iiij Cal. Nov 1646 (Annal. Colleg.)”
      The _Nova Erectio_ or foundation charter, granted to the University
      of Glasgow 13th July, 1577, in the minority of James VI, made
      provision for the appointment of three Regents, or Professors, along
      with the Principal. The first Regent was required to teach Rhetoric
      and Greek, the second Logic, Ethics, and the principles of
      Arithmetic and Geometry, and the third, who was also sub principal,
      Physiology, Geography, _Astrology_, and Chronology (See Copy of the
      _Nova Erectio_ in Evidence for University Commissioners for Scotland
      vol. 8. p. 241 London, 1837). In the year 1581, the Archbishop of
      Glasgow gifted to the University the customs of the city, which
      enabled them to establish the office of a fourth Regent, to whom was
      allotted exclusively the teaching of Greek, and, sometime previous
      to the year 1637, a fifth Regent was chosen, who was Professor of
      Humanity, “humanitarum literarum” (Old Stat. Acc. of Scot., vol xxi.
      Append. pp 24, 25). This professorship however, was not permanently
      established till the year 1706 (Rep. of Roy. Com. appointed in 1830,
      p. 241). By the foundation-charter the Regents were restricted to
      particular professions, or departments of academical instruction,
      that they might be found better qualified for the discharge of their
      different functions (ut adolescentes qui gradatim ascendunt, dignium
      suis studus et ingenuus præceptorem repettre queant). But this
      practice, as will be seen from the following minute of a University
      Commission, was changed in the year 1642. “The Visitat on after
      tryall, taking to consideration that everie Regent within the
      Colledge has beine accustomed hithertills to continue for more years
      togithere, in and on the same professione so that the schollers of
      one and the self-same class are necessitat yearlye to change theire
      masters, have found it more profitable and expedient, that the
      present course of teaching the schollers be altered, and that everie
      master educate his own schollers through all the foure classes,
      quhalk is appointed to begin presentlie thus that the classes, which
      are taken up with the masters the zeir they go on with them, so that
      Mr. David Munro having the Magistrand [or oldest] classe now, he
      take the Bejane classe [or the youngest students, the _Bejani_,
      derived from the French word _bejaune_, a novice] the next zeir.”
      (_Sessio 2__da__, September 17_. Evid. for Univ. Com. ut supra p.
      260). This new mode of instruction continued to be followed till the
      year 1727, when the old system enjoined in the foundation charter
      was revived (Rep. of Roy. Com. ut supra p. 223). It is said that Dr.
      Thomas Rand, the celebrated philosopher, was an advocate of the
      system of ambulatory professors, which was adhered to in Kings
      College, Aberdeen down to the beginning of the present century (Old
      Stat Acc. of Scot., vol. xxi. Append., p. 83). The first class that
      Binning taught was the class of the _Bejani_ (Wodrow’s Analecta,
      vol. i, p. 338. MSS in Bib. Ad.). He and the other Regents were all
      styled “Professors of Philosophy.” Appendix to Spottiswood’s Hist.
      of Ch. of Scot., p. 22, London, 1777.—_Ed._]

   97 [It was the custom of the Regents to _dictate_, to the students
      their observations on such parts of the writings of Aristotle,
      Porphyry, and others, as were read in their classes. This was done
      in Latin which was the only language allowed to be used by the
      students even in their common conversation. At a meeting of
      commissioners from the different universities of Scotland, which was
      held at Edinburgh on the 24th of July, 1648, one of the resolutions
      agreed upon, was to this effect—“Because the _diting_ [dictating] of
      long notes has in time past proved a hindrance, not only to
      necessary studies, but also to a knowledge of the text itself, and
      to the examination of such things as are taught, it is therefore
      seriously recommended by the commissioners to the dean and faculty
      of arts that the regents spend not so much time in _diting_ of their
      notes, that no new lesson be taught till the former be examined.”
      (Bower’s History of the University of Edinburgh, vol. i. p. 244).
      Binning, it is said, “dictated all his notes off hand” (Wodrow’s
      Analecta, vol. i. p. 338. MS in Bib. Ad.) Had he lived it was
      thought “he had been one of the greatest schoolmen of his time.”—Id.
      vol. v. p. 342.—_Ed_.]

   98 [Long after the publication of the _Novum Organum_ of Lord Bacon and
      even after the successful application of his principles by Sir Isaac
      Newton and Locke, the logic and metaphysics of Aristotle continued
      to occupy the chief place, in the course of instruction, in the most
      celebrated universities of Europe. The first great reform, in the
      mode of teaching philosophy, introduced into the college of Glasgow,
      was effected through a royal visitation, which took place in 1727.
      “The improvements in this university,” says Professor Jardine,
      arising from the regulations introduced by the royal visitation,
      were greatly promoted by the appointment, which took place shortly
      afterwards of more than one professor of singular zeal and ability.
      The first of these was Dr. Francis Hutcheson. This celebrated
      philosopher, whose mind was stored with the rarest gifts of
      learning, illustrated, with a copious and splendid eloquence, the
      amiable system of morality which is still associated with his name,
      producing thus the happiest effects not only on his own students but
      also on his colleagues, and infusing at once a more liberal spirit,
      and a greater degree of industry, into all the departments of
      teaching. Great obstacles, however, still remained. The professor of
      the first philosophy class according to the practice of the times
      continued to deliver his lectures in the Latin language, a method of
      instruction which, although it must long have proved a great
      impediment to the ready communication of knowledge on the part of
      the teacher, and to the reception of it on the part of the pupil,
      was not discontinued in this college, till upon the following
      occasion.

      In the year 1750 Adam Smith was appointed professor of logic and,
      being rather unexpectedly called to discharge the duties of his
      office he found it necessary to read to his pupils in the English
      language, a course of lectures on rhetoric and belles lettres, which
      he had formerly delivered in Edinburgh. It was only during one
      session however, that he gave these lectures, for at the end of it,
      he was elected professor of moral philosophy and it was on the
      occasion of this vacancy in the logic chair that Edmund Burke whose
      genius led him afterwards to shine in a more exalted sphere was
      thought of, by some of the electors, as a proper person to fill it.
      He did not, however, actually come forwurd as a candidate, and the
      gentleman who was appointed to succeed Dr. Smith, without
      introducing any change as to the subjects formerly taught in the
      logic class, followed the example of his illustrious predecessor in
      giving his prelections in English.—Outlines of Philosophical
      Education Illustrated by the Method of Teaching the Logic class in
      the University of Glasgow, pp. 20-21, Glasgow 182.—_Ed._]

   99 [The office of principal of the University of Glasgow was disjoined
      from the cure of the parish of Govan, in 1621, and the immediate
      predecessor of Binning was Mr. William Wilkie, who was deposed by
      the synod on the 29th of April, 1649. “Mr. William Wilkie, I
      thought,” says Principal Baillie “was unjustly put out of Govan,
      albeit his very evil carriage since, has declared more of his sins.”
      (MS Letters, vol. iii., p. 849, in Bib. Col. Glas.)

      There are certain extracts from the letters of Mr. William Wilkie to
      Dr. Balcanqubal, dean of Rochester, published in Lord Hailes’s
      Memorials and Letters (vol. ii pp. 47, 48). The learned judge,
      however, has mistaken the name Wilkie for _Willie_. Not knowing,
      therefore, who the writer of the letter was, he says, in a note,
      “This _Willie_ appears to have been a sort of ecclesiastical spy
      employed by Balcanqubal the great confident of Charles I. in every
      thing relating to Scotland” (Ibid.). In his preface, Lord Hailes
      acknowledges that the letters he has published were “chiefly
      transcribed from the manuscripts, amassed with indefatigable
      industry by the late Mr. Robert Wodrow.” But Wodrow himself states,
      in his Life of Dr. Strang (Wodrow MSS, vol. xiii, pp. 4, 5, in Bib.
      Coll. Glasg.), that he was possessed of six original letters, which
      had been written by Mr. William Wilkie, minister of Govan, during
      the sitting of the famous Glasgow Assembly in 1638, and addressed to
      Dr. Balcanqubal, who had come down to Scotland with the Marquis of
      Hamilton, the Lord Commissioner, and was then residing in Hamilton
      palace. He also informs us that these and some other letters were
      discovered “after Naseby encounter, or some other, where Dr.
      Balcanqubal happened to be, in a trunk found among the baggage,
      which fell into the hands of the parliament’s army.” Wilkie’s
      letters contained an account of the proceedings of the Assembly,
      Wodrow says, not very favourable to the majority there. And he then
      adds it was “from these and such other informations upon the one
      side, Doctor Balcanqubal drew up The Large Declaration, under the
      Kings name, in 1642.” At the time of the Glasgow Assembly, Mr.
      William Wilkie was one of the regents of the university.

      Since this was written, Wilkie’s letters have been printed, without
      abridgment in the Appendix to vol. of a new edition of Ballie’s
      Letters, published at Edinburgh by the Bannatyne club.

      “The originals of all these letters are contained in folio vol. xxv.
      of the Wodrow manuscripts, which is now preserved among the Archives
      of the Church of Scotland.”—Id. p. 481.—_Ed._]

  100 [The estate of Trochrigg which is one of the largest in the parish
      of Girvan, in the county of Ayr, is now the property of John
      Hutchieson Fergusson Esq. It was sold by the descendants of the
      ancient proprietors about the year 1782. It was to his paternal
      residence at Brodrigg that Principal Boyd retired with his family in
      1621, when he resigned his office as Principal of the University of
      Glasgow, and it was in this retreat he wrote the Latin poem
      entitled, _Ad Christum Servatorem Hecatombe_. This beautiful poem
      has been justly described to be, cannon totius fere Christianæ
      Religionis, seu evangeli æ doctrinæ medullam, vel compendium verius,
      cultissians dul tissimisque versibus, ex intimoque Latio petitis,
      stropbarum Sopphicarum centuria lectori ob oculos proponens, “a song
      embracing almost the whole of the Christian religion, or placing
      before the eyes of the reader in a hundred Sapphic stanzas, the
      marrow, or rather a compend of evangelical doctrine, in the most
      polished and mellifluent verses and in language taken from that of
      the Augustan age.” (Poet. Scot. Musa. Sacræ, p. 198, præfætio, vol.
      vi., Edin., 1739. Life of Boyd, Wodrow MSS., vol. xv. p. 123 in Bib.
      Coll. Glas.).

      The commentary on the Epistle to the Ephesians (Roberts Bodn, A
      frocheregia Scoti, In Epistolam ad Ephesios Prælectiones, fol. pp.
      1236. London, 1652) contains the substance of the Lectures, which
      Boyd delivered, when he was a professor of theology in the
      University of Saumur. This is attested by his cousin Mr. Zachary
      Boyd, who was one of the Regents at Saumur, and attended the
      delivery of them (harum prelectionum assidutis tuit auditor). Some
      time after the death of the learned and pious author, a copy of the
      _Prælectiones_ was transmitted to Holland to his friend Andreas
      Rivetus, that he might superintend the printing of it. As Chouet, a
      well known Genevese printer, happened to be in Holland at the time,
      Rivetus parted with the manuscripts to him, that they might be put
      to press immediately on his return to Switzerland. But,
      unfortunately, the vessel in which the manuscripts were shipped was
      taken by another vessel from Dunkirk, and having thus fallen into
      the hands of some Jesuits they never could be recovered. Rivetus
      consoled himself with the reflection that the original manuscripts,
      in the author’s own hand writing, were safe in Scotland in the
      keeping of the family. The church and the nation, however, being at
      this period in such a distracted state, the work was not given to
      the world till the year 1652, when it was published by the London
      Stationers Company, (Andrea Riveti Epistoli de vita, scriptis,
      moribus, et feliei exitu Roberti Bodn, ante Prelectiones Bodn)
      though the General Assembly had passed numerous acts, and entered
      into arrangements with different printers for the purpose. See Index
      of Unprinted Acts for the years 1645, 1646 and 1647.—_Ed._]

  101 [When the Presbytery of Glasgow had met on the 22d August 1649, “The
      parochineris of Govane gave in ane supplicatione shewing that
      whereas you are destitute of ane minister, and being certanelie
      informed of the qualifications of Mr. Hew Binnen, one of ye regents
      of ye colledge of Glasgow, for ye work of ye ministrie,” they were
      unanimously desirous he should be sent to preach to them, “so soone
      as he shall have past his tryels.” The presbytery, in consequence of
      this supplication, “ordaines Mr. Patrik Gillespie, moderator of the
      presbyterie to wrytt to ye said Mr. Hew, to acquaint him wt the
      desyre of the parochineris of Govane, and to repar to the presbytery
      to undertake his tryels for ye effect forsaid.” Records of the
      Presbytery of Glasgow.

      On the 5th September, 1649, “Mr. Robert Ramsay reported Mr. Hew
      Binnen had exercised on the text prescribed, and had geven the
      brethrene full satisfaction. He is ordained to handle the
      contraversie scientia media, and to give in theses thereupon.” Id.

      “Sept 19, 1649—The qlk daye Mr. Hew Binnen gave in theses upon the
      contraversie prescribed unto him, de scientia media, to be sustenit
      by him, he presbyterie appoint him to handle this contraversie this
      daye eight dayes at nyne houres.” Id.

      “Sept 26, 1649—The qlk daye Mr. Hew Binnen made his Latin lesson, de
      scientia media, and sustenit the disputt thairupon, and was approven
      in both. The following ministers were present, Mr. Patrik Gillespie,
      Mr. David Dicksone, Doctor Jhone Strang, Mr. Zach. Boyde, Mr. George
      Young, Mr. Hew Blair, Mr. Gab. Conyngham, Mr. David Benett, Mr.
      Matthew Mackill. Mr. Wm. Young, Mr. Arch. Dennestoune, Mr. Jhone
      Carstaires, Mr. James Hamilton.” The presbytery “ordaines Mr. Hugh
      Binnen to make ye exercise this daye fyfteen dayes, and the rest of
      his tryels to be ye said day.” Id.

      On the 10th October, 1649, after Mr. Hugh had “exercised”—“compeared
      the laird of Pollok and the parochineris of Govane, and desyred that
      Mr. Hew Binnen might preach to them the next Lordis daye, qlk was
      granted, and he ordained to go and preach yr.” Id.

      On the 24th Oct., 1649, “Compeared the parochineris of Govane, and
      gave in ane call to have Mr. Hew Binnen to be their minister.” Id.

      “December 19, 1649—The qlk day Mr. Hew Binnen handled the
      contraversie, de satisfactione Christi, and sustenit the disputt
      upon the theses given in be him, and was approven.” Id.

      On the 2d January, 1650, his admission to the ministerial charge of
      the parish of Govan is appointed to take place “next Fryday.” The
      minister who presided on that occasion was Mr. David Dickson, who
      was one of the professors of Theology in the University of Glasgow.
      Id.—_Ed._]

  102 [Dr. John Strang, who was the son of Mr. William Strang, minister of
      Irvine, was born in the year 1584. He studied at the University of
      St. Andrews, where he took the degree of master at sixteen. After
      having been a regent in St. Leonard’s college for several years, he
      was ordained in 1614, minister of Errol, in the Presbytery of Perth.
      When Cameron _le grand_, as he was called, (Vide Bayle’s Dict. Art.
      Cameron) resigned his situation as principal of the University of
      Glasgow, Dr. Strong succeeded him. He died at Edinburgh, on the 20th
      of June, 1654, in the seventieth year of his age and was buried near
      his distinguished predecessor, Principal Boyd. At his death, an old
      friend and very learned man, _Andreas Rawinæus octogenarius_,
      composed some Latin verses, as an affectionate tribute to his
      memory. These may be seen in a short Life of Dr. Strang which was
      written by Baillie and prefixed to Dr. Strang’s work, _De
      Interpretatione et Perfectione Scripturæ, Rotterodami_, 1663. It is
      from this Life the preceding particulars respecting the learned
      author have been taken.

      It appears to have been chiefly through the influence of Archbishop
      Law, who was his cousin, that Dr. Strang was made principal of the
      University of Glasgow. When the latter understood that
      _Trocheregius_ wished to be reinstated in his office, a
      correspondence took place betwixt them, which is in the highest
      degree honourable to the feelings and character of Dr. Strang. This
      correspondence is inserted by Wodrow in his _Life of Robert Boyd of
      Trochrig_ (Wodrow MSS. vol. xv. pp. 99-104 in Bib. coll. Glasg.).
      Butler represents Dr. Strang to have been an acute philosopher, and
      second to none in the kingdom as a disputant (nullique ad hunc usque
      diem, in nostra gente, hac in parte secundus. Vita Autoris, ut
      supra.) The strongly expressed commendation of such a man was no
      mean compliment to Binning’s talents and learning. Wodrow says he
      was told by a neighbouring clergyman, Mr. Patrick Simson, minister
      of Renfrew, who was ordained the same year that Binning died, and
      who lived for some years after the commencement of the following
      century, “yt qn they were seeking to get old principal Strang out of
      the colledge, ye principal said, ‘Ye are seeking to get me out of my
      place, qm have ye to fill my room? I know none, unless it be a young
      man newly come out of the school, viz., Mr. Hugh Binning’ ”
      (Analecta, vol. iv. p. 171. MSS in Bib. Ad.)—The Presbytery Records
      show that the common head which was presented to Binning was not,
      _De concursu_, &c, but one closely allied to it: _De scientia
      media_.—_Ed._]

  103 [See his epitaph, p. 1.—_Ed._]

  104 [Her name was _Mary_, or _Maria_ Simpson. The inventory of the
      effects of “Mr. Hew Binning, at Govane, deceiasit in ye monith of
      Sept. 1658,” is given up “be Marie Sympsone, his relict, and onlie
      exerix dative.” (Com. Rec. Glasg.). Towards the close of her life,
      Mrs. Binning became connected with the Society people. She seems to
      have corresponded with the Rev. James Renwick, one of their
      ministers, who, in a letter dated July 9, 1685, speaks of her as
      “like to die in prison,” and in another, of her having “gone to
      Ireland” (Renwick’s Letters, pp. 104, 179). Howie of Lochgoin, the
      author of “Lives of the Scots Worthies,” assures us that it is Mrs.
      Binning who is alluded to by Renwick in his Letters pp. 49, 104. He
      likewise quotes part of a letter written to her in 1692 by Sir
      Robert Hamilton of Preston, who commanded the army of the
      Covenanters at the battle of Bothwell bridge (Shields’ Faithful
      Contendings, pp. 486, 487). In a catalogue of the manuscripts of the
      Rev. Robert Wodrow, minister of Eastwood, which is in the library of
      the Faculty of Advocates vol. xxiv. folio is stated to contain “50
      letters from Mrs. Binning to Mr. Ham.” It is not known where this
      volume is now to be found.—_Ed._]

  105 [“The Rev. James Simpson was chaplain to the Lord Sinclair’s
      regiment. He appears to have settled in the charge of a congregation
      in Ulster, perhaps at Newry, which was the headquarters of his
      regiment for several years—He was still in his charge in Ireland in
      1650 in which year the Rev. Hugh Binning, minister of Govan, was
      married to his daughter.” Dr. Reid’s History of the Presbyterian
      Church in Ireland, vol. i. pp. 369, 370.—_Ed._]

  106 [What Koelman says is this that the adjoining parish to which he and
      his friends went was the one in which after sermon, the marriage
      ceremony was to be performed. Mrs. Binning it is probable was
      residing there at the time.—_Ed._]

  107 [His eloquence procured for him, according to Macward, the name of
      the Scots Cicero. Along with a distinct articulation be possessed
      great fluency. When he preached in Glasgow, which being the minister
      of a neighbouring parish was frequently the case, he was much
      admired and followed (Koelman’s “Het Leven en Sterven van Mr. Hugo
      Binning” prefixed to his translation of Binning’s Common Principles
      of the Christian Religion). With regard to the estimation in which
      as a preacher, he was held in his own parish, his mode of preaching
      being so completely different from what they had been accustomed to,
      it is said “he was more valued by Govan people after his death, than
      when alive.” Analecta, vol. i. p. 338, MSS in Bib. Ad.—_Ed_.]

  108 [The writer of “A Short Account of the Life and Writings of Mr. Hugh
      Binning,” prefixed to the small volume of his sermons, published for
      the first time in 1760, remarks “By the _haranguing way_ I suppose
      he means those sermons that are not divided or sub-divided into
      dominant observations and heads, marked by the numbers 1, 2, 3, &c.
      But the reader will see many of these discourses, where there are no
      figures, no first, second, third, or any number of heads mentioned,
      as regularly divided or sub-divided, as those sermons where we will
      see a good number of doctrines and heads.… Some useful sermons have
      been often perplexed with a great multitude of minds consisting of
      two or three sentences without any proof or illustrations of which
      the hearer or reader will remember or retain less than some sermons
      that contain five or six heads, or have not their distinct divisions
      marked with different figures or faces;” pp. xxii-xxiii.—_Ed_.]

  109 [It being “the perfection of art to conceal art.”—_Ed_.]

  110 [Mr. James Durham, minister of the Inner High church, Glasgow, was
      the son and heir of John Durham of Easter Powrie, now named
      Wedderburn, a considerable estate in the parish of Muirhouse, and
      county of Forfar (Old Stat. Acc. of Scot., vol. xiii, pp. 162, 163).
      In the time of the civil wars, and before he contemplated being a
      clergyman, he was a captain in the army. He held the office of
      king’s chaplain, when Charles the Second was in Scotland. The
      description which “Old Aitkenhead, who had it from the gentlewoman,”
      gave, of Cromwell’s visit, in April 1651, to the High church of
      Glasgow, where Mr. Durham was preaching, is this: “The first seat
      that offered him was P. Porterfield’s, where Miss Porterfield sat,
      and she, seeing him an English officer, was almost not civil.
      However he got in and sat next Miss Porterfield. After sermon was
      over he asked the minister’s name. She sullenly enough told him, and
      desired to know wherefore he asked. He said because he perceived him
      to be a very great man, and in his opinion might be chaplain to any
      prince in Europe, though he had never seen him nor heard of him
      before. She inquired about him, and found it was O. Cromwell”
      (Wodrow’s Anal., vol. v. p. 186, MSS in Bib. Ad.).

      Mr. Durham sided neither with the Resolutionists nor Protestors. For
      this he was strongly blamed at the time by Principal Baillie, who
      took a keen part in the controversy, (Let. and Jour., vol. ii. p.
      376) though after his death, he recorded, in the following terms,
      his opinion of Mr. Durham’s character and talents. “From the day I
      was employed by the presbytery to preach, and to pray, and to
      impose, with others, hands upon him, for the ministry at Glasgow, I
      did live to the very last with him in great and uninterrupted love,
      and in high estimation of his egregious endowments, which made him
      to me precious among the most excellent divines I have been
      acquainted with in the whole isle. O, if it were the good pleasure
      of the Master of the vineyard to plant many such noble vines in this
      land!” (Durham’s Commentary upon the book of Revelation, Address to
      the Reader, p. vi). The work written by Durham, entitled, “The Law
      Unsealed, or a Practical Exposition of the Ten Commandments,” has
      commendatory prefaces prefixed to it, by two distinguished English
      puritans, Dr. John Owen, and Mr. William Jenkyn. Dr. Owen wrote
      likewise a preface to the Clavis Cantici, or an Exposition of the
      Song of Solomon, by James Durham, minister at Glasgow, 4to, 1669.
      Doubts have been expressed, however, whether Wood, in his Athenæ
      Oxomenses, (vol. ii, p. 747, Lond. 1721) was warranted to attribute
      this preface to Owen, “as the preface is anonymous” (Orme’s Life of
      Owen, Append., p. 505). But the only copy of the work, which is in
      my possession, (Glas. 1723) has attached to it the name of “John
      Owen, May 20, 1669.”

      The widow of Mr. Durham, who was the daughter of Mr. William Muir of
      Glanderston, a branch of the family of the Muirs of Caldwell, was,
      in 1679, twice committed to prison, for having in her house
      religious meetings, or conventicles, as they were called in those
      days of relentless tyranny and oppression. On one of the occasions,
      she was taken to Edinburgh, and imprisoned there, along with her
      sister, the mother of Principal Carstairs. Wodrow’s Hist. of the
      Suff. of the Church of Scot., vol. iii, pp. 10, 54.—_Ed_.]

  111 [See page 368.—_Ed._]

  112 [See page 406.—_Ed._]

  113 [The following account of the origin of the differences between the
      Resolutioners and Protesters, is that given by Kirkton. “After the
      defeat of Dumbar, the king required a new army to be levyed, wishing
      earnestly it might be of another mettale than that which hade been
      lossed. So he desired that sort of people who were called
      Malignants, his darlings, might be brought into places of trust,
      both in council and army, though they hade been secluded from both
      by their own consent. And this request was granted both by committee
      of estates and commission of the church sitting at Perth. But there
      was a party in both these councils which alledged confidently, that
      though the malignants were content to profess repentance for their
      former practices, yet they should be found to be men neither sincere
      in their profusions, nor successful in their undertakings. This was
      the beginning of the fatal schism in the Scottish church. For though
      the king, to secure Scotland, was content once more to take the
      covenant at his coronation in Scoon (which instrument he caused burn
      at London) yet the dissatisfied party continued still in their
      jealousies, and even of the king himself whom they doubted most of
      all. This party was called Protesters and Remonstrators as the other
      was called Resolutioners, which names occasioned lamentable
      distraction” (History of the Church of Scotland p. 53). A more
      particular account of this unhappy controversy, so fatal in its
      results to both parties, may be seen in the introduction to Wodrow’s
      history.

      Though Baillie was a Resolutioner, he seems to have had some
      misgivings as to the course he adopted. “We carried unanimously at
      last,” says he in a letter to Mr. Spang, dated Perth, January 2,
      1651, “the answer herewith sent to you. My joy for this was soon
      tempered when I saw the consequence, the loathing of sundry good
      people to see numbers of grievous bloodshedders ready to come in,
      and so many malignant noblemen as were not like to lay down arms
      till they were put into some places of trust, and restored to their
      vote in parliament.” (Letters and Journals, vol. ii, p. 366). In the
      Life of Professor Wodrow written by his son, (pp. 29, 30, Edin.
      1828) it is said, “There were great endeavours used in the year
      1659, and 1660, entirely to remove that unhappy rent ’twixt the
      public Resolutioners and Protesters in this church, and had not Mr.
      Sharp struck in by his letters from London in order to serve his own
      designs, and ruin both, and made Mr. Douglas and other ministers at
      Edinburgh cold in this matter of the union, it had no doubt
      succeeded. These put Mr. Wodrow upon an inquiry into that debate,
      and when leaving the lessons during the vacation in the summer he
      desired Mr. Baillie’s directions what to read for understanding that
      subject. The professor said to him, ‘Jacobe, I am too much engaged
      personally in that debate to give you either my judgement on the
      whole, or to direct you to particular authors on the one side and
      the other,’ but taking him into his closet he gave him the whole
      pamphlets that had passed on both sides in print and manuscript,
      laid ranked in their proper order, and said, there is the whole that
      I know in that affair; take them home to the country with you, and
      read them carefully and look to the Lord for his guiding you to
      determine yourself aright upon the whole.”—_Ed._]

  114 [This treatise was afterwards printed and is included in the present
      edition of the works of the author.—_Ed._]

  115 [See page 226.—_Ed._]

  116 [Mr. Patrick Gillespie, who was brother to George Gillespie one of
      the ministers of Edinburgh, was for some time minister of Kirkcaldy.
      On the 4th December, 1641, “Mr. Pa. Gillespie produceit,” to the
      magistrates and council of Glasgow, “a presentation grantit to him,
      be his Majestie, of the place of the Highe Kirke, instead of the
      bischope” (Glasgow Burgh Records). He was one of the three ministers
      who, in 1651, were summarily deposed by the Assembly, for their
      opposition to the Public Resolutions, and protesting against the
      lawfulness of that Assembly (Lamont’s Diary, p. 33). His sentence
      was reversed by the Synod of Glasgow (Baillie’s Letters, vol. ii.,
      pp. 414, 415). Gillespie was evidently desirous to effect a
      reconciliation between the Resolutioners and Protesters, by means of
      mutual concessions (Id. pp. 388, 401, 411). In the year 1553, he was
      elected principal of the University of Glasgow, by the English
      sequestrators (Id. p. 371, Lamont’s Diary, p. 53).

      No one in Scotland had more influence with Cromwell than Principal
      Gillespie, who is said to have been the first minister in the Church
      of Scotland, who prayed publicly for him (Nicol’s Diary, p. 162). In
      April 1654, the Protector called him up to London, along with Mr.
      John Livingston of Ancrum, and Mr. John Menzies of Aberdeen, to
      consult with them on Scottish affairs (Life of Livingston, p. 55).
      He preached before the Protector in his chapel, and obtained from
      him, for the University of Glasgow, the confirmation of “all former
      foundations, mortifications, and donations made in its favour,
      particularly that of the bishopric of Galloway, to which he added
      the vacant stipends of the parishes, which had been in the patronage
      of the bishop of Galloway, for seven years to come; and also in
      perpetuity the revenues of the deanery and sub-deanery of Glasgow”
      (Old Stat. Acc. of Scot., vol. xxi., Append. pp. 25, 26). Through
      his influence with the Protector, he likewise procured a grant to
      the town of Glasgow, “for the use of the poor who had been injured
      by the fire in 1653,” [1652] (Brown’s Hist. of Glasg., p. 120) and
      “assisted and pleasured sundry in the matter of their fines”
      (Baillie’s Letters, vol. ii. p. 390). As to what is said by the
      editor of Kirkton’s History, that after the Restoration, “Gillespie
      had made great efforts for a pardon, and offered to promote
      episcopacy in Scotland” (p. 111), the reader is referred to a Review
      of that work, in the Christian Instructor (Vol. xvii. pp. 339, 340).
      He died not long after this at Leith (Law’s Memorials, p. 11).

      Gillespie’s work, entitled “The Ark of the Covenant Opened,”
      (London, printed for Tho. Parkhurst, 1677) has a preface from the
      pen of Dr. John Owen, who was with Cromwell in Scotland, as one of
      his chaplains, and in this way, no doubt, became acquainted with
      Gillespie (Wood’s Athenæ Oxomensis, vol. ii., p. 738, London, 1721).
      In his preface, Dr. Owen says, “My long Christian acquaintance with
      the author made me not unwilling to testify my respects unto him and
      his labours in the church of God, now he is at rest, for whom I had
      so great an esteem while he was alive.” Wodrow expresses his regret,
      that “the other three parts” of Gillespie’s work have not been
      printed, which, he informs us, the author “wrote and finished for
      the press” (Hist. of the Suff. of Ch. of Scot., vol. i., p. 204,
      Glasg. 1829). The Synod of Glasgow were informed, on the 8th of
      Oct., 1701, that “Mr. Parkhurst, at London,” possessed two
      unpublished parts of Gillespie’s Ark of the Covenant. They,
      therefore, appointed a committee to communicate with him on the
      subject, through some of the booksellers of Glasgow, “conceiving
      that the publishing of these pieces may be of use to the Church,
      from the experience they have had of the works of that worthy author
      already come to light, upon the same subject” (Records of Synod). On
      the 5th April, 1709, “Mr. Robert Wodrow reports, that Mr. Parkhurst
      continues still indisposed, so that nothing can be done with respect
      to the printing of Mr Gillespie’s book formerly mentioned.
      Wherefore, the Synod lets the matter fall out of their minutes.” Id.

      Chalmers (Caledonia, vol. iii., p. 591) seems to have imagined that
      Patrick Gillespie was the “Galasp” ridiculed by Milton, in one of
      his sonnets. Warton says, this was “George Gillespie, one of the
      Scotch ministers of the Assembly of Divines” (Warton’s Milton, p.
      339, Lond. 1791). But Milton referred neither to the one nor the
      other, but to Allaster Macdonald _Macgillespie_, (_son of
      Archibald_) otherwise known by the name of Colkittoch, or Colkitto,
      who commanded the Irish auxiliaries in Montrose’s army. See the new
      edition of Baillie’s Letters, now in course of publication, formerly
      quoted, vol. ii. p. 499.—_Ed_.]

  117 [This is a simple marble tablet surmounted with a heart, and the
      emblems of mortality. It was placed in a niche in the front wall of
      the old parish church; but, in 1826, when the present church was
      erected, which is a Gothic structure, it was removed to the
      vestibule. It is seen in the vignette of the title page. The
      inscription may be turned into English, thus “Mr. Hugh Binning is
      buried here, a man distinguished for his piety, eloquence, and
      learning, an eminent philologist, philosopher, and theologian; in
      fine, a faithful and acceptable preacher of the gospel, who was
      removed from this world in the 26th year of his age, and in the year
      of our Lord 1653. He changed his country, not his company, because
      when on earth he walked with God. If thou wish to know any thing
      beyond this, I am silent as to any thing further, since neither thou
      nor this marble can receive it.”—_Ed_.]

  118 [John Binning of Dalvennan was served heir to his grandfather on the
      19th of March, 1672 (Inq. Ret. Ab. Ayr, 580). And the Retour of his
      heritable property, at the date of his forfeiture, specifies, as
      having belonged to him, the ten mark land of the ten pound land of
      Keires, comprehending the lands of Dalvennan, Yondertoun and
      Burntoun, Daluy, Milntown, The Fence, Drumore, Hillhead,
      Rashiefauld, Chappel, the mill of Keires, &c., in the parish of
      Straiton; the lands of Over Priest-Craig and Nether Priest-Craig in
      the parish of Colmonell; and a house, garden, and land in the parish
      of Maybole, in the county of Ayr—Inq. De Possess Quinquen
      (18).—_Ed_.]

  119 [The name of “Binning of Dalvennan” appears in the Act of the
      Scottish parliament, “Rescinding the Forefaultures and Fynes since
      the year 1665” (Acts of the Parl. of Scot. vol. ix. p. 165) Previous
      to the passing of that Act, however, a petition was presented to the
      parliament by Mr. Roderick McKenzie, who had been a Depute Advocate
      in the former reign, in which he stated, “That John Binning of
      Dalvennan having been forefault for being in armes at Bothwell
      bridge, anno 1679, and the deceased Matthew Colvill, writer in
      Edinburgh, John Binning’s greatest enemy, being very active to
      obtain the gift of his forefaulture, with a designe of his ruine,
      and the prejudice of his numerous and just creditors, the deceased
      Mr. James Gordon, minister at Cumber in Ireland, John Binning’s
      father in law and former Curator, to whom he was oweing a
      considerable soume of money, came over to Scotland, at John
      Binning’s desire, who was then in Ireland, to obtaine the said gift,
      to disappoint Matthew Colvill thereof, who prevailed with the
      petitioner to lend the money to pay the compositione and expenses of
      the gift.” Mr. McKenzie also affirmed, that he had “no other
      security for the money soe lent, but a right to the said gift,” and
      that the money he had advanced “to the said Mr. James Gordon for the
      compositione and expenses of the gift, with what he has payed of
      John Binning’s reall and confirmed debts, far exceeds the value of
      his land.” In consequence of these representations, “Their Majesties
      High commissioner and said Estates of Parliament remitt the case of
      Mr. Roderick McKenzie, petitioner, anent the forfaulture of
      Dalvennan, to the consideratione of the commission nominate in the
      General Act recissory of ffynes and forefaulters, with power to them
      to hear the parties concerned thereanent, and to report to the next
      session of this, or any other ensuing parliament.”—Id. pp. 162, 163.

      John Binning was declared at this period to be “altogether
      insolvent.” This is the reason probably, if he was not in the mean
      time satisfied that his claim was untenable, that his case does not
      appear to have been brought under the notice of parliament again,
      and that he did not persist in his attempts to regain possession of
      Dalvennan (Id. Appendix, p. 32). To confirm his title to a property,
      which considering the office he held, seems to have been acquired
      under very suspicious circumstances, McKenzie had contrived to get
      an act of parliament passed in his favour, in the year 1685. In this
      Act, he is lauded for “suppressing the rebellious fanatical partie
      in the western and other shires of the realme, and putting lawes to
      vigorous execution against them, as His Majesties Advocate Deput,”
      and the lands of Dalvennan are said to have been transferred to him
      by “Jean Gordon, as donatrix,” who was the uterine sister of John
      Binning, and who is described as “relect of the deceist Daniel
      McKenzie sometime ensign to the Earle of Dalhousie, in the Earle of
      Marr’s Regiment” (Id. vol. viii. pp. 565-567). John Binning taught a
      school for some time (Faithful Contendings p. 66). The General
      Assembly showed kindness to him, on different occasions, for his
      father’s sake. In 1702, the Commission of the Assembly being
      informed by a petition from himself of his “sad circumstances,”
      recommended him to the provincial Synods of Lothian and Tweedale,
      and of Glasgow and Ayr “for some charitable supply” (Rec. of
      Commission, Sess. 39). In 1704, he applied for relief to the General
      Assembly, and stated that he had obtained from the Privy Council a
      patent to print his father’s works, of which twelve years were then
      unexpired, and that it was his intention to publish them in one
      volume. The Assembly recommended “every minister within the kingdom
      to take a double of the same book, or to subscribe for the same.”
      They likewise called upon the different presbyteries in the church
      to collect among themselves something for the petitioner (Unprinted
      Acts, Sess. 11). The last application he made to the Assembly for
      pecuniary aid was in 1717, when he must have been far advanced in
      life—Idem, 13th May.—_Ed_.]

  120 [Mr. James Gordon was minister of Comber, in the county of Down. He
      was ordained about the year 1646. We find his name in Wodrow’s list
      of the non-conforming ministers in the synod of Ballimenoch in
      Ireland (Hist. of Suff. of Ch. of Scot. vol. i. p. 324). According
      to Dr Reid, “Mr. Gordon, after having been deposed with the rest of
      his brethren in 1661, continued to officiate privately at Comber for
      many years, but about the year 1683, in his old age, he appears to
      have deserted his principles, and conformed to prelacy.” Hist. of
      the Presb. Ch. in Ireland, vol. ii. pp. 129, 130.—_Ed_.]

  121 [May 14, 1654—“Sederunt Mr John Carstaires and the Elders.

      “The qlk day the session being conveened for election and calling of
      a minr to the kirk of Govan, and having now this forenoon heard Mr.
      David Veetch, with whom most are satisfied, but for the satisfaction
      of all persons interested, who heard him never but once, both of
      heritors and elders, the session have delayed their election till
      they hear him again in the afternoon, and the session then were to
      meet again for that effect.

      “Sederunt Mr John Carstaires and the Elders.

      “The heritors and elders having now heard the said Mr. David Veetch
      twise, and both being well satisfied, and clear, and unanimous, the
      satisfaction of the session being first enquired, and next of the
      heritors, which, being both of one mynd, cordially for the thing, a
      call was presently drawn up, and subt by moderator and clerk, also
      by session and heritors, according to order. After the forsd
      draught, at appointment of the presbytery and session, Mr. John
      preached in the sd church, and, after sermon, did intimat to the
      people their nomination of Mr. David to take charge in the ministrie
      of that congregation, and ordained, that if any person had any thing
      to object agt the said Mr. David being minr at the sd church, they
      would come and signifie it to the session, now presently to meet at
      the sd church for that effect, according to the practice in such
      cases. The session having met, and none compearand to signifie their
      dissent, or assent, they take their non compearance for their
      signification of satisfaction, so, after three severall byesses at
      the most patent door of the sd church, by the officer intimating the
      forsd words, none at all appeared. So the sd Mr. David being desired
      to come in to session, they presented to him their unanimous and
      cordiall call of election to the ministrie of the kirk of Govan,
      which he accepted.” Records of Kirk-Session of Govan—_Ed_.]

  122 [12mo., Glasgow, 1609.—_Ed._]

  123 [Macward’s words are, _a prima manu_. Het Leven en Sterven van Mr.
      Hugo Binning.—_Ed._]

  124 [A copy of “The Common Principles of Christian Religion” is now
      before me which was Printed by R. S. Printer to the Town of Glasgow,
      1666, and which bears to be “The 5 Impression”.—_Ed._]

  125 [All the works of Binning, which were published in the lifetime of
      Koelman, were translated by him into the Dutch language. No fewer
      than four editions of these have been printed at Amsterdam.—_Ed._]

  126 [See page 457.—_Ed._]

  127 [See page 465.—_Ed._]

  128 [A contemporary of Binning, Mr. P. Simson, minister of Renfrew,
      informed Wodrow, “That Dr. Strang was in hazard to have been staged
      for his Dictates qch wer smoothed in his printed book, _De Voluntate
      Dei_, and would have been removed from his place if he had not
      demitted.” (Life of Dr. Strang, Wodrow MSS. vol. xiii. p. 9, in Bib.
      Coll. Glas.) Complaints regarding Dr. Strang having been presented
      to the General Assembly, a committee was appointed, on the 18th of
      June, 1646, to examine his written dictates, a copy of which was
      produced by Dr. Strang, and to find out whether the doctrines which
      he taught were in accordance with the doctrines of their own and
      other reformed churches, and whether there were any expressions used
      by him which gave countenance to the views of the enemies of the
      truth. This committee was composed of some of the most able men in
      the church, including several professors from the four universities
      The list contains, along with others, the names of Alexander
      Henderson, John Sharpe, the author of _Cursus Theologicus_, Robert
      Douglas, George Gillespie, Robert Blair, Samuel Rutherford, James
      Wood, William Strahan, David Dickson, Robert Baillie, John Neave,
      Edward Calderwood and Robert Leighton, afterwards Archbishop of
      Glasgow. On the 27th of August, 1647, the committee gave in a Report
      to the General Assembly, to the effect that Dr. Strang had employed
      some expressions in his dictates which were calculated to give
      offence, but that on conferring with him, they were satisfied in
      regard to his orthodoxy, and that to put an end to all doubts as to
      his meaning, the Doctor had gratified them by proposing of his own
      accord the addition of certain words to what was previously somewhat
      ambiguous (Vita Autoris, Strangu De Interpret. Script.).

      So far as can be collected from the imperfect account we have of the
      circumstances of the case, Dr. Strang discovered, it was imagined, a
      bias to Arminianism, whereas he seems to have been merely more of a
      sublapsarian than a supralapsarian. The “peculiar notions” he
      entertained were vented, we have been told, upon that profound
      subject _De concursi et influxu deimo cum actionibus creaturarum_ or
      the concurrence and influence of God in the actions of his
      creatures. In the two chapters of his published work which treat
      expressly upon this point, we can perceive nothing that is at
      variance with our own Confession. But this does not warrant us to
      infer that the dictates, as originally delivered and before they
      were amended and enlarged by the author himself, may not have
      contained some very objectionable language at least, especially when
      we look to the Report of the committee of the Assembly regarding
      them. Indeed, all that Baillie himself says, who was one of that
      committee, is, that Dr. Strang was pursued “without any ground at
      all _considerable_,” and that “he got him _reasonably_ fair off.”
      Letters and Journals, vol. ii., p. 338.

      The publication of Dr. Strang’s work, “De Voluntate et Actionibus
      Dei circa Peccatum” (Amstelodami Apud Ludovicum et Danielson
      Elzeurios, 1657. 4to. pp. 886), was intrusted to Mr. William Spang,
      minister of the English church at Middleburgh in Zealand. The
      manuscripts were sent to him by his cousin, Mr. Robert Baillie, at
      that time Professor of Theology in the University of Glasgow, who,
      after the death of his first wife, had married a daughter of Dr.
      Strang. “Dr. Strang, your good friend,” says Baillie, in a letter to
      Mr. Spang, dated July 20, 1654, “having to do in Edinburgh with the
      lawyers, concerning the unjust trouble he was put to for his
      stipends, did die, so sweetly and graciously, as was satisfactory to
      all, and much applauded over all the city, his very persecutors
      giving him an ample testimony. His treatise, _Dei circa peccatum_,
      he has enlarged, and made ready for the press. Be careful to get it
      well printed, according to the constant friendship that was always
      betwixt you and him.” (Letters, vol. ii. pp. 382, 383) At the
      request of Mr. Spang, Alexander Morus furnished a preface, and _Ad
      Lectorem Commomito,_ for Dr. Strang’s work.—_Ed._]

  129 [“This is somewhat strange, observes Howie of Lochgoin, “that a
      nameless author should quarrel that book because the publisher hath
      omitted to tell his name, and hath only inserted the author’s name.
      He might have known that it was not long a secret that Mr. James Kid
      (who was afterwards settled minister in Queensferry) was the
      publisher, and upon that account suffered both long imprisonment at
      Utrecht, and the seizure of all that they could get of the books.
      And as for vouchers, Mrs. Binning the relict of the worthy author,
      being then alive, had connexion and much correspondence with Mr.
      Hamilton, Mr. Renwick, and many of the persecuted Society people,
      and was of the same sentiments with them, as appears by several
      letters yet extant in their own hand-writ—and Mr. Renwick speaks of
      her in some of his letters, as in the 49 and 104 pages of the
      printed volume of his letters but especially it appears, by a
      paragraph which is omitted in the printed copy, page 58, (which
      shall be here transcribed from the original, written with his own
      hand,) wherein he says, ‘Likewise, according to your direction, I
      challenged Mrs. Binning upon the commendation she gave to John
      Wilson in her letter to you. But she says that she had not then seen
      his testimony, and was sorry when she saw it that it was so contrary
      both to her thoughts and commendation of him.’ And likewise a
      postscript to the 20th Letter, relative to the same matter is also
      omitted. And about the same time that Mr. Binning’s book was
      printed, while Sir Robert Hamilton was prisoner, upon account of the
      declaration [Sanquhar Declaration] in 1692, he wrote a letter to
      Mrs. Binning, wherein he complains of her unwonted silence, in his
      honourable bonds for such a noble Master. Yet trusting her sympathy
      is not diminished, he adds, ‘O, my worthy friend, I cannot express
      Christ’s love and kindness since the time of my bonds. He hath broke
      up new treasures of felt love and sweetness, and hath been pleased
      to give me visitations of love and access to himself, to comfort and
      confirm poor feckless me many ways, that this is his way that is now
      persecuted, and that it is his precious truths, interests, and
      concerns, that I am now suffering for, whatever enemies with their
      associated ministers and professors may allege, &c.’ ”

      “By which it is evident that they had much correspondence with Mrs.
      Binning. And there is yet a fair and correct manuscript copy of the
      foresaid book extant, which was in Sir Robert’s custody, and it is
      more than probable that it was procured from Mrs. Binning,
      especially as she survived its publication without quarrelling it.

      “It is unnecessary to notice what further is thrown out by the
      foresaid anonymous writer, against the book and the publisher, as
      Mr. Wodrow, in the preface to Mr. Binning’s octavo volume of
      sermons, printed 1760, hath modestly animadverted thereupon, and
      says there is no reason to doubt if it was Mr. Binning’s. He also
      ingenuously confesseth, that there is in it the best collection of
      scriptures he knows, concerning the sin and danger of joining with
      wicked and ungodly men, &c., and that it was wrote in a smooth good
      style, agreeable enough to Mr. Binning’s sentiments in some of his
      sermons.” Faithful Contendings Displayed, pp. 486, 487, note. See
      likewise Faithful Witness-bearing Exemplified, preface, p.
      iv.—_Ed._]

  130 [See page 527.—_Ed._]

  131 [See page 527.—_Ed._]

  132 [See page 528.—_Ed._]

  133 [Ibid.—_Ed._]

  134 [The word _reduce_ is here used in its literal etymological sense,
      as signifying _to bring back_ or to _restore_.—_Ed._]

  135 [The allusion here appears to be to the doctrines of the Quakers
      who, in Binning’s time, were increasing in the west of Scotland, and
      accustomed to rail, with impunity, at ministers in the face of their
      congregations. See Baillie’s Letters, vol. ii., pp.  393, 413,
      419.—_Ed._]

  136 [That is _felt_.—_Ed._]

  137 [These terms were made use of as descriptive of themselves by the
      sect called the Familists. See Discovery of Familism, p. 7 _apud_
      Baillie’s Anabaptism, pp. 102-127, Lond. 1647.—_Ed._]

  138 [That is, propound a nice question.—_Ed._]

  139 [That is, careless.—_Ed._]

  140 [The heathen poet whose words these are, (“We move towards what is
      forbidden”), describes well the perversity and the imbecility of our
      nature. Vid Ovid Amor. lib. iii. eleg. 4 ver. 17 Met. lib. vii. ver.
      20.—_Ed._]

  141 [That is, the most natural.—_Ed_]

  142 [That is, a twist or undue bend.—_Ed._]

  143 [That is, "His will stands for reason." Juv. Sat. vi. ver.
      222.—_Ed._]

  144 [Mr. Binning was a Supralapsarian. In this and the two following
      Lectures he treats of the “high mystery of predestination,” the
      consideration of which, though it should be handled with special
      prudence and care, (West. Conf. of Faith, ch. 3) is nevertheless,
      full of sweet pleasant and unspeakable comfort to godly persons.
      Art. of Ch. of Eng. Art. xvii. His views of this mysterious doctrine
      are stated with singular clearness, and the objections to it, which
      he notices and answers, are brought forward with the utmost
      ingenuousness and candour and expressed, it must be admitted, as
      strongly as a caviller could desire.—_Ed._]

  145 [The reader will remember that at this time the country was
      convulsed from one end of it to the other.—_Ed._]

  146 [That is, Fate leads the willing and drags the unwilling.—_Ed._]

  147 [This was the only consolation which one learned Roman could
      administer to another on the death of a friend. “This is hard,” said
      he, “but what cannot be remedied is more easily borne, with
      patience.” Hor. Carm. lib. I. carm. xxiv.—_Ed._]

  148 [Or _by the by_.—_Ed._]

  149 [That is grains or particles.—_Ed._]

  150 [What a sublime answer was that which one of the deaf and dumb
      pupils of M. Sicard gave to the question, “What is eternity?” It is
      “a day,” said Massieu, “without yesterday or to-morrow,—un jour sans
      hier ni demain.” The thoughts of our author on this boundless theme
      are hardly less sublime.—_Ed._]

  151 [That is, to have the same desires and aversions, that, in a word is
      strong friendship—_Sallust in Catil._ c. xx.—_Ed._]

  152 [That is, twist.—_Ed._]

  153 [Lycurgus, the Spartan lawgiver, made no law against ingratitude, it
      is said, because he conceived that no one could be so irrational as
      to be unthankful for kindness done to him.—_Ed._]

  154 [That is, quarter.—_Ed._]

  155 [The discourse ends so abruptly here, as plainly to show that it is
      an unfinished production, and was not designed by the learned and
      pious author for publication.—_Ed._]

  156 [Perhaps the word ought to be museum, used in the sense of a place
      for study.—_Ed._]

  157 [That is, not to speak of.—_Ed._]

  158 [This simple vernacular expression, which is used by other Scottish
      theological writers of the period as employed here, is particularly
      expressive. It signifies a place where either foes or friends have
      agreed to meet. Is that place the temple of the Lord? There surely
      will peace and harmony prevail. Is our Daysman there? He will make
      intercession for us and reconcile us to God.—_Ed._]

  159 [That is, orders us into his Son.—_Ed._]

  160 [The following baneful and impious doctrines, which were, in
      England, in those days, openly proclaimed from the pulpit, and
      disseminated through the press, were, it seems, not altogether
      unknown in the northern part of the island:

      1. That the moral law is of no use at all to a believer, no rule for
      him to walk or examine his life by, and that Christians are free
      from the mandatory power of it.

      2. That it is as possible for Christ himself to sin, as for a child
      of God to sin.

      3. That a child of God need not, nay ought not, to ask pardon for
      sin, and that it is no less than blasphemy for him to do this.

      4. That God does not chastise any of his children for sin.

      5.  That if a man, by the Spirit, know himself to be in a state of
      grace, though he should commit the greatest crimes, God sees no sin
      in him.

      Three leading Antinomian teachers were brought before a committee of
      the House of Commons, for promulgating, in different ways, these and
      similar opinions, which were justly regarded as subversive of all
      morality.—_Gataker’s _“God’s Eye on his Israel”,—preface, Lond.
      1645.—_Ed._]

  161 [“Antinomians, contending for faith of assurance, and leading men to
      be persuaded that God loveth every one, whom he commandeth to
      believe, with an everlasting love, and that ‘no man ought to call in
      question more whether he believe or no, than he ought to question
      the gospel and Christ,’ do with Libertines acknowledge a faith of
      assurance, but deny all faith of dependence on God through Christ,
      as if we were not justified by such a faith.”—“A Survey of the
      spiritual Antichrist, opening the secrets of Familisme and
      Antinominianisme.” by Samuel Rutherford, Professor of Divinity in
      the University of St. Andrew’s, part II. p. 235. London,
      1648.—_Ed._]

  162 [These observations discover an accurate knowledge of the philosophy
      of the human mind, as well as of the doctrines of Scripture. It is
      certainly one thing to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and another
      thing to feel assured of one’s salvation, or to be persuaded that we
      are possessed of that true faith which is the gift of God, and by
      which the just shall live. To identify, as is sometimes done, faith
      in Christ and the assurance of salvation, is calculated, on the one
      hand, to encourage presumption; and, on the other hand, to give rise
      to despair, Prov. xxx. 12, Ezek. xiii. 22, 23. What an earlier
      writer even than Binning says upon this subject, is not unworthy of
      notice. “St. Paul, wishing well to the church of Rome, prayeth for
      them after this sort. ‘The God of hope fill you with all joy in
      believing.’ Hence an error groweth, when men in heaviness of spirit
      suppose they lack faith, because they find not the sugared joy and
      delight, which indeed doth accompany faith, but so as a separable
      accident, as a thing that may be removed from it, viz. there is a
      cause why it should be removed. The light would never be so
      acceptable, were it not for that usual intercourse of darkness. Too
      much honey doth turn into gall, and too much joy, even spiritual,
      would make us wantons. Happier a great deal is that man’s case,
      whose soul by inward desolation is humbled, than he whose heart is,
      through abundance of spiritual delight, lifted up and exalted above
      measure. Better it is sometimes to go down into the pit, with him,
      who, beholding darkness, and bewailing the loss of inward joy and
      consolation, crieth from the bottom of the lowest hell, My God, my
      God, why hast thou forsaken me? than continually to walk arm in arm
      with angels, to sit as it were in Abraham’s bosom, and to have no
      thought, no cogitation; but, ‘I thank my God it is not with me as it
      is with other men.’ No; God will have them that shall walk in light
      to feel now and then what it is to sit in the shadow of death. A
      grieved spirit, therefore, is no argument of a faithless
      mind.”—_Hooker’s Works_, vol. iii. pp. 527, 528. Oxford.
      1807.—_Ed._]

  163 [That is, collect or obtain.—_Ed._]

  164 [That is, between extremes.—_Ed._]

  165 [Perhaps the word should be plungy, that is _rainy_. _Chauc._—_Ed._]

  166 [That is, cover with mist.—_Ed._]

  167 [That is, deserving of consideration.—_Ed._]

  168 [In the year 1661 Winston and some others sent a letter to Cromwell,
      through General Lambert, in which they charge the English army in
      Scotland “with divers errors countenancing of deposed ministers to
      preach _silencing of ministers that preach of state proceedings_,
      and suffering officers to preach,” &c.—_Whithel’s Memorials_ p.
      497.—_Ed._]

  169 [Cromwell, in his despatches, after the battle of Dunbar, states the
      number of his prisoners, exclusive of officers, to be near
      10,000.—_Cromwelliana_, p. 90. “The same daye the minister declaired
      yt yr wes a petitioune come from the prisoners at Tinmouth quho wer
      taiken at Dunbar, and representit to the presbyterie for support,
      because they wer in ane sterving conditione, and all comanders. And
      yt ye presbyterie hes recomendit the samen to ye several kirks of ye
      presbyterie, Therfoir ordaines that ane collectione be yranent upon
      Sondaye come 8 deyes, and intimation to be maid of it the next
      sabbathe to ye effect ye people may provide some considerable thing
      yranent.” Records of the kirk session of Govan, 1st July, 1652.
      “Upon the desire of the Guinea Merchants (20th Sept., 1651,) 1,500
      of the Scots prisoners were granted to them, and sent on shipboard
      to be transported to Guinea to work in the mines there.”—Whitelock’s
      Mem. p. 485. “Letters (25th October, 1651,) that many of the Scots
      prisoners and others at Shrewsbury were dead of a contagious
      fever.”—Id. p. 488.—_Ed._]

  170 [That is, in this world.—_Ed._]

  171 [That is, he will get, or meet with, a fall or fall lower as he, who
      aims at being wise above what is written, is in danger of falling
      into error.—_Ed._]

  172 [That is, treat with indignity.—_Ed._]

  173 [That is, check (from _compesco_, Lat.).—_Ed._]

  174 [Or, hesitation.—_Ed._]

  175 [That is, more honoured.—_Ed._]

  176 [That is, than.—_Ed._]

  177 [That is, concourse.—_Ed._]

  178 [Or pre-eminence above others.—_Ed._]

  179 [That is, directions, or different points of the compass.—_Ed._]

  180 [That is  careless or slight.—_Ed._]

  181 [This was long a current tradition. But Maundrell avers that he saw
      “several birds flying about and over the lake of Sodom,” or Dead Sea
      as it is called “without any visible harm”—Journey from Aleppo to
      Jerusalem A.D. 1696 p. 137. Edin. 1812.—_Ed._]

  182 [That is, destitute of reason.—_Ed._]

  183 [Or property.—_Ed._]

  184 [That is not so likely to happen.—_Ed._]

  185 [That is, the obscurity or mystery of the gospel.—_Ed._]

  186 [Coldly or carelessly.—_Ed._]

  187 [That is, “If thou lovest the earth, thou art earth”.—_Ed._]

  188 [Increase.—_Ed._]

  189 [Antiperistasis (αντιπεριστασις from αντι περ and ισταημ, the act of
      hemming round) a term employed in ancient times by the Peripatetics
      to denote the increase of one quality by the action of another of an
      opposite nature as when internal heat or inflammation is increased
      by external cold. It would be “a holy Antiperistasis in a
      Christian,” it is said (p. 216) were the surrounding ignorance and
      wickedness of the world to make the grace of God unite itself and
      work more powerfully as fire out of a cloud and shine more brightly
      as a torch in the darkness of the night. A learned English divine
      who lived in the same age with Binning declares that in the case of
      the faithful themselves sin derives additional power, by
      _antiperistasis_ from the law, to deceive, captivate, sell as a
      slave to make them do that which they hated and allowed not and do
      not that which they would and loved.—Bishop Reynold’s Works vol. I.
      p. 146, Lond. 1826.—_Ed._]

  190 [Exuberant or abundant.—_Ed._]

  191 [That is, conceived like that.—_Ed._]

  192 [That is, _than_ to look.—_Ed._]

  193 [That is, opposite.—_Ed._]

  194 [See Note, p. 208.—_Ed._]

  195 [That is disfigure.—_Ed._]

  196 [That is, “The soul is where it loves, not where it
      animates.”—_Ed._]

  197 [That is, indictment or accusation.—_Ed._]

  198 [That is, exert.—_Ed._]

  199 [These were booths, or other temporary erections, put up for the
      reception of such as were infected with the plague.—_Ed._]

  200 [In some of his epistles to his friends, Cicero expresses himself as
      if he thought death was to be followed by utter annihilation. But he
      speaks very differently in some of his other writings. The following
      passage occurs in a work (_Consolatio_) which has been ascribed to
      him—_Gorgias orator, jam ætate confectus ac morti proximus rogatus
      num libenter moreretur maxime vero inquit nam tamquam ex putri
      miseraque domo lætus egredior—Mortem igitur in malus nullo modo esse
      ponendam sed in præcipius bonus numerandam debitaturum puto
      neminem_—Gorgias the orator, when worn out with age and near death
      being asked whether he would die willingly said: Very willingly
      indeed for I depart as if I were gladly leaving a filthy and
      wretched house.—I therefore think that no one will hesitate to
      believe that death is not by any means to be ranked among evils but
      included among things which we account good in the highest
      degree.—Cic. Oper. tom. iv. pp. 1347, 1348. Basil 1681.—_Ed._]

  201 [Animals that have a sting are called aculeata animalis. _Plin. Nat.
      Hist._ lib. xx. cap. 91.—_Ed._]

  202 [That is, not knowing.—_Ed._]

  203 [Dr. Mead describes the means which were formerly resorted to in
      this country to check the progress of the plague. “The main import
      of the orders issued out at these times was as soon as it was found
      that any house was infected, to keep it shut up, with a large red
      cross, and these words ‘Lord, have mercy upon us,’ painted on the
      door, watchmen attending day and night to prevent any one’s going in
      or out except such physicians, surgeons, apothecaries, nurses,
      searchers, &c., as were allowed by authority, and this to continue
      at least a month after all the family was dead or recovered.

      “It is not easy to conceive a more dismal scene of misery than this,
      families locked up from all their acquaintance, though seized with a
      distemper which the most of any in the world requires comfort and
      assistance, abandoned it may be to the treatment of an inhuman
      nurse, (for such are often found at these times about the sick,) and
      strangers to every thing but the melancholy sight of the progress
      death makes among themselves, with small hopes of life left to the
      survivors and those mixed with anxiety and doubt, whether it be not
      better to die, than to prolong a miserable being, after the loss of
      their best friends and nearest relations.”—_Dr. Mead’s Medical
      Works_ p. 273.—_Ed._]

  204 [That is, stupified.—_Ed._]

  205 [That is obstruction. “Mr. Prin and the Erastian lawyers are now our
      _remora_”—Baillie’s Letters and Journal, vol. ii., p. 158.—_Ed._]

  206 [The ancient heathens seem to have looked upon a future state, says
      Leland, (Advantage and Necessity of the Christian Revelation, vol.
      ii. p. 305, Glasgow, 1819,) as too uncertain a thing to be relied
      upon, and therefore endeavoured to find out motives to virtue
      independent on the belief of the rewards prepared for good men after
      this life is at an end. They represented, in an elegant and
      beautiful manner, the present conveniences and advantages of virtue,
      and the satisfaction which attends it, but especially they insisted
      upon its intrinsic excellency, its dignity and beauty, and
      agreeableness to reason and nature, and its self sufficiency to
      happiness, which many of them, especially the stoics,—the most rigid
      moralists among them,—carried to a very  high degree. Cicero, in his
      Offices, and those excellent philosophers, Epictetus and Marcus
      Antoninus, in their works, which seem to be the best moral treatises
      pagan antiquity has left us, go upon this scheme. They were
      sensible, indeed that, in order to recommend virtue to the esteem of
      mankind, and engage them to pursue it, it was necessary to show that
      it would be for their own highest advantage.—_Ed._]

  207 [The Sun and the Wind had once a dispute which of them could soonest
      prevail with a certain traveller to part with his cloak. The Wind
      began the attack and assaulted him with much noise and fury; but the
      man, wrapping his cloak still closer about him, doubled his efforts
      to keep it, and went on his way. And now the Sun silently darted his
      warm insinuating rays which, melting our traveller by degrees at
      length obliged him to lay aside that cloak which all the rage of the
      Wind could not compel him to resign. _Learn_ hence, said the Sun
      _that soft and gentle means will often accomplish what force and
      fury can never effect_. (Fable of the Sun and the Wind. Boreas et
      Sol.) This is one of forty two fables ascribed to Æsop, which
      Avienus, a Latin poet who lived in the age of Theodosius turned into
      elegiac verse. The employment of apologues, which is sanctioned by
      scripture, seems to be a natural mode of imparting instruction.
      These arrest the attention, disarm prejudice, give to unwelcome
      truths a pleasing form and imprint deeply on the memory the lesson
      that is intended to be conveyed. It is mentioned by Vincent of
      Beauvais, who wrote in the middle of the thirteenth century, that
      the preachers of his age were accustomed to quote the fables of Æsop
      in order to rouse the indifference and relieve the languor of their
      hearers. Special Hist. lib. iii. cap. viii. p. 31. Ven. 1391, ap.
      Warton’s Diss. on Gesta Romanorum p. i.—_Ed_]

  208 [That is united or interwoven.—_Ed._]

  209 [Or available.—_Ed._]

  210 [Mr. Binning had the authority of Jerome for saying this. When
      speaking of the Dead sea or as it is styled in Scripture, the Salt
      sea, his words are Demque si Jordanis auctus imbribus pisces illuc
      influens rapuerit statim mortuntur, et pinguibus aquis supernatant.
      In fine, if the Jordan, which runs into it, should when swollen with
      rain, carry any fish along with it, they die immediately, and float
      upon the surface of the bituminous waters. (Hieron Comment in Ezek.
      cap. xlvii.) He also states that no living creature of any
      description was to be found in the Dead sea. (Comment in Joel cap.
      ii.) According to Volney, clouds of smoke are still observed to
      issue from this lake, and he represents the lava and pumice stones
      which have been thrown upon its banks to be likewise indubitable
      indicators of the agency of fire. The water however of what Milton
      describes as—

      “That bituminous lake where Sodom dam’d”

      —though excessively bitter, and so heavy that the most impetuous
      waves can scarcely ruffle its surface is now perfectly transparent.
      M. de Chateaubriand who mentions this also informs us that he heard
      a noise upon the lake about midnight, which the Bethlehemites who
      accompanied him told him, proceeded from legions of small fish,
      which come and leap about on the shore.—(Travels, vol. 1, p. 397.,
      Lond. 1812). He adds, “M. Seetzen, who is yet travelling in Arabia,
      observed in the Dead sea neither the helix nor the muscle, but found
      a few shell snails.”—Ibid.—_Ed._]

  211 [That is, guardians.—_Ed._]

  212 [Or attempt to walk.—_Ed._]

  213 [That is governed. “Most people in the world are _acted_ by levity
      and humour.” _South’s Sermons_.—_Ed._]

  214 [That is, spark.—_Ed._]

  215 [That is, set conscience aside.—_Ed._]

  216 [That is, corollary or consequence.—_Ed._]

  217 [Of good spirit.—_Ed._]

  218 [That is, compared to.—_Ed._]

  219 [That is, disburthen.—_Ed._]

  220 [That is, respecting.—_Ed._]

  221 [Oyes, (from oyez, the old imperative of the French verb _ouir_, to
      hear) a word used by public criers, before making their
      proclamations.—_Ed._]

  222 [That is, “pious frauds”.—_Ed._]

  223 [That is, sue for you or make their suit to you.—_Ed._]

  224 [That is, compared to those &c.—_Ed._]

  225 [That is, the quarter.—_Ed._]

  226 [It is unquestionably a remarkable fact that Pythagoras, one of the
      most celebrated philosophers of antiquity, represented the Great
      Author of all things to be possessed of a threefold form (Cudworth
      System. Intell. cap. iv. p. 446, June 1733). Nor is it less
      wonderful, as a learned writer has shown, that even the Chinese seem
      to have received, from the dispersed Jews, long before the birth of
      Christ, some knowledge of the doctrine of the Trinity. Bryant’s
      Philo Judaeus, pp. 283-290.—_Ed._]

  227 [That is, a bottom, or ball of thread.—_Ed._]

  228 [That is, to be manifested.—_Ed._]

  229 [The word _furniture_ had formerly a more varied and extensive
      signification than is now assigned to it. The old divines employed
      it to denote the union of the divine and human natures in the person
      of Christ, or the peculiar properties or qualifications with which,
      as the Messiah, he was furnished, to act in the character of our
      Mediator. “Consider that Christ’s calling to the office of
      Mediatorship may import three things his designation, his
      _furniture_, his investiture in the office.”—_Gillespie’s Ark of the
      Covenant_, p. 176. Lond. 1677.—_Ed._]

  230 [Codrus respecting whom this incident is recorded was the last king
      of the Athenians. His subjects from reverence to his memory resolved
      that with him should terminate their regal form of government.—_Val.
      Max._ lib. v. cap. 6. _Just. Hist._ lib. v. cap. 6.—_Ed._]

  231 [That is, appeal.—_Ed._]

  232 [“What Mahomet did, lies within any man’s reach. He was authorized
      by no miracle, he was countenanced by no prediction. But what was
      performed by Jesus Christ, is absolutely above the power and the
      imitation of man.

      “Mahomet established himself by slaughter, Jesus Christ by
      commanding us to lay down our lives. Mahomet, by forbidding his law
      to be read, Jesus Christ by engaging us to search and read. In a
      word, the two designs are in all respects so directly opposite that
      Mahomet took the way, in human probability to succeed, Jesus Christ,
      humanly speaking, to be disappointed. And hence, instead of so
      irrational a conclusion, as that because Mahomet succeeded, Jesus
      Christ might, in like manner have succeeded before, we ought to
      infer, that since Mahomet has succeeded, Christianity must
      inevitably have perished had it not been founded and supported by a
      power altogether divine” (Pascal’s Thoughts p. 95. Lond. 1886).
      Whoever wishes to see this comparison carried farther, may consult
      the masterly sermons of Professor White, preached before the
      University of Oxford at the Bampton Lecture. These contain a view of
      Christianity and Mahometanism, in their history, their evidence and
      their effects pp. 225-463. Lond. 1792.—_Ed._]

  233 [This was Cyrus, the younger son of Darius Nothus, king of Persia,
      and the brother of Artaxerxes. He was slain in battle, when fighting
      against his own brother. Plut. in Artax.—_Ed._]

  234 [It has been said that the following circumstance led Alexander to
      lay claim to a divine origin. As he entered the temple of Jupiter
      Ammon in Libya, the high priest approached him, intending to address
      him as his son. But not being master of the Greek language, instead
      of saying παιδιον, (paidion) which signifies _son_ he substituted
      _s_ for _n_, calling him παι διος (pai dios) which signifies _son of
      Jupiter_. (Plot. in Alex.). Alexander required his soldiers to
      address him as the son of Jupiter. This excited the indignation and
      contempt of Hegelochus, one of his generals. “Do we acknowledge,” he
      said, “him to be our king, who refuses to own Philip to be his
      father? It is all over with us if we can submit to these things. He
      who demands to be thought a God (qui postulat deus credi) despises
      not men only, but likewise the gods. We have lost Alexander. We have
      lost our king. We have encountered pride, not to be endured by the
      gods, to whom he equals himself nor by men from whom he withdraws
      himself.”—_Quint. Curt._ lib. vi. cap. 11. See also the speech of
      Callisthenes in the presence of Alexander himself.—_Arrian_ lib. iv.
      cap. 10.—_Ed._]

  235 [These are the words of the Vulgate, signifying literally, that
      “grief occupies the heights of joy.” A humiliating truth, akin to
      this, is contained in one of the maxims of Hippocrates: Ultimus
      sanitatis gradus est morbo proximus. “The highest state of health is
      as near as possible to disease.”—_Ed._]

  236 [The first of Francis Quarles, Emblems Divine and Moral, is the
      picture of a heart.  A representation of the globe covers the whole
      of the heart with the exception of the three angles or corners on
      each of which a syllable of the word Tri ni tas is imprinted.

      Frances Quarles was secretary to Archbishop Usher. He died in
      1644.—_Ed._]

  237 [That is, slight.—_Ed._]

  238 [These are two adages. The former is quoted by Cicero as an ancient
      proverb in his days (De Senect. cap. iii.). The meaning of it is,
      that, “equals or persons of the same age and rank, flock together.”
      The literal meaning of the other is “like take pleasure in like.” It
      (το ὁμοιοι το ὁμοιο φιλευ) is as old as the days of
      Aristotle.—Ethic. Nicom. lib. ix. cap. 3.—_Ed._]

  239 [That is, compound.—_Ed._]

  240 [That is, “the darkness of too much light”.—_Ed._]

  241 [That is, a defect.—_Ed._]

  242 [That is, genius.—_Ed._]

  243 [That is, who look upon a part or portion of the gospel, as if that
      were the whole of it.—_Ed._]

  244 [A celebrated English preacher, who was cotemporary with Binning
      makes a similar remark: “No question but those that have been so
      bold as to deny that there was a God have sometimes been much afraid
      they have been in error, and have at last suspected there was a God,
      when some sudden prodigy hath presented itself to them and roused
      their fears. And whatsoever sentiments they might have in their
      blinding prosperity, they have had other kind of notions in them in
      their stormy afflictions, and like Jonah’s mariners, have been ready
      to cry to him for help, whom they disdained to own so much as in
      being, while they swam in their pleasures. The thoughts of a Deity
      cannot be extinguished, but they will revive and rush upon a man at
      least under some sharp affliction. Amazing judgments will make them
      question their own apprehensions.” (Charnock’s Works, vol. 1, p. 42
      Lond. 1682). An ancient historian relates, concerning Caligula the
      Emperor of Rome, whose licentiousness knew no bounds, and who
      professed the utmost contempt for the gods of his country, that,
      when it thundered, he was accustomed from fear of the gods he
      derided, to shut his eyes, cover his head, and even conceal himself
      under a bed.—Suet. in Calig. cap. 51 Seneca de Ira, lib. i, cap.
      16.—_Ed._]

  245 [That is, place or station.—_Ed._]

  246 [That is, judge.—_Ed._]

  247 [That is, to sue for.—_Ed._]

  248 [Many of the speeches and actions of Philip, who was the father of
      Alexander the Great, are worthy of being remembered. A collection of
      his most memorable sayings has been made by Erasmus, in his
      Apothegmata Opus (pp. 268-279, Lutetiæ 154). The conduct of Philip,
      in many respects however, was very unlike that of a wise and
      virtuous prince. Like mankind in general, though he was reminded
      daily of this, he too often forgot that he was mortal.—_Ed._]

  249 [There is no fact, connected with the history of former times, which
      can be more easily proved than this that religious sacrifices were
      prevalent throughout every part of the Gentile world. Animals, which
      were deemed suitable for sacrifice by one nation, might be
      considered improper for such a purpose by another. But in the most
      remote countries victims of one kind or another, and not
      unfrequently human victims were seen bleeding on the altars of
      superstition, and with the death of these, the idea of substitution,
      or of presenting life for life, was almost invariably connected.
      When sacrificing her victim, Ovid makes his votaress exclaim—“I like
      heart for heart, I beseech thee, take entrails for entrails. We give
      to thee this life for a better one”—

      Cor pro corde, precor, pro obras sumite fibras.
      Hanc animam vobis pro meliore damus
      Fast lib. vi. v. 161

      But “as Kennicot observes from Delaney, whatever practice has
      obtained universally in the world, must have obtained from some
      dictate of _reason_, or some demand of _nature_, or some principle
      of _interest_, or else from some powerful influence or injunction of
      some Being of universal authority. Now the practice of animal
      sacrifice did not obtain from _reason_, for no reasonable notions of
      God could teach men that he could delight in blood, or in the fat of
      slain beasts. Nor will any man say, that we have any natural
      _instinct_ to gratify, in spilling the blood of an innocent
      creature. Nor could there be any temptation from appetite to do this
      in those ages, when the whole sacrifice was consumed by fire; or
      when, if it was not, yet men wholly abstained from flesh; and
      consequently this practice did not owe its origin to any principle
      of _interest_. Nay, so far from any thing of this, that the
      destruction of innocent and useful creatures is evidently _against
      nature_, _against reason_, and _against interest_, and therefore
      must be founded in an authority, whose influence was as powerful as
      the practice was universal and that could be none but the authority
      of God, the sovereign of the world; or of Adam, the founder of the
      human race. If it be said of Adam, the question still remains, what
      motive determined him to the practice? It could not be nature,
      reason, or interest, as has been already shown, it must therefore
      have been the authority of his Sovereign, and had Adam enjoined it
      to his posterity, it is not to be imagined that they would have
      obeyed him in so extraordinary and expensive a rite, from any other
      motive than the command of God. If it be urged, that superstitions
      prevail unaccountably in the world, it may be answered, that all
      superstition has its origin in true religion; all superstition is an
      abuse; and all abuse supposes a right and proper use. And if this be
      the case in superstitious practices that are of lesser moment and
      extent, what shall be said of a practice existing through all ages,
      and pervading every nation?—See Kennic, Two Diss. pp. 210, 211 and
      Rev. Exam. Diss. 8 p. 85-89.” Magee on the Atonement, vol. ii. part
      i. pp. 27-29.—_Ed._]

  250 [That is, restrain.—_Ed._]

  251 [See note page 96.]

  252 [Lucius Cinna was the grandson of Pompey the Great. It was through
      the intercession of Livia, the wife of Augustus, that Cinna was
      pardoned. “Do” said she to Augustus, “what physicians are accustomed
      to do, who, when the remedies they have employed do not succeed, try
      others which are entirely different. You have done no good by
      severity—Try now the effect of clemency. Forgive Lucius Cinna. Now
      that he has been discovered, he cannot injure you, but he can
      advance your reputation”—Seneca de Clem. lib. i.—_Ed._]

  253 [Language of this description was in common use with the Antinomians
      of the time, as may be seen in Edwards’ Gangræna (Part First, p. 22,
      Lond. 1646). Gataker’s Antinomiania Discovered and Confuted, (pp.
      18, 19, Lond. 1652) and other similar works written about this
      period.—_Ed._]

  254 [How inconsistent is this maxim of Machiavel with the semblance even
      of Christian integrity! Pascal, however, has supplied us with ample
      proofs not only from the books of the Jesuits but from their public
      Theses, that they hold it to be perfectly justifiable to calumniate
      their enemies or to charge them with crimes of which they know them
      to be innocent. He declares that this doctrine is so generally
      received by them (si constante,) that should a man dare to oppose
      it, he would be treated by them as a fool,—Les Provinciales tome
      troisieme quinzieme lettre.—_Ed._]

  255 [The philosophy of Aristotle was called architectonica
      (αρχιτεκτονικη), _pertaining to building_, from αρχος _a leader_,
      and τεκτην an _artificer_), as if every kind of knowledge had been
      rendered subservient to it.—_Ed._]

  256 [That is, arts or sciences.—_Ed._]

  257 [The Records of the Presbytery of Glasgow show, that this Fast was
      appointed by the commission of the General Assembly. “The
      commissioun of the Generall Assemblie, upone the 25 day of June 1650
      did emit ane seasonable warning concerning the present dangeris and
      dewties unto all the memberis of the kirk. To draw neir to God, to
      murne for thair ayin iniquiteis, and for all the synnes,
      prophanitie, and bakslydinges of the land, to studie to mak peace
      with God in Cryst Jesus, to searche and try our wayis and to return
      speedilie to the Lord, and to lift up our hartis with our handis to
      God in the heavines, that he may spair and save his pepill, that
      thai be not a prey to the enymie,” &c. (Nicol’s Diary of Public
      Transactions in Scotland, p. 17. Printed by Bannatyne Club, Edin.
      1836). On the 28th of June, a copy of this warning was presented to
      the Scottish parliament, who thanked the commission of the General
      Assembly for it, and requested them to delay the printing of it for
      a few days, that it might be accompanied with a Declaration from
      them suited to the existing crisis (Sir James Balfour’s Annals of
      Scotland, vol. iv. p. 63.). When the Presbytery of Glasgow met on
      the 31st of July, 1650, “the brethrene that wer present declaired
      that yei had keepit the fast, that yei had read the warning” (Presb.
      Rec). See also Lamont’s Diary, 7th July 1650. The appointment of
      Fasts to be observed on the Lord’s day, was at a subsequent period
      disapproved of by the Church of Scotland. “Albeit by the treatise of
      fasting emitted by the Assembly 25 December, 1565, the Sundays were
      appointed for some fasts as being for the greater ease of the
      people, and since by the last act of Assembly 1646, a fast is
      appointed on the Sabbath next except one preceding the then
      following General Assembly, yet seeing the work to be performed on
      the first day of the week is, by divine institution, already
      determined, we ought to set about it exactly, which we all
      acknowledge to be a thanksgiving and not a fast. Extraordinary
      duties are not to interfere with the ordinary, nor is one duty to
      shuffle out another. If either should be allowed, it would look
      somewhat like the reverse of redeeming the time, for thereby
      diligence is rather diminished than doubled in the service of
      God.”—Overtures of the General Assembly, 1705.—_Ed._]

  258 [“The abstinence is commanded to be from Saterday at eight of the
      clock at night, till Sonday eftir the exercise at eftir noone, that
      is, after five of the clock. And then onlie bread and drink to be
      used, and that with great sobrietie, that the bodie craving
      necessarie food, the soul may be provoked earnestly to crave of God,
      that which it most neideth, that is mercie for our former
      unthankfulnes, and the assistance of his holie spirit in tyme to
      cum.” (_The Ourdoure and Doctrine of the General Fast, set down by
      John Knox, and John Craig, at the Appoyntment of the Assemblie in
      the year 1565, Apud. Dunlop’s Confessions_, vol. ii. p. 686.) This
      Order was afterwards observed in all the fasts appointed by the
      General Assembly. (Id. p. 699.)—_Ed._]

  259 [That is, “Nor does God please all, when he sends rain.”—_Ed._]

  260 [That is, parts.—_Ed._]

  261 [The army of the Commonwealth was now on its march towards Scotland,
      under the command of Cromwell, who had been appointed by the English
      parliament captain general of their forces. But the hopes of the
      people of Scotland had been revived by the arrival of Charles II.
      from Breda, about a fortnight before this, who, at the mouth of the
      river Spey, before he landed, had signed the national covenant, and
      also the solemn league and covenant, though the commission appointed
      to receive his subscription appear, on too good grounds, to have
      suspected his sincerity (Sir Edward Walker’s Hist. Disc., p. 158.
      Life of Rev. J. Livingston, written by himself, p. 51. Glasg. 1754.)
      A letter, addressed by Charles to the Committee of Estates,
      immediately after the battle of Dunbar, and dated Perth, 12
      September, 1650, contains the following passage: “Wee cannot but
      acknowledge that the stroke and tryall is very harde to be borne,
      and would be impossible for us and you, in humane strength, but in
      the Lord’s wee are bold and confident, whoe hath always defended
      this ancient kingdome, and transmitted the governement of it upon us
      from so many worthy predecessors, whoe in the lyke difficulties have
      not fainted, and they had only the honor and civill liberties of the
      land to defend, but wee have with your religion, the gospel, and the
      covenant, _against which Hell shall not prevaile_, much lesse a
      number of sectains stirred up by it. Wee acknowledge, that what hath
      befallen is just from God for our sinns, and those of our house, and
      the whole land, and all the families in it, have lykewise helped to
      pull downe the judgement, and to kindle this fierce wrath. Wee shall
      strive to be humbled, that the Lord may be appeased, and that he may
      returne to the thousands of his people, and _comfort us according to
      the days wee have beene afflicted, and the yeares that wee have
      seene_. You are going, you sat, upon the deuites, for returne of the
      afflicted land, (you do well to do soe,) and to try the
      instrumentall causes and occasions of the disaster and surpressal.
      Looke not too much upon second causes, the pryme and originall, and
      only cause, is God’s just displeasure: for the causes of defeats in
      armys, they are harder to be found out than in any other of the
      actions of men, a word, a sound, the mooving or remooving of any
      body or squadron, may be, and have beane, the causes of the losse of
      battles, and how often have pannicke feares seazed upon them, that
      never any ground or resone could be given for? Lay not the fault
      upon this or that, coming doune, or not staing upon a ground of
      advantage, or upon this person or the other. That is the worst way
      of all, for nothing devided nor discord can stand or prosper, but
      leaste of all ane army; any thing of that kinde is the sodaine ruine
      of it. Upon any other constitution it will not worke so soone.
      Therefore wee intreete and charge you, as ye feare God, love his
      cause in your hands, have affection to your countrie, or respect to
      us, that you will remember, you are brethren in a covenant, and that
      you now stand up and joyne together as one man for religion, your
      countrie, your wives, children, liberties, and us, as your
      predecessors have done in their difficulties in their generations.
      Wee shall as willingly as any of them be ready to hazarde our lyfe
      (nay to lay it down) with you for God, the covenant, and the honor
      and freedom of this hitherto unconquered kyngdome, with any handful
      you have together, or when it shall be thought convenient.”
      (Thurloe’s State Papers, vol. i. p. 163.) The gross hypocrisy of
      Charles, in putting his name to a letter containing sentiments like
      these, and thus exciting false expectations in the minds of his
      credulous subjects, must be apparent to all who are acquainted with
      his subsequent history.—_Ed._]

  262 [The narrative of Hume presents an affecting posture of the
      cruelties perpetrated at the time of the Irish insurrection and
      massacre.  (Hist. of Eng. vol. iv. pp. 361-366, Lond. 1825).  It is
      said that “200,000 Protestants in two months space, were murdered,
      and many by exquisite torments, and many more were despoiled of all
      their worldly fortunes.” (May’s Brevary, p. 33. First printed in the
      year 1655. Reprinted London 1813).  For several years after this
      period, Ireland was laid waste by contending armies and by the wild
      rage of the native inhabitants.—_Ed._]

  263 [A reference to this passage may be seen in the Life of the Author
      prefixed to the Work.—_Ed._]

  264 [That is, compensated.—_Ed._]

  265 [When the national covenant was first subscribed by King James and
      his household, and by persons of all ranks, in the year 1581, a
      number of Jesuits and popish priests had unexpectedly made their
      appearance in the country. Various dispensations from the Pope
      likewise had been intercepted, whereby the Catholics were permitted
      to _promise, swear, subscribe, and do what else should be required
      of them, so as in mind they continued firm, and did use their
      diligence to advance in secret the Roman faith_. These
      dispensations, says Archbishop Spotswood, “being showed to the king,
      he caused his minister, Mr John Craig, form a short confession of
      faith, wherein all the corruptions of Rome, as well in doctrine as
      outward rites, were particularly abjured and a clause inserted
      (because of these dispensations) by which the subscribers did call
      God to witness that in their minds and hearts they did fully agree
      to the said confession, and did not feign or dissemble in any sort.
      This confession [or covenant] the king, for an example to others,
      did publicly swear and subscribe; the like was done by the whole
      council and court.” (Hist. of Ch. of Scotland, pp. 308, 309). By an
      ordinance of council and at the desire of the General Assembly, the
      national covenant, along with a Bond for the maintenance of the true
      religion, and the safety of the king’s person and government, was
      again subscribed by persons of all ranks in the year 1590. This Bond
      had been previously entered into and signed by his majesty, and
      various men of rank and station in the kingdom, in anticipation of
      the threatened Spanish invasion, and as a counter association to the
      Holy League, which had been formed by the most powerful popish
      princes in Europe with a view to extirpate the reformed religion.
      When the national covenant was renewed in 1638, and once more
      subscribed by all classes of the community, the Bond which
      accompanied it was altered to suit the circumstances of the times.
      It expressed a solemn determination on the part of those who
      subscribed it to aim at “a personal reformation,” as well as a
      resolution to withhold their sanction from the late innovations in
      religion, “till they be tried and allowed in free Assemblies, and in
      Parliaments.” These are the words—“And because we cannot look for a
      blessing from God upon our proceedings, except with our profession
      and subscription we join such a life and conversation as beseemeth
      Christians who have renewed their covenant with God. We therefore
      faithfully promise for ourselves, our followers, and all others
      under us, both in public, and in our particular families and
      personal carriage, to endeavour to keep ourselves within the bounds
      of Christian liberty, and to be good examples to others of all
      godliness, soberness, and righteousness, and of every duty we owe to
      God and man” (Dunlop’s Confessions vol. II., p. 136.). The following
      corresponding clause is contained in the Solemn League and Covenant,
      which was ratified by the parliaments both of England and Scotland,
      and subscribed generally by the people of both kingdoms in 1643, and
      renewed in Scotland in 1648.—“And because these kingdoms are guilty
      of many sins and provocations against God, and his Son Jesus Christ,
      as is too manifest by our present distresses and dangers, the fruits
      thereof, we profess and declare before God and the world, our
      unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of
      these kingdoms, especially that we have not, as we ought, valued the
      inestimable benefit of the gospel; that we have not laboured for the
      purity and power thereof, and that we have not endeavoured to
      receive Christ in our hearts, nor to walk worthy of him in our
      lives, which are the causes of other sins and transgressions so much
      abounding among us, and our true and unfeigned purpose, desire, and
      endeavour for ourselves, and all others under our power and charge,
      both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and to
      man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the
      example of a real reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath
      and heavy indignation, and establish these churches and kingdoms in
      truth and peace.”—_Ed._]

  266 [Nemo repente fuit turpissimus—Juv. Sat. II. v. 83.]

  267 [Num. xxiii. 21.—_Ed._]

  268 [Jer. l. 20.—_Ed._]

  269 [“About the time of the first renewing of the covenant, there was a
      sensible change to the better in men’s carriage and conversation,
      most of all those who joined in opposing the defection not only
      reforming themselves from common and gross sins such as drunkenness,
      uncleanness, swearing, profaning the Lord’s day, slighting of the
      ordinances, self seeking, covetousness, oppression, &c., but giving
      themselves to the duties of religion and righteousness, such as
      sobriety, edifying discourse, chaste behaviour, hallowing of the
      Lord’s day, diligent seeking of the Lord in secret and in their
      families, attending on the preaching of the word as often as
      opportunity is offered, liberality, love, charity one toward
      another, a public spirit and zeal for God. But all these things are
      now decayed in many and they are again grown as ill if not worse
      than before.” Causes of the Lord’s Wrath against Scotland. pp. 48,
      49. Printed in the year 1653.—_Ed._]

  270 [Much less.—_Ed._]

  271 [An inference unfavourable to the religious character of the
      countrymen of Binning, has been too hastily drawn from this and some
      other passages in his works. (Orme’s Mem. of Dr. Owen, p. 129). The
      late Dr M’Crie observed, that this was like “the attempts of popish
      writers to prove the _Reformation_ a _Deformation_, by culling
      quotations from the sermons of such Protestant preachers as
      inveighed most freely against prevailing vices.” (Christ. Inst. vol.
      xx. p. 624). In the “Representation, Propositions, and
      Protestations,” however, “of divers Ministers, Elders, and
      Professors,” printed in the year 1652, and probably about the time
      this sermon was preached, it is affirmed, that the religious aspect
      of the country had undergone an unhappy change, in the course of the
      two preceding years. “If we look back,” it is said, p. 3 “to that
      which we have already attained of the work of Reformation,
      (notwithstanding our short-coming in the power and practice of
      godliness,) what purity was there of worship, what soundness of
      doctrine, unity of faithful pastors, order and authority of
      assemblies, what endeavours for promoting the power of godliness,
      for purging of the ministry, judicatories and armies, and for
      employing such in places of power and trust as were of constant
      integrity and good affection to the cause, and of blameless
      conversation? And again, if we consider how in place of these,
      within these two years, have succeeded, for unity, division, for
      order, confusion, for purity of worship, outward contempt; for the
      power of godliness, atheism and profaneness; for purging of the
      ministry, judicatories and armies, sinful mixtures; for zeal,
      lukewarmness and toleration,—it is too palpable that we are far gone
      on in the way of declining, having lost much of that which we had
      attained, and that which remains being ready to die.”—_Ed._]

  272 [The author and the other protesters disapproved not only of the
      proceedings of the civil and ecclesiastical judicatures, but of the
      composition of these courts, after the act of classes had been
      rescinded on the 30th of May, 1651. In consequence of the repeal of
      this act, they who, on account of what was in the language of the
      times called malignancy, had formerly been excluded from their
      places in the Scottish parliament, were allowed to take possession
      of their seats, by signing a bond, the terms of which the parliament
      prescribed. This the protesters considered to be wrong as a matter
      both of policy and principle. They likewise declared the assembly,
      which in July, 1651, met at St. Andrews, and afterwards adjourned to
      Dundee, and also that which was held in Edinburgh, in July, 1652, to
      be “unlawful and corrupt,” adding, that “although with the renewing
      of the national covenant, and with the casting out of prelates, and
      the corruptions introduced by them, the Lord was graciously pleased
      to give repentance to not a few who were involved in that defection;
      yet, since that time, there hath always remained a corrupt party of
      insufficient, scandalous, and ill-affected ministers in the kirk,
      enemies to the power of godliness, and obstructors to the work of
      reformation, ... that party perceiving that they were not able to
      endure trial in a time of reformation and purging, began the last
      year to lift up their heads, and speak a language of their own,” &c.
      (Representation, ut supra, pp. 11, 12). The protesters, moreover,
      are found complaining at this period, “how gracious and well
      qualified elders are removed and kept out from church judicatories,
      and ignorant and profane persons brought in, and more endeavoured to
      be brought in in their room, how gifted and gracious young men are
      debarred from entering into the ministry, and a door is opened to
      others, whereof some are loose and profane, and many are ignorant
      and strangers to the work of the Lord upon their own hearts.”—Letter
      from Protesters, subscribed in the name of many ministers, &c. met
      at Edinburgh, 17th of March 1653, by Mr. Andrew Cant, p. 6. See what
      is said in reply to this, in “The Assertor’s Answer,” printed in the
      same year, p. 18.—_Ed._]

  273 [Acknowledge.—_Ed._]

  274 [See note, page 126.—_Ed._]

  275 [Recognise.—_Ed._]

  276 [That is, genius or ingenuity (from _ingenium_, Lat.) “But gif
      corporall doth be commoun to all. Why will ye jeoparde to lois
      eternall life to eschap that which neither ryche nor pure, neither
      wise nor ignorant, proud of stomoke nor febill of corage, and
      finally, no earthlie creature by no craft or engine of man, did ever
      avoid?” Letter of John Knox from Dieppe.—_Ed._]

  277 [That is, “He who cries up his descent boasts of that which is
      another’s.”—_Ed._]

  278 [Much less.—_Ed._]

  279 [This is a literal translation of a Greek proverb which is quoted by
      Aulus Gellius (Noct. Att. lib. xiii. cap. 17) and which has been
      rendered into Latin thus:—_Multa cadunt inter calicem labrumque
      supremum._—_Ed._]

  280 [Diod. Sic. Bibl. lib. i. p. 68.

      Venit ad occasum, mun lique extrema Sesostris,
      Et Pharios currus regum cervicibus egit.
      Lucan lib. x. ver. 276.

        The farthest west our great Sesostris saw,
      Whilst captive kings did his proud chariot draw.
      May’s Translation.

      Sesostris was so much affected and humbled, by the delicate appeal
      of the enslaved monarch, that he immediately commanded him, and the
      other unhappy kings who were harnessed to his car, to be removed
      from it.—Theophylact Hist. Maurit. lib. vi. chap. ii. Joan Tzetz.
      Hist. Chibad. iii. 69.—_Ed._]

  281 [See note page 98.—_Ed._]

  282 [Hear, O heavens and give ear, O earth. ver. 2.—_Ed._]

  283 [Regret, or accusation.—_Ed._]

  284 [Agreeably to the course of discipline in former ages, (Hooker’s
      Eccl. Pol. vol. iii. p. 15,) they who had been convicted of any
      gross crime were required by the First Book of Discipline, (chap.
      ix.) and by subsequent enactments of the Church of Scotland, to
      confess their sin in the hearing of the whole congregation. The same
      thing was required of delinquents by the canons of the Church of
      England. Dr. Grey, in his Impartial Examination of Neale’s History
      of the Puritans, (App. pp. 62-68,) has, from original documents
      which were in his own possession, furnished us with various forms,
      according to which, towards the end of the sixteenth century,
      offenders were appointed to make their confession, in different
      parts of England, in their respective parish-churches. The dues
      which, in cases of scandal, were exacted by the ecclesiastical
      courts of Scotland, were imposed and defined by acts of parliament.
      Power to levy these was given to justices of the peace, who were
      frequently members of the kirk session, or parochial consistory of
      their district. In the year 1648, the General Assembly “recommended
      to every congregation, to make use of the 9th act of the parliament
      1645, at Perth, for having magistrates and justices in every
      congregation.” (Rec. of Kirk of Scot. p. 511, Edn. 1839.) It was in
      this way, it would seem, or from elders acting both in a civil and
      in an ecclesiastical capacity, that the practice of exacting fines
      by kirk sessions arose and was continued. “You object that our
      church sessions did exact fines. But if you consider, that these
      fines, which you mention, are particularly imposed and determined by
      statute, and thereby appointed to be applied to pious uses, and
      therefore the demanding and uplifting thereof only, as well for the
      more summary and effectual restraint of sin, as for the end whereto
      they are destined, is in use to be exercised by kirk sessions, or
      rather by their officers and beadles in deficiency of the
      magistrate, this your scruple must quickly cease.” “The True
      Non-Conformist,” p. 55, printed abroad in the year 1671.—_Ed._]

  285 [See Note, page 375.—_Ed._]

  286 [This passage is quoted in the Life of the Author.—_Ed._]

  287 [That is, the persons who prescribe or appoint it.—_Ed._]

  288 [“The longer I live in the world the less fond am I of that divinity
      that stand upon quirks and subtilties. What should drive us upon
      determining whether faith or repentance goes first? What valuable
      ends or purposes in religion can it serve to promote? What
      edification can it give to an audience to dispute learnedly about a
      point of this nature?... I cannot but heartily approve what Mr
      Robert Blair, an eminent light of this church now in glory, said
      upon the question in hand. He told his people from the pulpit, that
      it was a very needless one. ’Tis just (said he,) as if you should
      ask me, when we are to walk, which foot should we lift first. If we
      should walk to purpose we must make use of both limbs; and so
      despatched the thorny question. I wish we may all imitate the wisdom
      of that great and good man. Is it not sufficient for us to declare
      that both are necessary, without determining the nice point of
      priority and posterority?” (Essay on Gospel and Legal Preaching, by
      a Minister of the Church of Scotland, pp. 22, 23. Edin. 1723.) “Mr.
      Robert Blair, born in Irvine, was first a Regent in the College of
      Glasgow, at which time he was licensed to preach the gospel, and was
      from the beginning zealous for truth and piety.” (Livingston’s
      Memorable Characteristics, p. 73) Mr. Blair died in 1666 in the 73d
      year of his age. (See Memoirs of the Life of Mr. Robert Blair, the
      first part written by himself, p. 128, Edin. 1754.) Mr. James
      Durham, Minister of the High Church of Glasgow, a short time before
      his death, intrusted to him the publication of his “Dying Man’s
      Testament to the Church of Scotland, or a Treatise concerning
      Scandal,” to which Mr. Blair wrote a preface. Principal Baillie
      gives this account of Blair, “Truly, I bear that man record that in
      all his English voyages, in many passages of the Assembly, private
      and public, he contributed as much to the pacifying of our
      differences as any, and much more than many.” Journals and Letters,
      vol. i. p. 306.—_Ed._]

  289 [Or, sin itself.—_Ed._]

  290 [That is, _power_ of persuasion.—_Ed._]

  291 [This is the word in the first Edition. It would seem to have been
      substituted for _arrive_.—_Ed._]

  292 [That is, unless you please.—_Ed._]

  293 [A proverb, which signifies that conscience does not deceive, and
      that its testimony is as overwhelming as that of a thousand
      witnesses—_Quintil Inst Orator_ lib. v. chap. xi.—_Ed._]

  294 [That is, not to will.—_Ed._]

  295 [See Note, page 96. _Si vis cadem semper vella, vera oportet
      velis._—“If you are desirous to have always similar wishes, it is
      necessary that you should wish for things that are proper.” _Senec.
      Epist._ xcv.—_Ed._]

  296 [That is, laid open or explained.—_Ed._]

  297 [Dispone is a Scots law expression. It signifies to convey a right
      or property to another.—_Ed._]

  298 See:

      Non bene conveniunt, nec in una sede morantur,
      Majestus et amor.

      _Ovid. Met._ lib. ii. v. 846.—_Ed._]

  299 [The name Immanuel ונמע לא signifies, _God with us_. Immelanu ונא
      לאמע signifies, _we with God_.—_Ed._]

  300 [The Goel (לאג), or nearest kinsman, was, by the Mosaic law,
      entitled not only to redeem a forfeited inheritance, but to avenge
      the blood of any of the family, by slaying the murderer, if he found
      him out of a city of refuge. He was therefore called the redeemer,
      or “avenger of blood,” Josh. xx. 3.—_Ed._]

  301 [The word λυτρον denotes the price of redemption, or that which is
      given to purchase the freedom of those who are in a state of
      captivity. “Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered to but
      to minister, and to give his life a ransom (λυτρον) for many” (Matt.
      xx. 28, Mark x. 45). αντιλυτρον is but once used in the New
      Testament. Its gratification is a counter-price, or the ransom that
      is paid when the life or person of one is given for that of another.
      “For there is but one God and one mediator between God and men, the
      man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom (αντιλυτρον) for all,” 1
      Tim. ii. 5, 6. Vide Leigh’s Critica Sacra.—_Ed._]

  302 [That is, proposed.—_Ed._]

  303 [That is, however.—_Ed._]

  304 [Verse 6.—_Ed._]

  305 [That is, place it upon God or charge him with it.—_Ed._]

  306 [That is, adorned itself.—_Ed._]

  307 [_Scottice_ for _than_.—_Ed._]

  308 [There is some obscurity in this sentence. The sentiment that is
      expressed, however, seems to be this:—_Much love to a particular
      object makes the act of seeking or praying for it to be loved
      more._—_Ed._]

  309 [That is, an earnest (_arrha_ Lat.).—_Ed._]

  310 [Yule is a name that is still applied to Christmas, in the Northern
      parts of England as well as in Scotland. “This name was originally
      given to the great annual feast celebrated among the northern
      nations, at the time of the winter solstice in honour of the sun.
      Hence Odin was denominated Julvatter, or the _Father of Yule_.”
      (Jamieson’s Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish language.) “He
      praised God that he was born in such a time, as in the time of the
      light of the gospel—to such a place as to be king of such a kirk,
      the sincerest kirk of the world. The kirk of Geneva keep Pasch and
      _Yule_; what have they for them? They have no institution. As for
      our neighbour kirk in England their service is an evil sad mass in
      English, they want nothing of the mass but the liftings.” (Speech of
      King James VI, to the Central Assembly of the Church of Scotland, at
      Edinburgh, August 1590. Calderwood’s Hist. of the Ch. of Scot. p.
      206.) What is called the birch or “birk in Yule even’” was probably
      the _Yule clog_. On Christmas eve at no very remote period, the
      _Yule clog_, which was a large shapeless piece of wood, selected for
      the purpose, was dragged by a number of persons bearing in their
      hand large candles, and placed by them on the fire where it was to
      be burned in compliance with an ancient superstitious custom. Our
      author may refer to this practice or perhaps he had simply in view
      the old proverb, “He’s as bare as the birk at Yule.”—Henderson’s
      Scottish Proverbs, p. 47. Edin. 1832.—_Ed._]

  311 [The records of the kirk session of the parish of Govan, during the
      incumbency of the author, after having been lost for many years,
      were fortunately recovered not long ago. These show the great
      strictness of the ecclesiastical discipline of those days. There
      were not fewer than twenty-two elders in the kirk session. Each of
      these had a ward or district assigned to him, of which it was his
      duty to take a particular superintendence. It was hardly possible,
      therefore, that any irregularity of which a parishioner was guilty
      could be concealed, and consequently, what is recorded in the
      register is to be regarded, not as a specimen, but as the gross
      amount of the immorality of the parish. Some may affect to ridicule
      the severe notice that was taken of particular instances of
      misconduct. But the cognizance that was taken of such things is a
      proof of the high tone of moral and religious feeling that prevailed
      at that time among the office bearers of the church. Individuals, we
      find, were brought before the kirk session, on account of family and
      domestic feuds, for quarrelling with their neighbours, for solitary
      instances of drunkenness, and of the use of profane language, for
      carrying water on the Lord’s day, for sleeping in church, for
      resorting to taverns on the Sabbath, for calumny, and for neglecting
      the education of their children, &c. They who were convicted of such
      offences, were sometimes rebuked in private by an elder, and at
      other times by the minister in the presence of the eldership. It was
      only in the case of graver offences, the number of which was
      comparatively small, that a reproof was administered in the presence
      of the congregation.—_Ed._]

  312 [In the “Causes of the Lord’s Wrath against Scotland, agreed upon by
      the Commission of the General Assembly,” 1650, “Backsliding and
      defection from the covenants and our solemn vows and engagements,”
      is specified (p. 46) to be “one of the greatest and most
      comprehensive and provoking sins in the land.” _Printed in the year
      1653._—_Ed._]

  313 [This is the language of a man who did not use “at any time
      flattering words,” or utter to his people “smooth things.” From what
      he says here, however, and in some other sermons, and from
      corresponding evidence which might be adduced, we are forced to
      conclude that the well-known description which Kirkton has given of
      the state of religion in Scotland in those days, (Hist. of Ch. of
      Scot. pp. 48, 54, 64) must be too highly coloured. The presence of a
      large military force and a state of civil warfare could not but be
      prejudicial, in various ways, to the religion and morality of a
      country. I am perfectly aware that the authority of Lord Clarendon,
      Bishop Burnet, Milton, and others, may be brought forward to prove
      that the parliamentary soldiers were kept under the strictest
      discipline, and were remarkable for their grave deportment. But I
      know likewise that the characters of not a few of those soldiers are
      seriously affected by the offensive details of the ecclesiastical
      records of the parish with which Binning was connected.—_Ed._]

  314 [See Note, p. 368.—_Ed._]

  315 [Or together.—_Ed._]

  316 [That is, explain.—_Ed._]

  317 [Coldly or indifferently.—_Ed._]

  318 [Languishing.—_Ed._]

  319 [“Upon Sunday, the 27th of February [1642], a declaration was read
      out of the old town pulpit [Aberdeen] by our minister, Mr William
      Strahan, showing the state of the Protestants in Ireland, and how
      their wives and bairns were miserably banished, and forced to flee
      into the west parts of Scotland for refuge, and the land not able to
      sustain them. It was found expedient that ilk parish within the
      kingdom should receive a collection of ilk man’s charity for their
      help and support, whereupon was collected of this poor parish
      fourscore pounds.” (Spalding’s “History of the Troubles in
      Scotland,” vol. i. p. 34. Aberdeen, 1792.) “As a body, the
      presbyterians [in Ireland] suffered less by the ravages of the
      rebellion than any other class. The more influential of their
      ministers, and the principal part of their gentry, had previously
      retired to Scotland to escape the tyranny of Strafford and the
      severities of the bishops and were thus providentially preserved.”
      (Dr. Reid’s “History of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland,” vol. i,
      p. 339.) After the execution of Charles I, an oath called the
      _Engagement_, was framed by the English parliament, requiring all
      persons to be “faithful to the commonwealth of England as now
      established, without a king or house of lords.” The Irish ministers
      refused to take this oath. The republicans were irritated by this
      refusal, and by the loyalty of the ministers, who publicly preached
      against them. They therefore imprisoned some of the ministers, while
      others fled to the woods, and some to Scotland. At length, at a
      council of war held at Carrickfergus in March, 1651, a formal act of
      banishment from the kingdom was passed against them. “Those that
      staid in the country, though they could not exercise their ministry
      orderly as formerly, and though their stipends were sequestered, yet
      they, changing their apparel to the habit of countrymen, travelled
      in their own parishes frequently, and sometimes in other places,
      taking what opportunities they could to preach in the fields, or in
      barns and glens, and were seldom in their own houses. They persuaded
      the people to constancy in the received doctrines, in opposition to
      the wild heresies which were then spreading, and reminding them of
      their duty to their lawful magistrates, the king and parliament, in
      opposition to the usurption of the times, and in their public
      prayers always mentioning the lawful magistrate. This continued
      throughout the summer of 1651, at which time there was diligent
      search made anew for them. Some were again taken, others fled, and
      those who were taken were imprisoned first, for a time, in
      Carrickfergus, in lodgings where they quartered; and thereafter,
      Colonel Venables not gaining any ground upon them, they were sent to
      Scotland.” Adair’s MS. apud Dr. Reid’s Hist. vol. ii. p. 246-248.
      See also a narrative of the sufferings of the Irish Presbyterians,
      for their religion and loyalty, in the “Sample of Jet-Black
      Calumny,” p. 214.—_Ed._]

  320 [What is perhaps meant is, it _swelleth_ much.—_Ed._]

  321 [That is, _that can lay claim to the favour of his Saviour even when
      his Saviour turns away his face from him_.—_Ed._]

  322 [What is here said would seem to fix the date of this sermon. It
      appears to have been preached before the battle of Dunbar.—_Ed._]

  323 [That is, strongly.—_Ed._]

  324 [That is, his utmost.—_Ed._]

  325 [It is evident from this, and similar references to recent events,
      that the Case of Conscience must have been written in the early part
      of the year 1651. The proceedings of the commission of the General
      Assembly, from July 1650 to July 1661, fill a large MS volume of
      more than 400 pages. These proceedings have never been printed, with
      the exception of certain detached papers, which are found engrossed
      in the controversial pamphlets and journals of the times.—Peterkin’s
      “Records of the Kirk of Scotland,” p. 592.—_Ed._]

  326 [“The Gen. Assembly itself at Edinburgh, in July thereafter, did,
      upon the 19 of that moneth, publish a Declaration, in which they
      give warning concerning Malignants thus:—‘We exhort all those who
      are in publick trust in ye comitee of Estates, or otherwise, not
      only to take good head of their private walking that it be suitable
      to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and of their families and followers,
      that they bee void of offence, but also be straight in the cause and
      covenant, and not to seek themselves, nor befriend any who have been
      enemies to the Lord’s work, self-seeking, and conniving at, and
      complying with, and pleading for Malignants, having been publick
      sins that have been often complained of; and we wish to God yr were
      no cause to complain of these things still, notwithstanding of the
      solemne confession of them, and ingadging against them. God forbid
      that any mocke the Lord. He is a severe avenger of all such things,
      and there is the more reason at this time not to own Malignants,
      because it is ordinary with men so to be taken with the sense of the
      dangers such is before them as not to look back to that which is
      behind hem. There may be inclinations in some to employ these men,
      and make use of them, that we may be strengthened in this and in our
      neighbour land, but God hath hitherto cursed all such counsels, and
      blasted such resolutions, and if we shall again fall into this sin,
      as our guilt shal be so much the greater by reasone of many promises
      and ingadgments to the contrair, so we may expect ane heavier
      judgment from the Lord upon it. Let us keep the Lord’s way, and
      though we be few and weake, the Lord shall be with us, and make us
      to prosper and prevail. They are not fit for the work of God, and
      for the glorious dispensations of his more than ordinary works of
      power and providence in these times, who cannot beleive nor act any
      thing beyonde what sense and reasone can make clear unto them from
      the beginning unto ye end of their undertakings. Former experiences
      and present straits call upon us that we should act and follow our
      deutie in such a way as may magnify the Lord, and make it known to
      others that we may live by Faith.’—‘The Waters of Sihor,’ or the
      Lands Defectione, By Mr. James Guthrie, Minister of Stirling,”
      Wodrow MSS vol. xvii. p. 41, in Bib. Ad.—_Ed._]

  327 [“At Stirlinge, the 12 of Septem. 1650. A shorte declaration and
      warninge to all the congregations of the Kirk of Scotland, from the
      commissioners of the General Assembly.

      “Albeit the Lord quhosse judgments are unsearchable, and quhosse
      wayes past finding out, has brought the land werey low wnder the
      hand of ane prewaillinge enemey, yet must we not forbeare to declair
      the mynd of God, nor vthers refusse to hearken thereto. It wer
      superfluous to give answer to the maney calumnies and reproches that
      are blazed abroad, for albeit in every thing we cannot justify the
      conducte of the armey, yet we hold it our deutie to desyre every one
      not to beleive groundless reports, bot rather to eye the Lord, and
      looke vpe to the hand that smytts them. And therfor, in the first
      place, we exhort and warne all the inhabitants of the land, to
      searche out ther iniquities, and to be deeplie humbled before the
      Lord, that he may turn away his wraith from us. The Lord hath
      wounded us and chasteissed us sore, wiche sayes that our iniquities
      are muche, and that our sins are increessed. It concerneth the King
      to mourne for all the grivous provocations of his father’s housse,
      and for all his auen guiltiness, and to consider if he hes come to
      the covenant, and joined himselve to the Lord, upone politicke
      interests, for gaining a croune to himselve rather then to advance
      religione and righteousness, that it is iniquitie quhilk God will
      not forgett excepte it be speedilie repented offe. It concerns our
      nobles and judges to consider wither ther carriadge in publicke
      matters be straight and equall, or rather savoring of seeking
      themselves and the thinges of this worlde, and how they walke in
      ther families, and in ther privat conversations. There is in maney a
      grate deall of perversenes and incorrigiblenes in regard of
      forsaking some and performing some deuties, notwithstanding publecke
      confessions and engagements, and this cannot bot heighlie provock
      the Lord. And it concerneth the officers of the armey, especially
      thesse quho are cheiffe among them, to weight weell quhat the Lord
      hes against them, and to repent of ther diffidence and carnall way
      of acting and undervaluing of God’s people. And ministers have also
      neid to searche themselves concerning ther faithfullness to be
      sound, for wiche God is angrie, doutles even amongest thesse is
      muche negligence. Albeit the Lord hes suffred that armey of
      perfideous and blasphemous sectaries to prevaill. Yet God forbid
      that the land should complay with him, quhatever may be the
      plauseable and faire carriage of some of that enimey, yet doubtless
      there is ane levin of error and hypocrassy amongest them wich all
      the lovers of treuth wold decern and avoyd. As the Lord hes trayed
      the stability and integritie of his people in the land heirtofore,
      by the prevailing of malignants, so doeth he now tray them by the
      prevailing of sectaries, and wee trust they will thinke it ther
      deutie and commendatione to prove staidfast against them als weill
      as the other.

      “3. Nather wold men be lesse cairfull and active to opposse the
      enimey, then they have beine in opposeing malignants heirtofor, our
      religione, lives, liberties and estaits, are als muche in hazard now
      as ever, all the ordinances of Jesus Christ in the land are in
      danger, and the foundatione lyke to be overturnid by thesse men quho
      are oblidged, by the band of the covenant, to mantiene all thesse
      and it wer a grate guiltines to ly doune and complay, and crutche
      under the burden of the strange impositions that they will lay upon
      us, and as men without head, to suffer our land to be brought in
      bondage and ourselves to be robbed of all thesse things quhilk are
      most precious and deire to us. If wee should doe so, the Lord wold
      be angrie with us, and our posterity could not bot curss us.

      “4. We would not think that all danger from the malignants is now
      gone, seeing that ther is a grate maney suche in the land, quho
      still retein ther former principales, therfor we wolde, with als
      muche watchfullnes and tendernes now as ever, avoyde ther snars, and
      beware of complayance and conjunctione with them, and take head,
      that under a pretence of doing for the king and kingdome they gett
      not power and strenth unto ther handes, for advanceing and
      promoveing ther old malignant desseinges. Doubtles our saftie is in
      holding fast our former principales, and keeping a straighte faithe,
      without declyning to the right hand ore to the lefte.

      “5. It concernes all the inhabitants of the land to bewarre of
      murmuring and complaning against God’s dispensations, and
      questioning the treuthe and goodnes of our causse or quarreling with
      God, or blaming or casting off the covenant, becausse of aney thing
      that hath befallin them, that wer a grate iniquitie not to be
      pardoned. Lett us beare the indignatione of the Lord patientlie,
      becausse wee have sinned against him, untill he plead our causse and
      execut judgment for us, he will bring us fourthe to the light, and
      we shall behold his righteousnes.”—Sir James Balfour’s Annales, vol.
      iv. pp. 98-102.—_Ed._]

  328 [“Causes of a soleme publicke humiliatione upone the defait of the
      army, to be keepit throughout all the congregations of the Kirk of
      Scotland.

      “Albeit soleme publicke humiliations hes beine muche slighted, and
      gone about in a formall way by maney in this land, so that it is not
      one of the least of our provocations that we have drawn neire to God
      with our mouthes and keepit our heartes fare from him, for wich the
      Lord hath turned the wisdome of the wysse unto foollishnes, and the
      strenthe of the strong men unto weaknes, yet seing it is a dutie
      that hath oftin provin comfortable to uswards, God doeth new call us
      in a speciall way by a singular peice of dispensatione, and knowing
      that all quho are acquainted with God in the land will make
      conscience of it, wee conceave it expedient that the quhole land be
      humbled for the causses following.

      “1. The continued ignorance and profanitie of the bodie of the land,
      and the obstinacey and incorrigiblenes of maney, notwithstanding of
      all the caires that God hath takin upon us by his word, and by his
      workes of mercy and judgement, to teache us in the knowledge of his
      name, and to refraine us from the eivell of our wayes.

      “2. The manifest provocations of the kinges housse wiche we feare
      are not throughlie repented off, nor forsaken by him to this day,
      togidder with the crooked and precipitant wayes that wer takin by
      sundrie of our statesmen for caring the trettey with the king.

      “3. The bringing home with the king a grate maney malignants, and
      indevoring to keepe some of them about him, and maney of them in the
      kingdome, notwithstanding of publicke resolutions to the contrarey.

      “4. The not purging of the kinges familie from malignant and profane
      men, and the constituting of the samen of weill affected and godlie
      persons, albeit it hathe beine oftin pressed upone the parliament
      and comittee of Estaits, undertaking and promessed to be performed
      by them.

      “5. The leveing of a most malignant and profaine guard of horsse to
      be aboute the king, quho having beine sent for to be purgit aboute 2
      dayes before the defaite, were suffred to be and feight in our
      armey.

      “6. The exceiding grate slaknes of maney and aversnes and
      untowardnes of some in the cheiffe judicatories of the kingdome and
      in the armey, in guid motione and publick deuties, especially in
      thesse thinges that concerne the purging of judicatories and the
      armey from malignant and scandalous persons, and filling all places
      of powre and trust with men of knowen integritie and trust, and of a
      blamles and Christiane conversatione, togider with grate
      inclinations to keepe and bring in malignants to the judicatories
      and to the armey, as if the land could not be gydit and defendit
      without thesse, and grate repyning and craying out against all that
      is done to the contrarie, and studding to make the same ineffectual.

      “7. The exceiding grate diffidence of some of the cheiffe leaders of
      our armey, and others amongest us quho thought wee could not be
      saved bot by ane numerous armey, who quhen wee have gottin many
      thousands togider, wold not hazard to acte aney thing,
      notwithstanding that God offred faire opportunities and advantages,
      and fitted the spiritts of the souldiers for ther deutie, for
      carnall confidence that was in maney of the armey, to the dispysing
      of the enimey and promising victorie to themselves without eying of
      God.

      “8. The lousnes, insolencie and oppressione, of maney in the armey,
      and the litle or no caire that was taken by maney to preserve the
      corne, by wich it hath come to passe that verey much of the food of
      the poore people of the land have beine neidlesly destroyed, and
      quhile wee even remember this, we wishe that the prophanitie and
      oppressione of sundrie of oure officers and souldiers in Ingland,
      quhen we were fighting for the assistance of the parliament of that
      kingdome, may not be forgottin, because it was matter of stumbling
      in that land, so it is lyke it is ane of the causses of the sore
      indignatione now manifested against us by the hands of thesse men.

      “9. Our grate unthankfullnes for former mercies and deliverances,
      and even for maney tokins of the Lords favor and goodness towards
      our present armey quhile they wer togider, and the grate impatience
      of spirit that was to be seine in maney thesse weekes past, quhilk
      made them limitt the Lord, and to compleine and weerie of his
      delaying of ane deliverance.

      “10. The enving and eyeing of the kings intrest and quarrell by
      maney, without subordinatione to religione and the liberties and
      saveties of this kingdomes.

      “11. The carnall selve seiking and crooked way of sundrie in our
      judicatories and armies, quho make ther employments and places
      rather ane matter of intrest and gain and preferment to themselves
      then of advancing religione and righteousness in the land.

      “12. The not putting difference betwix thesse that fear God, and
      thesse that fear him not, for our services, our companie, our
      employments, bot acompting all men alike, maney times preferring
      thesse quho have nothing of God in them.

      “13. The exceiding grate negligence that is in grate ones, and maney
      others, in performing the deuties in ther families notwithstanding
      of our former soleme acknowledgment of the samen; as also, our
      neglecte of the deuties of mutuall edificatione, and grate
      unfruitfullness and barrennes that is to be seene amongest all sorts
      of persons; togider with the following of deutie with a grate deall
      of mixture of carnall affections and fleschly wisdome wich grives
      the Spirit of God, and takes away muche of the beutie of the Lords
      image from our judicatories.

      “As we wold be humbled for thesse thinges, so wold wee also intreat
      the Lord that he wold sanctifie this affliction to his people that
      they nather dispysse his chestisings, nor faint quhen they are
      rebukit of him, bot that they may beare his indignatione patiently,
      and cleive steadfestly to the treuthe, and the covenants, and the
      causse of God without yeilding to the power of the enimey, or
      receaving ther errors, or complaying ather with them on the one
      hand, ore malignants on the other, and that the Lord wold poure out
      of his Spirit upon the people, that ther spiritts may be raissed
      unto ther deutie, and that they may be filled and furnished of God
      with wisdome and resolutione to acte against their enimies for the
      honor of God, ther awen preservatione; and that the Lord wold not
      suffer them to be tempted above that whiche they are able to beare,
      bot that he wold break the yoke of ther oppressors from off ther
      neckes, and give them salvatione and deliverance; earnestly to
      intreat the Lord in private and in publicke that he wold preserve
      with us the ordinances of Jesus Christe, the kingdom, the kings
      maties persone, the ministrie, from the power of ther enimies, quho
      seekes the destruction of all.”—Id. pp. 102-107.—_Ed._]

  329 [See the Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland, Anno 1650, xxx
      Novembris, vol. vi. p. 544.—_Ed._]

  330 [“About this time the king’s head was filled by some unhappy men
      about him, especially Dr. Fraser [who was the king’s physician] and
      Henry Seymour, with many extreme fears. After the affront at Leith,
      they had raised suspicions in his mind, which, upon the defeat at
      Dunbar, were increased, but by the separate rising in the west
      brought near to the head of a design to break the treaty with him,
      and agree upon his expences with Cromwell. Upon these motions the
      malignants in the north stept in, and by the forenamed persons began
      a correspondence for the raising of the north for his present
      service, under the conduct of Middleton. So many noblemen were on
      this unhappy enterprise. Crawford was given out for its head and
      contriver, albeit be professed to me his opposition to it.
      Lauderdale knew of it; but he has said so far to me, that I believe
      him he opposed it to his power. However, the thing was so foolishly
      laid, and the king, by the counsels of those about him, was so
      various in giving order for that rising, sometimes commanding and
      then countermanding to rise, that all the party was put in a
      confusion; yet, by the information of these foresaid fools, the king
      being put in fear, that Lorn, going timely to bury a soldier, was
      drawing together his regiment to lay hands on him, contrary to his
      former resolutions, he took horse with some two or three, as if it
      had been to go a hawking, but crossed Tay, and stayed not till he
      came to Clowe in Angus. By the way he repented of the journey, and
      meeting with Lauderdale at Diddup, and Balcarras coming from Dundee
      by accident, was almost persuaded by them to return, yet by Diddup
      and Buchan he was kept in Clowe. But when he came to that
      miserably-accommodated house, and in place of the great promised
      forces, he saw nothing but a small company of Highlanders, he
      presently sent for Robert Montgomery, who was near with his
      regiment, and without more ado, did willingly return, exceedingly
      confounded and dejected for that ill-advised start. When it was
      first blazed abroad, it filled all good men with great grief, and to
      my own heart it brought one of the most sensible sorrows that in all
      nay life I had felt. Yet his quick return of his own accord, and his
      readiness to give all satisfaction for that failure, and his kind
      receiving by the committee of states, among whom he ever sat after
      his return (though never before) turned our grief suddenly into joy,
      his absence not lasting above two full days. Yet all men were not so
      soon satisfied.

      “Sundry of them who had been on the plot, fearing a discovery and
      punishment, flew to arms; Lewis Gordon, Ogilvie, Athol, and others,
      under Middleton’s command, putting out a number of fair pretexts for
      their rising. This might have destroyed all; yet, by God’s mercy,
      all was quickly quieted. D. Leslie, with all his horse, marched
      towards them; the king wrote earnestly to them to lay down. The
      committee of estates sent a fair act of indemnity, and so without
      more ado they went home.”—Baillie’s Letters, vol. ii. p. 356.

      Middleton, like the Marquis of Montrose, had been at one time a
      covenanter. After the Restoration, he was appointed to open the
      Scottish parliament, as his Majesty’s commissioner. But this did not
      prevent him from taking part in the debate, when the Act Rescissory,
      by which the presbyterian form of church polity was completely
      destroyed, was under consideration. Mr. David Dickson, along with
      some others, was delegated by the presbytery of Edinburgh to present
      to the Earl of Middleton a petition upon this subject. Middleton
      told Mr. Dickson “he was mistaken if he thought to terrify him with
      papers,—he was no coward.” Mr. Dickson dryly replied, “They knew
      well he was no coward ever since the bridge of Dee.” This was a
      skirmish which took place on the 19th of June, 1638, in which
      Middleton had displayed great zeal for the covenant, in opposition
      to Charles I. He took no notice of Mr. Dickson’s sarcastic
      remark.—Kirkton’s “History of the Church of Scotland,” p.
      118.—_Ed._]

  331 [This was the “Acte of Pardon and Indemnitie, granted by the King
      and Comittee of Estaites to the Northerne Rebells, 26 October, 1650,
      and proclaimed at the mercat crosse of Perth, the 29th ditto, by
      Rosse Heraulde, A.L.” See Balfour’s Annales, vol. iv. p. 132.—_Ed._]

  332 [He refers to “The Northerne Band and Othe of Engagement sent by
      Mideltone to L. Generall David Lesley, 26th of October, 1650.”
      Middleton and the other subscribers of the Bond promise and swear
      that they “shall manteine the trew religione, as it is established
      in Scotland; the covenant, league and covenant, the Kings Majesties
      persone, prerogative, gratnes and authoritie; the previllidges of
      parliament and freedome of the subjects.”—Id. p. 129.—_Ed._]

  333 [See the Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland, ut supra.—_Ed._]

  334 [The reader will find a very interesting account of the negociations
      at Breda, in “A Brief Historical Relation of the Life of Mr. John
      Livingston, Minister at Ancrum in Scotland, and last at Rotterdam in
      Holland,” who was one of the commissioners sent from Scotland to
      Breda (pp. 39-52. Glasgow, 1754). Dr. Cook, who quotes from the MS.,
      does not seem to have been aware that the Life of Livingston was
      ever printed. See his “History of the Church of Scotland,” vol. iii.
      p. 177, _note_.—_Ed._]

  335 [“Immediately after the Scots army had marched in to England to the
      parliament’s assistance, did the King commissionate Montrose to
      raise a war in Scotland, by which he made account either to oblige
      the covenanters to recall their army out of England, or at least to
      make that nation smart for their boldness.  And this indeed he did
      effectually, for landing in the West Highlands, with a party of
      bloody Irish papists, who had been but a little before clashed in
      the cruel massacre of the innocent protestants he overran the whole
      country and beat the covenanters forces in six bloody conflicts. His
      war, I believe, was the most cruel in the world.” (Kirkton’s
      History, p. 43) “Montrose’s History is written in good Latin
      (supposed to be by Bishop Wishart), but with as little truth as most
      in the world.”  Id. p. 122.—_Ed._]

  336 [Sir James Turner and Colonel Urrey were sent to the west of
      Scotland with their respective regiments, in 1648 to overawe and
      reduce to obedience, those who were averse to Hamilton’s Engagement.
      (Guthry’s Memoirs, p. 272 second edition). This service seems to
      have been perfectly congenial to the habits and taste of Sir James
      Turner, who appears, says Sir Walter Scott, (“Tales of a
      Grandfather,” vol. ii. p. 211. Edin. 1829), by the account he gives
      of himself in his Memoirs to have been an unscrupulous plunderer,
      and other authorities describe him as a fierce and dissolute
      character. On coming to Glasgow, the way he took, as he himself
      tells us with considerable _gusto_, “to make the hardest headed
      Covenanter in the toune to forsake the kirk and side with the
      Parliament,” was to quarter on suspected persons “two or three
      troopers and halfe a dozen musketeers.” In the same heartless strain
      he proceeds to say—“Finding my Glasgow men groune prettie tame, I
      tenderd them a short paper, which whoever signed I promisd, sould be
      presentlie easd of all quartering.” It was nothing but a submission
      to all orders of Parliament, agreeable to the Covenant. This paper
      was afterward, by some merrie men christend Turner’s Covenant.
      (Memoirs of his own Life and Times by Sir James Turner, pp. 53, 54
      printed at Edinburgh, by the Bannatyne Club, in 1829). As he was
      deprived of his rank by the Act of Classes in 1649, Sir James Turner
      was one of those pretended penitents, of whom according to Bishop
      Burnet, “all churches were full” after the passing of the Public
      Resolutions. (Memoires of the Duke of Hamilton, p. 425.) “Martii 12,
      1651. The qlk day was given in ane lettre from the comission of the
      kirk, the tenour whereof follows,—Reverende and loving brethrene,
      having received a petition how general adjutant James Turner,
      acknowledgeing verie humblie his sin, in ye great accession he had
      to that unlawful engadgement against England, and partcularlie his
      impious carriage in your citie by perturbing divine service, he
      seems to be verie sensible of his former miscarriage. We however
      still continue him under conference wt presbyteries hear. Bot if we
      shall find him in a condition to mak publik satisfaction, we desire
      to know of you, if he can com and staye there wt safetie, and
      without danger from the enemie, that he may satisfie in ye kirk of
      Glasgow, which we thinke the most convenient place for removing the
      scandal, that if he can be secur, he may be appoynted to com to you,
      and if not, we may tak such other course as shall be thought most
      convenient. We have no more to say, bot commending you in all
      thingis to ye Lordis direction, we remain your loving brethrene the
      comissioners of ye generall assemblie. Perth, 13 Feb 1651. Sic
      subscribitur, Mr. Robert Douglas, Moderator.” (Records of the
      Presbytery of Glasgow.)

      What Principal Baillie says of the oppressive conduct of Sir James
      Turner at Glasgow, during the time of the Engagement, is this—“Some
      regiments of horse and foot were sent to our town, with orders to
      quarter on no other but the magistrates, council, session, and their
      lovers. These orders were executed with rigour. On the most
      religious people of our town, huge burdens did fall. On some 10, on
      some 20, on others 30 soldiers and more, did quarter, who, beside
      meat and drink, wine, and good cheer, and whatever they called for,
      did exact cruelly their daily pay, and much more. In ten days, they
      cost a few honest but mean people, 40,000 lb., besides plundering of
      those whom necessity forced to flee from their houses.” Letters and
      Journals, vol. ii. p. 294.—_Ed._]

  337 [“Stirling, 27 Sept, 1650: The comittee of Estaits considering the
      necessarey devine lying upone them in prosecutione of the acte of
      parliament and according to the frequent and serious remonstrances
      of the commissione of the churche for purging of the kings familey
      of all profaine, scandalous, malignant, and disaffected persons, and
      that it be constituted of such as are pious, and well affected to
      the cause and covenant qwho have not opposed the same by ther
      counsells and actions. And lykewayes considering the grate offence
      hes beine taken that the persons after nominated have not removed
      from courte nor departed out of the kingdome respectively, and
      having taken also into consideratione the report of the sub
      comittee, appoynted to think on the purging of the kings familey
      doth heirby therfor ordaine and command, The French Marques of
      Villaneuffe, The Earle of Cleveland, Lord Wentworthe his son,
      Viscount Grandeson, Lord Volmett, Lord Withringtone, Robert Long,
      Secretarey, Sr Edward Walker, Garter, Mr. Progers, Groome of His
      Maties Bed chamber, Master Lane, Master Marche, Colonell Darcey, Mr.
      Antoney Jacksone, Major Jacksone, Colonell Loes, Master Oder, Under
      Secretary Lord St. Paule, Sr Philipe Musgrave, Sr Faithful Fortskew,
      Sr Timothey Featherstons, L Coll Meutis, Collonell Carbraithe, to
      depart the courte within 24 houres, and to remove out of the
      kingdome within 20 dayes after intunatione, and Doctor Fraser and Sr
      George Melveill to withdraw from the court within 24 houres.” (Sir
      James Balfour’s Annales of Scotland, vol. iv. pp. 109, 110). Sir
      Edward Walker, whose name is included in the above list, says,
      “Money being ordered for my transportation, which I never got I was
      connived at for about three months, and therein had the opportunity
      to collect and write my observations of the Affairs as they then
      stood. Yet upon Friday the 4th of October, I was, by Sir James
      Balfour, lion king of arms, commanded from court, which I presently
      obeyed, and about a month after imbarqued for Holland, where I
      resided several years after.” (Historical Discourses. Contents
      folio. Lond. 1705.) The circumstances in which this zealous royalist
      was placed, together with his national prejudices, may account for
      his extreme credulity, in believing that the clergy of Scotland,
      after the battle of Dunbar, offered up such impious prayers as he
      has ascribed to them. (Id. p. 182) It was not to be expected that
      Mr. Hume would neglect the opportunity which was thus afforded him
      of covering with ridicule the Scottish covenanters. (See Hume’s
      Account of the Battle of Dunbar.) Rapin vindicates the conduct of
      the Estates, in inquiring the removal from about the person of the
      king, of some of his friends and attendants’ men he says, “whose
      principles and maxims were directly opposite to the interests of
      Scotland and who were the kingdoms reputed enemies.” Hist. of Eng.
      vol. ii. p. 581. Lond. 1833—_Ed._]

  338 [“At the nod of a prince.”—_Ed._]

  339 [That is, “He says, I say, he denies, I deny.” It is the parasite
      Gnatho that is referred to. Terence makes the shameless sycophant
      proclaim his own infamy—

      Quicquid dicunt, laudo, id rursum si negant, laudo id quoque
      Negat quis? Nego. Ait? Aio.—_Eunuchi_ Act ii. Sc. ii.

      “Whatever they say, I applaud. If again they deny that, I applaud
      that too. Does any one deny a thing? I deny it. Does he affirm it? I
      affirm it.”—_Ed._]

  340 [That is, the characteristics.—_Ed._]

  341 [For an account of the origin, progress, and unsuccessful issue of
      Hamilton’s Engagement or the Unlawful Engagement, as it was also
      called, the reader may consult Stevenson’s History of the Church and
      State of Scotland, book iv. chapter x., Cook’s History of the Church
      of Scotland, vol. iii. p. 149.—_Ed._]

  342 [Old MS.—_Ed._]

  343 [“Pearth Novemb. 29, 1650—The Comrs. of the Gen. Assemb. considering
      the great sin and offence these men are guilty of, who have had
      accessione to the late Rebellione in ye north, therefore they doe
      appoint that all these persons that were actually in arms at the
      late rebellione, and all such as subscribed the Bond and
      Declaratione emited by them to be suspended from the communione till
      the nixt Gen. Assemb. to which there are hereby refered for further
      censure, and for all others that had any accessione by counsel or
      otherwise, to that rebellione, or to the King’s withdrawing from his
      Counsell, refers to Presbytries to try diligently in their severall
      bounds these persons and the degree of their guiltiness and to
      report the same, with the evidences and proofs thereof, to the nixt
      meeting of this Commissione.” A. Ker.—“The Waters of Sihor.” Wodrow
      MSS., vol. xvii. pp. 44-45.—_Ed._]

  344 [James, Marquis of Montrose. After his forfeiture by the Scottish
      parliament he was usually styled in their Act and proclamations
      _James Graham_, and sometimes _James Graham, late Earl of Montrose_.
      Bishop Guthry says (Memoirs, p. 175) that it was considered a proof
      of malignancy to distinguish him and the Earl of Auly by their
      titles. In a letter to Principal Baillie, 19th March 1649, Mr. Spang
      mentions that he was admitted to an audience by the Prince of Orange
      at the Hague. Something was said by the Prince, which led Mr. Spang
      to suspect he alluded to Montrose. “I hoped,” says Mr. Spang, “his
      Highness did not mean of that man, whose apostasy, perjuries, and
      unheard of cruelty, had made him so odious, in all our country, that
      they could not hear of his name.” He presently gave me to understand
      he meant not him or any such, for by the comportment of our Scottish
      noblemen at court now, he perceives how odious _James Graham_ must
      be at home, for they will not salute or speak to him, nay, not look
      where they think he is, and this I have observed with my own eyes.
      Baillie’s Letters and Journals, vol. ii. p. 323.—_Ed._]

  345 [On the 14th of December 1650, an answer was returned to Parliament,
      “be the commissioners of the general assemblie to the quære, given
      in to thame be the estattis of parliament, anent the persones to be
      admitted to ryse in armes, and joyne with the forces of the
      kingdome, and in what capacitie, for defence thereoff aganes the
      armie of sectaries, &c.” (Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland, vol.
      vi. p. 554.) The Answer of the Commission, after a declaration that
      it is the duty of parliament to use all necessary and lawful means
      for the defence of the land, and a description of the enfeebled
      state of the kingdom, contains the following exposition of their
      views. “In this case of so great and evident necessity, we cannot be
      against the raising of all fencible persons in the land, and
      permitting them to fight against this enemy for defence of the
      kingdom, excepting such as are excommunicate, forfaulted,
      notoriously profane or flagitious, and such as have been from the
      beginning, and continue still, or are at this time, obstinate and
      professed enemies, and opposers of the Covenant and cause of God;
      and for the capacity of acting, that the Estates of Parliament ought
      to have, as we hope they will have special care, that in this so
      general concurrence of all the people of the kingdom, none be put in
      such trust or power as may be prejudicial to the cause of God, and
      that such Officers as are of known integrity and affection to the
      cause, and particularly such as have suffered in our former armies
      may be taken special notice of.”—“A True Representation of the Rise,
      &c. of the Present Division in the Church of Scotland,” pp. 10, 11.
      London, 1657. “The Answer of the Commission of the General Assemblie
      to the Quæree Propounded to them from the Parliament,” pp. 2, 3.
      Aberdeen, Printed by James Brown, 1651.—_Ed._]

  346 [“_Act of Leavie_: At Perth, the twentie third day of December, one
      thousand six hundred and fiftie yeiris, the Kingis Majestie and
      Estaits of parliament, being verie sensibill of the dangerous and
      distressed conditione of this kingdome, and most desyrious,
      according to the law of God and nature, in discharge of there public
      trust, to use all lawful and necessarie means for the saiftie and
      defence of religione, his Majesties persone and royal authoritie,
      laws and liberties of the kingdome, aganis an armie of sectaries,
      who most unjustlie and perfidiouslie, contrarie to the solemne
      league and covenant and treaties, have invaded, and are by all actis
      of hostilitie destroying the same, Thairfore hes statute and
      ordained that all fensible men, within the sherrefdomes of Fyiff,
      and Kinross, Clakmanan, Stirling, Dumbartane, Argyll, Boott, Perth,
      Forfar, Kincardine, Aberdeine, Bamff, Murray, Nairne, Inverness,
      Ross, Sutherland, Cromartie, Caitnes, and Orknay, cum to an
      randevouze in the severall divisions of ilk schyre respective, to be
      set doun and appoyntit be the comitties of war in ilk schyre,
      according to the number of the regimentis efter specifit. The haill
      hertofore noblemen, gentlemen, and utheris to burt and landwartly
      frenteris, woodsetteris, and all other fensible men, betwixt
      thriescore and sixteine, with all there horses fitt for service, and
      their haill armes for horsemen and footmen (except such as are
      excommunicate, forfeited, notoriouslie profane or flagitious, and
      such as have beene from the beginning, and continew still, or are at
      this tyme, obstinat and professed enemies and opposeris of the
      covenant and caus of God). Out of the quhilk haill number of
      fensible persones, in ilk division, all such as are vigorous and
      able men for war are heirby appoynted to be drawin out, and put in
      Regimentis, as is efter specifit, with there best horses and arms,
      so many as are serviceable horses, and the rest on foot, with their
      best armes, twa part musquettis and third part pickis, and all with
      swords. The horsemen to be armed with pistollis, hulsteris or
      syidpistollis, and launces,” &c., &c.—“Acts of the Parliaments of
      Scotland,” vol. vi, pp. 560-562.—_Ed._]

  347 [This disastrous attack was made by the forces in the west, from
      whom had proceeded, what was called the Western Remonstrance, which
      had been condemned both by the Committee of Estates, and the
      Commission of the church. (“Causes of the Lord’s Wrath in Scotland,”
      p. 60, printed in the year 1660). “Befoir this feight at Hammilton,
      Collonell Ker inquyred the judgement of his inferior officers the
      night befoir, quhat thai thocht of the caice of effaires, as they
      then stood, and schewed thame that he wold joyne with nane quho wes
      not for the Remonstrance, nor yit with those quho wold not declyne
      the Stait,—I meane the committee of Estait as it then stood.”
      (Nicol’s “Diary of Transactions in Scotland,” p. 37) The following
      letter from Cromwell describing the defeat at Hamilton, is
      interesting in itself as well as on account of the writer. “Sir, I
      have now sent you the results of some treaties amongst the enemy,
      which came to my hand this day. The Major General, and
      Commissary-Generall Whaley marched a few days ago towards Glasgow,
      and the enemy attempted his quarters in Hamilton, and entred the
      town, but by the blessing of God, by a very gracious hand of
      Providence, without the losse of 6 men, as I hear of, he beat them
      out, kild about 100, took also about the same number, amongst which
      are some prisoners of quality, and near 100 horse (as I am
      informed), the Major Gen. being in the chase of them, to whom also I
      have since sent the addition of a fresh party. Col. Kerre (as my
      messenger this night tells me) is taken, his Lieutenant-Col. and one
      that was sometimes Major to Collonel Straughan, and Keires Captain
      Lieutenant. The whole party is shattered, and give me leave to say
      it, if God had not brought them upon us, we might have marched 3000
      horse to death, and not have lighted on them, and truly it was a
      strange Providence brought them upon him. For I marched from
      Edenburgh on the north side of Cloid, appointed the Major-General to
      march from Peebles to Hamilton, on the south side of Cloid. I came
      thither by the time expected, tarried the remainder of the day, and
      untill neer 7 o’clock the next morning, apprehending the Major-Gen.
      would not come by reason of the waters. I being retreated, the enemy
      took encouragement, marched all that night, and came upon the
      Major-General’s quarters about two houres before day, where it
      pleased the Lord to order as you have heard.

      “The Major-Gen. and Commissary Gen. (as he sent me word) were still
      gone on in the prosecution of them, and saith, that except 150 horse
      in one body, he heares they are fled by 16 or 18 in a company, all
      the country over. Robin Montgomery was come out of Sterling, with 4
      or 5 regiments of horse and dragoons, but was put to a stand when he
      heard of the issue of this businesse. Straughan and some other
      officers had quitted some 3 weeks or a month before this businesse,
      so that Ker commanded this whole party in chief.

      “It is given out that the malignants will be all (almost) received
      and rise unanimously and expeditiously. I can assure you, that those
      that serve you here, find more satisfaction in having to deale with
      men of this stamp, then others, and it is our comfort that the Lord
      hath hitherto made it the matter of our prayers, and of our
      endeavours (if it might have been the will of God), to have had a
      Christian understanding between those that feare God in this land,
      and ourselves, and yet we hope it hath not been carryed on with a
      willing failing of our duty to those that trust us, and I am
      persuaded the Lord hath looked favourably upon our sincerity herein,
      and will still doo so, and upon you also whilst you make the
      interest of God’s people yours. Those religious people of Scotland,
      that fall in this cause, we cannot but pitty and mourne for them,
      and we pray that all good men may do so too. Indeed there is at this
      time a very great distraction, and mighty workings of God upon the
      hearts of divers, both ministers and people, much of it tending to
      the justification of your cause. And although some are as bitter and
      as bad as ever, making it their businesse to shuffle hypocritically
      with their consciences and the covenant, to make it lawfull to joyne
      with malignants, which now they do (as well as they might long
      before) having taken in the head of them, yet truly others are
      startled at it, and some have been constrained by the work of God
      upon their consciences, to make sad and solemn accusations of
      themselves, and lamentations in the face of their supream authority,
      charging themselves as guilty of the blood shed in this warre, by
      having a hand in the treaty at Breda, and by bringing the king in
      amongst them. This lately did a Lord of the Session, and withdrew,
      and lately Mr. James Leviston, a man as highly esteemed as any for
      piety and learning, who was a Commissioner for the Kirk at the said
      treaty, charged himselfe with the guilt of the blood of this war,
      before their assembly, and withdrew from them, and is retired to his
      own house. It will be very necessary to encourage victuallers to
      come to us, that you take off customes and excise from all things
      brought hither for the use of the army. I beg your prayers, and rest
      your humble servant, _O. Cromwell_. Edinburgh, 4 Dec. 1660.”—Sev.
      Proc. in Parl. Dec. 12 to 19, apud Cromwelliana, pp. 94, 95.—_Ed._]

  348 [That is, “How much changed from that assembly which was formerly!”
      (Quantum mutatus ab illo Hectore, qui, &c. _Virg. Æneid_, lib. ii.
      ver. 274.)—_Ed._]

  349 [“Ult. July, 1648. Post Meridian Sep. xxi. _A Declaration of the
      General Assembly concerning the present dangers of Religion and
      especially the unlawful engagement in War, against the kingdom of
      England_. Together with many necessary exhortations and directions
      to all the Members of the Kirk of Scotland.” Records of the Kirk of
      Scotland, pp. 498-505. Edited by A. Peterkin.—_Ed._]

  350 [At a meeting of the Committee of Estates, on the 6th of January,
      1651,—“Rege Presente. The letter from the Presbytery of Stirling to
      the Commission of the Generall Assembly, still disclaiming the kings
      intereste, and the unity of all the subjects of the land to assist
      their countrey against the comon enimey, redd, with the Commission
      of the Generall Assemblies ansuer therto, redd lykwayes approvin and
      ordained to be published and printed.” (Balfour’s Annales, vol. iv.
      p. 235). The Commission of the Assembly complained, that the letter
      of the Ministers of the Presbytery of Stirling, which was printed at
      Edinburgh 165l, had prefixed to it “the false and odious title of _A
      Remonstrance of the Presbtytery of Stirling against the present
      conjunction with the malignant partie_.” (“Answer of the
      Commission,” &c. dated Perth, 6 Jan. 1651 p. 19. Printed at
      Aberdeen, 1651). What Binning now advances is in vindication of the
      Letter of the Presbytery of Stirling and in reply to the Answer of
      the Commission. Mr. James Guthrie, and Mr. David Bennet, Ministers
      at Stirling, were charged by the committee of Estates with training
      this Letter, and summoned to appear before them, at Perth, on the
      19th of February, 1651, to answer for their conduct.—“Acts of Parl.,
      vol. vi. p. 578.”—_Ed._]

  351 [“And first, we shall desyre every one seriously to consider the
      case and condition wherein the kingdome is engaged and standeth at
      this tyme, that now we are not upon an engagement of invasive warre
      but upon necessary defence against a forraign enemy, who hath not
      only injustly invaded us, but also (through the holy permissive
      providence of God) slaine many of our brethren with the sword,
      subdued a great part of the land, is oppressing the people of God
      therein, and following his injust designes and intentions against
      the rest of the kingdome, that in this case, in the ordinary way of
      providence, according to which men must act, unlesse they would be
      guilty of tempting God, there is need of, and ought to be employed
      against the enemy, such a competency of power as is required in
      right and warrantable prudencie, and may be had, not being of itself
      sinful. This certainly is mans duety, whatever God, out of his
      soveraignity, hath done, or may doe in the case of want, or
      disproportion of meanes.”—Answer of the Commission, ut supra, p.
      6.—_Ed._]

  352 [“In such parts of the kingdome, as are yet free from the oppression
      of the enemy, and so out of which any men can be raised, there is
      not a possibility to get such a competencie of power, unlesse there
      be a more generall calling foorth of the body of the people than
      hath been before, this as it is most certain in itselfe, so it is
      most apparent, and evident unto all, that doe understand these parts
      of the kingdome. And whereas faithfull and honest men in the State,
      well acquainted with the severall shares of that part of the
      kingdome, have publickly declared that when all shall be brought
      together, that can be called foorth of these parts, according to
      publick resolution, there will scarce be a competent power against
      the power of the enemy, we cannot but much wonder, if any, not so
      acquainted therewith, shall hold the contrary, and not give credit
      to the declaration of honest and faithfull men, especially in
      authority, the matter being such, as in the immediate knowledge
      thereof dependeth on sense, and, as to those that have not that
      knowledge, pertaineth to humane faith, which giveth credit to the
      testimony _testium idoneorum_ of competent witnesses such as these
      are whom we have designed.”—Id. pp. 6, 7.—_Ed._]

  353 [“We need say no more unlesse there were some show of proofe to the
      contrary. Yet we shall say somewhat particularly to one place that
      which is said in the case of Amaziah’s associating with and taking
      to him the Israelits for help in his just defence, (2 Chron. xxv. 7:
      ‘O king let not the army of Israel goe with thee for the Lord is not
      with Israel even with all the house of Ephraim,’) as being mainly
      urged and as it seems most to stick with some in the present
      businesse to which sundry things may be answered, which clear the
      present businesse from the force thereof. 1. The Israelits were
      idolaters, and forreiners not so in our case, in either respect. But
      it is alledged that the reason why Amaziah is disswaded from taking
      their assistance is because God was not with them, and therefore the
      same reason having place in manie of these, whom the present
      resolution comprehendeth, the disswasion hath the same force against
      them. Therefore 2. God’s not being with them may be either conceived
      and understood, in regard of the estate of grace and reconciliation
      with God but how-so ever that with many of them God was not in this
      regard, yet the reason cannot be alledged in this sense because then
      it would follow by the argument, that we might not take the help of
      any man out of the estate of grace, for our just and necessary
      defence, which none will admit, or it may be understood of God’s
      assistance and prospering providence simply. But neither can it be
      taken thus, because it is certain and clear that God was often with
      them in this sense in their own cause and quarrells. Therefore it
      must needs be conceived, in regard of their profession, and
      religion, which was corrupt and idolatrous. Now the reason thus
      understood hath not place in our businesse. 3. Yet doe we not find
      that Amaziah is commanded to exclude any of the subjects of his own
      kingdom, from acting in that defence, or reproved for not doing of
      it notwithstanding many of them no doubt were naughty and corrupt in
      their way, 2 Kings xiv.”—Answer of the Commission, p. 12.—_Ed._]

  354 [That is, “chiefly.” The strict signification of _ut plurimum_ is,
      _as much as possible_.—_Ed._]

  355 [“At the bar of conscience.”—_Ed._]

  356 [“Doeth our mentioning onlie the kingdome in that resolution, import
      a separation of the kingdome, and the cause in the quarrell against
      our enemie? Or what logick can draw out such a consequence out of
      it? Wee do think that the kingdome being in danger by this enemie,
      the cause also is in danger, and the defending of the kingdome will
      be the defending of the cause also. And we trust no instruments
      shall bee employed for the defence of the kingdom to the prejudice
      of the cause.”—Answer of the Commission, ut supra, p. 19.—_Ed._]

  357 [“In point of fact.”—_Ed._]

  358 [“On that very account.”—_Ed._]

  359 [Bishop Hall quaintly remarks, that “No devil is so dangerous as the
      religious devil.” “Suppose the ends of this Engagement to be good,
      (which they are not,) yet the meanes and ways of prosecution are
      unlawful, because there is not an equall avoiding of rocks on both
      hands, but a joyning with malignants to suppresse sectaries, a
      joyning hands with a black devill to beat a white devill. They are
      bad physicians who would so cure one disease as to breed another as
      evil or worse.” (“A Declaration of the Gen. Assembly concerning the
      present dangers of Religion.” Rec. of the Kirk of Scotland, p. 501.)
      In the year 1649 the Scottish parliament passed an “Act against
      Consulters with Devils and Familiar Spirits,” &c. (Acts of the Parl.
      of Scot. vol. vi. p. 359.) It was supposed that the power of some of
      these was employed in particular instances for the benefit of
      mankind. They were therefore distinguished from the others in the
      same way that white witches or persons who used charms and
      incantations for curing diseases, &c. were distinguished, but not in
      the eye of the law, from black witches, or those who practised their
      art for the purposes of mischief. (Whitelock’s “Memorials,” p. 550.
      See also Sir Walter Scott’s “Tales of a Grandfather,” vol. ii. p.
      117.) If we look to the strange confessions of many of the
      unfortunate creatures who were condemned to suffer death for
      witchcraft in those days, without adverting to the cruel means that
      were often resorted to with a view to extort from them such
      confessions, the credulity of the age will not appear to have been
      so extraordinary as it has been represented. It is impossible not to
      admire the singular discretion of Dr. Grey, Rector of Houghton
      Conquest when speaking on this subject: “Nothing,” says he, “more
      plainly discovers the iniquity of those times than the great numbers
      of people executed in England and Scotland for witches, _if they
      were guilty_, or the barbarous superstition of the times, _if they
      were innocent_, which is the more probable.”—“Impartial Examination
      of the Fourth Volume of Mr. Daniel Neal’s History of the Puritans,”
      p. 96, Lond. 1739.—_Ed._]

  360 [That is, openly persisting. See “The Answer of the Commission to
      the Presbytery of Stirling,” p. 11.—_Ed._]

  361 [See “The Nullity of the Pretended Assembly at Saint Andrews and
      Dundee,” &c., p. 312. Printed in the year 1652. As many had been
      under age when the Solemn League and Covenant was first sworn the
      Commission of the General Assembly ordained it to be renewed by
      their Act, October 6, 1648, joining to it the “Solemn Acknowledgment
      of Public sins and Breaches of the Covenant, and a Solemn Engagement
      to all the Duties contained therein.”—_Ed._]

  362 [“We desire it may be  remembered that in the beginning of these
      troubles, anno 1638, when as there were then standing laws in this
      kingdom, which are not yet repealed to this day, discharging all
      subjects from rysing in armes, without the kings expresse warrant
      and command, yet the subjects of this kingdome perceiving themselves
      in danger to be destroyed by forraign invasion, did fynd these lawes
      no wayes to bynd up their hands from taking armes, for their just
      defence and selfe preservation,—these lawes, in the intention of the
      lawgiver, being made for the preservation of the kingdom and not for
      the destruction of it.—” Answer of the Commission, pp. 13,
      14.—_Ed._]

  363 [See “The Waters of Sihor, or the Lands Defectione,” Wodrow MSS.
      vol. xvii. pp. 39-41, in Bib. Ad.  Peterkin’s “Rec. of the Kirk of
      Scotland,” pp. 619-620.—_Ed._]

  364 [See Note, page 96.—_Ed._]

  365 [That is, “every where and at all times like himself and the
      same.”—_Ed._]

  366 [We learn from Principal Baillie, (“Letters and Journals,” vol. ii.
      p. 363,) that Binning had identified himself with the Association of
      the West, which was required to dissolve itself, by an Act of the
      Scottish parliament, passed 28th Decem., 1650.—_Ed._]

  367 [Or, general officers.—_Ed._]

  368 [The _first_ or _principal proposition_ in the preceding
      syllogism.—_Ed._]

  369 [(Minor probatur,) that is, _the second proposition_ in the
      preceding syllogism.  It will be perceived that the arguments of the
      author are constructed according to the rules of the Aristotelian
      logic.  A familiar acquaintance with this mode of reasoning
      continued to be cultivated, at this time, by all who wished to excel
      in public disputations (Professor Jardine’s “Outlines of
      Philosophical Education in the University of Glasgow,” p. 12. Glas.
      1825).  In the Westminster Assembly, the different speakers often
      presented their opinions under the form of syllogisms, which were
      impugned and defended by employing the usual terms and technical
      formalities of the dialectic art.—See Lightfoot’s “Journal of the
      Proceedings of the Assembly of Divines.” Works, vol. xiii. pp. 123,
      157, 203-205, &c.—_Ed._]

  370 [Aiming at.—_Ed._]

  371 [Mr. Robert Ramsay, Principal of the University, reminded the
      Presbytery of Glasgow at their first meeting in June, 1651, “that
      Mr. Hew Binnen had expresslie protested that it was not lawfull for
      us to pray for ye succeese of the armie, as it was constitute, and
      becaus of those who now have power in the same. And farther, the
      said Mr. Hew Binnen, when notice was taken of these words repeated
      them over and over agane, and avowed, he wold pray for a blessing to
      them, yt is, that yet might be converted, but, that he could not
      pray for success to them as yet are now constitute.”—“Records of the
      Presbytery of Glasgow.”—_Ed._]

  372 [Or shudder.—_Ed._]

  373 [For the Instructions given by the Scottish parliament to the
      Commissioners who went to Breda see “Acts of the Parliament of
      Scotland,” vol. vi. pp. 513, 514. A copy of the Treaty itself agreed
      upon by his Majesty Charles II and the Scottish Commissioners and
      afterwards ratified by parliament, will be found in Thurloe’s State
      Papers, vol. i. pp. 147, 148.—_Ed._]

  374 [That is, “who, because they are wise, are ignorant of that which
      they know.” (Tu pol, si sapis quod scis, nescis. Terent Eun. iv. 4,
      54.)—_Ed._]

  375 [That is, _lively_ or _distinct_ characters.—_Ed._]

  376 [“A fisherman is made wise by a bite.” A Greek proverb, the original
      of this (ὁ ἁλσευς πληγες νους φυσες) has been preserved in a
      fragment of Sophocles, Erasmi Adagiorum Chil. Quat. p. 41.  Coloniæ
      1612. Scholiastes Græci In Sophoc. Tom. iii. p. 602. Argentorati
      1788.—_Ed._]

  377 [“Another consequence of this defeat [at Dunbar] was, that every one
      blamed the other, the one side for purging out too many who might
      have been of service against the enemy, and these again blamed their
      opposites for being too remiss, and not well enough purged.”—Memoirs
      of the Life of the Rev. Robert Blair, p. 113. Edin. 1755.—_Ed._]

  378 [Answer of the Commission, _ut supra_, p. 8.—_Ed._]

  379 [P. 178 Edin. 1649.—_Ed._]

  380 [Or as a general principle.—_Ed._]

  381 [In opposition to what is here affirmed it is stated in the pamphlet
      entitled, “A True Representation of the Present Division in the
      Church of Scotland,” (p. 15.) that the Scottish Reformers did not
      look upon their conjunction with the Duke of Chatelherault and his
      followers, “as a cause of that sad stroak, as some would make the
      world believe, from Mr. Knoxes Sermon at Sterlin. For in the heads
      of that Sermon, printed in the History of the Church of Scotland, p.
      217 _Edit. Edinburgh_, 1644, in 4to, there is no mention of any such
      thing but only of their carnal confidence, that possibly they had
      not sincerely repented of their former opposition, and that they who
      were late come in were made to feel in their own hearts, how bitter
      a cup they had made others to drink before them. Nor doth he (as our
      Brethren’s tenets now lead them) presse them to purge out such as
      were lately admitted, but doth only presse repentance upon all of
      them.”—Dr. M’Crie presents his readers with an analysis of this
      sermon of the “great Apostle of the Scots,” as he was called by
      Beza.—See “Life of Knox,” pp. 192, 193, sixth edit.—_Ed._]

  382 [See page 495 of this edition.—_Ed._]

  383 [“The safety of the people” is “the highest law.”—_Ed._]

  384 [“The very heathens had a notion of the unlawfulnesse of
      confederacies with wicked men. For as Victorinus Strigelius on 2
      Chron. 25, noteth out of Æschylus his tragedy, intituled _Seven to
      Thebe_, Amphiaraus a wise vertuous man was therefore swallowed up in
      the earth, with seven men, and seven horses, because he had associat
      himself with Tydeus, Capaneus and other impious commanders marching
      to the siege of Thebe.” (“Gillespie’s Miscel. Quest.,” p. 178.)
      Æschylus makes Eteocles give the following description of the
      character of Amphiaraus, and foretell his destiny.—(“Septem cont
      Thebas,” ver. 597.)

          “Nothing worse
      In whate’er cause than impious fellowship,
      Nothing of good is reap’d   for when the field
      Is sown with wrong the ripened fruit is death
          So this seer
      Of temper’d wisdom, of unsullied honour,
      Just, good, and pious, and a mighty prophet,
      In despite to his better judgment join’d
      With men of impious daring, bent to tread
      The long, irremeable way, with them
      Shall, if high Jove assist us, be dragg’d down
      To joint perdition.”—_Potter_.

      Regarded simply as a poetical fiction, the account which Statius has
      given of the fate of Amphiaraus is particularly striking and
      beautiful—(Thebald. lib. vii. ver. 815-823)—_Ed._]

  385 [“A Hypothetical Proposition is one which asserts not absolutely,
      but under an hypothesis indicated by a conjunction. An hypothetical
      syllogism is one on which the reasoning depends on such a
      proposition.”—Whately’s “Elements of Logic,” p. 388.—_Ed._]

  386 [“For he who gives life gives the things which are necessary to
      life.”—Cic. De Offic. lib. cap. 4.—_Ed._]

  387 [The MS. in my possession which will be afterwards described has no
      part of this third answer. In place of it I find the following
      passage: “And though there had been disproportion of numbers betwixt
      us and the enemy, yet we cannot but still say, it had been a way
      much better beseeming the people of God, and in which there should
      have been much more peace and consort, to have had to do our duty
      with such a disproportion, than to have taken in the malignant party
      for making it up.”—_Ed._]

  388 [Than with.—_Ed._]

  389 [Dirge, or some such word is wanting here.—_Ed._]

  390 [That is, put them in mind.—_Ed._]

  391 [The remaining part of the Section is not contained in either of the
      two preceding editions of the “Case of Conscience,” but is taken
      from a MS. in the handwriting of the period with the use of which I
      have been favoured by my friend David Laing, Esq., Secretary to the
      Bannatyne Club. This MS. terminates with Section IV.—_Ed._]

  392 [Mr. George Gillespie, who was the son of Mr. John Gillespie,
      Minister of Kirkaldy, was at this time one of the Ministers of
      Edinburgh, but he had gone to Kirkaldy for the benefit of his
      health. He was one of the Commissioners from the Church of Scotland,
      to the Westminster Assembly. In his letters from London, Principal
      Baillie, who was also one of the Scottish Commissioners, speaks of
      his youthful colleague in terms of high admiration. “Of a truth,” he
      says, respecting him, in a letter dated March 26, 1644, “there is no
      man whose parts in a public dispute I do so admire. He has studied
      so accurately all the points ever yet came to our assembly, he has
      gotten so ready, so assured, so solid a way of public debating,
      that, however there be in the assembly divers very excellent men,
      yet in my poor judgment, there is not one who speaks more rationally
      and to the point, than that brave youth has done ever.” (“Letters
      and Journals,” vol. l. p. 451. See also, pp. 407, 419, 431.)
      Gillespie’s “Treatise of Miscellany Questions,” which was published
      after his death, in 1649, contains a chapter entitled, “Another most
      useful Case of Conscience discussed and resolved, concerning
      associations and confederacies with idolaters, infidels, heretics,
      or any other known enemies of truth and godliness” (pp. 169-193.)
      This, it will be observed is, with very little variation, the title
      of the Tractate of Binning. It is probable, that they who first
      undertook the publication of Binning’s MS. were led to adopt this
      title from the similarity of the views, as well as the identity of
      the subjects of the two authors. When the Commission of the church
      met at Perth, in December, 1650, for the purpose of considering the
      _query_ of the parliament as to the persons who ought, or ought not,
      in present circumstances to be employed, in the defence of the
      country,—it was not likely that the published opinions of Gillespie
      upon such a subject would be overlooked. But says Baillie, when
      giving an account of this meeting, “The question was alleged to be
      altered from that which Mr. Gillespie writes of.”—“Letters and
      Journals,” vol. ii. p. 365.—_Ed._]

  393 [The name of “M. F. Carmichael” is attached to a warrant, which is
      dated Sept. 1, 1651, and bears to be subscribed by certain
      commissioners of the church, authorizing George Ogilvy of Harras, to
      deliver up to Lord Balcarres, the Registers of the Kirk that were in
      his house (Reg. of Deeds, 6 March, 1701. Dr. M’Crie’s Mem. of Veitch
      and Brysson, Append. p. 525.) There can be little doubt that these
      were the original records of the church, which were produced and
      identified at the meeting of the General Assembly at Glasgow, in the
      year 1638. (Id. p. 497. “Rec. of the Kirk,” vol. l. pp. 22-24,
      Edited by A. Peterkin.) It is boldly asserted by Gordon, parson of
      Rothiemay, that the old authentic records of the Assemblies were at
      that time in the hands of Archbishop Spottiswood, who had carried
      them with him, he says, to London, though he more cautiously adds,
      in a _nota_, “It is _very uncertaine_ if the registers presented wer
      the principalls, or if only copyes.” (“History of Scots Affairs,”
      vol. i. pp. 146, 147. Aberdeen. Printed for the Spalding Club,
      1841.) Keith tells us in what way these records afterwards came into
      the possession of Mr. Archibald Campbell, a Scottish non-juring
      clergyman residing in London, by whom they were most unjustifiably
      detained from the Church after the Revolution, and subsequently
      gifted to Sion College, the governors of which being expressly
      restricted from permitting them to pass out of their custody.
      (“Hist. of the Aff. of Church and State in Scot.,” p. 497.) After
      some delay on the part of the governors, the long concealed records,
      bound up in three volumes, and embracing the whole period between
      1560 and 1616, were given up by them for inspection, in the year
      1834, to the Select Committee of the House of Commons on Church
      Patronage. (“Minutes of Evidence,” pp. 126, 355, 374.) Dr. Lee, one
      of the witnesses before the Committee, declared, after examining
      them, he was quite certain that they were “authentic records.” (Id.
      p. 450). The loss of such invaluable archives, soon after this,
      which now appears to be placed beyond all doubt, in consequence of
      the destruction of the House of Commons by fire, is much to be
      deplored.—_Ed._]

  394 [At the Restoration, Mr. Moncrieff was ejected from his parish, for
      the part he had acted in framing or sanctioning the “Remonstrance,”
      and the “Causes of the Lord’s wrath,” which was engenuously
      confessed by him (“Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland,” vol. vii.
      p. 367.) Wodrow has collected various particulars regarding the
      life, character, and subsequent sufferings, for conscience’ sake, of
      this pious and useful minister. (“Hist. of the Suff. of the Ch. of
      Scot.”, vol. i. pp. 197-200.) As he was persecuted, during the
      Usurpation, for persisting in praying publicly for the king, he had
      thus the singular misfortune of being punished both for his loyalty
      and his supposed disloyalty. Mr. Moncrieff has had a niche assigned
      to him by Howie among the _Scots Worthies_. (pp. 411-415. Dumfries,
      1835.) Mr. James Guthrie, Minister at Stirling, who was imprisoned
      at the same time with his friend, Mr. Moncrieff, and afterwards
      executed, was accused at his trial of compiling “the Remonstrance.”
      This he denied, affirming he could prove, by hundreds of witnesses,
      that he was at Stirling at the time, many miles distant.—See his
      Defences, “Acts of the Parl. of Scot.,” vol. vii. Append. p.
      37.—_Ed._]

  395 [The parliament of Scotland passed the _Act of Classes_ on the 23d
      of January, 1649. It was entitled an Act “for purging the
      Judicatories, and other places of Public trust.” Those whom it
      declared to be incapable of sitting in parliament, or of holding any
      civil or military appointment, were divided into four classes. The
      disqualification of such as, on account of their supposed greater
      criminality, were placed in the first class, was to continue for
      life, that of the second class for ten years; that of the third
      class for five years; and that of the fourth class for one year
      only, provided they gave previously sufficient evidence of their
      penitence.—“Acts of the Parl. of Scots,” vol. vi. p. 352.—_Ed._]

  396 [“After the woful rout at Dunbar, in the first meeting at Stirling,
      it was openly and vehemently pressed to have David Lesly laid aside,
      as long before was designed, but covertly by the chief purgers of
      the times. The man himself did as much press as any to have liberty
      to demit his charge, being covered with shame and discouragement for
      his late unhappiness, and irritated with Mr. James Guthrie’s publick
      invectives against him from the pulpit. The most of the committee of
      estates, and commission of the kirk, would have been content to let
      him go; but finding no man tolerably able to supply his place, and
      the greatest part of the remaining officers of horse and foot
      peremptory to lay down, if he continued not; and after all trials
      finding no maladministration on him to count of, but the removal of
      the army from the hill the night before the rout, which yet was a
      consequence of the committee’s order, contrary to his mind, to stop
      the enemy’s retreat, and for that end to storm Broxmouth house as
      soon as possible. On these considerations the state, unanimously did
      with all earnestness entreat him to keep still his charge against
      this order, my Lord Wariston, and, as I suppose Sir John Cheesly,
      did enter their dissent. I am sure Mr. James Guthrie did his, at
      which, as a great impertinency, many were offended. Col. Strachan
      offered to lay down his charge, being unwilling more to be commanded
      by D. Lesly. Some more inclined to do so, but all were quieted by
      this expedient.”—Baillie’s Letters, vol. ii. p. 350.—_Ed._]

  397 [The religious zeal of Binning, his patriotism, and his dread of
      arbitrary power were, it is clear, stronger than his loyalty. Sir
      Edward Walker, however, vouches for the loyalty, at this period, of
      the Scottish nation in general. “For the disposition of the people,”
      he says, (Hist. Disc. p. 194) “they are generally for the king and
      his government, being most under the notion of Malignants and
      Engagers, about 100 of 120 noblemen being in that condition. Most of
      the Gentry are very loyal, and in a manner all the common people.”
      Binning’s language respecting Charles II. at the time of passing the
      Public Resolutions, appears to have startled his co-presbyter,
      Principal Baillie, who writes thus in a letter which was first
      designed for his friend Mr. Dickson, but afterwards sent to Mr.
      Spang at Campvere.—“Mr. Patrick [Gillespie] and Mr. James Guthrie,
      wherever they came, uttered their passion. I heard one who had
      married Mr. Patrick’s sister’s daughter report to Mr. Douglas, that
      Mr. Hugh Binning, with Mr. Patrick, in Kirkaldy, had spoke like a
      distracted man, saying to Mr. Douglas’s own wife, and the young man
      himself, and his mother-in-law, Mr. Patrick’s sister, ‘that the
      commission of the kirk would approve nothing that was right; that a
      hypocrite ought not to reign over us; that we ought to treat with
      Cromwell and give him security not to trouble England with a king;
      and whoever marred this treaty, the blood of the slain in this
      quarrel should be on their heads.’ Strange words if true.”—Letters,
      vol. ii. p. 363. The ungrateful, impolitic, and barbarous treatment
      which his Scottish subjects received from Charles II. after the
      Restoration, must be held to be a proof of the sagacity at least of
      Binning, and a justification of the suspicion with which he and some
      of the other Protesters regarded him. It is not unlikely that, in
      their case, the strong appeal to the fears of the English and
      Scottish presbyterians, as the supposed friends of monarchy,
      contained in Milton’s “Tenure of Kings and Magistrates,” which was
      published but two years before this, had not failed altogether of
      its effect.—_Ed._]

  398 [I have not been able to discover to what “old translation” the
      author alludes. But Wilcox puts the same interpretation, that he
      does, upon the ninth verse of this chapter. “_Sinne_, (viz. which
      the wicked and ungodly men commit, and they know one of them by
      another,) _maketh fools to agree_, (viz. one of them with another:
      q.d. their partaking in wickednesse joineth the wicked’s minds, one
      of them towards another;) _but among the righteous_, (i.e. good and
      holy people,) _that which is acceptable_ (viz. before God and good
      men) _maketh agreement_ (viz. among themselves: q.d. good things
      onlie tie good men’s minds together).”  _A Short yet Sound
      Commentarie Written on that Worthie Work called the Proverbs of
      Salomon._ London, 1624.—_Ed._]

  399 [The Estates, or parliament.—_Ed._]

  400 [That is, notorious or manifest.—_Ed._]

  401 [In the margin of the authorized version the verse is translated
      thus “A great man grieveth all and he hireth the fool, he hireth
      also transgressors.”—_Ed._]

  402 [That is, violent blowing. _Cairding_ however, is not unlikely the
      proper word, a _caird_ being in Scotland the name of a
      tinker.—_Ed._]

  403 [“Although you expel nature by violence, she will still
      return.”—_Per. Epist._ lib. i. ep. 10. ver. 24.—_Ed._]

  404 [Having burst, as it were, its floodgates.—_Ed._]

  405 [That is, more.—_Ed._]

  406 [That is, a deficiency.—_Ed._]

  407 [Gen. xxx. 11.—_Ed._]

  408 [Vide Cic. de Offic. lib. iii. cap. 33.—_Ed._]

  409 [Or mines.—_Ed._]

  410 [Or, unsuitable.—_Ed._]

  411 [“Charity does not inflict punishment because an offence has been
      committed, but lest an offence should be committed.”—_Ed._]

  412 [“He that is not inclined to-day will be more inclined to-morrow.”
      This is reversing the saying of the poet—

      Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit

      Ovid, Remed. Amor. ver. 94.—_Ed._]

  413 [“She does not see what is in the bag behind her.”

      Sed non videmus manticæ quod in tergo est.

      Catul. Carm. xxii. ver. 21.

      There is an allusion here to one of the fables of Æsop. Jupiter,
      says Aesop, placed two bags upon men. The one, which contained their
      own faults, he put upon their back, and the other, which was filled
      with the faults of others, he suspended from their neck, upon their
      breast. In this way, we cannot see our own misdeeds, but, perceiving
      those of others, we censure them freely. Phæd. Fab. Æsop, lib. iv.
      fab. 10.—_Ed._]

  414 [These are terms (locus inventionis _the place or topic of
      invention_, and medium, _the argument or middle term of a
      syllogism_) which, belonging to the dialectic art, were employed by
      the school-men. All the arts and sciences have certain general
      subjects connected with them which presuppose particular facts,
      axioms, and rules. These general subjects, being used in the
      _invention_ of arguments, were called topics or common places. “They
      were so called by Aristotle, as if they were the seats from which
      arguments were to be brought forth.” (Sic appellatæ ab Aristotele
      sunt hæ quasi sedes e quibus argumenta promuntur). Cic. Top. cap.
      ii.—_Ed._]

  415 [We grant and solicit in our turn this indulgence.  Hor. De Art.
      poet. ver. 11.—_Ed._]

  416 [Or, condescendence.—_Ed._]

  417 [Or, without its begetting love.—_Ed._]

  418 [Overlook it.—_Ed._]

  419 [Most.—_Ed._]

  420 [The word _homo_ (man) has been supposed to be derived from _humus_
      (the ground) because man sprang from the earth. Quintillian’s
      objection to this derivation of the word is that all other animals
      have the same origin. (quasi vero non omnibus animal bus eadem
      origo. Instit. Orator lib. i, cap. 6) Such an objection however has
      but little force. For though, according to the account which Moses
      gives of the creation, the earth at the command of God, not only
      brought forth man, but other creatures, (Gen. i. 24) man alone was
      called _Adam_ מדא because he was formed of the dust of the _ground_,
      (המדא) Gen. ii. 7.—Joseph, Antiq. lib. i, cap. 1.—_Ed._]

  421 [That is, “humble beings.”—_Ed._]

  422 [See note page 168.—_Ed._]

  423 [Humility is “the seasoning of the virtues,” as well as “the garb.”
      Cicero represents suavity of speech and manners to be the seasoning
      of friendship (condimentum amicitiæ). De Amicitia, cap. 18.—_Ed._]

  424 [That is, “an ornament and covering.”—_Ed._]

        425 [Crede mihi, bene qui latuit, bene vixit; et intra
      Fortunam debet quisque manere suam.

      “Believe me, he who has not attracted the notice of the world has
      lived well, and every one ought to keep within his own proper
      sphere.” Ovid Trist. lib. iii. eleg. iv, ver. 25.—_Ed._]

  426 [“He who falls on a smooth surface, (yet this rarely happens,) falls
      in such a way that he can rise again from the ground he has
      touched.” Ovid, ut supra, ver. 17.—_Ed._]

  427 [A relation of the principal circumstances in Binning’s life
      follows.—_Ed._]

  428 [That is, he will not refuse.—_Ed._]

  429 [Parcel.—_Ed._]

  430 [Such a disburdening of former offences.—_Ed._]

  431 [Inclination.—_Ed._]

  432 [De Agricola filios suos docente. Æsop. Fab. p. 98. Oxon.
      1653.—_Ed._]

  433 [Subdue.—_Ed._]

  434 [Such a wonder.—_Ed._]

  435 [Violent inclination.—_Ed._]

  436 [That is, truths of little value.—_Ed._]

  437 [In the Scottish universities, they were said to have _laureated_,
      who had a decree conferred upon them, as they were “crowned with
      laurel leaves.” Ev. Un. Com. vol. i. p. 153. Lond. 1837.—_Ed._]

  438 [These are the generous sentiments of an enlightened Christian. They
      would lead us to infer that the author’s views, as a Protester, had
      been modified somewhat before he died or that he had never taken
      such high ground, as some others on this score.—_Ed._]

  439 [Or, _while we, on the other hand_.—_Ed._]

  440 [See note, page 168.—_Ed._]

  441 [Perhaps it should be _at least, less_.—_Ed._]

  442 [The word _mystery_ seems to be used here in the sense of _energy_.
      It is sometimes spelt by Scottish writers _mister_ and _myster_, and
      signifies an art or calling, being derived from the old French word
      _mestier_, a trade. When employed to denote something above human
      intelligence, it has a different origin (being formed from
      μυστηριον, a secret).—_Ed._]

  443 [Exonerate, or unburthen.—_Ed._]

  444 [Or harness.—_Ed._]

  445 [Senec. Ep. 107.  See note, page 76.—_Ed._]

  446 [We are not, “of our own authority.”—_Ed._]

  447 [That is, weight or force.—_Ed._]

  448 [That is, _the honour_ not _a load_ or _a load of honour_.—_Ed._]

  449 [Confined.—_Ed._]

  450 [See note, page 115.—_Ed._]

  451 [The friendly salutation which the steward of Joseph addressed to
      his master’s brethren, when they went a second time to Egypt to
      purchase corn, was (מכל מולש Shalom leikoum) “Peace be to you.”
      After the lapse of so many ages, it is interesting to know that this
      still continues to be, with little variation, the common salutation
      of friends in the East. Salam aleikoum, “Peace be with you,” is
      immediately acknowledged by a similar greeting, Aliekoum salam, “To
      you be peace.”—_Ed._]

  452 [To sit an offer is, not to accept it.—_Ed._]

  453 [Reception.—_Ed._]

  454 [The heathen mythologists represented the Sirens to be three in
      number, and described them as effecting the destruction of mariners,
      by luring them from their course with their singing.

                          —They the hearts
      Enchant of all, who on their coast arrive
      The wretch, who unforewarn’d approaching, hears
      The Sirens’ voice, his wife and little ones
      Ne’er fly to gratulate his glad return;
      But him the Sirens sitting in the meads
      Charm with mellifluous song, although he see
      Bones heap’d around them, and the mouldering skins
      Of hapless men, whose bodies have decay’d.

      _Hom. Od._ lib. xii. v. 39. Cowper’s Translation.]

  455 [That is, one tune from another.—_Ed._]

  456 [Or gifts of nature.—_Ed._]

  457 [See note, page 595.—_Ed._]

  458 [In the ancient Scottish dialect as in this instance, _always_ is
      frequently synonymous with _although_, _however_,
      _notwithstanding_.—_Ed._]

  459 [That is, coldly.—_Ed._]

  460 [Natural.—_Ed._]

  461 [Fallen out or quarrelled.—_Ed._]

  462 [Some words are omitted here, which may be supplied thus:—though
      _they_ said _this_, they perverted God’s meaning of the law,
      &c.—_Ed._]

  463 [Serves the purpose.—_Ed._]

  464 [Imperfect attempts.—_Ed._]

  465 [A Scottish forensic word corresponding to _Surety_.—_Ed._]

  466 [Acknowledge this.—_Ed._]

  467 [A name formerly given to bankrupts in Scotland.—See Act. James VI.
      par. 23, cap. 18.—_Ed._]

  468 [Attending the church.—_Ed._]

  469 [Aim at.—_Ed._]

  470 [Near the command.—_Ed._]

  471 [A belief in the prevalence of witchcraft at this time seems to have
      pervaded all ranks and classes. An Act of Parliament was passed
      against it on the 1st of February, 1649.—_Ed._]

  472 [Portal, or gate.—_Ed._]

  473 [Exempted.—_Ed._]

  474 [The illustration of the second proposition found in the text,
      “There is a faith feigned, and a faith unfeigned, a true and a false
      faith,” (p. 602) is omitted. We may conclude that this was the
      subject of a separate sermon, which has been lost.—_Ed._]

  475 [Deposes or testifies.—_Ed._]

  476 [That is, foresee or anticipate.—_Ed._]

  477 [Charges, or accusations.—_Ed._]

  478 [Than.—_Ed._]

  479 [Gates.—_Ed._]

  480 [Remove.—_Ed._]

  481 [Always.—_Ed._]

  482 [A proverbial expression signifying food and raiment.—_Ed._]

  483 [Much less.—_Ed._]

  484 [The sect of _Seekers_ hold that there are not at this time, neither
      have been for many ages past any true ministers or ambassadors of
      Christ. (Gillespie’s Miscellany Questions, p. 1. Edinburgh, 1649.) A
      few years before this, Laurence Clarkson, a _Seeker_, published a
      pamphlet entitled “The Pilgrimage of Saints.” Edwards, in his
      Gangræna (Part I, p. 24, Part II, p. 6. London, 1646) refers to it
      for an account of the opinion of the Seekers. Clarkson declared that
      in these days there ought to be no churches built, no sacraments
      administered, that the saints as pilgrims, wander here as in a
      temple filled with smoke, not being able to find religion, and that,
      on this account, waiting for a church and for the coming of the
      Spirit as the apostles did, they ought to seek knowledge of any
      passenger, of any opinion or tenet whatsoever.—_Ed._]

  485 [See note page 607.—_Ed._]

  486 [Kindred alliance.—_Ed._]

  487 [Or, in the third place.—_Ed._]

  488 [Notwithstanding.—_Ed._]

  489 [A cold desire.—_Ed._]

  490 [That is a glimmering or slight degree of desire.—_Ed._]

  491 [This was the exclamation of Archimedes the celebrated geometrician
      of Syracuse, (ευρηκα, ευρηκα), after discovering, when in the bath,
      a method of detecting the quantity of alloy, which a fraudulent
      artisan had mixed with the gold of Hiero’s crown.  (Plut. Mor. et
      Phil. Op. p. 1094.) An exclamation somewhat similar was uttered by
      Cicero, when, searching for the tomb of Archimedes in the
      neighbourhood of Syracuse he at length perceived it covered with
      thorns and brambles (Cic. Tusc. Quest lib. v. cap 23.) But if they
      had cause to be delighted, much more surely had Philip the apostle
      reason to be so when addressing Nathanael, he cried out in
      ecstasy—We have found him of whom Moses in the law and the prophets
      did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph! John i. 45.—_Ed._]

  492 [In the present world.—_Ed._]

  493 [Specify or enumerate.—_Ed._]

  494 [Acknowledging.—_Ed._]

  495 [Path or way.—_Ed._]

  496 [Than.—_Ed._]

  497 [Fix upon.—_Ed._]

  498 [That is, no thought of eternity.—_Ed._]

                      499 [Quid non mortalia pectora cogis
      Auri sacra fames?

      _Virg. Æneid_, lib. iii. ver. 56.

      “O sacred hunger of pernicious gold!
      What bands of faith can impious lucre hold?”

      _Dryden’s Translation_.

      Nihil enim est fam angusti animi, tamque parvi, quam amare divitias
      nihil honestius, magnifi entrusque, quam pecuniam contemnere, si non
      habeas si habeas, ad beneficentiam liberalitem que conferre. “There
      is no surer characteristic of a narrow and little mind than to love
      riches, nothing more amiable and noble than to despise money if you
      possess it not—if you possess it, to be beneficent and liberal in
      the use of it.” Cic. De Offic. lib. i. cap. 20.—_Ed._]

  500 [That is, “It is difficult things that are admired.”—_Ed._]

  501 [Excites.—_Ed._]

  502 [From these, as from mount Pisgah.—_Ed._]

  503 [That is, not “by a leap.”—_Ed._]

  504 [Intrusted.—_Ed._]

  505 [Too little.—_Ed._]

  506 [That is, bedecks.—_Ed._]

  507 [That is, has no interest in the world.—_Ed._]

  508 [That is, _the way in which you will take or receive._—_Ed._]

  509 [That is, the duty of sobriety.—_Ed._]

  510 [Much more.—_Ed._]

  511 [It must be perceived that the reading ought to be “overcome _like_
      the Archangel.”—_Ed._]

  512 [It is no less obvious that for “the prince Gabriel” we ought to
      read, _the prince Michael_. See Dan. x. 13, 21; Jude 9; Rev. xii.
      7.—_Ed._]

  513 [That is, the prospective glass.—_Ed._]

  514 [Or tutelage.—_Ed._]

  515 [Declining.—_Ed._]

  516 [That is, disposed. The word, though now obsolete, is found in
      Hooker.—_Ed._]

  517 [That is, that hang _low_, and take a _sweep_ of every thing by the
      way.—_Ed._]

  518 [A single word appears to have dropped out here, the absence of
      which materially changes the meaning of the author, and makes him
      contradict himself. The sentence, it is conceived, ought to run
      thus:—faith and a good conscience scarce sail _but_ in one bottom,
      that is, _in one ship_.—_Ed._]

  519 [That is, insipid.—_Ed._]

  520 [Upon the earth.—_Ed._]

  521 [“It is hard to find many who are not tipplers or common drunkards,
      or will _drink drunk_ on occasions and with company.” Causes of the
      Lord’s Wrath, p. 17. printed in the year 1653.—_Ed._]

  522 [That is, a convenient time or place.—_Ed._]

  523 [Or, till the evening.—_Ed._]

  524 [That is, _insane_ worldlings.—_Ed._]

  525 [Property.—_Ed._]







