II

THE NEW AND LIVING WAY

The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews declares that Christ has
introduced into the world “a new and living way” to God. The concrete
problems confronting this writer to a Jewish circle of the first century
were very different from our own problems to-day, but he so succeeded in
seizing an eternal aspect of the issue that his word about the new and
living way is as vital now as it was then.

His “new and living way,” as the tenth chapter shows, is the way of
personal consecration as a substitute for the old way of sacrifice. The
manner of his exposition may seem to us now a little artificial, but
there can be no question of the religious significance of the conclusion.
Following his usual line of interpretation, he begins by treating the
great national system of sacrifices as a “shadow,” _i.e._ a parable, or
a figure, or a symbol, of a true and higher reality. Then he goes on
boldly to declare that “sacrifices” have become empty performances—it is
impossible, he says, that the blood of bulls and goats works any real
change in the nature or the attitude of the soul. Next he buttresses his
radical conclusion with a citation of Scripture to the effect that God
has never taken pleasure in burnt offerings and ritual sacrifices, and
on this Scripture text from the Psalms he rises to his new insight,
that Christ has come not to do the sacrificial work of a priest, not to
satisfy God by a sacrifice, but to reveal the personal power of a life of
consecration: “Then said I, lo, I come to do thy will, O God.” This way
of dedication to the divine will, this complete consecration of self out
of love for the will of God, the writer calls “the new and living way.”

Two very important conclusions are inherently bound up with this
transition from a religion of sacrifices to a religion of dedication.
First, if carries a wholly new conception of God and secondly, it
involves a complete reinterpretation of human ministry. If God does not
take any pleasure in sacrifice, then the whole idea that He is a Being
to be appeased by gifts, by offerings, by incense, by blood, or by
self-inflicted suffering of any sort, falls to the ground. These things
are not shadows or symbols; they are blunders and mistakes. The God for
whom they are intended needs and asks for no such form of approach.
That has always been the contention of the supreme prophets of the race,
and Christ in His unveiling of God has made the fact sun-clear that God
is not rightly conceived when He is thought of as needing any kind of
sacrifice or any inducement to make Him forgiving or loving. Love is His
nature. The new and living way leads first of all to this new revelation
of God.

But no less certainly it leads to a new type of minister. The priest was
conceived as an expert in ways of _satisfying_ God and of _appeasing_
Him. He was supposed to know what God required and how to perform the
things required. He was indispensable, because only an expert, duly
ordained, could do the work that was necessary for bringing God and man
into relation with each other. Under “the new and living way,” however,
the priest has lost his occupation and the minister becomes an expert
in ways of expanding human life and in bringing men to a dedication of
themselves to the will of God and to the spiritual tasks of the world. In
accordance with this new insight, everything that concerns religion must
in some way attach to life. It must promote, or advance life, increase
life, add to its height and depth, or, in some manner, make life richer
and more joyous. The minister of the new and living way may be called, as
he no doubt will be called, to make many sacrifices of things that are
precious, and surrenders of things as dear as life itself, but there will
be no inherent magic in these sacrifices. They will not be efficacious
as a satisfaction to God. They will be only means toward some larger
end of life, as was the case with Christ’s surrenders and sacrifices.
The ascetic temper will be left forever behind. Whatever is cut off, or
plucked out, will be removed only for the sake of increasing the quality
of life and the dynamic of it. The final test is always to be sought in
the expansion of capacity, in the increase of talents, in the formation
of personality, in dedication to the task of widening the area of life.

The true minister will, like the great apostle, present his body, his
entire being, in living dedication. He will be satisfied with nothing
short of a holy and acceptable service—acceptable, because Christlike—he
will endeavor to make all his service “reasonable service”; that is,
intelligent service, and he will strive earnestly not to become _set_
into the mold of the world or into any deadening groove of habit, but to
be _transformed_ by a steady increase of life and a renewing of spiritual
insight, so that he can prove what is the perfect will of God and so that
he can minister to the growing life of the world.


III

AN APOSTLE OF THE INNER WAY

It is always a foolish blunder to take half when it is just as easy to
have a whole, but the tendency to dichotomize all realities into halves
and to assume that we are shut up to an _either-or_ selection, is an
ancient tendency and one that very often keeps us from winning the full
richness of the life that is possible for us. Human history is strewn
with dualistic formulations which have sorted men into _either-or_
groups. Now it is “spirit” and “flesh” that are sharply antagonistic and
men are called upon to settle which of these two halves of man’s life is
to have their loyalty. Again, it is “this world” and “the next world”—the
here and the yonder—that bid for our heart’s suffrage. “The Church” and
“the world”; “faith” and “reason”; “the sacred” and “the secular” are
other twin pairs that call for a sharp decision of allegiance. So, too,
it has been customary to cut apart the outer life and the inner life and,
with a stern _either-or_, to put them into rivalry with one another.
One camp insists that religion is to be sought in deeds and effects;
the other camp asserts that religion is an inward condition of life—_to
be_ is more important than _to do_. But this method of cutting is like
that which the unnatural mother asked Solomon to perform upon the living
child. It sunders what was alive and throbbing into two dead fragments,
neither of which is a real half of the united living whole. In place of
all the _either-or_ formulations that force a choice between the halves
of great spiritual realities I should put the living and undivided whole.
Instead of selecting _either-or_, I prefer to take _both_. There is no
line that splits the outer life and the inner life into two compartments.
Nobody can _do_ without _being_ and nobody can _be_ without _doing_.
Personality is the most complete unity in the universe and it binds
forever into an indissoluble and integral whole the outer and the inner,
the spirit and the deed.

But at the same time it is interesting to see what a supremely great and
many-sided soul like St. Paul has to say of the inwardness and interior
depth of religion. That he was a man of action is plain enough to be
seen and nobody can easily miss his clarion call to arm _cap-a-pie_ for
the positive, moral battles of life. He was ethical in the noblest sense
of the word, but there was an inner core of religious experience in him
which is as unique and wonderful as is his athletic ethical purpose or
his imperial spirit of moral conquest.

There was for him no kind of “doing” which could ever be a substitute for
the spiritual health of the soul. Nobody has ever lived who has been more
deeply concerned than was St. Paul over the primary problem of life: How
can my soul be saved? To be “saved” for him, however, does not mean to be
rescued from dire torment or from the consequences which follow sin and
dog the sinner. No transaction in another world can accomplish salvation
for him; no mere change from debit to credit side in the heavenly ledgers
can make him a saved man. To be saved for St. Paul is to become a new
kind of person, with a new inner nature, a new dimension of life, a new
joy and triumph of soul. There is a certain inner _feeling_ here which
systematic theology can no more convey than a botanical description of
a flower can convey what the poet feels in the presence of the flower
itself. There is no lack of books and articles which spread before us
St. Paul’s doctrines and which tell us his theory—his _gnosis_—of the
plan of salvation. The trouble with all these external accounts is that
they clank like hollow armor. They are like sounding brass and clanging
cymbals. We miss the _real thing_ that matters—the inner throbbing heart
of the living experience.

What he is always trying to tell us is that a new “nature” has been
formed within him, a new spirit has come to birth in his inmost self.
Once he was weak, now he is strong. Once he was permanently defeated,
now he is “led in a continual triumph.” Once he was at the mercy of the
forces of blind instinct and habit which dragged him whither he would
not, now he feels free from the dominion of sin and its inherent peril to
the soul. Once, with all his pride of pharisaism, he was an alien to the
commonwealth of God, now he is a fellow citizen with all the inward sense
of loyalty that makes citizenship real.

He traces the immense transformation to his personal discovery of a
mighty forgiving love, where he had least expected to find it, in the
heart of God—“We are more than conquerors through Him that loved us;”
“The life I now live, I live by faith in the Son of God who loved me
and gave Himself for me.” _Faith_, wherever St. Paul uses it to express
the central human fact of the religious life, is a word of tremendous
inward depth. It is bathed and saturated with personal experience, and it
proves to be a constructive life-principle of the first importance. Faith
_works_; it is something by which one lives: “The life I now live, I live
by faith.”

But the full measure—the length and breadth, depth and height—of his new
inner world does not come full into view until one sees how through faith
and love this man has come into conscious relation with the Spirit of God
inwardly revealed to him, and operative as a resident presence in his own
spirit. No forensic account of salvation can reach this central feature
of real salvation, which now appears as new inward life and power. St.
Paul takes religion out of the sphere of logic into the primary region
of life. There are ways of living upon the Life of God as direct and
verifiable as is the correspondence between the plant and its natural
environment. To _live_, in the full spiritual meaning of this word as St.
Paul uses it, is to be immersed in the living currents of the circulating
Life of God, and to be fed from within by those sources of creative Life
which feed the evolving world: “Beholding as in a mirror the glory of
the Lord, we are transformed into the same image by the Spirit of the
Lord;” “He hath sent forth the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, crying
Abba;” “The Spirit bears witness with our spirit that we are sons of
God.” With the progress of his experience and the maturing of his thought
upon it, there came to St. Paul an extraordinary insight. He came to
identify Christ with the Spirit: “The Lord is the Spirit.” He no longer
thought of Him as merely the historical person of Galilee, but rather
as the eternal revelation of God, first in a definite form as Jesus
the Christ, and then, after the resurrection, as Christ the invisible
Spirit, working within men, recreating and renewing their spiritual
lives. The influence of Christ for salvation was, thus, with him far
more than a moral influence. It was of the nature of a real energism—a
spiritual power coöperating with the human will and remaking men by the
formation of a new Christ-natured self within him. The process has no
known or conceivable limits. Its goal is the formation of a man “after
Christ”: “Till Christ be formed in you.” “That you may grow up into Him
in all things who is the Head;” “Till we all come to the measure of the
stature of the fulness of Christ.” The “fruit” of the Spirit, matured
in the inward realm of man’s central being and expressed in common acts
of daily life, is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, kindness, goodness,
faithfulness, meekness, self-control—a nature in all things like that
which was revealed in glory and fulness in the face of Jesus Christ.


