
THE INNER LIFE

                             [Illustration]

                          THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                  NEW YORK · BOSTON · CHICAGO · DALLAS
                         ATLANTA · SAN FRANCISCO

                        MACMILLAN & CO., LIMITED
                       LONDON · BOMBAY · CALCUTTA
                                MELBOURNE

                    THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LTD.
                                 TORONTO




                             THE INNER LIFE

                                   BY
                      RUFUS M. JONES, A.M., LITT.D.
              PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN HAVERFORD COLLEGE

                AUTHOR OF “STUDIES IN MYSTICAL RELIGION”
                       “SPIRITUAL REFORMERS,” ETC.

                                New York
                          THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                                  1917

                          _All rights reserved_

                            COPYRIGHT, 1916,
                        BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.

            Set up and electrotyped. Published October, 1916.
                        Reprinted January, 1917.

                              Norwood Press
                  J. S. Cushing Co.—Berwick & Smith Co.
                         Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.




INTRODUCTION


There is no inner life that is not also an outer life. To withdraw from
the stress and strain of practical action and from the complication of
problems into the quiet cell of the inner life in order to build its
domain undisturbed is the sure way to lose the inner life. The finest
of all the mystical writers of the fourteenth century—the author of
_Theologia Germanica_—knew this as fully as we of this psychologically
trained generation know it. He intensely desired a rich inner life, but
he saw that to be beautiful within he must live a radiant and effective
life in the world of men and events. “I would fain be,” he says, “to the
eternal God what a man’s hand is to a man”—_i.e._ he seeks, with all the
eagerness of his glowing nature, to be an efficient instrument of God in
the world. In the _practice_ of the presence of God, the presence itself
becomes more sure and indubitable. Religion does not consist of inward
thrills and private enjoyment of God; it does not terminate in beatific
vision. It is rather the joyous business of carrying the Life of God into
the lives of men—of being to the eternal God what a man’s hand is to a
man.

There is no one exclusive “way” either to the supreme realities or to
the loftiest experiences of life. The “way” which we individuals select
and proclaim as the only highway of the soul back to its true home turns
out to be a revelation of our own private selves fully as much as it is
a revelation of a _via sacra_ to the one goal of all human striving.
Life is a very rich and complex affair and it forever floods over and
inundates any feature which we pick out as essential or as pivotal to
its consummation. God so completely overarches all that is and He is so
genuinely the fulfillment of all which appears incomplete and potential
that we cannot conceivably insist that there shall be only one way of
approach from the multiplicity of the life which we know to the infinite
Being whom we seek.

Most persons are strangely prone to use the “principle of parsimony.”
They appear to have a kind of fascination for the dilemma of _either-or_
alternatives. “Faith” or “works” is one of these great historic
alternatives. But this cleavage is too artificial for full-rounded
reality. Each of these “halves” cries for its other, and there cannot be
any great salvation until we rise from the poverty of either half to the
richness of the united whole which includes both “ways.”

So, too, we have had the alternative of “outer” or “inner” way forced
upon us. We are told that the only efficacious way is the way of the
cross, treated as an outer historical transaction; and we have, again,
been told that there is no way except the inner way of direct experience
and inner revelation. There are those who say, with one of George
Chapman’s characters:

    “I’ll build all inward—not a light shall ope
    The common out-way.
    I’ll therefore live in dark; and all my light
    Like ancient temples, let in at my top.”

Over against the mystic who glories in the infinite depths of his own
soul, the evangelical, with excessive humility, allows not even a spark
of native grandeur to the soul and denies that the inner way leads to
anything but will-o’-the-wisps. This is a very inept and unnecessary
halving of what should be a whole. It spoils religious life, somewhat as
the execution of Solomon’s proposal would have spoiled for both mothers
the living child that was to be divided. Twenty-five hundred years ago
Heraclitus of Ephesus declared that there is “a way up and a way down and
both are one.” So, too, there is an outer way and an inner way and both
are one. It takes both diverse aspects to express the rich and complete
reality, which we mar and mangle when we dichotomize it and glorify our
amputated half. There is a fine saying of a medieval mystic: “He who can
see the inward in the outward is more spiritual than he who can only see
the inward, in the inward.”

This little book on the “Inner Life” does not assume to deal with the
whole of the religious life. It recognizes that the outer in the long
run is just as essential as the inner. This one inner aspect is selected
for emphasis, without any intention of slighting the importance of the
other side of the shining shield. Men to-day are so overwhelmingly
occupied with objective tasks; they are so busy with the field of outer
action, that it is a peculiarly opportune time to speak of the interior
world where the issues of life are settled and the tissues of destiny
are woven. There will certainly be some readers who will be glad to turn
from accounts of trenches lost or won to spend a little time with the
less noisy but no less mysterious battle line inside the soul, and from
problems of foreign diplomacy to the drama of the inner life.




CONTENTS


                                                                      PAGE

    INTRODUCTION                                                         v

    CHAPTER I. THE INNER WAY                                             1

        Sec. 1. The Momentous Choice                                     1

        Sec. 2. Making a Life                                            9

        Sec. 3. The Spirit of the Beatitudes                            14

        Sec. 4. The Way of Contagion                                    23

        Sec. 5. The Second Mile                                         30

    CHAPTER II. THE KINGDOM WITHIN THE SOUL                             39

        Sec. 1. Bags that Wax not Old                                   39

        Sec. 2. Otherism                                                46

        Sec. 3. Scavengers and the Kingdom                              50

        Sec. 4. “The Beyond is Within”                                  56

        Sec. 5. The Attitude toward the Unseen                          61

    CHAPTER III. SOME PROPHETS OF THE INNER WAY                         70

        Sec. 1. The Psalmist’s Way                                      70

        Sec. 2. The New and Living Way                                  77

        Sec. 3. An Apostle of the Inner Way                             82

        Sec. 4. The Ephesian Gospel                                     90

    CHAPTER IV. THE WAY OF EXPERIENCE                                   97

        Sec. 1. Waiting on God                                          97

        Sec. 2. In the Spirit                                          105

        Sec. 3. The Power of Prayer                                    111

        Sec. 4. The Mystery of Goodness                                116

        Sec. 5. “As One having Authority”                              123

        Sec. 6. Seeing Him Who is Invisible                            133

    CHAPTER V. A FUNDAMENTAL SPIRITUAL OUTLOOK                         138

    CHAPTER VI. WHAT DOES RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE TELL US ABOUT GOD       164




THE INNER LIFE




CHAPTER I

THE INNER WAY


I

THE MOMENTOUS CHOICE

Every scrap of writing that sheds any light on the life of Jesus, and
every incident that gives the least detail about His movements or
His teaching are precious to us. One can hardly conceive the joy and
enthusiasm that would burst forth in all lands, if new fragments of
papyrus or of parchment could be unearthed that would add in any measure
to our knowledge of the way this Galilean life was lived “beneath the
Syrian blue.” But it may now probably be taken for granted that the
material will never be forthcoming—and it surely is not now in hand—for
an adequate biography of Him. The lives of Jesus that have been written
in modern times have a certain value, as suggestive revelations of what
the writers thought He ought to have been or ought to have done, but
biographies, in the true sense of the word, they are not. The Evangelists
performed for us an inestimable service, but they did not furnish us the
sort of data necessary for a detailed biography, expressed in clock-time
language.

Our “sources” are much more adequate when we turn our attention from
external events to the inner way which His life reveals, though they
still allow for free play of imagination and for much fluidity of
subjective interpretation. It is possible, however, I believe, to look
through the genuine words that are preserved and to see, with clairvoyant
insight, the inner kingdom of the soul in that Person whose interior life
was the richest of all those who have walked our earth. There are curious
little playthings to be bought in Rome. If one looks through a pin-hole
peep somewhere in one of these tiny toys, one sees to his surprise the
whole mighty structure of St. Peter’s Cathedral, standing out as large
as it looks in reality. Perhaps we can find some pin-hole peeps in the
gospels that in a similar way will let us see the marvelous inner world,
the extraordinary spiritual life, of this Person whose outer biography so
baffles us.

Our first single glimpse of His interior life must be got without the
help of any actual word of His. It is given to us in the gospel accounts
of His discovery of His mission. How long the consciousness of mission
had been gestating we cannot tell. What books He read, if any, are never
named. What ripening influence the days of toil in the carpenter shop may
have had, is unnoted. What dawned upon Him as He meditated in silence is
not reported. What formative ideas may have come from the little groups
of “the quiet ones in the land” can only be guessed at. We are merely
told that He increased in wisdom as He advanced in stature, which is
the only conceivable way that personality can be attained. Suddenly the
moment of clear insight came and He _saw_ what He was in the world for.

It was usual for the great prophets of His people to discover their
mission in some such moment of clarified inward sight. Isaiah saw the
Lord with His train filling the temple, felt his lips cleansed, and heard
the call “who will go?” Ezekiel saw the indescribable living creature
with the hands of a man under the wings of the Spirit and heard himself
called to his feet for his commission. So here, there was a sudden
invading consciousness from beyond. The world with its solid hills
appears only the fragment, which it is, and the World of wider Reality
floods in and reveals itself. The sky seems rent apart, the Spirit, as
though once more brooding over a world in the making, covers Him from
above, and gives inward birth to a conviction of uniqueness of Life and
uniqueness of mission. He feels Himself in union with His Father.[1]

This experience of the invading Life, awakening a consciousness of
unique personal mission, brought with it, as an unavoidable sequence,
the stress and strain of a very real temptation. The inner world of
self-consciousness has strange watershed “divides” that shape the
currents of the life as the mountain ridges of the outer world do the
rivers. No new nativity, no fresh awakening, can come to a soul without
forcing the momentous issue of its further meaning, or without raising
the urgent question, how shall the new insight, the fresh light, the
increased power be wrought into life? The deepest issues turn, not
upon the choice of “things,” but upon the choice of the kind of self
that is to be, and the most decisive dramas are those that are enacted
in the inner world before the footlights of our private theater. The
temptation is described by the Evangelists in such conventional language
and in such popular and pictorial imagery that its immense inner
reality is often missed by the reader. This oriental, pictorial way of
presenting the drama of the soul catches the western mind in the toils of
literalism. The picture is taken for the reality. What we have here in
the temptation, when we go into the heart of the matter, is the momentous
choice of the kind of Person that is to emerge. It is the immemorial
battle between the higher and the lower self within. It was the line of
least resistance to accept popular expectation, to go forth to realize
the dream of the age. A person conscious of divine anointing, fired with
passionate loyalty to the nation’s hopes, gifted with extraordinary power
of moving men to new issues would feel at once that he had only to put
himself forth as the expected Messiah in order to carry the enthusiastic
people with him. Let him but come with the spectacular powers of the
Messiah that was eagerly looked for, the power to turn stones to bread,
to leap from the pinnacle of the temple without injury, to break the
Roman yoke and make Jerusalem once again the city of God’s chosen
people—and success was sure to follow. God’s ancient covenant was an
absolute pledge to the faithful that He would in His own time make bare
His arm and deliver His people. As soon as the anointed one appeared all
the forces of the unseen world would be at his command and his triumph
would be assured.

The appeal of a career like that is no fictitious “temptation.” It is of
a piece with what besets us all. It is out of the very stuff of nature.
At some such crossroad we have all stood—with the issue of our inner
destiny in unstable equilibrium.

Over against it, another “way” is set, another kind of life is dimly
outlined, another type of anointed one is seen to be possible, another
kingdom, totally different from the one of popular expectation, is
descried. This kingdom of His spiritual vision cannot come by miracle
or by power; it can come only through complete adjustment of will to the
will of the Father-God. This anointed one of His higher aspiration will
be no temporal ruler, no political king, no spectacular wonder-worker.
He will rule only by the conquering power of love and goodness. He
will venture everything on sheer faith in the Father’s love and on the
appeal of uncalculating goodness of heart and will. This new kind of
life that draws Him from the line of least resistance is a life of utter
simplicity, which discounts what the world calls “goods,” which draws
upon an unseen environment for its resources and which expands inwardly,
rather than outwardly, after the manner of the green bay tree. The new
“way” that opens to His sight, and that beckons Him from all other ways
of glory, is a way of suffering and sacrifice, a way of the cross. It
offers itself not because self-giving is a better way than an easy, happy
path, but because it is the _only way_ by which love in a world like
ours can reach its goal; it is the only way by which the kingdom of God
can be formed in the lives of men like us.

He came forth from those momentous days of inner struggle with the issue
settled, and with the first step taken in the way of the Kingdom.


