CHAPTER IV

THE WAY OF EXPERIENCE


I

WAITING ON GOD

As worship, taken in its highest sense and widest scope, is man’s
loftiest undertaking, we cannot too often return to the perennial
questions: What is worship? Why do we worship? How do we best perform
this supreme human function? Worship is too great an experience to
be defined in any sharp or rigid or exclusive fashion. The history
of religion through the ages reveals the fact that there have been
multitudinous ways of worshiping God, all of them yielding real returns
of life and joy and power to large groups of men. At its best and truest,
however, worship seems to me to be _direct, vital, joyous, personal
experience and practice of the presence of God_.

The very fact that such a mighty experience as this is possible means
that there is some inner meeting place between the soul and God; in other
words, that the divine and human, God and man, are not wholly sundered.
In an earlier time God was conceived as remote and transcendent. He
dwelt in the citadel of the sky, was worshiped with ascending incense
and communicated His will to beings beneath through celestial messengers
or by mysterious oracles. We have now more ground than ever before
for conceiving God as transcendent; that is, as above and beyond any
revelation of Himself, and as more than any finite experience can
apprehend. But at the same time, our experience and our ever-growing
knowledge of the outer and inner universe confirm our faith that God is
also immanent, a real presence, a spiritual reality, immediately to be
felt and known, a vital, life-giving environment of the soul. He is a
Being who can pour His life and energy into human souls, even as the sun
can flood the world with light and resident forces, or as the sea can
send its refreshing tides into all the bays and inlets of the coast, or
as the atmosphere can pour its life-giving supplies into the fountains
of the blood in the meeting place of the lungs; or, better still, as the
mother fuses her spirit into the spirit of her responsive child, and lays
her mind on him until he believes in her belief.

It will be impossible for some of us ever to lose our faith in, our
certainty of, this vital presence which overarches our inner lives as
surely as the sky does our outer lives. The more we know of the great
unveiling of God in Christ, the more we see that He is a Being who can
be thus revealed in a personal life that is parallel in will with Him
and perfectly responsive in heart and mind to the spiritual presence. We
can use as our own the inscription on the wall of the ancient temple in
Egypt. On one of the walls a priest of the old religion had written for
his divinity: “I am He who was and is and ever shall be, and my veil hath
no man lifted.” On the opposite wall, some one who had found his way into
the later, richer faith, wrote this inscription: “Veil after veil have we
lifted and ever the Face is more wonderful!”

It must be held, I think, as Emerson so well puts it, that there is “no
bar or wall in the soul” separating God and man. We lie open on one side
of our nature to God, who is the Oversoul of our souls, the Overmind of
our minds, the Overperson of our personal selves. There are deeps in our
consciousness which no private plumb line of our own can sound; there are
heights in our moral conscience which no ladder of our human intelligence
can scale; there are spiritual hungers, longings, yearnings, passions,
which find no explanation in terms of our physical inheritance or of our
outside world. We touch upon the coasts of a deeper universe, not yet
explored or mapped, but no less real and certain than this one in which
our mortal senses are at home. We cannot explain our normal selves or
account for the best things we know—or even for our condemnation of our
poorer, lower self—without an appeal to and acknowledgment of a divine
Guest and Companion who is the real presence of our central being. How
shall we best come into conscious fellowship with God and turn this
environing presence into a positive source of inner power, and of energy
for the practical tasks and duties of daily life?

It is never easy to tell in plain words what prepares the soul for
intercourse with God; what it is that produces the consciousness of
divine tides, the joyous certainty that our central life is being flooded
and bathed by celestial currents. No person ever quite understands how
his tongue utters its loftiest words, how his pen writes its noblest
phrases, how his clearest insights came to him, how his most heroic
deeds got done, or how the finest strands of his character were woven.
Here is a mystery which we never quite uncover—a background which we
never wholly explore lies along the fringes of the most illumined part of
our lives. This mystery surrounds all the supreme acts of religion. They
cannot be _reduced_ to a cold and naked rational analysis. The intellect
possesses no master key which unlocks all the secrets of the soul.

We can say, however, that purity of heart is one of the most essential
preconditions for this high-tide experience of worship. That means, of
course, much more than absence of moral impurity, freedom from soilure
and stain of willful sins. It means, besides, a cleansing away of
prejudice and harsh judgment. It means sincerity of soul, a believing,
trusting, loving spirit. It means intensity of desire for God, singleness
of purpose, integrity of heart. The flabby nature, the duplex will, the
judging spirit, will hardly succeed in worshiping God in any great or
transforming way.

Silence is, again, a very important condition for the great inner action
which we call worship. So long as we are content to speak our own
_patois_, to live in the din of our narrow, private affairs, and to tune
our minds to stock broker’s tickers, we shall not arrive at the lofty
goal of the soul’s quest. We shall hear the noises of our outer universe
and nothing more. When we learn how to center down into the stillness and
quiet, to listen with our souls for the whisperings of Life and Truth,
to bring all our inner powers into parallelism with the set of divine
currents, we shall hear tidings from the inner world at the heart and
center of which is God.

But by far the most influential condition for effective worship is
group-silence—the waiting, seeking, expectant attitude permeating and
penetrating a gathered company of persons. We hardly know in what the
group-influence consists, or why the presence of others heightens the
sensitive, responsive quality in each soul, but there can be no doubt
of the fact. There is some subtle telepathy that comes into play in the
living silence of a congregation which makes every earnest seeker more
quick to feel the presence of God, more acute of inner ear, more tender
of heart to feel the bubbling of the springs of life than any one of them
would be in isolation. Somehow we are able to “lend our minds out,” as
Browning puts it, or at least to contribute toward the formation of an
atmosphere that favors communion and coöperation with God.

If this is so, if each assists all and all in turn assist each, our
responsibilities in meetings for worship are very real and very great and
we must try to realize that there is a form of ministry which is dynamic
even when the lips are sealed.


