II

OTHERISM

(_Matt. VII. 1-12_)

Altruism is an honored word. Otherism is only recently coined and has not
yet become widely current in good speech. We need, however, a word that
has more inward depth than altruism usually carries, and perhaps otherism
will eventually take that vacant place.

Not merely in these days of war, but in all our human relations all the
time we greatly need to get the interior vision which enables us to
understand from within those with whom we live and work. Nobody sees life
correctly until he has corrected his own views by a true appreciation of
the views of others. From the outside it is impossible to estimate any
life fairly. We have long ago learned that we can get no true account of
any historical character unless we have a historian who can put himself
in the place of the person he is describing. He must have imagination
and be able to see clearly the conditions and forces, the influences and
the atmosphere in which the man lived. The problems which he had to deal
with, the conceptions which governed men’s thoughts when he lived—all
these must be understood, before we can get any estimate of the man
himself. The same sort of imagination is necessary to judge the person
who lives next door. We dare not pronounce upon him until we know all
that he has to face. If we could once feel his quivering spirit and could
see his inward struggles, we could not set up our private tribunal and
pass our cold individual judgment upon him. The real remedy for this hard
critical spirit which breaks society up into independent units is the
spirit of love, the spirit of otherism.

The moment we put ourselves in the place of others, and pronounce no
judgment upon persons until we have seen all the circumstances of their
life, a new state of things at once appears. Genuine sympathy, clear
interior insight into the personality of others, immediately creates a
new world. The trouble too often is that we see all the defects in others
and forget our own. We want to take the mote out of another person’s eye
while all the time there is a whole fence rail in our own. Christ’s rule
is to make oneself perfect before one goes to correcting others. “Let him
who is without sin cast the first stone.”

There is another situation also which would be remedied if we learned
to put ourselves in the other person’s place—if we had the spirit of
otherism. Christ sums it up in the proverb about _casting pearls before
swine_, _i.e._ giving what is a misfit. Many of our well-meant charities
are of this sort. We blunder in our efforts to help poor needy people,
because we do not get their point of view. We do not live our way into
their lives. There is no fit between our gift and their need. They get a
stone for bread.

The same thing happens in much of our public speaking. Many persons have
the barbarous habit of never imagining the listeners’ point of view. They
go on speaking as unconscious of the condition confronting them as the
hose pipe is when the water is turned on. The remedy again is otherism.
It is impossible to help anybody with a message until you can in some
measure _share_ his life.

    “The Holy Supper is kept, indeed,
    In whatso we share with another’s need.”

This teaching is all summed up in the golden rule, “All things that ye
would that men should do unto you do ye also unto them.” It is clear at
once that to do this one must cultivate both his spirit of love and his
power of imagination. It is never enough to want to help a person. We
must put ourself in his place and be able to do what really _will help
him_. It would appear, therefore, that the most difficult and at the same
time the most heavenly attainment in the world is sympathy—the spirit of
otherism.


III

SCAVENGERS AND THE KINGDOM

We no longer expect a world of perfect conditions to appear by sudden
intervention. We have explained so many things by the discovery of
antecedent developmental processes that we have leaped to the working
faith that all things come that way. We do, no doubt, find unbridged gaps
in the enormous series of events that have culminated in our present
world, and we must admit that nature seems sometimes to desert her usual
placid way of process for what looks like a steeplechase of sudden
“jumps,” but we feel pretty sure that even these “jumps” have been slowly
prepared for and are themselves part of the process-method.

Then, too, we find it very difficult to conceive how a spiritual
kingdom—a world which is built and held together by the inner gravitation
of love—could come by a fiat, or a stroke, or a jet. The qualities which
form and characterize the kingdom of God are all qualities that are
born and cultivated within by personal choices, by the formation of
rightly-fashioned wills, by the growth of love and sympathy in the heart,
by the creation of pure and elevated desires. Those traits must be won
and achieved. They cannot be shot into souls from without. If, therefore,
we are to expect the crowning age that shall usher in a world in which
wrath and hate no longer destroy, from which injustice is banished and
the central law of which is love like that of Christ’s, then we must look
for this age, it seems to me, to come by slow increments and gains of
advancing personal and social goodness, and by divine and human processes
already at work in some degree in the lives of men.

Christ often seems to teach this view. There is a strand in his sayings
that certainly implies a kingdom coming by a long process of slow
spiritual gains. There is first the seed, then the blade, then the
ear and finally the full corn in the ear. The mustard seed, though
so minute and tiny, is a type of the kingdom because it contains the
potentiality of a vast growth and expansion. The yeast is likewise a
figure of ever-growing, permeating, penetrating living force which in
time leavens the whole mass. The kingdom is frequently described as an
inner life, a victorious spirit. It “comes” when God’s will is done in a
person as it is done in heaven, and, therefore, it is not a spectacle to
be “observed,” like the passing of Cæsar’s legions, or the installation
of a new ruler. But, on the other hand, there are plainly many sayings
which point toward the expectation of a mighty sudden _event_. We seem,
again and again, to be hearing not of process, but of apocalypse, not
of slow development, but of a mysterious leap. There can be no question
that most devout Jews of the first century expected the world’s relief
expedition to come by miracle, and it is evident that there was an
intense hope in the minds of men that, in one way or another, God
would intervene and put things right. Many think that Christ shared
that hope and expectation. It is of course possible that in sharing, as
He did, the actual life of man, He partook of the hopes and travails
and expectations of His times. But, I think, we need to go very slowly
and cautiously in this direction. To interpret Christ’s message mainly
in terms of apocalypse and sudden interventions is surely to miss its
naturalness, its spiritual vision, and its inward depth. We can well
admit that nobody then had quite our modern conception of process or our
present day dislike of breaks, interruptions, and interventions. There
was no difficulty in thinking of a new age or dispensation miraculously
inaugurated. Only it looks as though Christ had discovered an ethical and
spiritual way which made it unnecessary to count on miracle. There was
much refuse to be consumed, much corruption to be removed, before the new
condition of life could be in full play, but He seems to have seen that
the consuming fire and the cleansing work were an essential and inherent
part of the _process_ that was bringing the kingdom.

When he was asked _where_ men were to look for the kingdom, His answer
was that they were to find a figure and parable of it in the normal
process of nature’s scavengers. The carcass lies decaying in the sun,
corrupting the air and tainting everything in its region. There can
be no wholesome conditions of life in that spot until the corruption
is removed. But nature has provided a way of cleansing the air. The
scavenger comes and removes the refuse and corruption and turns it
by a strange alchemy into living matter. Life feeds on the decaying
refuse, raises it back into life, and cleanses the world by making
even corruption minister to its own life processes. We could not live
an hour in our world if it were not alive with a myriad variety of
scavenging methods that burn up effete matter, transmute noxious forms
into wholesome stuff, cleanse away the poisons, and transmute, not by
an apocalypse, but by a process, death into life and corruption into
sweetness. May not the vulture, like the tiny sparrow who cannot fall
without divine regard, be a sign, a figure, a parable? When we look for
the kingdom, in the light of this sign, we shall not search the clouds
of heaven, we shall not consult “the number of the beast”—we shall look
for it wherever we see life conquering death, wherever the white tents
of love are pitched against the black tents of hate, wherever the living
forces of goodness are battering down the strongholds of evil, wherever
the sinner is being changed to a saint, wherever ancient survivals of
instinct and custom are yielding to the sway of growing vision and
insight and ideal. It is “slow and late” to come, this kingdom! So was
life slow to come, while all that was to be

    “Whirl’d for a million æons thro’ the vast
    Waste dawn of multitudinous-eddying light.”

So was man slow to come, while fantastic creatures were “tearing each
other in the slime.” So was a spirit-governed Person slow to come, while
men lived in lust and war and hate. But in God’s world at length the
things that ought to come do come, and we may faintly guess by what we
see that the kingdom, too, is coming. There is something like it now in
some lives.


