V

THE SECOND MILE

It may seem to some incongruous to be writing about an inner way of life
in these days when _action_ is felt by so many to be the only reality and
when in every direction outside there is dire human need to be met.

    “Leave, then, your wonted prattle,
      The oaten reed forbear;
    For I hear a sound of battle,
      And trumpets rend the air.”

But more than ever is it necessary for us to center down to eternal
principles of life and action, to attain and maintain the right inner
spirit, and to _see_ what in its faith and essence Christianity really
means. Precisely now when the Sermon on the Mount seems least to be the
program of action and the map of life, is it a suitable time for us to
endeavor to discover what Christ’s way means, by looking through the
literal phrases in clairvoyant fashion to the spirit treasured and
embalmed within the wonderful words?

There is one phrase which seems to me to be, in a rare and peculiar
degree, the key to the entire gospel—I mean the invitation to go “the
second mile”: “If any man compel you to go a mile, go two miles.” It is
always dangerous, I know, to fly away from the literal significance of
words and to indulge in far-fetched “spiritual” interpretations. But it
is even more dangerous, perhaps, to read words of oriental imagery and
paradox as though they were the plain prose speech of the occidental
mind, and to be taken only at their face value.

There will probably always be Tolstoys—great or small—who will make the
difficult, and never very successful, experiment of taking this and the
other “commands” of the Sermon on the Mount in a literal and legalistic
sense, but to do so is almost certainly to be “slow of heart,” and
to miss Christ’s meaning. Whatever else may be true or false in our
interpretations of the teachings of Christ, it may always be taken for
certain that He did not inaugurate a religion of the legalistic type,
consisting of commands and exact directions, to be literally followed
and obeyed as a way to secure merit and reward. To go “the second mile,”
then, is an attitude and character of spirit rather than a mere rule and
formula for the legs.

Christ always shows a very slender appreciation of any act of religion or
of ethics which does not reach beyond the stage of _compulsion_. What is
done because it _must_ be done; because the law requires it, or because
society expects it, or because convention prescribes it, or because the
doer of it is afraid of consequences if he omits it, may, of course, be
rightly done and meritoriously done, but an act on that level is not yet
quite in the region where for Christ the highest moral and religious
acts have their spring. The typical Pharisee was an appalling instance
of the inadequacy of “the first-mile” kind of religion and ethics. He
plodded his hard mile, and “did all the things required” of him. In the
region of commands, or “touching the law” he was “blameless.” But there
was no spontaneity in his religion, no free initiative, no enthusiastic
passion, no joyous abandon, no gratuitous and uncalculating acts. He did
things enough, but he did them because he _had_ to do them, not because
some mighty love possessed him and flooded him and inspired him to go not
only the expected mile, but to go on without any calculation out beyond
milestones altogether. Just here appears the new inner way of Christ’s
religion. The legalist, like the rich young man, “does all the things
that are commanded in the law,” but still painfully “lacks” something.
To get into Christ’s way, to “follow” in any real sense, he must cut his
cables and swing out from the moorings where he is _tied_. He must catch
such a passion of love that giving either of his money or of himself,
shall no longer be for him an imposed duty but rather a joy of spirit.

The parable of the “great surprise” is another illustration, a glorious
illustration, of the spirit of the “second mile.” The “blessed ones” in
the picture (which is an unveiling of actual everyday life in its eternal
meaning rather than a portraiture of the day of judgment) find themselves
at home with God, drawn into His presence, crowned with His approval, and
sealed with His fellowship. They are surprised. They had not been adding
up their merits or calculating their chances of winning heaven. They are
beautifully artless and naïve: “When saw we Thee hungry and fed Thee?”
They have been doing deeds of love, saying kind words, relieving human
need, banishing human loneliness, making life easier and more joyous,
because they had caught a spirit of love and tenderness, and, therefore,
“could not do otherwise,” and now they suddenly discover that those whom
they helped and rescued and served were bound up in one inseparable life
with God himself, so that what was done to them was done to Him, and they
find that _their_ spontaneous and uncalculating love was one in essence
and substance with the love of God and that they are eternally at home
with Him.

The tender, immortal stories of the woman who broke her alabaster vase of
precious nard and “filled all the house with the odor,” and of the woman
(perhaps the same one) who had been a sinner and who from her passion of
love for her great forgiveness wet Christ’s feet with her tears, even
before she could open her cruse of ointment, are the finest possible
illustrations of the spirit of “the second mile.” They picture, in
subtly suggestive imagery, the immense contrast between the spontaneous,
uncalculating act of one who “loves much” and does with grace what love
prompts; and acts, on the other hand, like that of Simon the pharisaic
host, who offers Jesus a purely conventional and grudging hospitality,
or like that of the disciples who sit indeed at the table with Jesus but
come to it absorbed with the burning question, “who among us is to be
first and greatest,” not only at the table but “in the Kingdom!”

What grace and unexpected love come into action in the simple deed of the
“Samaritan” who, from nobility of nature, does what official Priest and
Levite leave undone! The hated foreigner, spit at and stoned as he walked
the roads of Judea, under no obligation to be kind or serviceable, is the
real “neighbor,” the bearer of balm and healing, the dispenser of love
and sympathy. He may have no ordination to the priesthood, but he finely
exhibits the attitude of grace which belongs in the religion of “the
second mile.”

But we do not reach the full significance of “the second mile” until we
see that it is something more than the highest level of human grace.
What shines through the gospels everywhere, like a new-risen sun, is
the revelation that _this_—this grace of the second mile—is the supreme
trait and character-nature of God as well. How surprising and unexpected
is that extraordinary unveiling of the divine nature in the story of
the prodigal boy! It is wonderful enough that one who has wasted his
substance and squandered his own very life should still be able in his
squalor and misery to come to himself and want to go home; but the fact
which radiates this sublime story like a glory is the uncalculating,
ungrudging, unlimited love of the Father, which remains unchanged by the
boy’s blunder, which has never failed in the period of his absence, and
which bursts out in the cry of joy: “This my son was dead and is alive
again, he was lost and is found.”

It is, and always has been, the very center of our Christian faith that
the real nature and character of God come full into view in Christ,
that God is in mind and heart and will revealed in the Person whom we
call Christ. “The grace,” then, “of the Lord Jesus Christ,” of which
we are reminded in that great word of apostolic benediction, is a true
manifestation of the deepest nature and character of God Himself. The
Cross is not an artificial scheme. The Cross is the eternal grace, the
spontaneous, uncalculating love of God made visible and vocal in our
temporal world. It is the apotheosis of the spirit of the second mile.




