IV

THE MYSTERY OF GOODNESS

We generally use the word “mystery” to indicate the dark, baffling,
and forbidding aspects of our life-experience. The things which spoil
our peace and mar our harmonies and break our unions are for us
characteristically _mysteries_. Pain, suffering, and death are the most
ancient of mysteries, which philosophers and poets have always been
striving to solve and unravel. Evil in all its complicated forms and sin
in all its hideous varieties constitute another group of these dark and
forbidding mysteries, about which the race has forever speculated. The
problem of evil has been the prolific source both of mythological stories
and of systems of philosophy.

Every war that has swept the world, from that of Chedorlaomer to that
of Europe to-day, has driven this mystery of evil into the foreground
of consciousness, wherever the dark trail of ruin and devastation and
myriad woe has lain, or lies, across the lives and hearts of men. Now,
as always, burning homes, ruined business, masses of slain, maimed
bodies, the welter of animal instincts, the suffering of women and
little children, and the hates enflamed between races form the greatest
summation of baffling evils that man has known.

But it is an interesting fact that the mysteries referred to by the
greatest prophets of the soul are not of this dark and baffling type.
They are mysteries of light rather than mysteries of darkness. Christ
speaks of “the mystery of the Kingdom of God.” Saint Paul finds the
central mystery to be an incarnational revelation of a suffering, loving
God, who re-lives His life in us, and the author of the Epistle to
Timothy announces “the great mystery of _godliness_.”[4] Love is put
above all mysteries; the gospel of grace is more “unsearchable” than
any suffering of this present time, and the real mystery is to be found
rather in resurrection than in death: “Behold I show you a mystery. We
shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed and the dead shall be
raised.”

Science has confirmed this emphasis of the spiritual prophets. We come
back from the greatest books of the present time with the same conclusion
as this of the New Testament that the prime mysteries of the world are
mysteries of goodness and not of evil; of light and not of darkness.
We can pretty easily understand how there should be “evil” in a world
that has evolved under the two great biological conditions: (1) Every
being that survives wins out because he is more physically fit than his
neighbors in the struggle for existence, and (2) there is a tendency for
all inherited traits to persist in offspring. In order to have “nature”
at all, there must be a heavy tinge of redness in tooth and claw. The
primitive passions must be strong in order to insure any beings that can
survive. And if there is to be inheritance of parental traits, then the
tendencies of bygone ages are bound to persist on, even into a world of
more highly evolved beings, and there will be inherited “relics” of
fears, of appetites, of impulses, of instincts, and of desires, as there
are inherited “relics” in the physical structure, and men will continue
to do things which would better suit the animal level. And, finally, if
the world is to be made by evolving processes, there will of necessity
be an overlapping of “high” and “low.” The world cannot _go on_ without
carrying its past along with the advancing line, so that in the light of
the new and better that comes, the old and out-passed seems “evil” and
“bad.”

We can see plainly enough where the drive of selfishness came from,
where the passionate fears and angers and hates that mar our world
got into the system. What is not so clear and plain is how we came to
be possessed of a driving hunger for _goodness_, how we ever got a
bent for self-sacrifice, how we derived our disposition for love, how
we discovered that it is more blessed to give than to receive. The
mystery after all _is_ the mystery of goodness. The gradual growth of
a Kingdom of God, in which men live by love and brotherhood, in which
they give without expecting returns, in which they decrease that others
may increase, and in which their joy is fulfilled in the _spreading_ of
joy—that is, after all, the mystery.

The coming, into this checkerboard world, of One who practiced love in
all the varying issues of life,

    “Who nailed all flesh to the cross
    Till self died out in the love of his kind,”

and who Himself believed, and taught others to believe, that His Life was
a genuine revelation of God and the spiritual realm of reality—there is a
mystery.

That this Life which was in Him is an actual incursion from a higher,
inexhaustible world of Spirit, that we all may partake of it, draw upon
it, live in it, and have it live in us, so that in some sense it becomes
true that _Christ lives in us_ and we are raised from the dead—that is
the mystery.

This word “mystery” or “mysteries” did not, however, stand in the thought
of the early Christians for something mysterious and inscrutable. It
stood rather for some unspeakably precious reality which could be known
only by initiation and to the initiate. The “mysteries” of Mithra were
forever hidden to those on the outside; to those who formed the inner
circle the secret of the real presence of the god was as open and clear
as the sunlight under the sky. So, too, with the “mysteries” of the
gospel. They could not be conveyed by word of wisdom or by proof of
logic. Then, and always, the love of Christ “passes knowledge,” “the
peace of God” overtops processes of thought. Love, Grace, Goodness,
Godliness, Christlikeness breaking forth in men like us, remains a
“mystery”—a thing not “explainable” in terms of empirical causation
and not capable of being “known” except to those who see and taste and
touch, because they have been “initiated into this Life.” We shall
no doubt still puzzle over the dark enigmas of pain and death, of war
and its train of woe, but we shall do well to remember that there is
a greater mystery than any of these—the mystery of the suffering, yet
ever-conquering love of God which no one _knows_ except he who is
immersed in it.


