IV

“THE BEYOND IS WITHIN”

Among the parables of Christ there is a very impressive one on the shut
door. It is a story of ten country maidens who were invited to a wedding.
They were to meet the bridegroom coming from a distance, as soon as his
arrival should be announced, and with their lighted lamps they were to
guide him and his attendants through the darkness to the home of the
bride, where the banquet and the festal dance were to be held.

For many days these simple maidens had been living in the thrilling
expectation of the great event in which they were to take a leading part.

They had been busy with their preparations, drilling their rhythmic
steps, and talking eagerly of the approaching night. But five of them
foolishly neglected the critically important part of the preparation—they
took no oil to supply their lamps and at the dramatic moment they found
themselves compelled to withdraw from the joyous throng and to go in
search of the necessary equipment. When at length they arrived with their
oil, the illuminated procession was over and the door of the festal house
was shut.

The simple maidens soon discovered that there was a stern finality to
this shut door. Their blunder had irrevocable consequences. They may have
had other interesting opportunities as life went on, but they forever
missed this joyous procession and this wedding feast. “Too late, too
late. Ye cannot enter now.”

Christ turns this common, trivial neighborhood incident into a parable
of the Kingdom of God. Those who believe that He was looking, as so many
in His time were looking, for a sudden shift of dispensations and for a
Kingdom to be ushered in by a stupendous apocalyptic event, find in this
irrevocably shut door of the parable a figure of the doom of those who
failed to prepare for the sudden coming of this crisis, decisive of the
destiny of men.

But there is another, and, I think, a truer, way of interpreting this
shut door. There is a stern finality to all opportunities that have been
missed and to all high occasions that have been blundered and bungled.
All decisions of the will, all choices of life have, in their very
nature, apocalyptic finality. They suddenly reveal and unveil character
and they are loaded with destiny which can be changed only by a change
of character. Other opportunities may offer themselves and new chances
may indeed come, but when any choice has been made or any opportunity has
been missed that chance has gone by and that door is shut.

The football player who has had a chance in the great game of the year
to make a goal, and instead of doing it fumbled the ball and lost the
opportunity to score, may just possibly have another chance sometime, but
no apologies and no explanations can ever change the apocalyptic finality
of that fumble.

Something like that is involved in all the spiritual issues of life, and
our deeds and attitudes are all the time irrevocably opening or shutting
doors, which prove to be doors to the Kingdom of God. Christ may possibly
at times have looked for some sudden revelation of destiny, but surely
for the most part He looked for the momentous issues of the Kingdom
_within the soul itself_ rather than in a spectacular event in the outer
world. This principle throws light on all Christ’s sayings about the
future. The coming destiny is not in the stars, it is not in the sentence
of a Great Assize, it is not in the sudden shift of “dispensations”; it
is in the character and inner nature, as they have been formed within
each soul. The thing to be concerned about is not so much a day of
judgment or an apocalyptic moment, as the trend of the will, the attitude
of the spirit, the formation of inner disposition and character. We
are always facing issues of an eternal aspect, and every day is a day
of judgment, revealing the line of march and the issues of destiny.
Conversion crises are fortunately possible, when suddenly a new level
of life may be reached and a fresh start may be made, and in this inner
world of personality, there are always new possibilities occurring, but,
as at oriental marriage feasts, neglected opportunities are irreversibly
neglected, shut doors are irrevocably shut, and blunders that affect
the issues of the soul have an apocalyptic finality about them. New
dispensations may await us; the Kingdom may come in ways we never dreamed
of; the beyond may be more momentous than we have ever expected, but
always and everywhere “the within” determines “the beyond,” and character
is destiny.


V

THE ATTITUDE TOWARD THE UNSEEN

“Nowhere as yet has history spoken in favor of the ideal of a morality
without religion. New active forces of will, so far as we can observe,
have always arisen in conjunction with ideas about the unseen.” So
wrote the great German historian and philosopher, Wilhelm Dilthey. The
greatest experts in the field both of ethics and of religion agree with
this view. Henry Sidgwick and Leslie Stephen are experts in the field
of ethics who cannot be suspected of holding a brief for religion, and
yet Sidgwick says: “Ethics is an imperfect science alone. It must run up
into religion to complete itself;” and Leslie Stephen says: “Morality
and religion stand or fall together.” Spinoza, who was denounced during
his lifetime as an atheist and a destroyer of the faith, nevertheless
makes love of God the whole basis of genuine ethics, insisting that there
is no morality conceivable without love of God. St. Augustine’s famous
testimony may suffice as a religious expert’s view. He says, “Love God
and then you may do what you please,” meaning, of course, that you cannot
then approve a wrong course of action or of life.

Nowhere, certainly, are religion and ethics so wonderfully fused into
one indissoluble whole as in the experience and teaching of Christ. This
appears not only in His supreme rule for religion and for good conduct:
“Thou shalt love God with all thy powers and thy neighbor as thyself,”
but still more does it appear in the inner steps and processes which
underlie and prepare the way for the decisions and acts of Christ’s
own life. Here, unmistakably, _all the active forces of will arose in
conjunction with ideas about the unseen_.

It is the modern custom to talk much about the ethics of Jesus and to see
in the Sermon on the Mount an ideal of human personality and a program
for an ideal social order. But a careful reader cannot fail to feel in
Christ’s teaching the complete fusion of His ideal for the individual
and for society with His consciousness of the world of unseen realities.
The new person and the new society are possible in His thought, only
through unbroken _correspondence_ with the world of higher forces and
of perfect conditions. The only way to be perfect is to be on the way
toward likeness to the heavenly Father, the only moral dynamic that will
work is a love, like that of God’s love, which expels all selfishness
and all tendency to stop at partial and inadequate goods. If any kingdom
of heavenly conditions is ever to be expected on earth, if ever we may
hope for a day to dawn when the divine will is to be exhibited among men
and they are to live the love-way of goodness, it is because God is our
Father and we have the possibilities of His nature.

The ethical ideals of the Kingdom are inherently attached to the prayer
experience of Jesus. The kind of human world which His faith builds for
men is forever linked to the kind of God to whom He prays. Cut the link
and both worlds fall away. We cannot shuffle the cold, hard, loveless
atoms of our social world into lovely forms of coöperative relationship.
The atoms must be changed. In some way we must learn how to lift men into
the faith which Christ had, that God is the Father who is seeking to draw
us all into correspondence with His unseen world of Life and Love. “After
this manner pray ye. Our heavenly Father of the holy name, thy Kingdom
come, Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.” The two faiths make
one faith—the faith in a Father-God who cares, and the faith in the
realization of an ideal society based on coöperative love.

“And as He was praying, the fashion of His countenance was altered and
His raiment became white and dazzling.” This is a simple, synoptic
account of an experience attaching to a supreme crisis of personal
decision in the life of Jesus. His so-called ethics, as I have been
insisting, is indivisibly bound up with His attitude toward the
unseen, with His experience of a realm where what ought to be, really
is. So, too, it is because He has found His inward relation with God
that He makes His great decision to go forward toward Jerusalem, to
meet the onset of opposition, to see His work frustrated by the rulers
of the nation, to suffer and to die at the hands of His enemies. The
Transfiguration has been treated as a myth and again as a misplaced
resurrection story. But it is certainly best to treat it as a genuine
psychological narrative which fits reality and life at every point. As
the clouds darken and the danger threatens and the successful issue of
His mission seems impossible, Jesus falls back upon God, brings His
spirit into absolute parallelism with the heavenly will and accepts
whatever may be involved in the pursuit of the course to which He is
committed. When He pushes back into the inner experience of relation
with His Father and the circuit of connection closes and living faith
floods through Him and fixes His decision unalterably to go forward, His
face and form are transfigured and illuminated through the experience of
union. This prayer of illumination reported in the gospels, is not an
isolated instance, a solitary experience. The altered face, the changed
body, the glorified figure, the radiation of light, have marked many a
subordinate saint, and may well have characterized the Master as He found
the true attitude of soul toward the unseen and formed His momentous
decision to be faithful unto death in His manifestation of love.

In Gethsemane, as the awful moment came nearer, once more we catch a
glimpse of His attitude to the unseen. In place of illuminated form and
shining garments, we hear now of a face covered with the sweat and blood
of agony. Just in front are the shouting rabble, the cross and the nails,
the defeat of lifelong hopes and the defection of the inner fellowship,
but the triumphant spirit within Him unites with the infinite will that
is steering the world and piloting all lives, and calmly acquiesces with
it. But to this suffering soul, battling in the dark night of agony,
the infinite will is no abstract Power, no blind fate, to be dumbly
yielded to. The great word which breaks out from these quivering lips
is the dear word for “Father” that the little child’s lips have learned
to say: “Abba.” The will above is His will now and He goes forward to
the pain and death in the strength of communion and fellowship with
His Abba-Father. There may have been a single moment of desolation in
the agony of the next day when the cry escaped, “My God, why hast thou
forsaken me?” but immediately the inner spirit recovers its connection
and its confidence and the crucifixion ends, as it should, with the words
of triumphant faith, “Father, into thy hands I intrust my spirit.”

The most important fact of this Life, which has ever since poured Alpine
streams of power into the life of the world, is its attitude toward the
unseen. We miss the heart of things when we reduce the gospel to ethics
or when we transform it into dry theology. Through all the story and
behind all the teaching is the mighty inner fact of an intimate personal
_experience_ of God as Father. To live is to be about the “Father’s
business.” In great moments of intercourse there comes to Him a flooding
consciousness of sonship, joyous both to Father and Son: “In Him I am
well pleased,” and in times of strain and tragedy the onward course is
possible because the inner bond holds fast and the Abba-experience abides.

It is not strange that a synoptic writer reports the saying: “No man
knoweth the Father but the Son.” The passage as it stands reported in
Matthew may be colored by later theology, but there is a nucleus of
absolute truth hidden in the saying. There is no other way to know God
but this way of inner love-experience. Only a son can know a Father. Only
one who has trodden the wine-press in anguish and pain, and through
it all has felt the enfolding love of an Abba-father really _knows_.
Mysticism has its pitfalls and its limitations, but this much is sound
and true, that the way to know God is to have inner heart’s experience of
Him, like the experience of the Son.




