CHAPTER III

SOME PROPHETS OF THE INNER WAY


I

THE PSALMIST’S WAY

Emerson’s friend, Margaret Fuller, coined the phrase, “standing the
universe.” “I can stand the universe,” was her brave statement. But long
before Concord was discovered or “the transcendental school” was dreamed
of a school of Hebrew saints had learned how to stand the universe.

Canaan, with all its milk and honey, was never a land arranged by
preëstablished harmony as a paradise for the idealist. It enjoyed no
special millennium privileges. Whatever rainbow dreams may have filled
the mind of optimistic prophets were always quickly put to flight by the
iron facts of the rigid world which ringed them round. The Philistines
were pitiless neighbors. Like Gawain, they were spiritually too blind
even to have desires to _see_. Coats of mail, gigantic spear heads,
iron chariots, and Goliath champions were their arguments. How could a
nation like Israel be free to work out its spiritual career with these
crude materialistic Philistines always hanging on its borders and always
threatening its national existence? When the Philistines were temporarily
quiet there were Moabites, or Edomites, or Syrians ready to take a turn
at hampering the ideals of Israel. And worse still was ahead. From the
time of the battle of Karkar (854 B.C.) on, the armies of Assyria had to
be reckoned with. Here was another pitiless foe; efficient, militant,
inventive, with a culture and religion suited to its genius, but as
ruthless as a wolf toward everything in its path. It smashed whatever
it struck and in the course of events Jerusalem was ground in its
irresistible mill.

When a “return” was granted under the Persians, and the national and
religious life was restored in Jerusalem, new difficulties swarmed.
During the long period of “restoration” the half-breed peoples in
Palestine with their low ideals threatened to defeat the hopes of
the returned exiles and made their feeble beginnings as difficult as
possible. Then, again, the new nation was hardly firm in its re-found
life when it had to meet the forces of Hellenism which rose out of
the expansion policies of Alexander. A culture incompatible with the
ideals and passions of the Hebrews broke in and surrounded them. It was
a different enemy to any they had yet met but no less irreconcilable.
Under the Hellenized kings of Antioch all the hopes and ideals of this
long-suffering race were put in jeopardy, and the very existence of the
chosen nation was in desperate peril in the period of the Maccabean
struggle.

But through all these centuries of warfare with alien peoples, and during
all these hard periods of strain and anguish, there existed a school of
saints who were learning how to stand the universe and who were teaching
the world a way of victory even in the midst of outward defeat. Their
“way” was the fortification of the soul, the construction of the interior
life; and the literature which they produced has proved to be one of
the most precious treasures of the race. The gold dust words of these
saints are scattered through most of the early books of Israel, for in
all periods the poets of this race were mainly busy with this central
problem of life, the problem of standing the universe. But it is in the
collection which we call the _Psalms_ that we find the supreme literature
of this inner way of fortification and victory.

“Thou restorest my soul,” is the joyous testimony of one of these saints,
and this testimony of the best loved member of this school of saints is
the key to the Psalmist’s way of triumph in general. In the confusion
of events and the irrationality of things—_die Ohnmacht der Natur_—he
felt his way back, like a little child in the dark feeling for his
mother, until he found God as the rock on which his feet could stand.
The processes of reconstruction are never traced out. The logic of this
way back to the fortification of the soul through the discovery of God
is not given in detail. The moments when we shift the levels of life are
never quite describable. But somehow when the way outside goes on into
the valley of the shadow of death, and the table is set in the face of
enemies, the soul falls back upon God and is _restored_.

“I could not understand,” another Psalmist declares. Everything was
baffling. The wicked seemed to prosper and the righteous to suffer. The
world appeared out of joint and the whole web of life hopelessly tangled;
“but,” he adds with no further explanation, “I came into the sanctuary of
God and then I saw.” It is like the final solution in the great inner
drama of Job. _God answers_ and Job’s problem is solved: “I had heard
of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye seeth thee.” In the
great phrase of the book, “_God_ turned the captivity of Job.”

These men who gave us our Psalms had learned how to bear adversity and
affliction without being overwhelmed or defeated. “All thy waves and thy
billows have gone over me,” one of them cries. He has lost his land and
has only the _memory_ of Jordan and Hermon and Mizar. His adversaries
are a constant “sword in his bones.” They jeer at him and ask, “Where
now is thy God?” but his trust holds steadily on: “The Lord will command
His loving-kindness in the daytime, and in the night His song shall be
with me!” Even when the water-spouts of trouble break over him, when “the
waters roar and are troubled,” when the “nations rage and kingdoms are
moved,” when “desolations are abroad in the earth,” God abides for him “a
very present help in time of trouble,” “a refuge and strength” for his
soul. Dismay and trembling may be abroad; pain may come as on a woman in
travail, yet this deep soul can calmly say, “God is our God forever; He
will be our guide even unto death.”

This element of _trust_ and _confidence_ has never anywhere had grander
utterance. The Psalmist has got beyond reliance on “horses and chariots,”
beyond trust in “riches,” “princes,” in “the bow or the sword,” or
in “man, whose breath is in his nostrils.” He rests his case on God
alone, and builds on naked faith in His goodness and care: “_Thou_ hast
delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from
falling.” Puzzled he often is with the prosperity of the wicked, who
“flourish like green bay-trees”; perplexed he sometimes is with God’s
delay in coming to the help of the poor and needy and oppressed; but
his faith holds on and he does not “slide.” It gives us almost a sense
of awe as we see a valiant soul, hard pressed, hemmed around, deep in
affliction and sorrow, “standing the world” and saying in clear voice:
“Oh, give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good; His loving-kindness
endureth forever!”

We understand when we read such words why this collection of Psalms
has held its place in the religious life of the world. It contains the
living, throbbing _experience_ of great souls, who cared absolutely for
one thing—to find God and to enjoy Him, and who, having found their one
precious jewel, could do without all else, and by this inner experience
could stand the world.


