II

IN THE SPIRIT

There has surely been no lack of discussion on the Trinity during the
centuries of Christian history! But in all the welter and turmoil of
words there has been surprisingly little said about the Spirit. The
nature of the Father and the Son has always been the central theme, and
whatever is said of the Spirit is vague and brief. The Creeds are very
precise in their accounts of God the Father and of Christ the Son, but of
the Spirit, they merely say without explanation or expansion: “I believe
in the Holy Spirit.”

The mystics and the heretics have generally had more to say of the
Spirit. They have almost always claimed for themselves direct and inward
guidance; they have insisted that God is near at hand, a presence to
be felt, and they have endeavored to bring in a “dispensation” of the
religion of the Spirit. But they, too, have contented themselves with
vague and hazy accounts of the nature and operation of the Spirit. It
has largely remained a subject of mystery, a kind of “fringe” with no
definite idea corresponding to the word.

One reason for this haze and vagueness is due to the fact that the
Spirit has generally been supposed to act suddenly, miraculously, and
“as He lists,” so that no law or principle or method of His operation
can be discovered. He has been conceived as working upon or through the
individual in such a way that the individual is merely an “instrument,”
receiving and transmitting what comes entirely from “beyond” himself.
Consequently to be “in the Spirit” has meant to be “out of oneself,”
_i.e._ to be a channel for something that has had no origin in, and no
assistance from, our own personal consciousness. As Philo, the famous
Alexandrian teacher of the first century, states this view: “Ideas in an
invisible manner are suddenly showered upon me and implanted in me by an
inspiration from on high.”

There is no doubt that in some cases in all ages men and women have had
experiences like that of Philo’s. But they are by no means universal;
they are extremely rare and unusual. God does sometimes “give to His
beloved in sleep” and He does apparently sometimes open the windows of
the soul by sudden inrushes of light and power. It is, however, a grave
mistake to limit the sphere and operation of the divine Spirit to these
sudden, unusual, miraculous incursions. It is precisely that mistake—made
by so many spiritual persons—that has kept Christians in general from
realizing the immense importance of the work of the Spirit in everyday
religious life. The mistake is, of course, due to our persistent tendency
to separate the divine from the human as two independent “realities,” and
to treat the divine as something “away,” “above,” and “beyond.”

St. Paul, in spite of all his rabbinical training and the dualisms
of his age, is still the supreme exponent of the genuine, as opposed
to the false, idea of the Spirit. Whether the sermon on the Areopagus
as given in Acts is an exact report of an actual speech, or not, the
words, “in Him we live and move and are,” express very well St. Paul’s
mature conception of the all-pervasive immanence of God, though they
by no means indicate the extraordinary richness and boldness of his
thought. He identifies Christ and the Spirit—“the Lord is the Spirit.”[2]
The resurrected and glorified Christ, he holds, relives, reincarnates
Himself, in Christian believers. He becomes the spirit and life of their
lives. He makes through them a new body for Himself, a new kind of
revelation of Himself. They themselves are “letters of Jesus Christ,”
written by the Spirit. He is no longer limited to one locality of the
world or to one epoch of time. He is “present” wherever two or three
believers meet in loyalty to Him. He is revealed wherever any of His
faithful followers are working in love and devotion to extend the sway of
His Kingdom. The Church, which for St. Paul means always the fellowship
of believers, living in and through the Spirit, is “a growing habitation
of God.”

The “sign” of the Spirit’s presence is, however, no sudden miraculous
bestowal like an unknown tongue or an extraordinary gift of healing. It
is just a normal thing like the manifestation of love. It is proved by
the increase of fellowship, the growth of group-spirit, the spread of
community-loyalty. When love has come, the Spirit is there, and when
love comes, those who are in its spirit suffer long and are kind; they
envy not; they are not provoked; they do not exalt mistakes; they bear
all things, believe all things, hope all things, endure all things. Love
constructs, because it is the inherent evidence of the Spirit, living,
working, operating in the persons who love. Through them the incarnation
of God is continued in the world, the Spirit of Christ finds its organ
of expression and life, and the Kingdom of God comes on earth as it
is in heaven. This “body,” this Church, this community-group of loyal
believers, is “the completion of Him who through all and in all is being
fulfilled.”[3]

If this Pauline idea of the Spirit is the true idea—and I believe it
is—then we are to look for the divine presence, the divine guidance,
the divine inspiration, not so much in sudden extraordinary inrushes
and miraculous bestowals, as in the processes which transform our
stubborn nature, which make us loyal and loving, which bind us into
fellowship with others, which form in us community-spirit and sympathetic
coöperation, and which make us efficient organs of the Christ-life and of
the growing Kingdom of God.


III

THE POWER OF PRAYER

It seems to me very clear that there is a native, elemental homing
instinct in our souls which turns us to God as naturally as the flower
turns to the sun. Apparently everybody in intense moments of human need
reaches out for some great source of life and help beyond himself. That
is one reason why we can pray and do pray, however conditions alter.
It is further clear that persons who pray in living faith, in some way
unlock reservoirs of energy and release great sources of power within
their interior depths. There is an experimental energy in prayer as
certainly as there is a force of gravitation or of electricity. In a
recent investigation of the value of prayer, nearly seventy per cent of
the persons questioned declared that they felt the presence of a higher
power while in the act of praying. As one of these personal testimonies
puts it: prayer makes it possible to carry heavy burdens with serenity;
it produces an atmosphere of spirit which triumphs over difficulties.

It certainly is true that a door opens into a larger life and a new
dimension when the soul flings itself out in real prayer, and incomes of
power are experienced which heighten all capacities and which enable the
recipient to withstand temptation, endure trial, and conquer obstacles.
But prayer has always meant vastly more than that to the saints of past
ages. It was assuredly to them a homing instinct and it was the occasion
of refreshed and quickened life, but, more than that, it meant to them
a time of intimate personal intercourse and fellowship with a divine
Companion. It was two-sided, and not a solitary and one-sided heightening
of energy and of functions. Nor was that all. To the great host of
spiritual and triumphant souls who are behind us prayer was an _effective
and operative power_. It accomplished results and wrought effects beyond
the range of the inner life of the person who was praying. It was a way
of setting vast spiritual currents into circulation which worked mightily
through the world and upon the lives of men. It was believed to be an
operation of grace by which the fervent human will could influence the
course of divine action in the secret channels of the universe.

Is this two-sided and objective view of prayer, as real intercourse and
as effective power, still tenable? Can men who accept the conclusions of
science still pray in living faith and with real expectation of results?
I see no ground against an affirmative answer. Science has furnished
no evidence which compels us to give up believing in the reality of
a personal conscious self which has a certain area of power over its
own acts and its own destiny, and which is capable of intercourse,
fellowship, friendship, and love with other personal selves. Science has
discovered no method of describing this spiritual reality, which we
call a self, nor can it explain what its ultimate nature is, or how it
creatively acts and reacts in love and fellowship toward other beings
like itself. This lies beyond the sphere and purview of science.

Science, again, has furnished no evidence whatever against the reality of
a great spiritual universe, at the heart and center of which is a living,
loving Person who is capable of intercourse and fellowship and friendship
and love with finite spirits like us. That is also a field into which
science has no _entrée_; it is a matter which none of her conclusions
touch. Her business is to tell how natural phenomena act and what their
unvarying laws are. She has nothing to say and can have nothing to say
about the reality of a divine Person in a sphere within or above or
beyond the phenomenal realm, _i.e._ the realm where things appear in the
describable terms of space and time and causality.

Real and convincing intimations have broken into our world that there
actually is a spiritual universe and a divine Person at the heart and
center of it who is in living and personal correspondence with us. This
is the most solid substance, the very warp and woof, of Christ’s entire
revelation. The universe is not a mere play of forces, nor limited to
things we see and touch and measure. Above, beyond, within, or rather in
a way transcending all words of space, there is a Father-God who is Love
and Life and Light and Spirit, and who is as open of access to us as the
lungs to the air. Nothing in our world of space disproves the truth of
Christ’s report. Our hearts tell us that it might be true, that it ought
to be true, that it is true. And if it is true, prayer, in all the senses
in which I have used it, may still be real and still be operative.

There is no doubt a region where events occur under the play of
describable forces, where consequent follows antecedents and where
law and causality appear rigid and unvarying. In that narrow, limited
realm of space particles we shall perhaps not expect interruptions or
interferences. We shall rather learn how to adjust to what is there, and
to respect it as the highest will of the deepest nature and wisdom of
things. But in the realm of personal relationships, in all that touches
the hidden springs of life, in the stress and strain of human strivings,
in the interconnections of man with man, and group with group, in the
vital matters by which we live or die, in the weaving of personal and
national issues and destinies, we may well throw ourselves unperplexed on
God, and believe implicitly that what we pray for affects the heart of
God and influences the course and current of this Deeper Life that makes
the world.


