CHAPTER II

THE KINGDOM WITHIN THE SOUL


I

BAGS THAT WAX NOT OLD

The ancient world found it very difficult to keep money even after it was
got. There were almost constant wars involving the dire stripping of the
unprotected country districts, and the siege and devastation of cities.
In those times almost everything was fragile. It was never easy to
discover any form of wealth that was surely abiding. Even if the besom of
an invading army did not sweep away the labor of years, still there were
other enemies to be feared. Tyrants were, always on the watch for ways of
relieving wealthy men of their treasures. There were robber bands lying
in wait for the traveler, and neighborhood thieves found it a small
matter to break into private houses and to steal hidden money. It was no
uncommon thing for men to dig in the ground and hide the talent which
they had saved, or to bury the pearl of great price, or other precious
jewel, in a field. If one invested his wealth in garments, then another
enemy was to be feared. The moth is as old as clothes, and he got in even
where the thief failed to break through.

The problem of getting an indestructible money-bag was, thus, a problem
of first importance. A journey to Jericho might any day reduce a man
to primitive conditions, or a passing army might make him a beggar, or
the visit of a thief might strip him of all his living, or the silent
work of a brood of moths might ruin the savings of years. There were no
perdurable purses, no nonbreakable banks, no irreducible forms of wealth.

Christ evidently recognized that there was a value in money. He did
not apparently demand from his follower the absolute renunciation of
ownership. He expounded no new theory of economics. But he was profoundly
impressed by the moral havoc and the social calamities caused by the
excessive ambition for, and pursuit of, wealth. He saw how the mad rush
for money and the overvaluation of it killed out the noblest fundamental
traits of the soul, and, more than all else, he felt the tragedy of human
lives being focused with intensity of strain and fixed with burning
passion on the pursuit of such pitiably fragile treasures—money-bags of
all sorts waxing old and becoming incapable of holding the hoard that
absorbed the whole life.

Christ, then, proposes a new kind of purse, an indestructible and
immutable treasure-bag—“make for yourselves bags that wax not old.” Such
purses are not on the market, they cannot be purchased, they must be
woven by each person for himself, and they must be woven, if at all, out
of the stuff of _life_ itself. We here pass over, as so often in Christ’s
teaching, from extrinsic wealth to intrinsic, from the wealth which men
merely possess to the kind of wealth which they can themselves _be_. We
once more find ourselves brought to an inner way of living, where the
issue is no longer how to accumulate goods, but rather how to become
good. The problem is the problem of what men live by. We are called to
loosen our grip on perishable treasures only that we may tighten our
hold on heavenly, _i.e._ spiritual, treasure. We are shown the folly of
spending a life building barns for expanding earthly possessions, while
we are taking no pains to make ourselves rich in God.

What is it, then, that men live by? What will prove to be imperishable
wealth, whether we are in this world, or in any other world of real moral
issues? It is obviously not money, for men often live nobly after the
money-bag has waxed old and after the bank has failed, and it is our most
elemental faith that life blossoms out into its consummate richness after
all earthly affairs come to a complete close, and after every penny
of visible wealth has been left forever behind. Money is plainly not
intrinsic treasure; love is, goodness is, joy is. A beloved disciple, in
a moment of inspiration, announced the profound truth that love is “of
God.” Men wrongly divide love into two types, “human love” and “divine
love,” but in reality there is only _love_. Wherever love has become
the nature of the soul, and it has become “natural” now to forget self
for others, to seek to give rather than to get, to share rather than to
possess, to be impoverished in order that some loved one may abound,
there a divine and Godlike spirit has been formed. And we now come upon
a new kind of wealth, a kind that accumulates with use, because it is
a law that the more the spirit of love is exercised, the more the soul
spends itself in love, so much the more love it has, the richer it grows,
the diviner its nature becomes. But at the same time, it is a fact that
love is never complete, never reaches its full scope and measure until
our love takes on an eternal aspect—until we love God in Himself or love
Him in our loved ones. One reason why love is exalted by death is that we
no longer love our immortal loved one in any narrow and selfish way; we
love now for pure love’s sake, and the truest of all treasures which can
be laid up in imperishable bags is this stock of unalloyed love for that
which is most lovely—for God and for souls that are given to us to bring
some of His nature closer to our human hearts.

Goodness is, of course, notoriously hard to define. It is never an
abstract quality that can be described by logical concepts. It is a
way of living, a way of acting, a way of working out relationships. It
is, like love, a cumulative thing. To be good inherently means to be
becoming better, to be on the way to an unattained goal of action, or
of character. It is the glory of going on to be perfect like our Father
in heaven. To be rich in goodness of character, therefore, is to be on
the way to become ever richer, however long the journey lasts, however
far the spiral winds, for goodness, like love, is of God, and steadily
assimilates our imperfect human nature to the perfect divine nature.

Joy is, perhaps, not often thought of as one of the things men live
by, as the soul’s eternal wealth. Life is so full of sorrow and pain
that joy seems like a fleeting, vanishing asset. But that is because
joy is confused with pleasure. True joy is not a thing of moods, not a
capricious emotion, tied to fluctuating experiences. It is a state and
condition of the soul. It survives through pain and sorrow and, like a
subterranean spring, waters the whole life. It is intimately allied and
bound up with love and goodness, and so is deeply rooted in the life
of God. Joy is the most perfect and complete mark and sign of immortal
wealth, because it indicates that the soul is living by love and by
goodness, and is very rich in God.


