II

MAKING A LIFE

Our present-day age has a kind of passion for the study of developing
_processes_. We do not feel quite at home with any subject until we can
work our way back to its origin or origins and then follow it in its
unfoldings, explaining the higher and more complex stages in terms of the
lower and more simple ones.

That method, however, cannot be successfully used to unlock the secret
of the gospels. We do not find beginnings here; we cannot follow genetic
processes; we are unable to discriminate higher and lower stages of
insight. We must launch out at the very start in mid-sea. Whatever words
of Christ one begins with indicate that He has already arrived at an
absolute insight—I mean, that He has found a way of living that is no
longer relatively good, but intrinsically and absolutely good.

It is an inveterate habit with men like us to estimate everything in
terms of relative results. We are pragmatists by the very push of our
immemorial instincts. Our first question, consciously or unconsciously,
is apt to be, what effects will come, if I act so, or so? Will this
course work well? Will it further some issue or some interest? And this
deep-lying pragmatic tendency—this aim at results—appears woven into the
very fiber even of much of the religion of the world.

Sometimes the results sought are near, sometimes they are remote;
sometimes they are sought for this world, sometimes they are sought
for the next world; sometimes the pragmatic aim at results is crudely
and coarsely selfish, sometimes it is refined, or altogether veiled,
but religion has no doubt often enough been an impressive kind of
double-entry bookkeeping, the piling up of credits or of merits which
some day will bring the sure result that is sought.

Just that entire pragmatic attitude Christ has left forever behind. His
inner way, His interior insight, passes on to a new level of life, to a
totally different type of religious aspiration and to another method of
valuation. For Him the beyond is always within. The only good thing is
a life that is intrinsically good; the only blessedness worth talking
about is a kind of blessedness which attaches by a law of inner necessity
to the character of the life itself. It makes no difference what world
one may eventually be in—if only it is still a world of spiritual
issues—goodness, holiness, likeness to God, will still constitute
blessedness as they do in this world.

When once this insight is reached, it affects all the pursuits and all
the valuations of the soul. All “other things” at once become secondary,
and “entering into life,” “seeking life,” “finding life,” becomes the
primary thing. “Making a life” overtops in importance even “making a
living”—the life is more than meat, more than raiment, more than gaining
the whole world. It is better to enter into life halt and maimed—with
right hand cut off and eye plucked out—than bend all one’s energies
to preserve the body whole and yet to miss _life_. The way to life is
strait, the entering gate is narrow. One cannot _enter_ without facing
the stern necessity of focusing the vision on the central purpose,
without getting “a single eye,” without letting go _many things_ for the
sake of _one thing_.

Sacrifice, surrender, negation, are inherently involved in any great
onward-marching life. They go with any choice that can be made of a rich
and intense life. It is impossible to find without losing, to get without
giving, to live without dying. But sacrifice, surrender, negation, are
never for their own sake; they are never ends in themselves. They are
involved in life itself.

One great spiritual law comes to light and becomes operative, as soon as
the interior insight is won, as soon as the inner way is found: The law
that _the soul can have what it wants_. This law of the interior life,
of the inner way, Christ affirms again and again in varying phrase. The
inner attitude, the settled trend of desire, the persistent swing of the
will, are the very things that make life. The person who cherishes hate
in his soul forms a disposition of hatred and must live in the atmosphere
which that spirit forms. The person who longs for deeds that are wrong,
and allows desire to play with free scope is inwardly as though he did
the deed. He is what he wants to be. And so, too, on the other hand,
the rightly fashioned will is its own reward and has its own peculiar
blessedness. The person who hungers and thirsts for goodness will get
what he wants. He who seeks, with undivided aspiration, will always
find. He who knocks with persistent desire for the gates of life to open
will see them swing apart for him to go through to his goal. He who asks,
with the ground swell of his whole inner being, for the things which
minister to life and feed its deepest roots, will get what he asks for.
The very pity of the Pharisee’s way of life is that he has his reward—he
gets what he is seeking. The glory of the other way is the glory of the
imperfect—the glory of living toward the flying goal of likeness to the
Father in heaven.


III

THE SPIRIT OF THE BEATITUDES

In putting the emphasis for the moment on the inner way of religion, we
must be very careful not to encourage the heresy of treating religion
as a withdrawal from the world, or as a retreat from the press and
strain of the practical issues and problems of the social order. That
is the road to spiritual disaster, not to spiritual power. Christ gives
no encouragement to the view that the spiritual ideal—the Kingdom of
God—can ever be achieved apart from the conquest of the whole of life or
without the victory that overcomes the world. Religion can no more be cut
apart from the intellectual currents, or from the moral undertakings,
or from the social tasks of an age, than any other form of life can be
isolated from its native environment. To desert this world, which presses
close around us, for the sake of some remote world of our dreams, is to
neglect our one chance to get a real religion.

But at the same time the only possible way to realize a kingdom of God
in this world, or in any other world, is to begin by getting an inner
spirit, the spirit of the Kingdom, formed within the lives of the few
or many who are to be the “seed” of it. The “Beatitudes” furnish one of
these extraordinary pin-hole peeps, of which I spoke in a former section,
through which this whole inner world can be seen. Here, in a few lines,
loaded with insight, the seed-spirit of the Kingdom comes full into
sight. We are given no new code, no new set of rules, no legal system at
all. It is the proclamation of a new spirit, a new way of living, a new
type of person. To have a world of persons of this type, to have this
spirit prevail, would mean the actual presence of the Kingdom of God,
because this spirit would produce not only a new inner world, but a new
outer world as well.

The first thing to note about the _blessedness_ proclaimed in the
beatitudes is that it is not a prize held out or promised as a final
reward for a certain kind of conduct; it attaches by the inherent nature
of things to a type of life, as light attaches to a luminous body, as
motion attaches to a spinning top, as gravitation attaches to every
particle of matter. To be this type of person is to be living the happy,
blessed life, whatever the outward conditions may be. And the next thing
to note is that this type of life carries in itself a principle of
advance. One reason why it is a blessed type of life is that it cannot
be arrested, it cannot be static. The beatitude lies not in attainment,
not in the arrival at a goal, but in the _way_, in the spirit, in the
search, in the march.

I suspect that the nature of “the happy life” of the beatitudes can
be adequately grasped only when it is seen in contrast to that of the
Pharisee who is obviously in the background as a foil to bring out the
portrait of the new type. The pity of the Pharisee’s aim was that it
could be reached—he gets his reward. He has a definite limit in view—the
keeping of a fixed law. Beyond this there are no worlds to conquer. Once
the near finite goal is touched there is nothing to pursue. The immediate
effect of this achievement is conceit and self-satisfaction. The trail of
calculation and barter lies over all his righteousness. There is in his
mind an equation between goodness and prosperity, between righteousness
and success: “If thou hast made the most High thy habitation there shall
no evil befall thee; neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling.”
The person who has loss or trouble or suffering must have been an overt
or a secret sinner, as the question about the blind man indicates.

The goodness portrayed in the “beatitudes” is different from this by
the width of the sky. Christ does not call the _righteous person_
the happy man. He does not pronounce the attainment of righteousness
blessed, because a “righteousness” that gets attained is always external
and conventional; it is a kind that has definable, quantitative
limits—“how many times must I forgive my brother?” “Who is my neighbor?”
The beatitude attaches rather to hunger and thirst for goodness. The
aspiration, and not the attainment, is singled out for blessing. In the
popular estimate, happiness consists in getting desires satisfied. For
Christ the real concern is to get new and greater desires—desires for
infinite things. The reach must always exceed the grasp. The heart must
forever be throbbing for an attainment that lies beyond any present
consummation. It is the “glory of going on,” the joy of discovering unwon
territory beyond the margin of each, spiritual conquest.

Poverty of spirit—another beatitude-trait—is bound up with hunger for
goodness as the convex side of a curve is bound up with the concave
side. They are different aspects of the same attitude. The poor in
spirit are by no means poor-spirited. They are persons who see so much
to be, so much to do, such limitless reaches to life and goodness that
they are profoundly conscious of their insufficiency and incompleteness.
Self-satisfaction and pride of spiritual achievement are washed clean
out of their nature. They are open-hearted, open-windowed to all truth,
possessed of an abiding disposition to receive, impressed with a sense
of inner need and of childlike dependence. Just that attitude is its own
sure reward. By an unescapable spiritual gravitation the best things in
the universe belong to open-hearted, open-windowed souls. Again, in the
beatitude on the mourner, He reverses the Pharisaic and popular judgment.
Losses and crosses, pains and burdens, heartaches and bereavements,
empty chairs and darkened windows, are the antipodes of our desires and
last of all things to be expected in the list of beatitudes. They were
then, and still often are, counted as visitations of divine disapproval.
Christ rejects the superficial way of measuring the success of a life
by the smoothness of its road or by its freedom from trial, and He will
not allow the false view to stand; namely, that success is the reward
of piety, and trouble the return for lack of righteousness. There is
no way to depth of life, to richness of spirit, by shun-pikes that go
around hard experiences. The very discovery of the nearness of God, of
the sustaining power of His love, of the sufficiency of His grace, has
come to men in all ages through pain, and suffering and loss. We always
go for comfort to those who have passed through deeps of life and we may
well trust Christ when He tells us that it is not the lotus-eater but the
sufferer who is in the way of blessing and is forming the spirit of the
Kingdom.

Meekness and mercy and peace-making are high among the qualities that
characterize the inner spirit of the kingdom. Patience, endurance,
steadfastness, confidence in the eternal nature of things, determination
to win by the slow method that is right rather than by the quick and
strenuous method that is wrong are other ways of naming meekness.
Mercy is tenderness of heart, ability to put oneself in another’s
place, confidence in the power of love and gentleness, the practice of
forgiveness and the joyous bestowal of sympathy. Peace-making is the
divine business of drawing men together into unity of spirit and purpose,
teaching them to live the love-way, and forming in the very warp and
woof of human society the spirit of altruism and loyalty to the higher
interests of the group. These traits belong to the inmost nature of
God and of course those who have them are blessed, and it is equally
clear that the Kingdom is theirs. There is furthermore, in this happy
way of life, a condition of heart to which the vision of God inherently
attaches. He is no longer argued about and speculated upon. He is seen
and felt. He becomes as sure as the sky above us or our own pulse beat
within us. We spoil our vision with selfishness, we cloud it with
prejudices, we blur it with impure aims. We cast our own shadow across
our field of view and make a dark eclipse. It is not better spectacles
we need. It is a pure, clean, sincere, loving, forgiving, passionately
devoted heart. God who is love can be _seen_, can be found, only by a
heart that intensely loves and that hates everything that hinders love.


