IV

THE WAY OF CONTAGION

We have seen that religion cannot be sundered from the intellectual
currents, or from the moral undertakings, or from the social tasks of the
world. It cannot be _merely_ inward. It can preserve its inward power
only as it lives in actual correspondence with its whole environment and
becomes also outward. But the primary thing for Christ, we saw, was the
attainment of an inner spirit, the seed-spirit of the Kingdom, the spirit
of the beatitudes—the attainment of a type of life to which blessedness
inherently attaches.

The question at once arises, how shall this inner spirit be spread and
propagated? How is religion of the inner type to grow and expand? There
are two characteristic ways of propagating religious ideas, of carrying
spiritual discoveries into the life of the world. One way is the way of
_organization_; the other way is the way of _contagion_. The way of
organization, which is as old as human history, is too familiar to need
any description. Our age has almost unlimited faith in it. If we wish to
carry a live idea into action, we _organize_. We select officials. We
make “motions.” We pass resolutions. We appoint committees or boards or
commissions. We hold endless conferences. We issue propaganda material.
We have street processions. We use placards and billboards. We found
institutions, and devise machinery. We have collisions between “pros”
and “antis” and stir up enthusiasm and passion for our “cause.” The
Christian Church is probably the most impressive instance of organization
in the entire history of man’s undertakings. It has become, in its
historical development, almost infinitely complex, with organizations
within organizations and suborganizations within suborganizations. It has
employed every known expedient, even the sword, for the advancement of
its “cause,” it has created a perfect maze of institutions and it has
originated a vast variety of educational methods for carrying forward its
truth.

But great as has been the historical emphasis on organization, it
nevertheless occupies a very slender place in the consciousness of
Christ. There is no clear indication that He appointed any officials,
or organized any society, or founded any institution. There are two
“sayings” in Matthew which use the word “Church,” but they almost
certainly bear the mark and coloring of a later time, when the Church
had already come into existence and had formed its practices and its
traditions. And even though the great “saying” at Cæsarea Philippi
were accepted as the actual words of Jesus, it is still quite possible
to see in it the announcement of a spiritual fellowship, spreading by
inspiration and contagion, rather than the founding of an official
institution. It is, no doubt, fortunate on the whole that the Church
was organized, and that the great _idea_ found a visible body through
which to express itself, though nobody can fail to see that the Church,
while meaning to propagate the gospel, has always profoundly modified and
transformed it, and that it has brought into play a great many tendencies
foreign to the original gospel.

Christ’s way of propagating the truth—the way that inherently fits
the inner life and spirit of the gospel of the Kingdom—was the way of
personal _contagion_. Instead of founding an institution, or organizing
an official society, or forming a system, or creating external machinery,
He counted almost wholly upon the spontaneous and dynamic influence of
life upon life, of personality upon personality. He would produce a
new world, a new social order, through the contagious and transmissive
character of personal goodness. He practically ignored, or positively
rejected, the method of _restraint_, and trusted absolutely to the
conquering power of loyalty and consecration. It was His faith that,
if you get into the world anywhere a _seed_ of the Kingdom, a nucleus
of persons who exhibit the blessed life, who are dedicated to expanding
goodness, who rely implicitly on love and sympathy, who try in meek
patience the slow method that is right, who still feel the clasping
hands of love even when they go through pain and trial and loss, this
seed-spirit will spread, this nucleus will enlarge and create a society.
If the new spirit of passionate love, and of uncalculating goodness gets
formed in one person, by a silent alchemy a group of persons will soon
become permeated and charged with the same spirit, new conditions will be
formed, and in time children will be born into a new social environment
and will suck in new ideals with their mother’s milk.

Persons of the blessed life, Christ says, are the saving _salt_ of the
earth. They carry their wholesome savor into everything they touch. They
do not try to save themselves. They are ready like salt to dissolve and
disappear, but, the more they give themselves away, the more antiseptic
and preservative they become to the society in which they live. They keep
the old world from spoiling and corrupting not by attack and restraint,
not by excision and amputation, but by pouring the preservative savor
of their lives of goodness into all the channels of the world. This
preservative and saving influence on society depends, however, entirely
on the continuance of the inner quality of life and it will be certain to
cease if ever the salt lose its savor, _i.e._ if the _soul_ of religion
wanes or dies away and only the outer form of it remains.

But such lives are more than antiseptic and preservative; they are
kindling and illuminative. They become “candles of the Lord.” Candles
emit their light and kindle other candles by burning themselves up and
transmitting their flame. When a life is set on fire, and is radiant with
self-consuming love, it will invariably set other lives on fire. Such a
person may teach many valuable ideas, he may organize many movements,
he may attack many evil customs, but the best thing he will ever do will
be to fuse and kindle other souls with the fire of his passion. His own
burning, shining life is always his supreme service.

    “The greatest legacy the hero leaves his race
    Is—to have been a hero.”

Such a person will be eager to decrease that his kindling power may
increase. He will not care to save himself, or to reap a reward for his
service. He may not even know that he is shining, like the early saint
who “wist not that his face did shine.” But for all that, men will see
the way by his light and will catch the glory of living because he
exhibits it. He can no more be hid than can a hill-top city, or the
headlight of a locomotive, or the newly risen sun.

That is Christ’s way of spreading the life of the Kingdom, that is His
method of propagating the inner spirit, and of producing a society of
blessed people.


