IV

THE EPHESIAN GOSPEL

In his fresh, impressive book, _The Ephesian Gospel_, Dr. Percy
Gardner says that in the early period of Christianity no city, save
only Jerusalem, was more influential for the development of Christian
thought than was the city of Ephesus. It was here in Ephesus, scholars
are convinced, some time about the end of the first century, that the
life and message of Jesus received its most sublime and wonderful
interpretation, and it was through this Ephesian interpretation that the
gathered mysticism of Greece and the other ancient religions of the world
was indissolubly fused with the great ethical teachings of the Galilean.

It will never be known, with absolute certainty, who was the profound
genius that made this Ephesian interpretation, but it will always
continue to be called the gospel “according to John.” There will never be
any doubt, in the minds of those who read appreciatively, that, either
inwardly or outwardly, the writer of it had “lain on Christ’s bosom”;
that he had “received of His fulness,” and that he had “seen with his
eyes, and heard with his ears and handled with his hands the Word of
Life.” He was, we can almost certainly say, one of St. Paul’s men. He
has fully grasped the central ideas of the apostle who first planted the
truth in Ephesus, and he carries out in powerful fashion the Pauline
discovery that Christ has become an invisible, eternal presence in the
world. At the same time he possesses, either at first or second hand, a
large amount of narrative material for the expansion of the simple gospel
story as it had come from the three synoptic writers. But from first to
last everything in this gospel is told for a definite purpose and every
incident is loaded with a spiritual, interpretative content and meaning.
He does not undervalue history or the details of the Life lived in Judea
and Galilee, but he is concerned at every point to raise men’s thoughts
to the eternal meaning of Christ’s coming, to cultivate inward fellowship
with Him, and to reveal the last great _beatitude_, that those who have
not seen with outward eyes, but nevertheless have _believed_, are the
truly blessed ones.

The earliest of our gospel documents—the document now called Q—centers
upon the “message,” and gives us a collection of simple but bottomlessly
profound sayings of Jesus. Another document—the gospel of Mark—hardly
less primitive and no less wonderful, focuses upon the person of Jesus
and His doings. Here we have in very narrow compass the earliest story
of this Life, inexhaustible in its depth of love and grace, which has
ever since woven itself into the very tissue of human life and thought.
But now this final document, which we have been calling “the Ephesian
Gospel,” makes a unique contribution and carries us up to a new level
of life. It announces that Jesus who gave the message, the Jesus who
lived this extraordinary personal life and did the deeds of love and
sacrifice, has become an ever-living, environing, permeative Spirit,
continuing His revelation, reliving His life, extending His sway in men
of faith. He is no longer of one date and one locality, but is present to
open, responsive human hearts everywhere as the atmosphere is present to
breathing lungs, or the sea to swimming fish, or the sunlight to growing
plants. We can no more lose this Christ of experience than we can lose
the sky.

Christianity is in this interpretation vastly more than an historical
religion, bound up forever with the incidents of its temporal origin.
It is as much a present fact and a present power as electricity is. It
is rooted in an inexhaustible source of Life. It is as dynamic as the
central springs of the universe, and it is perpetually supplied from
within by invisible fountains of living energy. But this triumphant and
eternal principle of the spiritual life is, “according to John,” no
vague, abstract principle of logic, but instead a warm, tender, intimate,
concrete personification of Life, Light, and Love who has definitely
incarnated the Truth and revealed the nature of God and the possible
glory of man.

The great Ephesian makes no division between history and experience. The
Christ of his faith and of his account is alike the Christ of history and
of experience. He looks backward, and he looks inward, and the Christ of
his story is the seamless and invisible product of this double process.
This is wholly in the manner of the great apostle who declared “if we
have known Christ after the flesh we know Him so now no more,” and yet
neither the Ephesian disciple nor the apostolic master discounted the
importance of the facts of the Christ after the flesh. The transcendent
truth for them both is the truth that the Church still has its Christ,
who is leading it into all the truth and progressively revealing Himself
with the expanding ages.

Every Christian mystic for nineteen hundred years has felt the influence
of this great Ephesian prophet, and his message has become a part of
the necessary air we breathe. His gospel and his brief epistle, loaded
with its message of love, are, as Deissmann has well said, the greatest
monument of the appreciation of the mystical teaching of St. Paul that
has ever been reared in the world. The man who performed this immense
literary task for us of the after ages now

    “Lies as he lay once, breast to breast with God,”

but his _word_ is still quick and powerful and he has helped us more
than any other writer has done to interpret our own experience, and more
than any other prophet this Ephesian has inspired our faith in the real
presence and has given us the assurance, inwardly verified, that we are
not comfortless and alone, in a world of pain and loss and death, but are
bound as living twigs in one sap-giving Vine of Life, participants of the
vitalizing, refreshing, joy-bringing bread and water of Life, and with
open access to the infinite healing and comfort and fortification of the
Eternal Christ.




