V

“AS ONE HAVING AUTHORITY”

The word “authority” has shifted its meaning many times. We do not mean
now by it what churchmen of former times meant when they used it. Even as
late as the beginning of the twentieth century a great French scholar,
Auguste Sabatier, wrote an influential book in which he contrasted
“Religions of Authority” with “Religions of the Spirit.” By religions of
authority he meant types of religion which rest on a dogmatic basis and
on the super-ordinary power of ecclesiastical officials to _guarantee_
the truth. However authoritative a religion of that type may once
have been, it is so no longer, at least with those who have caught the
intellectual spirit of our age.

“Authority” is found now for most of us where the common people who
listened to Jesus found it—in the convincing and verifying power of
the message itself. We should not now think for a moment of taking our
views on astronomy or geology or physiology—about the circulation of the
blood, for instance—on the “authority” of a priest, assuming that his
ordination supplied him with oracular knowledge on these subjects. We
want to know rather what the facts in any one of these fields compel us
to conclude, and we go for assistance to persons who have trained and
disciplined their powers of observation and who can make us see what
they see. Our “authority” in the last resort to-day is the _evidence_ of
observable facts and legitimate _inference_ from these facts. A religion
of authority, then, for our generation rests, not on the infallible
guarantee of any ordained man, or of any miraculously equipped church,
but on the spiritual nature of human life itself and on the verifiable
relations of the soul with the unseen realities of the universe.

I need hardly say—it is so plain that the runner can see it—that the
so-called Sermon on the Mount is one of the best illustrations available
of this type of authoritative religion. Whatever is declared as truth in
that discourse is true, not because a messenger from heaven brought it,
not because a supernatural authority guaranteed it, but _because it is
inherently so_, and if any statement here obviously conflicted with the
facts of life and stood confuted by the testimony of the soul itself,
it would in the end, in the long run as we say, have to go. The whole
message, from the beatitude upon the poor-in-spirit to the judgment test
of life in action, as revealed in the figure of the two houses, is a
message which can be verified and tried out as searchingly as can the
law of gravitation or the theory of luminiferous ether. All the results
that are here announced are results which attach to the essential nature
of the soul, and the conditions of blessedness are as much bound up with
the nature of things as are the conditions of physical health for a man,
or the conditions of literary success for an author.

Any one who has read William James’ chapter on “Habit” knows how it
feels to be reading something which verifies itself and which convicts
the judgment of the reader in almost every sentence. As one comes toward
the end of the chapter he finds these words: “Every smallest stroke of
virtue or of vice leaves its never so little scar. The drunken Rip Van
Winkle excuses himself for every fresh dereliction by saying, ‘I won’t
count this time!’ Well! he may not count it, and a kind heaven may not
count it; but it is being counted none the less. Down among the nerve
cells and fibers the molecules are counting it, registering and storing
it up to be used against him when the next temptation comes.” These words
have the irresistible drive of observable facts behind them. We have come
upon _something which is so because it is so_. It can no more be juggled
with or dodged than can the fact of the precession of the equinoxes. The
calm authority of that chapter might well be the envy of every preacher
of the gospel and of every writer of articles on religion. If either the
preacher or the religious writer expects to speak to the condition of
his age, then he must acquire this authoritative way of dealing with the
issues of life, for the other kind of “authority” has had its day.

It is interesting to discover that Tertullian and St. Augustine—two
men who, almost beyond all others, helped to forge this waning type of
“authority”—came very near risking the whole case of religion in their
day on the primary authority of first-hand experience and the testimony
of the soul itself. “I call in,” Tertullian wrote, “a new testimony; yea,
one that is better known than all literature, more discussed than all
doctrine, more public than all publications, greater than the whole man—I
mean all which is man’s. Stand forth, O soul, ... and give thy witness
... I want thy experience. I demand of thee the things thou bringest with
thee into man, the things thou knowest either from thyself or from thy
Author.... Whenever the soul comes to itself, as out of a surfeit or a
sleep or a sickness and attains something of its natural soundness, it
speaks of God.”

Nobody has ever shown more skill and subtlety in examining the actual
processes of the inner life than has Augustine, nor has any one more
powerfully revealed the native hunger of the soul for God, or the
coöperative working of divine grace in the inner region where all the
issues of life are settled. Take this vivid passage, picturing the
hesitating will, zig-zagging between the upward pull and the tug of the
old self just before the last great act of decision which led to his
conversion.

“Thus was I sick and suffering in mind, upbraiding myself more bitterly
than ever before, twisting and turning in my chains in the hope that they
would soon snap, for they had almost worn too thin to hold me. Yet they
did still hold me. But Thou wast instant with me in the inner man, with
merciful severity, redoubling the lashes of fear and shame, lest I should
cease from struggling.... I kept saying within my heart, ‘Let it be now,
now!’—and with the word I was on the point of going on to the resolve. I
had almost done it, but I had not done it; and yet I did not slip back
to where I was at first, but held my footing at a short remove and drew
breath. And again I tried; I came a little nearer, and again a little
nearer, and now—now—I was in act to grasp and hold it; but still I did
not reach it, nor grasp it, nor hold it, ... for the worse that I knew
so well had more power over me than the better that I knew not, and the
absolute point of time at which I was to change filled me with greater
dread the more nearly I approached it.”

That is straight out of life. The thing which really matters there is
not some fine-spun dogma or the power of some mitered priest, but the
answer of the soul, the obedience of the will in the presence of what is
unmistakably divine. “The whole work of this life,” he once said, “is
to heal the eye of the heart by which we see God.” Both these men made
great contributions to the imperial, authoritative church and they were
foremost architects of the immense system of dogma under which men lived
for long centuries, but the religion by which they themselves lived was
born in their own experience, and back of all their secondary authority
was this primary authority of the soul’s own testimony.

What our generation needs above everything, if I read its problems
rightly, is a clearer interpretation of the spiritual capacities and the
unseen compulsions of the ordinary human soul; that is to say, a more
authoritative and so more compelling psychological account of the actual
and potential nature of our own human self, with its amazing depths and
its infinite relationships. We have had fifteen hundred years under the
dogma of original sin and total depravity; now let us have a period of
actually facing our own souls as they reveal themselves, not to the
theologian, but to the expert in souls. We shall find them mysterious
and bad enough no doubt, but we shall also find that they are strangely
linked up with that unseen and yet absolutely real Heart of all things
whom we call God. And our generation also needs a more authoritative
account of Jesus Christ—more authoritative because more truly and more
historically drawn. We have had centuries of the Christ of dogma and
even to-day the Church is split and sundered by its attempt to maintain
dogmatic constructions about His Person. Was He monophysite? Was he
diphysite? Those dead questions have divided the world in former ages
and still rally oriental sects. Our problem is different. We want to
see how He lived. We want to discover what He said. We want to feel the
power of His attractive personality. We want to find out what His own
experience was and what bearing it has on life to-day. We need to have
Him reinterpreted to us in terms of life, so that once again He becomes
for us as real and as dynamic as He was for Paul in Corinth or for John
in Ephesus. The moment anybody succeeds in doing _that_, He proves to be
as much alive as ever, and religion becomes as authoritative as ever.
Theology is not extinct, but it is becoming wholly transformed and the
theology of the coming time will be a knowledge of God builded not on
abstract logic, but on a penetrating psychology of man’s inner nature
and a no less penetrating interpretation of history and biography,
especially at the points where the revelation of God has most evidently
shone forth and broken in upon us.


