CHAPTER II. THE CHARACTER OF A GOOD PRINCE.


Another time he asked a general, whom the Athenians had lately chosen,
why Homer calls Agamemnon the pastor of the people? "Is it not," said
he, "because as a shepherd ought to take care of his flocks, that they be
well and want for nothing; so a general ought to take care to keep his
soldiers always in a good condition, to see they be supplied with
provisions, and to bring to a happy issue the design that made them take
arms, which is to overcome their enemies, and to live more happily
afterwards? And why does the same poet praise Agamemnon likewise for
being--

    'At once a gracious prince and generous warrior'?

For is it not true, that to gain a prince the character of being generous
and a warrior too, it is not sufficient to be brave in his own person,
and to fight with intrepidity; but he must likewise animate the whole
army, and be the cause that every soldier behave himself like him? and to
gain the reputation of a good and gracious prince, it is not enough to
have secured his private affairs, he must also take care that plenty and
happiness be seen in all places of his dominions. For kings are not
chosen to take care of themselves only, but to render happy the people
who choose them. All people engage in war only to secure their own
quiet, and choose commanders that they may have guides to conduct them to
the end which they propose to themselves. A general, therefore, ought to
prepare the way of good fortune to those who raise him to that dignity;
this is the most glorious success he can desire, as nothing can be more
ignominious to him than to do the contrary."

We see by this discourse that Socrates, designing to give the idea of a
good prince, required scarce anything of him but to render his subjects
happy.



CHAPTER III. ON THE BUSINESS OF A GENERAL OF HORSE.


Socrates at another time, as I well remember, had the following
conference with a general of the cavalry:--

"What was your reason," said Socrates, "to desire this office? I cannot
think it was that you might march first at the head of the troops, for
the horse-archers are to march before you. Nor can I believe it was to
make yourself be known, for no men are more generally known than madmen.
Perhaps it was because you thought you could mend what was amiss in the
cavalry, and make the troops better than they are, to the end that if the
Republic should have occasion to use them, you might be able to do your
country some eminent service." "That is my design," answered the other.
"It were well you could do this," said Socrates, "but does not your
office oblige you to have an eye on the horses and troopers?" "Most
certainly." "What course will you then take," continued Socrates, "to
get good horses?" "It is not my business to look to that," replied the
general; "every trooper must take care for himself." "And what," said
Socrates, "if they bring you horses whose feet and legs are good for
nothing, or that are so weak and lean that they cannot keep up with the
others, or so restive and vicious that it would be impossible to make
them keep their ranks, what good could you expect from such cavalry? What
service would you be able to do the State?" "You are much in the right,
Socrates, and I promise you I will take care what horses are in my
troops." "And will you not have an eye likewise on the troopers?" "Yes,"
answered he. "In my opinion then," answered Socrates, "the first thing
you ought to do is to make them learn to get a horseback." "No doubt of
it," replied the general, "for by that means they would the more easily
escape, if they should happen to be thrown off their horses." Socrates
went on: "You ought also to make them exercise, sometimes here, sometimes
there, and particularly in places like those where the enemy generally
is, that they may be good horsemen in all sorts of countries; for when
you are to fight you will not send to bid the enemy come to you in the
plain, where you used to exercise your horse. You must train them up,
likewise, to lance the spear; and if you would make them very brave
fellows, you must inspire them with a principle of honour, and inflame
them with rage against the enemy." "Fear not," said he, "that I will
spare my labour." "But have you," resumed Socrates, "thought on the
means to make yourself obeyed? for without that all your brave troopers
will avail you nothing." "It is true," said he, "but how shall I gain
that point of them?" "Know you not," said Socrates, "that in all things
men readily obey those whom they believe most capable? Thus in our
sickness we most willingly submit to the prescriptions of the best
physicians; at sea, to the most I skilful pilot; and in affairs of
agriculture, to him who has most experience in it." "All this I grant
you." "It is then to be presumed, that in the conduct of the cavalry he
who makes it appear that he understands it best will be the person whom
the others will be best pleased to obey." "But if I let them see that I
am most worthy to command, will that be sufficient to make them obey me?"
"Yes, certainly," said Socrates, "if you can persuade them besides that
their honour and safety depend on that obedience." "And how shall I be
able to make them sensible of this?" "With less trouble," answered
Socrates, "than it would be to prove that it is better to be virtuous
than vicious." "Then a general," added the other, "ought to study the
art of speaking well?" "Do you imagine," said Socrates, "that he will be
able to execute his office without speaking a word? It is by speech that
we know what the laws command us to learn for the conduct of our lives.
No excellent knowledge can be attained without the use of speech; the
best method to instruct is by discourse, and they who are thoroughly
versed in the sciences speak with the applause of all the world. But
have you observed," continued he, "that in all sorts of occasions the
Athenians distinguish themselves above all the Greeks, and that no
Republic can show such youths as that of Athens? For example: when we
send from hence a choir of musicians to the Temple of Apollo in the Isle
of Delos, it is certain that none comparable to them are sent from other
cities; not that the Athenians have better voices than the others, nor
that their bodies are more robust and better made, but the reason is
because they are more fond of honour, and this desire of honour is what
excites men to excellent actions. Do not you think, therefore, that if
good care were taken of our cavalry, it would excel that of other
nations, in the beauty of arms and horses, in order of good discipline,
and in bravery in fight; provided the Athenians were persuaded that this
would be a means to acquire them glory and renown?" "I am of your
opinion." "Go, then, and take care of your troops," said Socrates, "make
them serviceable to you, that you may be so to the Republic." "Your
advice is good," said he, "and I will immediately follow it."



