CHAPTER V. THE PRAISE OF TEMPERANCE.


And if temperance be a virtue in man, as undoubtedly it is, let us see
whether any improvement can be made by what he said of it. I will here
give you one of his discourses on that subject:--

"If we were engaged in a war," said he, "and were to choose a general,
would we make choice of a man given to wine or women, and who could not
support fatigues and hardships? Could we believe that such a commander
would be capable to defend us and to conquer our enemies? Or if we were
lying on our deathbed, and were to appoint a guardian and tutor for our
children, to take care to instruct our sons in the principles of virtue,
to breed up our daughters in the paths of honour and to be faithful in
the management of their fortunes, should we think a debauched person fit
for that employment? Would we trust our flocks and our granaries in the
hands of a drunkard? Would we rely upon him for the conduct of any
enterprise; and, in short, if a present were made us of such a slave,
should we not make it a difficulty to accept him? If, then, we have so
great an aversion for debauchery in the person of the meanest servant,
ought we not ourselves to be very careful not to fall into the same
fault? Besides, a covetous man has the satisfaction of enriching
himself, and, though he take away another's estate, he increases his own;
but a debauched man is both troublesome to others and injurious to
himself. We may say of him that he is hurtful to all the world, and yet
more hurtful to himself, if to ruin, not only his family, but his body
and soul likewise, is to be hurtful. Who, then, can take delight in the
company of him who has no other diversion than eating and drinking, and
who is better pleased with the conversation of a prostitute than of his
friends? Ought we not, then, to practise temperance above all things,
seeing it is the foundation of all other virtues; for without it what can
we learn that is good, what do that is worthy of praise? Is not the
state of man who is plunged in voluptuousness a wretched condition both
for the body and soul? Certainly, in my opinion, a free person ought to
wish to have no such servants, and servants addicted to such brutal
irregularities ought earnestly to entreat Heaven that they may fall into
the hands of very indulgent masters, because their ruin will be otherwise
almost unavoidable."

This is what Socrates was wont to say upon this subject. But if he
appeared to be a lover of temperance in his discourses, he was yet a more
exact observer of it in his actions, showing himself to be not only
invincible to the pleasures of the senses, but even depriving himself of
the satisfaction of getting an estate; for he held that a man who accepts
of money from others makes himself a servant to all their humours, and
becomes their slave in a manner no less scandalous than other slaveries.



CHAPTER VI. THE DISPUTE OF SOCRATES WITH ANTIPHON, THE SOPHIST.


To this end it will not be amiss to relate, for the honour of Socrates,
what passed between him and the sophist Antiphon, who designed to seduce
away his hearers, and to that end came to him when they were with him,
and, in their presence, addressed himself to him in these words:--"I
imagined, Socrates, that philosophers were happier than other men; but,
in my opinion, your wisdom renders you more miserable, for you live at
such a rate that no footman would live with a master that treated him in
the same manner. You eat and drink poorly, you are clothed very
meanly--the same suit serves you in summer and winter--you go barefoot,
and for all this you take no money, though it is a pleasure to get it;
for, after a man has acquired it, he lives more genteely and more at his
ease. If, therefore, as in all other sorts of arts, apprentices
endeavour to imitate their masters, should these who frequent your
conversation become like you, it is certain that you will have taught
them nothing but to make themselves miserable."

Socrates answered him in the following manner:--"You think, Antiphon, I
live so poorly that I believe you would rather die than live like me. But
what is it you find so strange and difficult in my way of living? You
blame me for not taking money; is it because they who take money are
obliged to do what they promise, and that I, who take none, entertain
myself only with whom I think fit? You despise my eating and drinking;
is it because my diet is not so good nor so nourishing as yours, or
because it is more scarce and dearer, or lastly, because your fare seems
to you to be better? Know that a man who likes what he eats needs no
other _ragout_, and that he who finds one sort of drink pleasant wishes
for no other. As to your objection of my clothes, you appear to me,
Antiphon, to judge quite amiss of the matter; for, do you not know that
we dress ourselves differently only because of the hot or cold weather,
and if we wear shoes it is because we would walk the easier? But, tell
me, did you ever observe that the cold hath hindered me from going
abroad? Have you ever seen me choose the cool and fresh shades in hot
weather? And, though I go barefoot, do not you see that I go wherever I
will? Do you not know that there are some persons of a very tender
constitution, who, by constant exercise, surmount the weakness of their
nature, and at length endure fatigues better than they who are naturally
more robust, but have not taken pains to exercise and harden themselves
like the others? Thus, therefore, do not you believe that I, who have
all my life accustomed myself to bear patiently all manner of fatigues,
cannot now more easily submit to this than you, who have never thought of
the matter? If I have no keen desire after dainties, if I sleep little,
if I abandon not myself to any infamous amour, the reason is because I
spend my time more delightfully in things whose pleasure ends not in the
moment of enjoyment, and that make me hope besides to receive an
everlasting reward. Besides, you know very well, that when a man sees
that his affairs go ill he is not generally very gay; and that, on the
contrary, they who think to succeed in their designs, whether in
agriculture, traffic, or any other undertaking, are very contented in
their minds. Now, do you think that from anything whatsoever there can
proceed a satisfaction equal to the inward consciousness of improving
daily in virtue, and acquiring the acquaintance and friendship of the
best of men? And if we were to serve our friends or our country, would
not a man who lives like me be more capable of it than one that should
follow that course of life which you take to be so charming? If it were
necessary to carry arms, which of the two would be the best soldier, he
who must always fare deliciously, or he who is satisfied with what he
finds? If they were to undergo a siege who would hold out longest, he
who cannot live without delicacies, or he who requires nothing but what
may easily be had? One would think, Antiphon, that you believe happiness
to consist in good eating and drinking, and in an expensive and splendid
way of life. For my part, I am of opinion that to have need of nothing
at all is a divine perfection, and that to have need but of little is to
approach very near the Deity, and hence it follows that, as there is
nothing more excellent than the Deity, whatever approaches nearest to it
is likewise most near the supreme excellence."

Another time Antiphon addressed himself to Socrates: "I confess you are
an honest, well-meaning man, Socrates; but it is certain you know little
or nothing, and one would imagine you own this to be true, for you get
nothing by your teaching. And yet, I persuade myself, you would not part
with your house, or any of the furniture of it, without some gratuity,
because you believe them of some small value; nay, you would not part
with them for less than they are worth: if, therefore, you thought your
teaching worth anything you would be paid for it according to its value;
in this, indeed, you show yourself honest, because you will not, out of
avarice, cheat any man, but at the same time you discover, too, that you
know but little, since all your knowledge is not worth the buying."

Socrates answered him in this manner:--"There is a great resemblance
between beauty and the doctrine of philosophers; what is praiseworthy in
the one is so in the other, and both of them are subject to the same
vice: for, if a woman sells her beauty for money, we immediately call her
a prostitute; but if she knows that a man of worth and condition is
fallen in love with her, and if she makes him her friend, we say she is a
prudent woman. It is just the same with the doctrine of philosophers;
they that sell it are sophists, and like the public women, but if a
philosopher observe a youth of excellent parts, and teacheth him what he
knows, in order to obtain his friendship, we say of him, that he acts the
part of a good and virtuous citizen. Thus as some delight in fine
horses, others in dogs, and others in birds; for my part all my delight
is to be with my virtuous friends. I teach them all the good I know, and
recommend them to all whom I believe capable to assist them in the way to
perfection. We all draw together, out of the same fountain, the precious
treasures which the ancient sages have left us; we run over their works,
and if we find anything excellent we take notice of it and select it: in
short, we believe we have made a great improvement when we begin to love
one another." This was the answer he made, and when I heard him speak in
this manner I thought him very happy, and that he effectually stirred up
his hearers to the love of virtue.

Another time when Antiphon asked him why he did not concern himself with
affairs of State, seeing he thought himself capable to make others good
politicians? he returned this answer:--"Should I be more serviceable to
the State if I took an employment whose function would be wholly bounded
in my person, and take up all my time, than I am by instructing every one
as I do, and in furnishing the Republic with a great number of citizens
who are capable to serve her?"



