CHAPTER VII. SOCRATES SHOWETH ARISTARCHUS HOW TO GET RID OF POVERTY.


Socrates had an extreme tenderness for his friends, and if through
imprudence they fell into any misfortune, he endeavoured to comfort them
by his good counsels; if they laboured under poverty he did all he could
to relieve them, teaching all men that they ought mutually to assist one
another in necessity. I will set down some examples of his behaviour in
these occasions.

Meeting Aristarchus, who looked very dejected, he said to him, "I see,
Aristarchus, that something troubles you, but impart the cause of your
grief to your friends, and perhaps we may comfort you." "Indeed," said
he, "I am in great affliction; for since the late troubles, many persons
having fled for shelter to the Piraeus, it has so fallen out that my
sisters, nieces, and cousins have all thrown themselves upon me, so that
I have no less than fourteen of them to maintain. You know very well
that we receive no profit of our lands, the enemies being masters of the
open country; our houses in the city are uninhabited, there being at
present very little company in Athens; nobody will buy any goods; no man
will lend money upon any interest whatever, and I believe we may as soon
take it up in the middle of the streets as find where to borrow it. And
I am much concerned that I shall not be able to assist my relations whom
I see ready to perish, while it is impossible for me to maintain them in
the present scarcity of all things." Socrates having heard him
patiently, said to him, "How comes it to pass that Ceramon, who has so
many persons in his family, finds means not only to maintain them, but
likewise to enrich himself by the profit he makes of them, and that you
are afraid of starving to death, because you have a great many in your
family?" "The reason," answered Aristarchus, "is this, Ceramon has none
but slaves to take care of, and I am to provide for persons who are
free." Socrates went on: "For which have you most esteem, for Ceramon's
slaves, or for the persons who are at your house?" "There is no
comparison between them," said Aristarchus. "Is it not then a shameful
thing," replied Socrates, "that Ceramon should grow rich by means of
those whom you acknowledge to be of less value, and that you should grow
poor and be reduced to straits, though you keep men of condition in your
house, whom you value more?" "By no means," said Aristarchus, "there is
a wide difference betwixt the two; the slaves that Ceramon keeps follow
some trades, but the persons I have with me have had a liberal education
and follow none." "May not he," replied Socrates, "who knows how to do
anything that is useful be said to know a trade?" "Yes, certainly." "And
are not," continued Socrates, "oatmeal, bread, the clothes of men and
women, cassocks, coats, and other the like manufactures, things very
useful?" "Without doubt." "And do not the persons at your house know
how to make any of these things?" "On the contrary," said Aristarchus,
"I believe they know how to make all of them." "What are you then afraid
of," added Socrates? "Why do you complain of poverty, since you know how
to get rich? Do not you observe how wealthy Nausicides is become, what
numerous herds he is master of, and what vast sums he lends the Republic?
Now what made this man so rich? Why, nothing but one of those
manufactures we mentioned, that of making oatmeal. You see, too, that
Cirthes keeps all his family, and lives at his ease upon what he has got
by being a baker. And how doth Demeas, of the village of Colyttus, get
his livelihood? By making cassocks. What makes Menon live so
comfortably? His cloak manufacture. And are not most of the inhabitants
of Megara in good circumstances enough by the trade which they drive of
coats and short jackets?" "I grant all this," said Aristarchus, "but
still there is a difference betwixt these persons and me: for, whereas,
they have with them some barbarians whom they have bought, and compel to
work what brings them in gain; I, for my part, keep only ladies and
gentlemen at my house, persons who are free, and some of them my own
relations. Now would you have me to set them to work?" "And because
they are free and your relations," said Socrates, "do you think they
ought to do nothing but eat and sleep? Do you observe that they, who
live thus idle and at their ease, lead more comfortable lives than
others? Do you think them more content, more cheerful, that is to say,
more happy than those who employ themselves in any of those manufactures
we have mentioned, or in whatever else tends to the utility or
convenience of life? Do you imagine that idleness and laziness
contribute toward our learning things necessary; that they can enable us
to retain those things we have already learnt; that they help to
strengthen the body or keep it in health; that they can assist us to get
riches, or keep what we have got already; and do you believe that labour
and industry are good for nothing? Why did your ladies learn what you
say they know. Did they believe them to be useless things, and had they
resolved never to put them in practice? Or, on the contrary, was it with
design to employ themselves in those matters, and to get something by
them? Is it a greater piece of wisdom to sit still and do nothing, than
to busy oneself in things that are of use in life, and that turn to
account? And is it not more reasonable for a man to work than to be with
his arms across, thinking how he shall do to live? Shall I tell you my
mind, Aristarchus? Well, then, I am of opinion that in the condition you
are in you cannot love your guests, nor they you for this reason, that
you, on the one hand, feel they are a burden to you, and they, on the
other, perceive you uneasy and discontented on their account. And it is
to be feared that the discontent will increase on both sides, and that
the sense of past favours will wear off; but when you set them to work
you will begin to love them, because they will bring you some profit; and
when they find that you regard them with more complacency they will not
fail to have more love for you. The remembrance of your kindnesses will
be more grateful to them, and the obligations they have to you will be
the greater. In a word, you will be kinder relations and better friends.
Indeed, if what they were to do was a thing worthy of blame, it would be
better to die than to think of it; but what they can do is honourable,
and becoming of their sex, and whoever knows how to do a thing well will
acquit himself of it with honour and pleasure. Therefore defer no longer
to make the proposal to them, since it will be so advantageous to all of
you, and be assured they will receive it with joy and pleasure." "Good
God! what a fine scheme you have proposed! Indeed, I cannot but approve
of it; nay, it has made such a wonderful impression on my mind, that
whereas I was lately against borrowing money at all, because I saw that
when I had spent it I should not be in a condition to repay it, I am now
resolved to go try where I can take some up upon any terms, to buy tools
and other materials to set ourselves to work."

What was proposed was forthwith executed. Aristarchus bought what he
wanted; he laid in a provision of wool, and the ladies worked from
morning to night. This occupation diverted their melancholy, and,
instead of the uneasiness there was before between them and Aristarchus,
they began to live in a reciprocal satisfaction. The ladies loved him as
their protector, and he considered them as persons who were very useful
and necessary to him.

To conclude, some time afterwards Aristarchus came to see Socrates, and
related the whole matter to him with great content, and told him the
women began to complain that none but he was idle. "Why do you not put
them in mind," said Socrates, "of the fable of the dog? For, in the days
when beasts could speak, according to the fable, the sheep said to her
master, 'You are a strange man; we yield you wool, lambs, and cheeses,
and yet you give us nothing but what we can get upon the ground; and the
dog, who brings you in no profit, is kindly used, for you feed him with
the same bread you eat yourself.' The dog, overhearing this complaint,
answered her: 'It is not without reason that I am used so well. It is I
who protect you; it is I who hinder thieves from taking you away, and
wolves from sucking your blood. If I were not always keeping watch about
you, you would not dare so much as to go to feed.' This answer was the
reason that the sheep yielded freely to the dog the honour they pretended
to before. In like manner do you also let these ladies know that it is
you who are their guardian and protector, and that you watch over them
for their safety with as much care as a faithful and courageous dog
watcheth over a herd committed to his charge. Tell them that because of
you no man dares hurt them, and that it is by your means that they live
at ease and in safety."



