CHAPTER VII. IN WHAT MANNER SOCRATES DISSUADED MEN FROM SELF-CONCEIT AND
OSTENTATION.


But let us now see whether by dissuading his friends from a vain
ostentation he did not exhort them to the pursuit of virtue. He
frequently said that there was no readier way to glory than to render
oneself excellent, and not to affect to appear so. To prove this he
alleged the following example:--"Let us suppose," said he, "that any one
would be thought a good musician, without being so in reality; what
course must he take? He must be careful to imitate the great masters in
everything that is not of their art; he must, like them, have fine
musical instruments; he must, like them, be followed by a great number of
persons wherever he goes, who must be always talking in his praise. And
yet he must not venture to sing in public: for then all men would
immediately perceive not only his ignorance, but his presumption and
folly likewise. And would it not be ridiculous in him to spend his
estate to ruin his reputation? In like manner, if any one would appear a
great general, or a good pilot, though he knew nothing of either, what
would be the issue of it? If he cannot make others believe it, it
troubles him, and if he can persuade them to think so he is yet more
unhappy, because, if he be made choice of for the steering of ships, or
to command an army, he will acquit himself very ill of his office, and
perhaps be the cause of the loss of his best friends. It is not less
dangerous to appear to be rich, or brave, or strong, if we are not so
indeed, for this opinion of us may procure us employments that are above
our capacity, and if we fail to effect what was expected of us there is
no remission for our faults. And if it be a great cheat to wheedle one
of your neighbours out of any of his ready money or goods, and not
restore them to him afterwards, it is a much greater impudence and cheat
for a worthless fellow to persuade the world that he is capable to govern
a Republic." By these and the like arguments he inspired a hatred of
vanity and ostentation into the minds of those who frequented him.




BOOK II.


CHAPTER I. A CONFERENCE OF SOCRATES WITH ARISTIPPUS CONCERNING PLEASURE
AND TEMPERANCE.


In the same manner, likewise, he encouraged his hearers by the following
arguments to support hunger and thirst, to resist the temptations of
love, to fly from laziness, and inure themselves to all manner of
fatigues. For, being told that one of them lived too luxuriously, he
asked him this question: "If you were entrusted, Aristippus, with the
education of two young men, one to be a prince and the other a private
man, how would you educate them? Let us begin with their nourishment, as
being the foundation of all." "It is true," said Aristippus, "that
nourishment is the foundation of our life, for a man must soon die if he
be not nourished." "You would accustom both of them," said Socrates, "to
eat and drink at a certain hour?" "It is likely I should?" "But which
of the two," said Socrates, "would you teach to leave eating before he
was satisfied, to go about some earnest business?" "Him, without doubt,"
answered Aristippus, "whom I intended to render capable to govern, to the
end that under him the affairs of the Republic might not suffer by
delay." "Which of the two," continued Socrates, "would you teach to
abstain from drinking when he was thirsty, to sleep but little, to go
late to bed, to rise early, to watch whole nights, to live chastely, to
get the better of his favourite inclinations, and not to avoid fatigues,
but expose himself freely to them?" "The same still," replied
Aristippus. "And if there be any art that teaches to overcome our
enemies, to which of the two is it rather reasonable to teach it?" "To
him to," said Aristippus, "for without that art all the rest would avail
him nothing." "I believe," said Socrates, "that a man, who has been
educated in this manner, would not suffer himself to be so easily
surprised by his enemies as the most part of animals do. For some perish
by their gluttony, as those whom we allure with a bait, or catch by
offering them to drink, and who fall into the snares, notwithstanding
their fears and distrust. Others perish through their lasciviousness, as
quails and partridges, who suffer themselves to be decoyed by the
counterfeit voice of their females, and blindly following the amorous
warmth that transports them, fall miserably into the nets." "You say
true," said Aristippus. "Well, then," pursued Socrates, "is it not
scandalous for a man to be taken in the same snares with irrational
animals? And does not this happen to adulterers, who skulk and hide
themselves in the chambers and closets of married women, though they know
they run a very great risk, and that the laws are very strict and
rigorous against those crimes? They know themselves to be watched, and
that, if they are taken, they shall not be let go with impunity. In a
word, they see punishment and infamy hanging over the heads of criminals
like themselves. Besides, they are not ignorant, that there are a
thousand honourable diversions to deliver them from those infamous
passions, and yet they run hand over head into the midst of these
dangers, and what is this but to be wretched and desperate to the highest
degree?" "I think it so," answered Aristippus. "What say you to this,"
continued Socrates, "that the most necessary and most important affairs
of life, as those of war and husbandry, are, with others of little less
consequence, performed in the fields and in the open air, and that the
greatest part of mankind accustom themselves so little to endure the
inclemency of the seasons, to suffer heat and cold? Is not this a great
neglect? and do you not think that a man who is to command others ought
to inure himself to all these hardships?" "I think he ought," answered
Aristippus. "Therefore," replied Socrates, "if they who are patient and
laborious, as we have said, are worthy to command, may we not say that
they who can do nothing of all this, ought never to pretend to any
office?" Aristippus agreed to it, and Socrates went on.

"Since then you know the rank which either of these two sorts of men
ought to hold, amongst which would you have us place you?" "Me!" said
Aristippus; "why truly, not amongst those that govern; for that is an
office I would never choose. Let those rule who have a mind for it; for
my part, I envy not their condition. For, when I reflect that we find it
hard enough to supply our own wants, I do not approve of loading
ourselves, besides, with the necessities of a whole people; and that
being often compelled to go without many things that we desire, we should
engage ourselves in an employment that would render us liable to blame,
if we did not take care to supply others with everything they want: I
think there is folly in all this. For republics make use of their
magistrates as I do of my slaves, who shall get me my meat and drink, and
all other necessaries, as I command, and not presume to touch any of it
themselves; so, too, the people will have those, who govern the State,
take care to provide them with plenty of all things, and will not suffer
them to do anything for their own advantage. I think, therefore, that
all who are pleased with a hurry of affairs, and in creating business for
others, are most fit to govern, provided they have been educated and
instructed in the manner we mentioned. But, for my part, I desire to
lead a more quiet and easy life."

"Let us," said Socrates, "consider whether they who govern lead more
happy lives than their subjects: among the nations that are known to us
in Asia, the Syrians, the Phrygians, and the Lydians, are under the
empire of the Persians. In Europe, the Maeotians are subject to the
Scythians; in Africa, the Carthaginians reign over the rest of the
Africans. Which now, in your opinion, are the most happy? Let us look
into Greece, where you are at present. Whose condition, think you, is
most to be desired, that of the nations who rule, or of the people who
are under the dominion of others?" "I can never," said Aristippus,
"consent to be a slave; but there is a way between both that leads
neither to empire nor subjection, and this is the road of liberty, in
which I endeavour to walk, because it is the shortest to arrive at true
quiet and repose." "If you had said," replied Socrates, "that this way,
which leads neither to empire nor subjection, is a way that leads far
from all human society, you would, perhaps, have said something; for, how
can we live among men, and neither command nor obey? Do you not observe
that the mighty oppress the weak, and use them as their slaves, after
they have made them groan under the weight of oppression, and given them
just cause to complain of their cruel usage, in a thousand instances,
both general and particular? And if they find any who will not submit to
the yoke, they ravage their countries, spoil their corn, cut down their
trees, and attack them, in short, in such a manner that they are
compelled to yield themselves up to slavery, rather than undergo so
unequal a war? Among private men themselves, do not the stronger and
more bold trample on the weaker?" "To the end, therefore, that this may
not happen to me," said Aristippus, "I confine myself not to any
republic, but am sometimes here, sometimes there, and think it best to be
a stranger wherever I am." "This invention of yours," replied Socrates,
"is very extraordinary. Travellers, I believe, are not now so much
infested on the roads by robbers as formerly, deterred, I suppose, by the
fate of Sinnis, Scyron, Procrustes, and the rest of that gang. What
then? They who are settled in their own country, and are concerned in
the administration of the public affairs, they have the laws in their
favours, have their relations and friends to assist them, have fortified
towns and arms for their defence: over and above, they have alliances
with their neighbours: and yet all these favourable circumstances cannot
entirely shelter them from the attempts and surprises of wicked men. But
can you, who have none of these advantages, who are, for the most part,
travelling on the roads, often dangerous to most men, who never enter a
town, where you have not less credit than the meanest inhabitant, and are
as obscure as the wretches who prey on the properties of others; in these
circumstances, can you, I say, expect to be safe, merely because you are
a stranger, or perhaps have got passports from the States that promise
you all manner of safety coming or going, or should it be your hard
fortune to be made a slave, you would make such a bad one, that a master
would be never the better for you? For, who would suffer in his family a
man who would not work, and yet expected to live well? But let us see
how masters use such servants.

"When they are too lascivious, they compel them to fast till they have
brought them so low, that they have no great stomach to make love, if
they are thieves, they prevent them from stealing, by carefully locking
up whatever they could take: they chain them for fear they should run
away: if they are dull and lazy, then stripes and scourges are the
rewards we give them. If you yourself, my friend, had a worthless slave,
would you not take the same measures with him?" "I would treat such a
fellow," answered Aristippus, "with all manner of severity, till I had
brought him to serve me better. But, Socrates, let us resume our former
discourse."

"In what do they who are educated in the art of government, which you
seem to think a great happiness, differ from those who suffer through
necessity? For you say they must accustom themselves to hunger and
thirst, to endure cold and heat, to sleep little, and that they must
voluntarily expose themselves to a thousand other fatigues and hardships.
Now, I cannot conceive what difference there is between being whipped
willingly and by force, and tormenting one's body either one way or the
other, except that it is a folly in a man to be willing to suffer pain."
"How," said Socrates, "you know not this difference between things
voluntary and constrained, that he who suffers hunger because he is
pleased to do so may likewise eat when he has a mind; and he who suffers
thirst because he is willing may also drink when he pleases. But it is
not in the power of him who suffers either of them through constraint and
necessity to relieve himself by eating and drinking the moment he desires
it? Besides, he that voluntarily embraceth any laborious exercise finds
much comfort and content in the hope that animates him. Thus the
fatigues of hunting discourage not the hunters, because they hope to take
the game they pursue. And yet what they take, though they think it a
reward for all their toil, is certainly of very little value. Ought not
they, then, who labour to gain the friendship of good men, or to overcome
their enemies, or to render themselves capable of governing their
families, and of serving their country, ought not these, I say, joyfully
to undertake the trouble, and to rest content, conscious of the inward
approbation of their own minds, and the regard and esteem of the
virtuous? And to convince you that it is good to impose labours on
ourselves, it is a maxim among those who instruct youth that the
exercises which are easily performed at the first attempt, and which we
immediately take delight in, are not capable to form the body to that
vigour and strength that is requisite in great undertakings, nor of
imprinting in the soul any considerable knowledge: but that those which
require patience, application, labour, and assiduity, prepare the way to
illustrious actions and great achievements. This is the opinion of good
judges, and of Hesiod in particular, who says somewhere--

    'To Vice, in crowded ranks, the course we steer,
    The road is smooth, and her abode is near;
    But Virtue's heights are reached with sweat and pain,
    For thus did the immortal powers ordain.
    A long and rough ascent leads to her gate,
    Nor, till the summit's gained, doth toil abate.'

And to the same purpose Epicharmus:--

    "The gods confer their blessings at the price
    Of labour--."

Who remarks in another place--

    "Thou son of sloth, avoid the charms of ease,
    Lest pain succeed--."

"Of the same opinion is Prodicus, in the book he has written of the life
of Hercules, where Virtue and Pleasure make their court to that hero
under the appearance of two beautiful women. His words, as near as I can
remember, are as follows:--

"'When Hercules,' says the moralist, 'had arrived at that part of his
youth in which young men commonly choose for themselves, and show, by the
result of their choice, whether they will, through the succeeding stages
of their lives, enter into and walk in the path of virtue or that of
vice, he went out into a solitary place fit for contemplation, there to
consider with himself which of those two paths he should pursue.

"'As he was sitting there in suspense he saw two women of a larger
stature than ordinary approaching towards him. One of them had a genteel
and amiable aspect; her beauty was natural and easy, her person and shape
clean and handsome, her eyes cast towards the ground with an agreeable
reserve, her motion and behaviour full of modesty, and her raiment white
as snow. The other wanted all the native beauty and proportion of the
former; her person was swelled, by luxury and ease, to a size quite
disproportioned and uncomely. She had painted her complexion, that it
might seem fairer and more ruddy than it really was, and endeavoured to
appear more graceful than ordinary in her mien, by a mixture of
affectation in all her gestures. Her eyes were full of confidence, and
her dress transparent, that the conceited beauty of her person might
appear through it to advantage. She cast her eyes frequently upon
herself, then turned them on those that were present, to see whether any
one regarded her, and now and then looked on the figure she made in her
own shadow.

"'As they drew nearer, the former continued the same composed pace, while
the latter, striving to get before her, ran up to Hercules, and addressed
herself to him in the following manner:--

"I perceive, my dear Hercules, you are in doubt which path in life you
should pursue. If, then, you will be my friend and follow me, I will
lead you to a path the most easy and most delightful, wherein you shall
taste all the sweets of life, and live exempt from every trouble. You
shall neither be concerned in war nor in the affairs of the world, but
shall only consider how to gratify all your senses--your taste with the
finest dainties and most delicious drink, your sight with the most
agreeable objects, your scent with the richest perfumes and fragrancy of
odours, how you may enjoy the embraces of the fair, repose on the softest
beds, render your slumbers sweet and easy, and by what means enjoy,
without even the smallest care, all those glorious and mighty blessings.

"And, for fear you suspect that the sources whence you are to derive
those invaluable blessings might at some time or other fail, and that you
might, of course, be obliged to acquire them at the expense of your mind
and the united labour and fatigue of your body, I beforehand assure you
that you shall freely enjoy all from the industry of others, undergo
neither hardship nor drudgery, but have everything at your command that
can afford you any pleasure or advantage."

"'Hercules, hearing the lady make him such offers, desired to know her
name, to which she answered, "My friends, and those who are well
acquainted with me, and whom I have conducted, call me Happiness; but my
enemies, and those who would injure my reputation, have given me the name
of Pleasure."

"'In the meantime, the other lady approached, and in her turn accosted
him in this manner:--"I also am come to you, Hercules, to offer my
assistance; I, who am well acquainted with your divine extraction and
have observed the excellence of your nature, even from your childhood,
from which I have reason to hope that, if you would follow the path that
leadeth to my residence, you will undertake the greatest enterprises and
achieve the most glorious actions, and that I shall thereby become more
honourable and illustrious among mortals. But before I invite you into
my society and friendship I will be open and sincere with you, and must
lay down this as an established truth, that there is nothing truly
valuable which can be purchased without pains and labour. The gods have
set a price upon every real and noble pleasure. If you would gain the
favour of the Deity you must be at the pains of worshipping Him; if you
would be beloved by your friends you must study to oblige them; if you
would be honoured by any city you must be of service to it; and if you
would be admired by all Greece, on account of your probity and valour,
you must exert yourself to do her some eminent service. If you would
render your fields fruitful, and fill your arms with corn, you must
labour to cultivate the soil accordingly. Would you grow rich by your
herds, a proper care must be taken of them; would you extend your
dominions by arms, and be rendered capable of setting at liberty your
captive friends, and bringing your enemies to subjection, you must not
only learn of those that are experienced in the art of war, but exercise
yourself also in the use of military affairs; and if you would excel in
the strength of your body you must keep your body in due subjection to
your mind, and exercise it with labour and pains."

"'Here Pleasure broke in upon her discourse--"Do you see, my dear
Hercules, through what long and difficult ways this woman would lead you
to her promised delights? Follow me, and I will show you a much shorter
and more easy way to happiness."

"Alas!" replied the Goddess of Virtue, whose visage glowed with a passion
made up of scorn and pity, "what happiness can you bestow, or what
pleasure can you taste, who would never do anything to acquire it? You
who will take your fill of all pleasures before you feel an appetite for
any; you eat before you are hungry, you drink before you are athirst;
and, that you may please your taste, must have the finest artists to
prepare your viands; the richest wines that you may drink with pleasure,
and to give your wine the finer taste, you search every place for ice and
snow luxuriously to cool it in the heat of summer. Then, to make your
slumbers uninterrupted, you must have the softest down and the easiest
couches, and a gentle ascent of steps to save you from any the least
disturbance in mounting up to them. And all little enough, heaven knows!
for you have not prepared yourself for sleep by anything you have done,
but seek after it only because you have nothing to do. It is the same in
the enjoyments of love, in which you rather force than follow your
inclinations, and are obliged to use arts, and even to pervert nature, to
keep your passions alive. Thus is it that you instruct your
followers--kept awake for the greatest part of the night by debaucheries,
and consuming in drowsiness all the most useful part of the day. Though
immortal, you are an outcast from the gods, and despised by good men.
Never have you heard that most agreeable of all sounds, your own praise,
nor ever have you beheld the most pleasing of all objects, any good work
of your own hands. Who would ever give any credit to anything that you
say? Who would assist you in your necessity, or what man of sense would
ever venture to be of your mad parties? Such as do follow you are robbed
of their strength when they are young, void of wisdom when they grow old.
In their youth they are bred up in indolence and all manner of delicacy,
and pass their old age with difficulties and distress, full of shame for
what they have done, and oppressed with the burden of what they are to
do, squanderers of pleasures in their youth, and hoarders up of
afflictions for their old age.

"On the contrary, my conversation is with the gods, and with good men,
and there is nothing excellent performed by either without my influence.
I am respected above all things by the gods and by the best of mortals,
and it is just I should. I am an agreeable companion to the artisan, a
faithful security to masters of families, a kind assistant to servants, a
useful associate in the arts of peace, a faithful ally in the labours of
war, and the best uniter of all friendships.

"My votaries, too, enjoy a pleasure in everything they either eat or
drink, even without having laboured for it, because they wait for the
demand of their appetites. Their sleep is sweeter than that of the
indolent and inactive; and they are neither overburdened with it when
they awake, nor do they, for the sake of it, omit the necessary duties of
life. My young men have the pleasure of being praised by those who are
in years, and those who are in years of being honoured by those who are
young. They look back with comfort on their past actions, and delight
themselves in their present employments. By my means they are favoured
by the gods, beloved by their friends, and honoured by their country; and
when the appointed period of their lives is come they are not lost in a
dishonourable oblivion, but live and flourish in the praises of mankind,
even to the latest posterity."

"Thus, my dear Hercules, who are descended of divine ancestors, you may
acquire, by virtuous toil and industry, this most desirable state of
perfect happiness."

"Such was the discourse, my friend, which the goddess had with Hercules,
according to Prodicus. You may believe that he embellished the thoughts
with more noble expressions than I do. I heartily wish, my dear
Aristippus, that you should make such an improvement of those divine
instructions, as that you too may make such a happy choice as may render
you happy during the future course of your life."



