CHAPTER XIII. SEVERAL APOPHTHEGMS OF SOCRATES.


A certain man being vexed that he had saluted one who did not return his
civility, Socrates said to him, "It is ridiculous in you to be
unconcerned when you meet a sick man in the way, and to be vexed for
having met a rude fellow."

2. Another was saying that he had lost his appetite and could eat
nothing. Socrates, having heard it, told him he could teach him a remedy
for that. The man asking what it was, "Fast," said he, "for some time,
and I will warrant you will be in better health, spend less money, and
eat with more satisfaction afterwards."

3. Another complained that the water which came into the cistern was
warm, and nevertheless he was forced to drink it. "You ought to be glad
of it," said Socrates, "for it is a bath ready for you, whenever you have
a mind to bathe yourself." "It is too cold to bathe in," replied the
other. "Do your servants," said Socrates, "find any inconvenience in
drinking it, or in bathing in it?" "No, but I wonder how they can suffer
it." "Is it," continued Socrates, "warmer to drink than that of the
temple of AEsculapius?" "It is not near so warm." "You see, then," said
Socrates, "that you are harder to please than your own servants, or even
than the sick themselves."

4. A master having beaten his servant most cruelly, Socrates asked him
why he was so angry with him. The master answered, "Because he is a
drunkard, a lazy fellow who loves money, and is always idle." "Suppose
he be so," said Socrates: "but be your own judge, and tell me, which of
you two deserves rather to be punished for those faults?"

5. Another made a difficulty of undertaking a journey to Olympia. "What
is the reason," said Socrates to him, "that you are so much afraid of
walking, you, who walk up and down about your house almost all day long?
You ought to look upon this journey to be only a walk, and to think that
you will walk away the morning till dinner-time, and the afternoon till
supper, and thus you will insensibly find yourself at your journey's end.
For it is certain that in five or six days' time you go more ground in
walking up and down than you need to do in going from Athens to Olympia.
I will tell you one thing more: it is much better to set out a day too
soon than a day too late; for it is troublesome to be forced to go long
journeys; and on the contrary, it is a great ease to have the advantage
of a day beforehand. You were better therefore to hasten your departure
than be obliged to make haste upon the road."

6. Another telling him that he had been a great journey, and was
extremely weary, Socrates asked whether he had carried anything. The
other answered that he had carried nothing but his cloak. "Were you
alone?" said Socrates. "No; I had a slave with me." "Was not he
loaded?" continued Socrates. "Yes, for he carried all my things." "And
how did he find himself upon the road?" "Much better than I." "And if
you had been to carry what he did, what would have become of you?"
"Alas!" said he, "I should never have been able to have done it." "Is it
not a shame," added Socrates, "in a man like you, who have gone through
all the exercises, not to be able to undergo as much fatigue as his
slave?"



CHAPTER XIV. SOCRATES PROPOSETH SOME REGULATIONS FOR THE BETTER
MANAGEMENT OF THEIR PUBLIC FEASTS.


Socrates having observed that in public suppers every one brought his own
dish of meat, and that sometimes some brought more and others less, was
wont, when this happened, to bid a servant set the least dish in the
middle of the table, and to give some of it to all the company. No man
could, in civility, refuse it, nor exempt himself from doing the like
with his own dish, insomuch that every man had a taste of the whole, and
all fared alike. This in some measure banished luxury and expensiveness
from these feasts. For they who would have laid out a great deal of
money in delicacies cared no longer to do so, because they would have
been as much for others as for themselves.

Being one day in these assemblies, and seeing a young man who ate his
meat without bread, he took occasion to rally him for it upon a question
that was started touching the imposing of names. "Can we give any
reasons," said he, "why a man is called flesh-eater--that is to say, a
devourer of flesh?--for every man eats flesh when he has it; and I do not
believe it to be upon that account that a man is called so." "Nor I
neither," said one of the company. "But," continued Socrates, "if a man
takes delight to eat his meat without bread, do you not take him to be,
indeed, a flesh-eater?" "I should think it difficult to find another who
better would deserve that name." Upon which somebody else taking the
word said, "What think you of him who, with a little bread only, eats a
great deal of flesh?" "I should," replied Socrates, "judge him, too, to
be a flesh-eater; and whereas others ask of the gods in their prayers to
give them an abundance of fruits, such men in their petitions it is
likely would pray only for abundance of flesh."

The young man whom Socrates had in mind, suspecting that he spoke upon
his account, took some bread, but continued still to eat a great deal of
flesh with it. Socrates perceived him, and showing him with his finger
to those that sat next to him, said to them, "Take notice of your
neighbour, and see whether it be the meat that makes him eat his bread,
or the bread that makes him eat his meat."

In a like occasion, seeing a man sop the same morsel of meat in several
sauces, he said, "Is it possible to make a sauce that will cost more, and
be not so good, as one that is made by taking out of several different
sauces at once? For there being more ingredients than usual, no doubt it
costs more; but then because we mix things together, which the cooks
never used to mingle, because they agree not well with one another, we
certainly spoil the whole; and is it not a jest to be curious in having
good cooks, and at the same time to be so fantastical as to alter the
relish of the dishes they have dressed? Besides, when we have once got a
habit of eating thus of several dishes at once, we are not so well
satisfied when we have no longer that variety. Whereas a man who
contents himself to eat but of one dish at a time finds no great
inconvenience in having but one dish of meat for his dinner."

He made likewise this remark: that to express what the other Greeks
called "to eat a meal," the Athenians said "to make good cheer;" and that
the word "good" shows us that we ought to eat such things only as will
neither disorder the body nor the mind, which are easily had, and
purchased without great expense. From whence he inferred that they alone
who live temperately and soberly can truly be said to make good
cheer--that is to say, to eat well.




