CHAPTER IV. INSTANCES OF THE INVIOLABLE INTEGRITY OF SOCRATES.--HIS
CONVERSATION WITH HIPPIAS CONCERNING JUSTICE.


Concerning justice, it cannot be said that Socrates concealed his opinion
of it, for he plainly revealed his sentiments by his actions, as well in
public as in private, making it his business to serve every man, and to
obey the magistrates and the laws; insomuch, that as well in the army as
in the city, his obedience and uprightness rendered him remarkable above
all others. He fully discovered the integrity of his soul, when he
presided in the assemblies of the people; he would never pass a decree
that was contrary to the laws; he alone defended the cause of justice
against the efforts of the multitude, and opposed a violence which no man
but himself was able to resist. Again, when the Thirty commanded him
anything that was unjust, he did not obey them. Thus, when they forbid
him to speak to the young men, he regarded not their inhibition, and when
they gave orders to him, as well as to some other citizens, to bring
before them a certain man, whom they intended to put to death, he alone
would do nothing in it, because that order was unjust. In like manner
when he was accused by Melitus, though in such occasions others endeavour
to gain their judges by flatteries and ignominious solicitations, which
often procure them their pardon, he would not put in practice any of
these mean artifices that are repugnant to the laws, and yet he might
very easily have got himself acquitted, if he could have prevailed with
himself to comply in the least with the custom, but he chose rather to
die in an exact observance of the laws, than to save his life by acting
contrary to them, for he utterly abhorred all mean or indirect practices;
and this was the answer he gave to several of his friends who advised him
to the contrary.

Since I am now illustrating the character of Socrates with regard to
justice, I will, at the same time, relate a conversation I remember he
had with Hippias of Elis on that subject.

It was a long while that Hippias had not been at Athens; and being
arrived there, he happened to come to a place where Socrates was
discoursing with some persons, and telling them that if any one had a
mind to learn a trade, there wanted not masters to teach him; nay, that
if one would have a horse trained up there were persons enough to
undertake it; but that if one desired to learn to be a good man, or to
have his son, or any of his family taught to be so, it would be difficult
to know to whom to apply himself. Hippias rallying him, said:--"What!
Socrates, you are still repeating the same things I heard you say so long
ago." "Nay, more," replied Socrates, "and always upon the same subject;
but you, perhaps, being learned as you are, do not always say the same
thing upon the same subject." "Indeed," said Hippias, "I always
endeavour to say something new." "Is it possible," replied Socrates?
"Pray tell me if you were asked how many letters there are in my name,
and which they are, would you answer sometimes in one manner and
sometimes in another? Or if you were asked whether twice five be not
ten, would you not always say the same thing?" "In subjects like those,"
said Hippias, "I should be obliged to say the same thing as well as you;
but since we are upon the theme of justice, I believe I can now say some
things of it, against which, neither you nor any man else can make any
objection." "Good God!" cried Socrates, "what a mighty boast is here!
Upon my word, Hippias, you have made an admirable discovery! and you have
reason to value yourself upon it; for, let me tell you, if you can
establish one single opinion of justice, the judges will be no longer
divided in their sentiments, there will be no more quarrels, no more
suits at law, no more seditions among citizens, no more wars between
republics. Indeed, it much troubles me to leave you before you have
taught me this secret, which you say you have discovered." "I give you
my word," answered Hippias, "that I will tell you nothing of it, till you
have first declared your own opinion concerning justice; for it is your
old way to interrogate others, and then to laugh at them by refuting what
they have said; but you never make known your own opinions, that you may
not be obliged to give a reason for them." "Why do you lay this to my
charge," said Socrates, "since I am continually showing to all the world
what are the things I believe to be just?" "How do you show it?" said
Hippias. "If I explain it not by my words," answered Socrates, "my
actions speak it sufficiently; and do you think that actions deserve not
rather to be believed than words?" "Much rather," said Hippias, "because
many may say one thing, and do another; nay, we see that, in fact, many
who preach up justice to others are very unjust themselves; but this
cannot be said of a man whose every action is good, and that never in his
life did an unjust thing." "Have you known, then," said Socrates, "that
I have accused any man out of malice, that I have sown dissension among
friends, that I have raised seditions in the Republic; in short, that I
have committed any other sort of injustice?" "Not in the least," said
he. "Well, then," added Socrates, "do you not take him to be just who
commits no manner of injustice?" "It is plain, now,'" said Hippias,
"that you intend to get loose, and that you will not speak your mind
freely, nor give us an exact definition of justice. For all this while
you have only shown what just men do not, but not what they do." "I
should have thought," said Socrates, "I had given at once a good
definition, and a clear instance of justice, when I called it an aversion
from doing injustice. But since you will not allow it to be so, see
whether this will satisfy you: I say, then, that justice 'is nothing but
the observance of the laws.'" "You mean," said Hippias, "that to observe
the laws is to be just?" "Yes," answered Socrates. "I cannot comprehend
your thought," said Hippias. "Do you not know," pursued Socrates, "what
the laws in a State are?" "The laws," answered Hippias, "are what the
citizens have ordained by an universal consent." "Then," inferred
Socrates, "he who lives conformably to those ordinances observes the
laws; and he who acts contrary to them is a transgressor of the laws."
"You say true." "Is it not likewise true," continued Socrates, "that he
who obeys these ordinances does justly, and that he obeys them not does
unjustly?" "Yes." "But," said Socrates, "he who acts justly is just,
and he who acts unjustly is unjust?" "Without doubt." "Therefore," said
Socrates, "whosoever observes the laws is just, and whosoever observes
them not is unjust." "But how can it be imagined," objected Hippias,
"that the laws are a good thing, and that it is good to obey them, since
even they that made them mend, alter, and repeal them so often?" To this
Socrates answered, "When you blame those who obey the laws, because they
are subject to be abrogated, you do the same thing as if you laughed at
your enemies for keeping themselves in a good posture of defence during
the war, because you might tell them that the peace will one day be made:
and thus you would condemn those who generously expose their lives for
the service of their country. Do you know," added he, "that Lycurgus
could never have rendered the Republic of Sparta more excellent than
other States if he had not made it his chief care to incline the citizens
most exactly to observe the laws? This, too, is what all good
magistrates aim at, because a Republic that is obedient to the laws is
happy in peace, and invincible in war. Moreover, you know that concord
is a great happiness in a State. It is daily recommended to the people;
and it is an established custom all over Greece to make the citizens
swear to live in good understanding with one another, and each of them
takes an oath to do so. Now, I do not believe that this unity is exacted
of them, only that they might choose the same company of comedians, or of
musicians, nor that they might give their approbation to the same poets,
or all take delight in the same diversions, but that they may all
unanimously obey the laws, because that obedience is the security and the
happiness of the State. Concord, therefore, is so necessary, that
without it good polity and authority cannot subsist in any State, nor
good economy and order in any family.

"In our private capacity, likewise, how advantageous is it to obey the
laws? By what means can we more certainly avoid punishments, and deserve
rewards? What more prudent conduct can we observe, always to gain our
suits at law, and never to be cast! To whom should we with greater
confidence trust our estates or our children, than to him who makes a
conscience of observing the laws? Who can deserve more of his country?
whom can she more safely entrust with public posts, and on whom can she
more justly bestow the highest honours, than on the good and honest man?
Who will discharge himself better of his duty towards his father or his
mother, towards his relations or his domestics, towards his friends, his
fellow-citizens, or his guests? To whom will the enemy rather trust for
the observing of a truce, or for the performance of a treaty of peace?
With whom would we rather choose to make an alliance? To whom will the
allies more readily give the command of their armies, or the government
of their towns? From whom can we rather hope for a grateful return of a
kindness than from a man who strictly obeys the laws? and, by
consequence, to whom will men be more ready to do good turns, than to him
of whose gratitude they are certain? With whom will men be better
pleased to contract a friendship, and, consequently, against whom will
men be less inclined to commit acts of hostility, than against that
person who has everybody for his well-wisher and friend, and few or none
for his ill-wishers or enemies? These, Hippias, are the advantages of
observing the laws. And now, having shown you that the observance of the
laws is the same thing with justice, if you are of another opinion, pray
let me know it." "Indeed, Socrates," answered Hippias, "what you have
said of justice agrees exactly with my sentiments of it." "Have you
never heard," continued Socrates, "of certain laws that are not written?"
"You mean the laws," answered Hippias, "which are received all over the
earth." "Do you think, then," added Socrates, "that it was all mankind
that made them?" "That is impossible," said Hippias, "because all men
cannot be assembled in the same place, and they speak not all of them the
same language." "Who, then, do you think gave us these laws?" "The
gods," answered Hippias; "for the first command to all men is to adore
the gods." "And is it not likewise commanded everywhere to honour one's
father and mother?" "Yes, certainly," said Hippias. Socrates went
on:--"And that fathers and mothers should not marry with their own
children, is not that too a general command?" "No," answered Hippias,
"this last law is not a Divine law, because I see some persons transgress
it." "They observe not the others better," said Socrates; "but take
notice, that no man violates with impunity a law established by the gods.
There are unavoidable punishments annexed to this crime; but we easily
secure ourselves from the rigour of human laws, after we have
transgressed them, either by keeping ourselves hid, or defending
ourselves by open force." "And what is this punishment," said Hippias,
"which it is impossible for fathers, who marry with their own children,
to avoid?" "It is very great," said Socrates; "for what can be more
afflicting to men, who desire to have children than to have very bad
ones?" "And how do you know," pursued Hippias, "that they will have bad
children? What shall hinder them, if they are virtuous themselves, from
having children that are so likewise?" "It is not enough," answered
Socrates, "that the father and the mother be virtuous: they must,
besides, be both of them in the vigour and perfection of their age. Now,
do you believe, that the seed of persons who are too young, or who are
already in their declining age, is equal to that of persons who are in
their full strength?" "It is not likely that it is," said Hippias. "And
which is the best?" pursued Socrates. "Without doubt," said Hippias,
"that of a man in his strength." "It follows, then," continued Socrates,
"that the seed of persons who are not yet come to their full strength, or
who are past it, is not good." "In all appearance it is not." "In those
ages, then, we ought not to get children?" said Socrates. "I think so."
"Such, therefore, as indulge their lust in such untimely fruition will
have very weakly children?" "I grant they will." "And are not weakly
children bad ones?" "They are," said Hippias.

"Tell me, further," said Socrates, "is it not an universal law to do good
to those who have done good to us?" "Yes," said Hippias, "but many
offend against this law." "And they are punished for it," replied
Socrates, "seeing their best friends abandon them, and that they are
obliged to follow those who have an aversion for them. For are not they
the best friends who do kindnesses whenever they are desired? And if he
who has received a favour neglect to acknowledge it, or return it ill,
does he not incur their hate by his ingratitude? And yet, finding his
advantage in preserving their goodwill, is it not to them that he makes
his court with most assiduity?" "It is evident," said Hippias, "that it
is the gods who have ordered these things; for, when I consider that each
law carries with it the punishment of the transgressor, I confess it to
be the work of a more excellent legislator than man." "And do you
think," said Socrates, "that the gods make laws that are unjust?" "On
the contrary," answered Hippias, "it is very difficult for any but the
gods to make laws that are just." "Therefore, Hippias," said Socrates,
"according to the gods themselves 'to obey the laws is to be just.'"

This is what Socrates said on the subject of justice, and his actions
being conformable to his words, he from day to day created a greater love
of justice in the minds of those who frequented him.



