CHAPTER IV. SOCRATES PROVETH THE EXISTENCE OF A DEITY.


If there be any who believe what some have written by conjecture, that
Socrates was indeed excellent in exciting men to virtue, but that he did
not push them forward to make any great progress in it, let such reflect
a little on what he said, not only when he endeavoured to refute those
that boasted they knew all things, but likewise in his familiar
conversations, and let them judge afterwards if he was incapable to
advance his friends in the paths of virtue.

I will, in the first place, relate a conference which he had with
Aristodemus, surnamed the Little, touching the Deity, for he had heard
that he never sacrificed to the gods; that he never addressed himself to
them in prayer; that he never consulted the oracles, and even laughed at
those that practised these things, he took him to talk in this manner:--

"Tell me, Aristodemus, are there any persons whom you value on account of
their merit?" He answered, "Yes, certainly." "Tell me their names,"
added Socrates. Aristodemus replied: "For epic poetry I admire Homer as
the most excellent; for dithyrambics, Melanippides; Sophocles for
tragedy; Polycletes for statuary; and Zeuxis for painting." "Which
artists," said Socrates, "do you think to be most worthy of your esteem
and admiration: they who make images without soul and motion, or they who
make animals that move of their own accord, and are endowed with
understanding?" "No doubt the last," replied Aristodemus, "provided they
make them not by chance, but with judgment and prudence." Socrates went
on: "As there are some things which we cannot say why they were made, and
others which are apparently good and useful, tell me, my friend, whether
of the two you rather take to be the work of prudence than of hazard."
"It is reasonable," said Aristodemus, "to believe that the things which
are good and useful are the workmanship of reason and judgment." "Do not
you think then," replied Socrates, "that the first Former of mankind
designed their advantage when he gave them the several senses by which
objects are apprehended; eyes for things visible, and ears for sounds? Of
what advantage would agreeable scents have been to us if nostrils suited
to their reception had not been given? And for the pleasures of the
taste, how could we ever have enjoyed these, if the tongue had not been
fitted to discern and relish them? Further, does it not appear to you
wisely provided that since the eye is of a delicate make, it is guarded
with the eyelid drawn back when the eye is used, and covering it in
sleep? How well does the hair at the extremity of the eyelid keep out
dust, and the eyebrow, by its prominency, prevent the sweat of the
forehead from running into the eye to its hurt. How wisely is the ear
formed to receive all sorts of sounds, and not to be filled with any to
the exclusion of others. Are not the fore teeth of all animals fitted to
cut off proper portions of food, and their grinders to reduce it to a
convenient smallness? The mouth, by which we take in the food we like,
is fitly placed just beneath the nose and eyes, the judges of its
goodness; and what is offensive and disagreeable to our senses is, for
that reason, placed at a proper distance from them. In short, these
things being disposed in such order, and with so much care, can you
hesitate one moment to determine whether it be an effect of providence or
of chance?" "I doubt not of it in the least," replied Aristodemus, "and
the more I fix my thoughts on the contemplation of these things the more
I am persuaded that all this is the masterpiece of a great workman, who
bears an extreme love to men." "What say you," continued Socrates, "to
this, that he gives all animals a desire to engender and propagate their
kind; that he inspires the mothers with tenderness and affection to bring
up their young; and that, from the very hour of their birth, he infuses
into them this great love of life and this mighty aversion to death?" "I
say," replied Aristodemus, "that it is an effect of his great care for
their preservation." "This is not all," said Socrates, "answer me yet
farther; perhaps you would rather interrogate me. You are not, I
persuade myself, ignorant that you are endowed with understanding; do you
then think that there is not elsewhere an intelligent being?
Particularly, if you consider that your body is only a little earth taken
from that great mass which you behold. The moist that composes you is
only a small drop of that immense heap of water that makes the sea; in a
word, your body contains only a small part of all the elements, which are
elsewhere in great quantity. There is nothing then but your
understanding alone, which, by a wonderful piece of good fortune, must
have come to you from I know not whence, if there were none in another
place; and can it then be said that all this universe and all these so
vast and numerous bodies have been disposed in so much order, without the
help of an intelligent Being, and by mere chance?" "I find it very
difficult to understand it otherwise," answered Aristodemus, "because I
see not the gods, who, you say, make and govern all things, as I see the
artificers who do any piece of work amongst us." "Nor do you see your
soul neither," answered Socrates, "which governs your body; but, because
you do not see it, will you from thence infer you do nothing at all by
its direction, but that everything you do is by mere chance?" Aristodemus
now wavering said, "I do not despise the Deity, but I conceive such an
idea of his magnificence and self-sufficiency, that I imagine him to have
no need of me or my services." "You are quite wrong," said Socrates,
"for by how much the gods, who are so magnificent, vouchsafe to regard
you, by so much you are bound to praise and adore them." "It is needless
for me to tell you," answered Aristodemus, "that, if I believed the gods
interested themselves in human affairs, I should not neglect to worship
them." "How!" replied Socrates, "you do not believe the gods take care
of men, they who have not only given to man, in common with other
animals, the senses of seeing, hearing, and taste, but have also given
him to walk upright; a privilege which no other animal can boast of, and
which is of mighty use to him to look forward, to remote objects, to
survey with facility those above him, and to defend himself from any
harm? Besides, although the animals that walk have feet, which serve
them for no other use than to walk, yet, herein, have the gods
distinguished man, in that, besides feet, they have given him hands, the
instruments of a thousand grand and useful actions, on which account he
not only excels, but is happier than all animals besides. And, further,
though all animals have tongues, yet none of them can speak, like man's;
his tongue only can form words, by which he declares his thoughts, and
communicates them to others. Not to mention smaller instances of their
care, such as the concern they take of our pleasures, in confining men to
no certain season for the enjoying them, as they have done other animals.

"But Providence taketh care, not only of our bodies, but of our souls: it
hath pleased the great Author of all, not only to give man so many
advantages for the body, but (which is the greatest gift of all, and the
strongest proof of his care) he hath breathed into him an intelligent
soul, and that, too, the most excellent of all, for which of the other
animals has a soul that knows the being of the Deity, by whom so many
great and marvellous works are done? Is there any species but man that
serves and adores him? Which of the animals can, like him, protect
himself from hunger and thirst, from heat and cold? Which, like him, can
find remedies for diseases, can make use of his strength, and is as
capable of learning, that so perfectly retains the things he has seen, he
has heard, he has known? In a word, it is manifest that man is a god in
comparison with the other living species, considering the advantages he
naturally has over them, both of body and soul. For, if man had a body
like to that of an ox the subtilty of his understanding would avail him
nothing, because he would not be able to execute what he should project.
On the other hand, if that animal had a body like ours, yet, being devoid
of understanding, he would be no better than the rest of the brute
species. Thus the gods have at once united in your person the most
excellent structure of body and the greatest perfection of soul; and now
can you still say, after all, that they take no care of you? What would
you have them do to convince you of the contrary?" "I would have them,"
answered Aristodemus, "send on purpose to let me know expressly all that
I ought to do or not to do, in like manner as you say they do give you
notice." "What!" said Socrates, "when they pronounce any oracle to all
the Athenians, do you think they do not address themselves to you too,
when by prodigies they make known to the Greeks the things that are to
happen, are they silent to you alone, and are you the only person they
neglect? Do you think that the gods would have instilled this notion
into men, that it is they who can make them happy or miserable, if it
were not indeed in their power to do so? And do you believe that the
human race would have been thus long abused without ever discovering the
cheat? Do you not know that the most ancient and wisest republics and
people have been also the most pious, and that man, at the age when his
judgment is ripest, has then the greatest bent to the worship of the
Deity?

"My dear Aristodemus, consider that your mind governs your body according
to its pleasure: in like manner we ought to believe that there is a mind
diffused throughout the whole universe that disposeth of all things
according to its counsels. You must not imagine that your weak sight can
reach to objects that are several leagues distant, and that the eye of
God cannot, at one and the same time, see all things. You must not
imagine that your mind can reflect on the affairs of Athens, of Egypt,
and of Sicily, and that the providence of God cannot, at one and the same
moment, consider all things. As, therefore, you may make trial of the
gratitude of a man by doing him a kindness, and as you may discover his
prudence by consulting him in difficult affairs, so, if you would be
convinced how great is the power and goodness of God, apply yourself
sincerely to piety and his worship; then, my dear Aristodemus, you shall
soon be persuaded that the Deity sees all, hears all, is present
everywhere, and, at the same time, regulates and superintends all the
events of the universe."

By such discourses as these Socrates taught his friends never to commit
any injustice or dishonourable action, not only in the presence of men,
but even in secret, and when they are alone, since the Divinity hath
always an eye over us, and none of our actions can be hid from him.



