CHAPTER X. SOCRATES ADVISES DIODORUS TO DO JUSTICE TO THE MERIT OF
HERMOGENES, AND TO ACCEPT OF HIS SERVICE AND FRIENDSHIP.


Socrates, meeting one day with Diodorus, addressed him thus:--"If one of
your slaves ran away, would you give yourself any trouble to find him?"
"Yes, certainly," answered he; "and I would give public notice, and
promise a reward to any that brought him to me." "And if one of them
were sick, would you take care of him, and send for physicians to
endeavour to save his life?" "Without doubt I would." "And if you saw,"
replied Socrates, "one of your friends--that is to say, a person who
renders you a thousand times more service than a slave, reduced to
extreme want--ought you not to relieve him? I speak this to you on
account of Hermogenes. You very well know he is not ungrateful, and that
he would scorn to receive the least favour from you and not return you
the like. You know likewise that a great number of slaves are not to be
valued like one man who serves willingly, who serves with zeal and
affection, and who is not only capable of doing what he is desired, but
who can likewise of himself think of many things that may be of service
to us; who reasons well, who foresees what may happen, and from whom we
may expect to receive good advice. Now, the best managers hold it as a
maxim that when we find anything of value to be sold cheap we ought to
buy it. Think of it, therefore, for as times now go you may procure
yourself many friends at a cheap rate." "You say right," replied
Diodorus, "and therefore pray send Hermogenes to me." "Excuse me in
that," answered Socrates, "you would do as well to go to him yourself as
to send for him."

This discourse was the reason that Diodorus went to Hermogenes, and for a
small gratification obliged him to be his friend; after which Hermogenes
took particular care to please Diodorus, and sought all opportunities of
serving him and of giving him content.




BOOK III.


CHAPTER I. OF THE QUALIFICATIONS OF A GENERAL.


Let us now see how Socrates was serviceable to those who were desirous to
qualify themselves for employments of trust and honour, by advising them
to apply themselves diligently to the study of their duty, that they
might acquire a perfect knowledge of it.

Having heard that there was arrived at Athens one Dionysodorus, who
undertook to teach the art of war, he made the following discourse to one
of his friends, who pretended to one of the highest posts in the army:--

"It were a scandalous thing," said Socrates to him, "for a man who aims
to be chief over others, to neglect to learn how to command, when so fair
an opportunity offers; nay, I think he would rather deserve to be
punished, than the man who should undertake to make a statue without
having learnt the sculptor's trade; for as in war the whole fortune of
the Republic is trusted to the general, it is to be presumed that his
good conduct will procure success, and that his faults will be followed
with great losses. And, therefore, a man who should neglect to make
himself capable of such an employment, and yet pretend to it, ought to be
severely punished." By these reasons he persuaded this young man to get
himself instructed.

After the youth had imagined that he had acquired some knowledge of the
art, he returned to pay Socrates a visit, who, jesting him, addressed the
company that were present in this manner:--"Do not you think, gentlemen,
that as Homer, when speaking of Agamemnon, gives him the surname of
venerable, we ought also to bestow the same epithet on this young man,
who justly deserveth to be called by that name, since, like him, he has
learned how to command? For, as a man who can play on the lute is a
player on that instrument, though he never toucheth it; and as he who is
knowing in the art of physic is a physician, though he never practise; so
this young man, having learned to command is become a general, though not
a man of us should ever give our voice to make him so. On the contrary,
it is in vain for him who knows not how to command, to get himself
chosen; he will not be one jot a better general for it, no more than he
who knows nothing of physic is a better physician, because he has the
reputation of being one." Then turning towards the young man, he went
on--"But because it may happen that one of us may have the honour of
commanding a regiment or a company in the troops that are to compose your
army, to the end we may not be entirely ignorant of the military art,
pray tell us by what he began to instruct you." "By what he ended,"
answered the young man; "for he showed me only the order that ought to be
observed in an army, either in marching, encamping, or fighting." "But
what is that," said Socrates, "in comparison of the many other duties
incumbent on a general? He must, besides, take care for the preparations
of war; he must furnish the soldiers with necessary ammunition and
provisions; he must be inventive, laborious, diligent, patient, quick of
apprehension; he must be mild and rigorous together; he must be open and
close; he must know to preserve his own, and take what is another's; he
must be prodigal and a ravager; he must be liberal and covetous; he must
be wary, and yet enterprising. I confess that he ought to know likewise
how to draw up his troops in order of battle; and, indeed, order and
discipline are the most important things in an army, and without them it
is impossible to have any other service of the troops than of a confused
heap of stones, bricks, timber, and tiles; but when everything is in its
due place, as in a building, when the foundations and the covering are
made of materials that will not grow rotten, and which no wet can damage,
such as are stones and tiles, and when the bricks and timber are employed
in their due places in the body of the edifice, they altogether make a
house, which we value among our most considerable enjoyments." Here the
young man, interrupting him, said:--

"This comparison puts me in mind of another thing that generals ought to
observe; which is, to place their best soldiers in the first and last
ranks, and the others in the middle; that those in the first rank may
draw them on, and those in the last push them forward." "He has taught
you too," said Socrates, "how to know the good and the bad soldiers
asunder, otherwise this rule can be of no use to you; for if you were to
reckon money upon a table, and were ordered to lay the best at the two
ends, and the worst in the middle, how could you do this, if you had not
been shown how to distinguish between the good and the bad?" "Indeed,"
replied the young man, "he did not teach me what you mention; and, I
suppose, we must learn of ourselves to discern the good soldiers from the
bad." "If you please," continued Socrates, "let us consider how a
general ought to govern himself in this matter. If it were to take any
money, ought he not to make the most covetous march in the front? If it
were an action of great peril, ought he not to send the most ambitious,
because they are the men who, out of a desire of glory, rush into the
midst of dangers? And as for them, you would not be much troubled to
know them, for they are forward enough in discovering themselves. But
tell me, when this master showed you the different ways of ordering an
army, did he teach you when to make use of one way, and when of another?"
"Not at all," answered he. "And yet," replied Socrates, "the same order
is not always to be observed, nor the same commands given, but to be
changed according to the different occasions." "He taught me nothing of
that," said the young man. "Go to him, then," added Socrates, "and ask
him concerning it; for if he know anything of the matter, and have ever
so little honour, he will be ashamed to have taken your money and send
you away so ill-instructed."



