CHAPTER II. SOCRATES NOT A DEBAUCHER OF YOUTH.


What surprises me yet more is, that some would believe that Socrates was
a debaucher of young men! Socrates the most sober and most chaste of all
men, who cheerfully supported both cold and heat; whom no inconvenience,
no hardships, no labours could startle, and who had learned to wish for
so little, that though he had scarce anything, he had always enough. Then
how could he teach impiety, injustice, gluttony, impurity, and luxury?
And so far was he from doing so, that he reclaimed many persons from
those vices, inspiring them with the love of virtue, and putting them in
hopes of coming to preferment in the world, provided they would take a
little care of themselves. Yet he never promised any man to teach him to
be virtuous; but as he made a public profession of virtue, he created in
the minds of those who frequented him the hopes of becoming virtuous by
his example.

He neglected not his own body, and praised not those that neglected
theirs. In like manner, he blamed the custom of some who eat too much,
and afterwards use violent exercises; but he approved of eating till
nature be satisfied, and of a moderate exercise after it, believing that
method to be an advantage to health, and proper to unbend and divert the
mind. In his clothes he was neither nice nor costly; and what I say of
his clothes ought likewise to be understood of his whole way of living.
Never any of his friends became covetous in his conversation, and he
reclaimed them from that sordid disposition, as well as from all others;
for he would accept of no gratuity from any who desired to confer with
him, and said that was the way to discover a noble and generous heart,
and that they who take rewards betray a meanness of soul, and sell their
own persons, because they impose on themselves a necessity of instructing
those from whom they receive a salary. He wondered, likewise, why a man,
who promises to teach virtue, should ask money; as if he believed not the
greatest of all gain to consist in the acquisition of a good friend, or,
as if he feared, that he who, by his means, should become virtuous, and
be obliged to him for so great a benefit, would not be sufficiently
grateful for it. Quite different from Socrates, who never boasted of any
such thing, and who was most certain that all who heard him and received
his maxims would love him for ever, and be capable of loving others also.
After this, whosoever says that such a man debauched the youth, must at
the same time say that the study of virtue is debauchery.

But the accuser says that Socrates taught to despise the constitution
that was established in the Republic, because he affirmed it to be a
folly to elect magistrates by lots; since if anyone had occasion for a
pilot, a musician, or an architect, he would not trust to chance for any
such person, though the faults that can be committed by men in such
capacities are far from being of so great importance as those that are
committed in the government of the Republic. He says, therefore, that
such arguments insensibly accustom the youth to despise the laws, and
render them more audacious and more violent. But, in my opinion, such as
study the art of prudence, and who believe they shall be able to render
themselves capable of giving good advice and counsel to their
fellow-citizens, seldom become men of violent tempers; because they know
that violence is hateful and full of danger; while, on the contrary, to
win by persuasion is full of love and safety. For they, whom we have
compelled, brood a secret hatred against us, believing we have done them
wrong; but those whom we have taken the trouble to persuade continue our
friends, believing we have done them a kindness. It is not, therefore,
they who apply themselves to the study of prudence that become violent,
but those brutish intractable tempers who have much power in their hands
and but little judgment to manage it.--He farther said that when a man
desires to carry anything by force, he must have many friends to assist
him: as, on the contrary, he that can persuade has need of none but
himself, and is not subject to shed blood; for who would rather choose to
kill a man than to make use of his services, after having gained his
friendship and goodwill by mildness?

The accuser adds, in proof of the ill tendency of the doctrine of
Socrates, that Critias and Alcibiades, who were two of his most intimate
friends, were very bad men, and did much mischief to their country. For
Critias was the most insatiable and cruel of all the thirty tyrants; and
Alcibiades the most dissolute, the most insolent, and the most audacious
citizen that ever the Republic had. As for me, I pretend not to justify
them, and will only relate for what reason they frequented Socrates. They
were men of an unbounded ambition, and who resolved, whatever it cost, to
govern the State, and make themselves be talked of. They had heard that
Socrates lived very content upon little or nothing, that he entirely
commanded his passions, and that his reasonings were so persuasive that
he drew all men to which side he pleased. Reflecting on this, and being
of the temper we mentioned, can it be thought that they desired the
acquaintance of Socrates, because they were in love with his way of life,
and with his temperance, or because they believed that by conversing with
him they should render themselves capable of reasoning aright, and of
well-managing the public affairs? For my part, I believe that if the
gods had proposed to them to live always like him, or to die immediately,
they would rather have chosen a sudden death. And it is easy to judge
this from their actions; for as soon as they thought themselves more
capable than their companions, they forsook Socrates, whom they had
frequented, only for the purpose I mentioned, and threw themselves wholly
into business.

It may, perhaps, be objected that he ought not to have discoursed to his
friends of things relating to the government of the State, till after he
had taught them to live virtuously. I have nothing to say to this; but I
observe that all who profess teaching do generally two things: they work
in presence of their scholars, to show them how they ought to do, and
they instruct them likewise by word of mouth. Now, in either of these
two ways, no man ever taught to live well, like Socrates; for, in his
whole life, he was an example of untainted probity; and in his discourses
he spoke of virtue and of all the duties of man in a manner that made him
admired of all his hearers. And I know too very well that Critias and
Alcibiades lived very virtuously as long as they frequented him; not that
they were afraid of him, but because they thought it most conducive to
their designs to live so at that time.

Many who pretend to philosophy will here object, that a virtuous person
is always virtuous, and that when a man has once come to be good and
temperate, he will never afterwards become wicked nor dissolute; because
habitudes that can be acquired, when once they are so, can never more be
effaced from the mind. But I am not of this opinion; for as they who use
no bodily exercises are awkward and unwieldy in the actions of the body,
so they who exercise not their minds are incapable of the noble actions
of the mind, and have not courage enough to undertake anything worthy of
praise, nor command enough over themselves to abstain from things that
are forbid. For this reason, parents, though they be well enough assured
of the good natural disposition of their children, fail not to forbid
them the conversation of the vicious, because it is the ruin of worthy
dispositions, whereas the conversation of good men is a continual
meditation of virtue. Thus a poet says,

    "By those whom we frequent, we're ever led:
    Example is a law by all obeyed.
    Thus with the good, we are to good inclined,
    But vicious company corrupts the mind."

And another in like manner:

    "Virtue and vice in the same man are found,
    And now they gain, and now they lose their ground."

And, in my opinion, they are in the right: for when I consider that they
who have learned verses by heart forget them unless they repeat them
often, so I believe that they who neglect the reasonings of philosophers,
insensibly lose the remembrance of them; and when they have let these
excellent notions slip out of their minds, they at the same time lose the
idea of the things that supported in the soul the love of temperance;
and, having forgot those things, what wonder is it if at length they
forget temperance likewise?

I observe, besides, that men who abandon themselves to the debauches of
wine or women find it more difficult to apply themselves to things that
are profitable, and to abstain from what is hurtful. For many who live
frugally before they fall in love become prodigal when that passion gets
the mastery over them; insomuch that after having wasted their estates,
they are reduced to gain their bread by methods they would have been
ashamed of before. What hinders then, but that a man, who has been once
temperate, should be so no longer, and that he who has led a good life at
one time should not do so at another? I should think, therefore, that
the being of all virtues, and chiefly of temperance, depends on the
practice of them: for lust, that dwells in the same body with the soul,
incites it continually to despise this virtue, and to find out the
shortest way to gratify the senses only.

Thus, whilst Alcibiades and Critias conversed with Socrates, they were
able, with so great an assistance, to tame their inclinations; but after
they had left him, Critias, being retired into Thessaly, ruined himself
entirely in the company of some libertines; and Alcibiades, seeing
himself courted by several women of quality, because of his beauty, and
suffering himself to be corrupted by soothing flatterers, who made their
court to him, in consideration of the credit he had in the city and with
the allies; in a word, finding himself respected by all the Athenians,
and that no man disputed the first rank with him, began to neglect
himself, and acted like a great wrestler, who takes not the trouble to
exercise himself, when he no longer finds an adversary who dares to
contend with him.

If we would examine, therefore, all that has happened to them; if we
consider how much the greatness of their birth, their interest, and their
riches, had puffed up their minds; if we reflect on the ill company they
fell into, and the many opportunities they had of debauching themselves,
can we be surprised that, after they had been so long absent from
Socrates, they arrived at length to that height of insolence to which
they have been seen to arise? If they have been guilty of crimes, the
accuser will load Socrates with them, and not allow him to be worthy of
praise, for having kept them within the bounds of their duty during their
youth, when, in all appearance, they would have been the most disorderly
and least governable. This, however, is not the way we judge of other
things; for whoever pretended that a musician, a player on the lute, or
any other person that teaches, after he has made a good scholar, ought to
be blamed for his growing more ignorant under the care of another master?
If a young man gets an acquaintance that brings him into debauchery,
ought his father to lay the blame on the first friends of his son among
whom he always lived virtuously? Is it not true, on the contrary, that
the more he finds that this last friendship proves destructive to him,
the more reason he will have to praise his former acquaintance. And are
the fathers themselves, who are daily with their children, guilty of
their faults, if they give them no ill example? Thus they ought to have
judged of Socrates; if he led an ill life, it was reasonable to esteem
him vicious; but if a good, was it just to accuse him of crimes of which
he was innocent?

And yet he might have given his adversaries ground to accuse him, had he
but approved, or seemed to approve those vices in others, from which he
kept himself free: but Socrates abhorred vice, not only in himself, but
in everyone besides. To prove which, I need only relate his conduct
toward Critias, a man extremely addicted to debauchery. Socrates
perceiving that this man had an unnatural passion for Euthydemus, and
that the violence of it would precipitate him so far a length as to make
him transgress the bounds of nature, shocked at his behaviour, he exerted
his utmost strength of reason and argument to dissuade him from so wild a
desire. And while the impetuosity of Critias' passion seemed to scorn
all check or control, and the modest rebuke of Socrates had been
disregarded, the philosopher, out of an ardent zeal for virtue, broke out
in such language, as at once declared his own strong inward sense of
decency and order, and the monstrous shamefulness of Critias' passion.
Which severe but just reprimand of Socrates, it is thought, was the
foundation of that grudge which he ever after bore him; for during the
tyranny of the Thirty, of which Critias was one, when, together with
Charicles, he had the care of the civil government of the city, he failed
not to remember this affront, and, in revenge of it, made a law to forbid
teaching the art of reasoning in Athens: and having nothing to reproach
Socrates with in particular, he laboured to render him odious by
aspersing him with the usual calumnies that are thrown on all
philosophers: for I have never heard Socrates say that he taught this
art, nor seen any man who ever heard him say so; but Critias had taken
offence, and gave sufficient proofs of it: for after the Thirty had
caused to be put to death a great number of the citizens, and even of the
most eminent, and had let loose the reins to all sorts of violence and
rapine, Socrates said in a certain place that he wondered very much that
a man who keeps a herd of cattle, and by his ill conduct loses every day
some of them, and suffers the others to fall away, would not own himself
to be a very ill keeper of his herd; and that he should wonder yet more
if a Minister of State, who lessens every day the number of his citizens,
and makes the others more dissolute, was not ashamed of his ministry, and
would not own himself to be an ill magistrate. This was reported to
Critias and Charicles, who forthwith sent for Socrates, and showing him
the law they had made, forbid him to discourse with the young men. Upon
which Socrates asked them whether they would permit him to propose a
question, that he might be informed of what he did not understand in this
prohibition; and his request being granted, he spoke in this manner: "I
am most ready to obey your laws; but that I may not transgress through
ignorance, I desire to know of you, whether you condemn the art of
reasoning, because you believe it consists in saying things well, or in
saying them ill? If for the former reason, we must then, from
henceforward, abstain from speaking as we ought; and if for the latter,
it is plain that we ought to endeavour to speak well." At these words
Charicles flew into a passion, and said to him: "Since you pretend to be
ignorant of things that are so easily known, we forbid you to speak to
the young men in any manner whatever." "It is enough," answered
Socrates; "but that I may not be in a perpetual uncertainty, pray
prescribe to me, till what age men are young." "Till they are capable of
being members of the Senate," said Charicles: "in a word, speak to no man
under thirty years of age." "How!" says Socrates, "if I would buy
anything of a tradesman who is not thirty years old am I forbid to ask
him the price of it?" "I mean not so," answered Charicles: "but I am not
surprised that you ask me this question, for it is your custom to ask
many things that you know very well." Socrates added: "And if a young
man ask me in the street where Charicles lodges, or whether I know where
Critias is, must I make him no answer?" "I mean not so neither,"
answered Charicles. Here Critias, interrupting their discourse, said:
"For the future, Socrates, you must have nothing to do with the city
tradesmen, the shoemakers, masons, smiths, and other mechanics, whom you
so often allege as examples of life; and who, I apprehend, are quite
jaded with your discourses." "I must then likewise," replied Socrates,
"omit the consequences I draw from those discourses; and have no more to
do with justice, piety, and the other duties of a good man." "Yes, yes,"
said Charicles; "and I advise you to meddle no more with those that tend
herds of oxen; otherwise take care you lose not your own." And these
last words made it appear that Critias and Charicles had taken offence at
the discourse which Socrates had held against their government, when he
compared them to a man that suffers his herd to fall to ruin.

Thus we see how Critias frequented Socrates, and what opinion they had of
each other. I add, moreover, that we cannot learn anything of a man whom
we do not like: therefore if Critias and Alcibiades made no great
improvement with Socrates, it proceeded from this, that they never liked
him. For at the very time that they conversed with him, they always
rather courted the conversation of those who were employed in the public
affairs, because they had no design but to govern.--The following
conference of Alcibiades, in particular, which he had with Pericles, his
governor--who was the chief man of the city, whilst he was yet under
twenty years of age--concerning the nature of the laws, will confirm what
I have now advanced.

"Pray," says Alcibiades, "explain to me what the law is: for, as I hear
men praised who observe the laws, I imagine that this praise could not be
given to those who know not what the law is." "It is easy to satisfy
you," answered Pericles: "the law is only what the people in a general
assembly ordain, declaring what ought to be done, and what ought not to
be done." "And tell me," added Alcibiades, "do they ordain to do what is
good, or what is ill?" "Most certainly what is good." Alcibiades
pursued: "And how would you call what a small number of citizens should
ordain, in states where the people is not the master, but all is ordered
by the advice of a few persons, who possess the sovereignty?" "I would
call whatever they ordain a law; for laws are nothing else but the
ordinances of sovereigns." "If a tyrant then ordain anything, will that
be a law?" "Yes, it will," said Pericles. "But what then is violence
and injustice?" continued Alcibiades; "is it not when the strongest makes
himself be obeyed by the weakest, not by consent, but by force only?" "In
my opinion it is." "It follows then," says Alcibiades, "that ordinances
made by a prince, without the consent of the citizens, will be absolutely
unjust." "I believe so," said Pericles; "and cannot allow that the
ordinances of a prince, when they are made without the consent of the
people, should bear the name of laws." "And what the chief citizens
ordain, without procuring the consent of the greater number, is that
likewise a violence?" "There is no question of it," answered Pericles;
"and in general, every ordinance made without the consent of those who
are to obey it, is a violence rather than a law." "And is what the
populace decree, without the concurrence of the chiefs, to be counted a
violence likewise, and not a law?" "No doubt it is," said Pericles: "but
when I was of your age, I could resolve all these difficulties, because I
made it my business to inquire into them, as you do now." "Would to
God," cried Alcibiades, "I had been so happy as to have conversed with
you then, when you understood these matters better." To this purpose was
their dialogue.

Critias and Alcibiades, however, continued not long with Socrates, after
they believed they had improved themselves, and gained some advantages
over the other citizens, for besides that they thought not his
conversation very agreeable, they were displeased that he took upon him
to reprimand them for their faults; and thus they threw themselves
immediately into the public affairs, having never had any other design
but that. The usual companions of Socrates were Crito, Chaerephon,
Chaerecrates, Simmias, Cebes, Phaedon, and some others; none of whom
frequented him that they might learn to speak eloquently, either in the
assemblies of the people, or in the courts of justice before the judges;
but that they might become better men, and know how to behave themselves
towards their domestics, their relations, their friends, and their fellow-
citizens. All these persons led very innocent lives; and, whether we
consider them in their youth or examine their behaviour in a more
advanced age, we shall find that they never were guilty of any bad
action, nay, that they never gave the least ground to suspect them of
being so.

But the accuser says that Socrates encouraged children to despise their
parents, making them believe that he was more capable to instruct them
than they; and telling them that as the laws permit a man to chain his
own father if he can convict him of lunacy, so, in like manner, it is but
just that a man of excellent sense should throw another into chains who
has not so much understanding. I cannot deny but that Socrates may have
said something like this; but he meant it not in the sense in which the
accuser would have it taken: and he fully discovered what his meaning by
these words was, when he said that he who should pretend to chain others
because of their ignorance, ought, for the same reason, to submit to be
chained himself by men who know more than he. Hence it is that he argued
so often of the difference between folly and ignorance; and then he
plainly said that fools and madmen ought to be chained indeed, as well
for their own interest as for that of their friends; but that they who
are ignorant of things they should know, ought only to be instructed by
those that understand them.

The accuser goes on, that Socrates did not only teach men to despise
their parents, but their other relations too; because he said that if a
man be sick, or have a suit in law, it is not his relations, but the
physicians, or the advocates who are of use to him. He further alleged
that Socrates, speaking of friends, said it was to no purpose to bear
goodwill to any man, if it be not in our power to serve him; and that the
only friends whom we ought to value are they who know what is good for
us, and can teach it to us: thus, says the accuser, Socrates, by
persuading the youth that he was the wisest of all men, and the most
capable to set others in the right road to wisdom, made them believe that
all the rest of mankind were nothing in comparison with him. I remember,
indeed, to have heard him sometimes talk after this manner of parents,
relations, and friends; and he observed besides, if I mistake not, that
when the soul, in which the understanding resides, is gone out of the
body, we soon bury the corpse; and even though it be that of our nearest
relation, we endeavour to put it out of our sight as soon as decently we
can. Farther, though every man loves his own body to a great degree, we
scruple not nevertheless to take from it all that is superfluous, for
this reason we cut our hair and our nails, we take off our corns and our
warts, and we put ourselves into the surgeons' hands, and endure caustics
and incisions; and after they have made us suffer a great deal of pain,
we think ourselves obliged to give them a reward: thus, too, we spit,
because the spittle is of no use in the mouth, but on the contrary is
troublesome. But Socrates meant not by these, or the like sayings, to
conclude that a man ought to bury his father alive, or that we ought to
cut off our legs and arms; but he meant only to teach us that what is
useless is contemptible, and to exhort every man to improve and render
himself useful to others; to the end that if we desire to be esteemed by
our father, our brother, or any other relation, we should not rely so
much on our parentage and consanguinity, as not to endeavour to render
ourselves always useful to those whose esteem we desire to obtain.

The accuser says further against Socrates, that he was so malicious as to
choose out of the famous poets the passages that contained the worst
instructions, and that he made use of them in a sly manner, to inculcate
the vices of injustice and violence: as this verse of Hesiod,

    "Blame no employment, but blame idleness."

And he pretends that Socrates alleged this passage to prove that the poet
meant to say that we ought not to count any employment unjust or
dishonourable, if we can make any advantage of it. This, however, was
far from the thoughts of Socrates; but, as he had always taught that
employment and business are useful and honourable to men, and that
idleness is an evil, he concluded that they who busy themselves about
anything that is good are indeed employed; but that gamesters and
debauched persons, and all who have no occupations, but such as are
hurtful and wicked, are idle. Now, in this sense, is it not true to
say:--

    "Blame no employment, but blame idleness"?

The accuser likewise says that Socrates often repeated, out of Homer, a
speech of Ulysses; and from thence he concludes that Socrates taught that
the poet advised to beat the poor and abuse the common people. But it is
plain Socrates could never have drawn such a wild and unnatural inference
from those verses of the poet, because he would have argued against
himself, since he was as poor as anyone besides. What he meant,
therefore, was only this, that such as are neither men of counsel nor
execution, who are neither fit to advise in the city nor to serve in the
army, and are nevertheless proud and insolent, ought to be brought to
reason, even though they be possessed of great riches. And this was the
true meaning of Socrates, for he loved the men of low condition, and
expressed a great civility for all sorts of persons; insomuch that
whenever he was consulted, either by the Athenians or by foreigners, he
would never take anything of any man for the instructions he gave them,
but imparted his wisdom freely, and without reward, to all the world;
while they, who became rich by his liberality, did not afterwards behave
themselves so generously, but sold very dear to others what had cost them
nothing; and, not being of so obliging a temper as he, would not impart
their knowledge to any who had it not in their power to reward them. In
short, Socrates has rendered the city of Athens famous throughout the
whole earth; and, as Lychas was said to be the honour of Sparta, because
he treated, at his own expense, all the foreigners who came to the feasts
of the Gymnopaedies, so it may, with much greater reason, be said of
Socrates that he was the glory of Athens, he who all his life made a
continual distribution of his goodness and virtues, and who, keeping open
for all the world the treasures of an inestimable wealth, never sent any
man out of his company but more virtuous, and more improved in the
principles of honour, than formerly he was. Therefore, in my opinion, if
he had been treated according to his merit, they should have decreed him
public honours rather than have condemned him to an infamous death. For
against whom have the laws ordained the punishment of death? Is it not
for thieves, for robbers, for men guilty of sacrilege, for those who sell
persons that are free? But where, in all the world, can we find a man
more innocent of all those crimes than Socrates? Can it be said of him
that he ever held correspondence with the enemy, that he ever fomented
any sedition, that he ever was the cause of a rebellion, or any other the
like mischiefs? Can any man lay to his charge that he ever detained his
estate, or did him or it the least injury? Was he ever so much as
suspected of any of these things? How then is it possible he should be
guilty of the crimes of which he was accused; since, instead of not
believing in the gods, as the accuser says, it is manifest he was a
sincere adorer of them? Instead of corrupting the youth, as he further
alleges against him, he made it his chief care to deliver his friends
from the power of every guilty passion, and to inspire them with an
ardent love for virtue, the glory, the ornament, and felicity of families
as well as of states? And this being fact (and fact it is, for who can
deny it?), is it not certain that the Republic was extremely obliged to
him, and that she ought to have paid him the highest honours?



