CHAPTER VII. METHOD TO BE OBSERVED IN STUDY.--ARTS AND SCIENCES NO
FURTHER USEFUL, THAN THEY CONTRIBUTE TO RENDER MEN WISER, BETTER, OR
HAPPIER.--VAIN AND UNPROFITABLE KNOWLEDGE TO BE REJECTED.


I presume now, that what I have said has been a sufficient evidence of
the frankness and sincerity with which Socrates conversed with his
friends, and made known his opinions to them. It remains now that I
should say something of the extreme care Socrates showed for the
advancement of his friends, and how much he had at heart that they might
not be ignorant of anything that could be useful to them, to the end they
might not want the assistance of others in their own affairs. For this
reason, he applied himself to examine in what each of them was knowing;
then, if he thought it in his power to teach them anything that an honest
and worthy man ought to know, he taught them such things with incredible
readiness and affection; if not, he carried them himself to masters who
were able to instruct them. But he resolved within himself how far a
person who was well-educated in his studies ought to learn everything.

Thus for geometry he said, that we ought to know enough of it not to be
imposed upon in measure when we buy or sell land, when we divide an
inheritance into shares, or measure out the work of a labourer, and that
it was so easy to know this, that if a man applied himself ever so little
to the practice of such things, he would soon learn even the extent and
circumference of the whole earth, and how to measure it; but he did not
approve that a man should dive into the very bottom of this science, and
puzzle his brains with I know not what figures, though he himself was
expert in it, for he said he could not see what all those niceties and
inventions were good for, which take up the whole life of a man, and
distract him from other more necessary studies.

In like manner he was of opinion that a man should employ some time in
astronomy, that he might know by the stars the hour of the night, what
day of the month it is, and what season of the year we are in, in order
that we might know when to relieve a sentinel in the night, and when it
is best to venture out to sea, or undertake a journey, and, in short,
that we might know how to do everything in its proper season. He said
that all this was easily learnt by conversing with seamen, or with such
as go a-hunting by night, or others who profess to know these things; but
he dissuaded very much from penetrating farther into this science, as
even to know what planets are not in the same declination, to explain all
their different motions, to know how far distant they are from the earth,
in how long time they make their revolutions, and what are their several
influences, for he thought these sciences wholly useless, not that he was
ignorant of them himself, but because they take up all our time, and
divert us from better employments. In fine, he could not allow of a too
curious inquiry into the wonderful workmanship of the Deity in the
disposition of the universe, that being a secret which the mind cannot
comprehend, and because it is not an action acceptable to God to
endeavour to discover what He would hide from us. He held, likewise,
that it was dangerous to perplex the mind with these sublime
speculations, as Anaxagoras had done, who pretended to be very knowing in
them, for in teaching that the sun was the same thing as fire, he does
not consider that fire does not dazzle the eyes, but that it is
impossible to support the splendour of the sun. He did not reflect,
neither, that the sun blackens the sky, which fire does not; nor lastly,
that the heat of the sun is necessary to the earth, in order to the
production of trees and fruits, but that the heat of fire burns and kills
them. When he said, too, that the sun was only a stone set on fire, he
did not consider that a stone glitters not in the fire, and cannot last
long in it without consuming, whereas the sun lasts always, and is an
inexhaustible source of light.

Socrates advised, likewise, to learn arithmetic, but not to amuse
ourselves with the vain curiosities of that science, having established
this rule in all his studies and in all his conferences, never to go
beyond what is useful.

He exhorted his friends to take care of their health, and to that purpose
to consult with the learned; and to observe, besides, each in his own
particular, what meat, what drink, and what exercise is best for him, and
how to use them to preserve himself in health. For when a man has thus
studied his own constitution, he cannot have a better physician than
himself.

If any one desired to attempt or to learn things that were above the
power or capacity of human nature, he advised him to apply himself to
divination; for he who knows by what means the gods generally signify
their mind to men, or how it is they used to give them counsel and aid,
such a person never fails to obtain from the Deity all that direction and
assistance that is necessary for him.



CHAPTER VIII. BEHAVIOUR OF SOCRATES FROM THE TIME OF HIS CONDEMNATION TO
HIS DEATH.--HIS CHARACTER SUMMED UP IN A FEW WORDS.


To conclude: if, because Socrates was condemned to death, any one should
believe that he was a liar to say that he had a good demon that guided
him, and gave him instructions what he should or should not do, let him
consider, in the first place, that he was arrived to such an age that if
he had not died when he did, he could not have lived much longer; that by
dying when he did he avoided the most toilsome part of life, in which the
mind loses much of its vigour; and that in amends for it he discovered to
the whole world the greatness of his soul, acquired to himself an
immortal glory, by the defence he made before his judges, in behaving
himself with a sincerity, courage, and probity that were indeed
wonderful, and in receiving his sentence with a patience and resolution
of mind never to be equalled; for it is agreed by all that no man ever
suffered death with greater constancy than Socrates.

He lived thirty days after his condemnation, because the Delian feasts
happened in that month, and the law forbids to put any man to death till
the consecrated vessel that is sent to the Isle of Delos be come back to
Athens. During that time his friends, who saw him continually, found no
change in him; but that he always retained that tranquillity of mind and
agreeableness of temper which before had made all the world admire him.
Now, certainly no man can die with greater constancy than this; this is
doubtless the most glorious death that can be imagined; but if it be the
most glorious, it is the most happy; and if it be the most happy, it is
the most acceptable to the Deity.

Hermogenes has told me, that being with him a little after Melitus had
accused him, he observed, that he seemed to decline speaking of that
affair: from whence he took occasion to tell him that it would not be
amiss for him to think of what he should answer in his own justification.
To which Socrates replied: "Do you believe I have done anything else all
my life than think of it?" And Hermogenes asking him what he meant by
saying so? Socrates told him that he had made it the whole business of
his life to examine what was just and what unjust; that he had always
cherished justice and hated injustice, and that he did not believe there
was any better way to justify himself.

Hermogenes said further to him--"Do you not know that judges have often
condemned the innocent to death, only because their answers offended
them, and that, on the contrary, they have often acquitted the guilty?"
"I know it very well," answered Socrates; "but I assure you, that having
set myself to think what I should say to my judges, the demon that
advises me dissuaded me from it." At which Hermogenes seeming surprised,
Socrates said to him, "Why are you surprised that this God thinks it
better for me to leave this world than to continue longer in it? Sure,
you are not ignorant that I have lived as well and as pleasantly as any
man, if to live well be, as I take it, to have no concern but for virtue,
and if to live pleasantly be to find that we have made some progress in
it. Now, I have good reason to believe that this is my happy case, that
I have always had a steady regard for virtue, and made progress in it,
because I perceive that my mind, at this time, doth not misgive me, nay,
I have the sincere testimony of my conscience that I have done my duty;
and in this belief I strengthen myself by the conversation I have had
with others, and by comparing myself with them. My friends, too, have
believed the same thing of me, not because they wish me well, for in that
sense every friend would think as much of his friend, but because they
thought they advanced in virtue by my conversation.

"If I were to live longer, perhaps I should fall into the inconveniences
of old age: perhaps my sight should grow dim, my hearing fail me, my
judgment become weak, and I should have more trouble to learn, more to
retain what I had learnt; perhaps, too, after all, I should find myself
incapable of doing the good I had done before. And if, to complete my
misery, I should have no sense of my wretchedness, would not life be a
burden to me? And, on the other hand, say I had a sense of it, would it
not afflict me beyond measure? As things now stand, if I die innocent
the shame will fall on those who are the cause of my death, since all
sort of iniquity is attended with shame. But who will ever blame me
because others have not confessed my innocence, nor done me justice? Past
experience lets us see that they who suffer injustice, and they who
commit it, leave not a like reputation behind them after their death. And
thus, if I die on this occasion, I am most certain that posterity will
more honour my memory than theirs who condemn me; for it will be said of
me, that I never did any wrong, never gave any ill advice to any man; but
that I laboured all my life long to excite to virtue those who frequented
me."

This was the answer that Socrates gave to Hermogenes, and to several
others. In a word, all good men who knew Socrates daily regret his loss
to this very hour, reflecting on the advantage and improvement they made
in his company.

For my own part, having found him to be the man I have described, that is
to say, so pious as to do nothing without the advice of the Deity; so
just as never to have in the least injured any man, and to have done very
signal services to many; so chaste and temperate as never to have
preferred delight and pleasure before modesty and honesty; so prudent as
never to have mistaken in the discernment of good and evil, and never to
have had need of the advice of others, to form a right judgment of
either; moreover, most capable to deliberate and resolve in all sorts of
affairs, most capable to examine into men, to reprehend them for their
vices, and to excite them to virtue; having, I say, found all these
perfections in Socrates, I have always esteemed him the most virtuous and
most happy of all men; and if any one be not of my opinion, let him take
the pains to compare him with other men, and judge of him afterwards.




