CHAPTER IV. A DISCOURSE OF SOCRATES WITH NICOMACHIDES, IN WHICH HE
SHOWETH THAT A MAN SKILFUL IN HIS OWN PROPER BUSINESS, AND WHO MANAGES
HIS AFFAIRS WITH PRUDENCE AND SAGACITY, MAY MAKE, WHEN OCCASION OFFERS, A
GOOD GENERAL.


Another time, Socrates meeting Nicomachides, who was coming from the
assembly where they had chosen the magistrates, asked him, "of whom they
had made choice to command the army?" Nicomachides answered: "Alas! the
Athenians would not chose me; me! who have spent all my life in arms, and
have gone through all the degrees of a soldier; who have been first a
private sentinel, then a captain, next a colonel of horse, and who am
covered all over with wounds that I have received in battles" (at these
words he bared his breast, and showed the large scars which were
remaining in several places of his body); "but they have chosen
Antisthenes, who has never served in the infantry, who even in the
cavalry never did anything remarkable, and whose only talent consists in
knowing how to get money." "So much the better," said Socrates, "for
then the army will be well paid." "A merchant," replied Nicomachides,
"knows how to get money as well as he; and does it follow from thence
that he is fit to be a general?" "You take no notice," replied Socrates,
"that Antisthenes is fond of honour, and desirous to excel all others in
whatever he undertakes, which is a very necessary qualification in a
general. Have you not observed, that whenever he gave a comedy to the
people, he always gained the prize?" "There is a wide difference,"
answered Nicomachides, "between commanding an army and giving orders
concerning a comedy." "But," said Socrates, "though Antisthenes
understands not music, nor the laws of the stage, yet he found out those
who were skilful in both, and by their means succeeded extremely well."
"And when he is at the head of the army," continued Nicomachides, "I
suppose you will have him to find out too some to give orders, and some
to fight for him?" "Why not?" replied Socrates, "for if in the affairs
of war he take the same care to provide himself with persons skilful in
that art, and fit to advise him, as he did in the affair of the plays, I
see not what should hinder him from gaining the victory in the former as
well as in the latter. And it is very likely that he will be better
pleased to expend his treasure to obtain an entire victory over the
enemy, which will redound to the honour and interest of the whole
Republic, than to be at a great expense for shows, to overcome his
citizens in magnificence, and to gain a victory, which can be honourable
to none but himself and those of his tribe." "We must then infer," said
Nicomachides, "that a man who knows well how to give a comedy knows well
how to command an army?" "Let us rather conclude," answered Socrates,
"that every man who has judgment enough to know the things that are
necessary for his designs, and can procure them, can never fail of
success, whether he concern himself with the stage, or govern a State, or
command an army, or manage a family."

"Indeed," resumed Nicomachides, "I could never have thought you would
have told me, too, that a good economist would make a good general."
"Come, then," said Socrates, "let us examine wherein consists the duty of
the one and of the other, and see what relation there is between those
two conditions. Must not both of them keep those that are under them in
submission and obedience?" "I grant it." "Must not both of them take
care to employ every one in the business he is fit for? Must he not
punish those who do amiss and reward those that do well? Must they not
make themselves be esteemed by those they command? Ought they not alike
to strengthen themselves with friends to assist them upon occasion? Ought
they not to know how to preserve what belongs to them, and to be diligent
and indefatigable in the performance of their duty?" "I own," answered
Nicomachides, "that all you have said concerns them equally; but if they
were to fight it would not be the same as to both of them." "Why?" said
Socrates. "Have not both of them enemies?" "They have." "And would it
not be the advantage of both to get the better of them?" "I allow it,"
said Nicomachides; "but what will economy be good for when they are to
come to blows?" "It is then it will be most necessary," replied
Socrates. "For when the good economist sees that the greatest profit he
can get is to overcome, and that the greatest loss he can suffer is to be
beaten, he will prepare himself with all the advantages that can procure
him the victory, and will carefully avoid whatever might be the cause of
his defeat. Thus, when he sees his army well provided with all things,
and in a condition that seems to promise a good success, he will give his
enemies battle; but when he wants anything he will avoid coming to an
engagement with them. Thus you see how economy may be of use to him; and
therefore, Nicomachides, despise not those who apply themselves to it;
for between the conduct of a family and that of a State the sole
difference is that of a greater or lesser number; for as to all besides
there is much conformity between them. The sum of what I have advanced
is this, that without men there could not be any policy or any economy,
that they are often executed by the same persons, and that they who are
called to the government of the Republic are the very same whom great men
employ for their private affairs. Lastly, that they who make use of
proper persons for their several businesses are successful in their
economy and in politics; and that, on the contrary, they who fail in this
point commit great faults both in one and the other."



CHAPTER V. A CONVERSATION BETWEEN SOCRATES AND PERICLES CONCERNING THE
THEN PRESENT STATE OF THE REPUBLIC OF ATHENS, IN WHICH SOCRATES LAYS DOWN
A METHOD BY WHICH THE ATHENIANS MAY RECOVER THEIR ANCIENT LUSTRE AND
REPUTATION.


Socrates one day being in company with Pericles, the son of the great
Pericles, introduced the following discourse:--

"I hope that when you command the army the Republic will be more
successful and gain more glory in their wars than formerly." "I should
be glad of it," answered Pericles, "but I see little likelihood of it."
"We may bring this matter to the test," said Socrates. "Is it not true
that the Boeotians are not more numerous than the Athenians?" "I know
it." "Nor are they either braver or stronger?" "True, they are not."
"Do you believe that they agree better among themselves?" "Quite the
contrary," said Pericles; "for there is a great misunderstanding between
most of the Boeotians and the Thebans, because of the great hardships the
latter put upon the former, and we have nothing of this among us." "But
the Boeotians," replied Socrates, "are wonderfully ambitions and
obliging; and these are the qualities that naturally push men on to
expose themselves for the sake of glory and of their country." "The
Athenians," answered Pericles, "come not short of them in either of those
qualities." "It is true," replied Socrates, "that there is no nation
whose ancestors have done braver actions, and in greater number, than
those of the Athenians. And these domestic examples excite us to
courage, and create in us a true love of virtue and bravery."
"Notwithstanding all this," continued Pericles, "you see that after the
defeat of Tolmides at Lebadia, where we lost a thousand men, and after
another misfortune that happened to Hippocrates before Delium, the
greatness of the Athenians is sunk so low, and the courage of the
Boeotians so increased, that they, who even in their own country durst
not look the Athenians in the face without the assistance of the
Lacedemonians and of the other States of the Peloponnesus, now threaten
Attica with their single forces. And that the Athenians, who before
ravaged Boeotia when it was not defended by foreign troops, begin to
fear, in their turn, that the Boeotians will put Attica to fire and
sword." "In my opinion," answered Socrates, "a governor ought to be well
pleased to find a republic in such a condition, for fear makes a people
more careful, more obedient, and more submissive. Whereas a too great
security is attended with carelessness, luxury, and disobedience. This
is plainly seen in men who are at sea. When they fear not anything,
there is nothing in the ship but confusion and disorder; but when they
apprehend that they shall be attacked by pirates, or that a tempest is
hanging over their head, they not only do whatever they are commanded,
but even observe a profound silence, waiting the order of their captain,
and are as decent and orderly in their behaviour and motions as those who
dance at a public entertainment."

"We shall yield, then," replied Pericles, "that the Athenians are
obedient. But how shall we do to create in them an emulation to imitate
the virtue of their ancestors to equal their reputation and to restore
the happiness of their age in this present one?" "If we would have
them," answered Socrates, "make themselves masters of an estate, which is
in the possession of others, we need only tell them that it is descended
to them from their forefathers, and they will immediately be for having
it again. If we would encourage them to take the first rank among the
virtuous, we must persuade them that it is their due from all antiquity,
and that if they will take care to preserve to themselves this advantage
they will infallibly likewise surpass others in power. We must
frequently represent to them that the most ancient of their predecessors
were highly esteemed on account of their great virtue." "You would be
understood," said Pericles, "to speak of the contention of two of the
divinities concerning the patronage of the city of Athens, of which the
citizens, in the days of Cecrops, were chosen arbitrators on account of
their virtue." "You are in the right," said Socrates; "but I would have
them be put in mind likewise of the birth and nourishment of Erictheus,
and of the war that was in his time against the neighbouring nations; as
also of that which was made in favour of the descendants of Hercules
against the people of Peloponnesus, and, in short, of all the other wars
that were in the days of Theseus, in which our ancestors were always
reputed the most valiant men of their age. If you think fit, they may
likewise be told what the descendants of these ancients and our
predecessors of the last age have done. They may be represented to them
as resisting sometimes with their own forces only the nations whom all
Asia obeyed, whose dominions extended into Europe as far as Macedonia,
and who had inherited a potent empire from their fathers, together with
formidable forces, and who were already renowned for many great exploits.
Sometimes you must relate to them the victories they gained by sea and
land in conjunction with the Lacedemonians, who are likewise reputed a
very brave people. They should be told also that great commotions being
arisen among the Greeks, and the most part of them having changed their
places of abode, the Athenians always continued in their country, that
they have been chosen by several people to arbitrate their differences,
and that the oppressed have always fled to them for protection." "When I
reflect on all this," said Pericles, "I am surprised to see the Republic
so much fallen off from what it was." "In my opinion," replied Socrates,
"she has behaved herself like those persons who, for having too great
advantage over their rivals, begin to neglect themselves, and grow in the
end pusillanimous, for after the Athenians saw themselves raised above
the other Greeks they indulged themselves in indolence, and became at
length degenerate."

"What course must they take now," said Pericles, "to regain the lustre of
their ancient virtue?" "They need only call to mind," replied Socrates,
"what were the exercises and the discipline of their ancestors, and if,
like them, they apply themselves to those practices, they will no doubt
arrive at their perfection; or if they will not govern themselves by that
example, let them imitate the nations that are now uppermost; let them
observe the same conduct, follow the same customs, and be assured they
will equal, if not surpass them, if they labour to do so." "You seem to
be of opinion, my dear Socrates, that virtue is much estranged from our
Republic? And, indeed, when will the Athenians respect old age as they
of Sparta do, since they begin, even by their own fathers, to deride men
advanced in years? When, too, will they use themselves to the manly
exercises of that Republic, since they not only neglect the good
disposition and activity of body, but laugh at those who endeavour to
acquire them? When will they be obedient to the magistrates, they who
make it a glory to despise them? When will they be in perfect unity,
they who, instead of assisting, daily prejudice one another, and who envy
one another more than they do all the rest of mankind? They are every
day quarrelling in the public and private assemblies; they are every day
suing one another, and had rather find their own advantage in the ruin of
their neighbours than get an honest gain by reciprocally assisting one
another. The magistrates mind not the Government of the Republic any
farther than their own interests are concerned, and, therefore, they use
their utmost endeavours to be in office and authority; and for this
reason in the administration of the State there is so much ignorance and
malice, and such animosities, and so many different parties among private
persons. And I much fear that this mischief will get such a head that at
length there will be no remedy against it, and that the Republic will
sink under the weight of its misfortunes."

"Fear it not," said Socrates, "and do not believe that the Athenians
labour under an incurable disease. Do you not observe how skilful and
obedient they are at sea, that in the combats for prizes they exactly
obey the orders of those that preside there, and in the comedies how
readily they comply with what they are bid to do?" "I see it well,"
answered Pericles, "and cannot but wonder that they are so ready to obey
in these and the like occasions, and that the military men, who ought to
be the chosen part of the citizens, are so mutinous and refractory." "And
what say you," pursued Socrates, "to the Senate of the Areopagus; are
they not all of them persons of great worth? Do you know any judges who
discharge their office with more integrity, and who more exactly observe
the laws, who more faithfully render justice to private men, and who more
worthily acquit themselves of all manner of affairs?" "I blame them
not," said Pericles. "Despair not, then, of the Athenians," added
Socrates, "as of an untractable people." "But it is in war," replied
Pericles, "that much discipline is required, and much modesty and
obedience, and these things the Athenians wholly want in that occasion."
"Perhaps, too," continued Socrates, "they who command them know little of
their own duty. Do you not take notice that no man undertakes to govern
a company of musicians, or of comedians, or of dancers, or of wrestlers,
unless he be capable of it; and that all who take such employments upon
them can give an account where they have learnt the exercises of which
they are become masters? Our misfortunes in war, then, I very much
apprehend, must be owing in a great measure to the bad education of our
generals.

"I know very well that you are not of this number, and that you have
improved to your advantage the time you have spent in learning the art of
war and other laudable exercises. I imagine, likewise, that in the
memoirs of your father, the great Pericles, you have found many rare
stratagems, and that by your diligence you have also collected up and
down a great number of others. Nor do I doubt but that you frequently
meditate on these matters, that nothing may be wanting in you that may be
of use to a general. Insomuch, that if you find yourself in doubt of
anything, you immediately have recourse to those that know it, and spare
neither presents nor civilities to incline them to assist you and to
teach you the things of which you are ignorant." "Alas! Socrates," said
Pericles, "you flatter me, and flatter me for many things that, I am
afraid, I am deficient in; but by that you instruct me in my duty."

Upon this Socrates, interrupting him--"I will," said he, "give you an
advice. Have you not observed that in the high mountains, which are the
frontiers of Attica, and divide it from Boeotia, the roads through which
you must of necessity pass to go from one country to the other are very
rough and narrow?" "Yes, I have." "Tell me, besides, have you never
heard say that the Mysians and the Pisidians, who are in possession of
advantageous places where they dwell in the dominions of the King of
Persia, arm themselves lightly, and make continual inroads upon the
neighbouring provinces, and by that means are very troublesome to that
king's subjects, and preserve their own liberty?" "I have heard so." "It
is probable, too," continued Socrates, "that if the Athenians would
possess themselves of the mountains that are between Boeotia and Attica,
and if they took care to send thither some young men with arms proper for
inroaders, our enemies would be much prejudiced by them, and all those
mountains would be as a great rampart to cover our country from their
insults." "I believe what you say," answered Pericles, "and take all the
advices you have given me to be very good." "If you think them so,"
replied Socrates, "endeavour, my friend, to put them in practice; for if
any of them succeed you will receive the honour, and the Republic the
profit; and even though they should not meet with success the Republic
would have no inconvenience to apprehend, nor you the least dishonour."



