CHAPTER XI. DISCOURSE OF SOCRATES WITH THEODOTA, AN ATHENIAN LADY, OF NO
GOOD CHARACTER; WHEREIN HE ENDEAVOURETH, IN THE MOST ARTFUL AND ENGAGING
MANNER, TO WIN HER OVER FROM THE CRIMINAL PLEASURES TO WHICH SHE WAS
ADDICTED UNTO THE SUBLIMER AND MORE INNOCENT DELIGHTS OF PHILOSOPHY AND
VIRTUE.


There was at Athens a very beautiful lady called Theodota, who had the
character of a loose dame. Some person was speaking of her in presence
of Socrates, and saying that she was the most beautiful woman in the
whole world; that all the painters went to see her, to draw her picture,
and that they were very well received at her house. "I think," said
Socrates, "we ought to go see her too, for we shall be better able to
judge of her beauty after we have seen her ourselves than upon the bare
relation of others." The person who began the discourse encouraged the
matter, and that very moment they all went to Theodota's house. They
found her with a painter who was drawing her picture; and having
considered her at leisure when the painter had done, Socrates began
thus:--"Do you think that we are more obliged to Theodota for having
afforded us the sight of her beauty than she is to us for coming to see
her? If all the advantage be on her side, it must be owned that she is
obliged to us; if it be on ours, it must be confessed that we are so to
her." Some of the company saying there was reason to think so, Socrates
continued in these words:--"Has she not already had the advantage of
receiving the praises we have given her? But it will be yet a much
greater to her when we make known her merit in all the companies we come
into; but as for ourselves, what do we carry from hence except a desire
to enjoy the things we have seen? We go hence with souls full of love
and uneasiness; and from this time forward we must obey Theodota in all
she pleases to enjoin us." "If it be so," said Theodota, "I must return
you many thanks for your coming hither." Meanwhile Socrates took notice
that she was magnificently apparelled, and that her mother appeared
likewise like a woman of condition. He saw a great number of women
attendants elegantly dressed, and that the whole house was richly
furnished. He took occasion from hence to inform himself of her
circumstances in the world, and to ask her whether she had an estate in
land or houses in the city, or slaves, whose labour supplied the expenses
of her family. "I have nothing," answered she, "of all this; my friends
are my revenue. I subsist by their liberality."

Upon which Socrates remarked that "friendship was one of the greatest
blessings in life, for that a good friend could stand one in stead of all
possessions whatever." And he advised Theodota to try all her art to
procure to herself some lovers and friends that might render her happy.
The lady asking Socrates whether there were any artifices to be used for
that purpose, he answered, "there were," and proceeded to mention
several:--"Some for attracting the regard of the men, some for
insinuating into their hearts; others for securing their affections and
managing their passions." Whereupon Theodota, whose soul then lay open
to any impression, mistaking the virtuous design of Socrates in the whole
of this discourse for an intention of another sort, cried out in
raptures, "Ah! Socrates, why will not you help me to friends?" "I
will," replied Socrates, "if you can persuade me to do so." "And what
means must I use to persuade you?" "You must invent the means," said
Socrates, "if you want me to serve you." "Then come to see me often,"
added Theodota. Socrates laughed at the simplicity of the woman, and in
raillery said to her, "I have not leisure enough to come and see you; I
have both public and private affairs which take up too much of my time.
Besides, I have mistresses who will not suffer me to be from them neither
day nor night, and who against myself make use of the very charms and
sorceries that I have taught them." "And have you any knowledge in those
things, too?" said she. "Why do Apollodorus and Antisthenes," answered
Socrates, "never leave me? why do Cebes and Simmias forsake Thebes for my
company? This they would not do if I were not master of some charm."
"Lend it me," said Theodota, "that I may employ it against you, and charm
you to come to me." "No," said Socrates, "but I will charm you, and make
you come to me." "I will," said Theodota, "if you will promise to make
me welcome." "I promise you I will," answered Socrates, "provided there
be nobody with me whom I love better than you."



CHAPTER XII. OF THE NECESSITY OF EXERCISE TO HEALTH AND STRENGTH OF
BODY.


Among others who frequented Socrates, there was a young man whose name
was Epigenes, and who was very awkward in his person and behaviour, and
had contracted an ill habit of body, having never learnt nor used any
exercise. Socrates reproached him for it, and told him that it was
unworthy of any man to be so negligent of himself. Epigenes slightly
answered that he was under no obligation to do better. "You are no less
obliged to it," replied Socrates, "than they who train themselves up for
the Olympic Games. For do you believe that to fight for one's life
against the enemies of the Republic, which we are all obliged to do when
the Athenians please to command us, is a less important occasion than to
contend with antagonists for a prize? How many men are there who, for
want of strength, perish in fights; or have recourse to dishonourable
means to seek their safety? Some are taken prisoners, and remain in
slavery all the rest of their days, or are forced to pay so great a
ransom, as makes them live poor and miserable ever afterwards: others are
ill thought of, and their weakness is imputed to cowardice. And do you
value so little all these misfortunes, which constantly attend an ill
habit of body, and do they seem to you so slight? In my opinion, there
are no fatigues in the exercises but what are more easy and more
agreeable. But perhaps you despise the advantages of a good disposition
of body: nevertheless, they are considerable; for men in that condition
enjoy a perfect health, they are robust and active, they come off from
combats with honour, they escape from dangers, they succour their
friends, they render great services to their country. For these reasons
they are well received wherever they come, they are in good reputation
with all men, they attain to the highest offices, they live the more
honourably and the more at ease, and they leave their posterity the most
noble examples. If, therefore, you do not practise the military
exercises in public, you ought not to neglect the doing so in private,
but to apply yourself to them with all possible diligence.

"To have the body active and healthy can be hurtful to you in no
occasions: and since we cannot do anything without the body, it is
certain that a good constitution will be of great advantage to us in all
our undertakings. Even in study, where there seems to be least need of
it, we know many persons who could never make any great progress for want
of health. Forgetfulness, melancholy, loss of appetite, and folly, are
the diseases that generally proceed from the indisposition of the body;
and these diseases sometimes seize the mind with so great violence, that
they wipe out even the least remembrance of what we knew before. But in
health we have nothing like this to fear, and consequently there is no
toil which a judicious man would not willingly undergo to avoid all these
misfortunes. And, indeed, it is shameful for a man to grow old before he
has tried his own strength, and seen to what degree of dexterity and
perfection he can attain, which he can never know if he give himself over
for useless; because dexterity and strength come not of themselves, but
by practice and exercise."



