CHAPTER IV. A DISCOURSE OF SOCRATES CONCERNING FRIENDSHIP.


I remember likewise a discourse which I have heard him make concerning
friendship, and that may be of great use to instruct us by what means we
ought to procure ourselves friends, and in what manner we should live
with them. He said "that most men agree that a true friend is a precious
treasure, and that nevertheless there is nothing about which we give
ourselves so little trouble as to make men our friends. We take care,"
said he, "to buy houses, lands, slaves, flocks, and household goods, and
when we have them we endeavour to keep them, but though a friend is
allowed to be capable of affording us a far greater happiness than any or
all of these, yet how few are solicitous to procure themselves a friend,
or, when they have, to secure his friendship? Nay, some men are so
stupid as to prefer their very slaves to their friends. How else can we
account for their want of concern about the latter when either in
distress or sickness, and at the same time their extreme anxiety for the
recovery of the former when in the same condition? For then immediately
physicians are sent for, and all remedies that can be thought of applied
to their relief. Should both of them happen to die, they will regret
more the loss of their slave than of their friend, and shed more tears
over the grave of the former than of the latter. They take care of
everything but their friends; they will examine into and take great
notice of the smallest trifle in their affairs, which perhaps stand in no
need of their care, but neglect their friends that do. In short, though
they have many estates, they know them all; but though they have but few
friends, yet they know not the number of them; insomuch that if they are
desired to name them, they are puzzled immediately, so little are their
friends in their thoughts. Nevertheless, there is nothing comparable to
a good friend; no slave is so affectionate to our person or interest; no
horse can render us so great service; in a word, nothing is so useful to
us in all occasions. For a true friend supplies all the wants and
answers all the demands of another, either in the conduct of his private
affairs or in the management of the public. If, for instance, his friend
be obliged to do a kindness to any man, he puts him in the way of it; if
he be assaulted with any danger he immediately flies to his relief. At
one time he gives him part of his estate, at another he assists him with
the labour of his hands; sometimes he helps him to persuade, sometimes he
aids him to compel; in prosperity he heightens his delight by rejoicing
with him; in adversity he diminisheth his sorrows by bearing a share of
them. The use a man may make of his hands, his eyes, his ears, his feet,
is nothing at all when compared with the service one friend may render
another. For often what we cannot do for our own advantage, what we have
not seen, nor thought, nor heard of, when our own interests were
concerned, what we have not pursued for ourselves, a friend has done for
his friend. How foolish were it to be at so much trouble in cultivating
a small orchard of trees, because we expect some fruit from it, and yet
be at no pains to cultivate that which is instead of a whole estate--I
mean Friendship--a soil the most glorious and fertile where we are sure
to gather the fairest and best of fruit!"



CHAPTER V. OF THE WORTH AND VALUE OF FRIENDS.


To what I have advanced above I shall here relate another discourse of
his, as far as I can remember, in which he exhorted his hearers to
examine themselves, that they might know what value their friends might
set upon them; for seeing a man who had abandoned his friend in extreme
poverty, he asked Antisthenes this question in presence of that very man
and several others: "Can we set a price upon friends as we do upon
slaves? One slave may be worth twenty crowns, another not worth five;
such a one will cost fifty crowns, another will yield a hundred. Nay, I
am told that Nicias, the son of Niceratus, gave even six hundred crowns
for one slave to be inspector of his silver mines. Do you think we might
likewise set prices upon friends?" "I believe we may," answered
Antisthenes; "for there are some men by whom I would rather choose to be
loved than to have twenty crowns; others for whose affection I would not
spend five. I know some, too, for whose friendship I would give all I am
worth." "If it be so," said Socrates, "it would be well that each man
should consider how much he can be worth to his friends, and that he
should endeavour to render himself as valuable as he can in their regard,
to the end they might not abandon him; for when I hear one complain that
his friend has betrayed him; another that he, whom he thought faithful,
has preferred a small gain to the preservation of his friendship, I
reflect on these stories, and ask whether, as we sell a good-for-nothing
slave for what we can get for him, we are not likewise tempted to get rid
of an ill-friend when we are offered more for him than he is worth?
because I do not see men part with their slaves if they be good, nor
abandon their friends if they be faithful."



CHAPTER VI. OF THE CHOICE OF FRIENDS.


The following conversation of Socrates with Critobulus may teach us how
we ought to try friends, and with whom it is good to contract
friendship:--"If we were to choose a friend," said Socrates to him, "what
precaution ought we to take? Ought we not to look out for a man who is
not given to luxury, to drunkenness, to women, nor to idleness? For with
these vices he could never be very useful to his friend nor to himself."
"That is certain," answered Critobulus. "Then," said Socrates, "if we
found a man that loved to live great, though he had not an estate to
support the expense, and who having daily occasion to employ the purses
of his friends should show by his actions that whatever you lend him is
so much lost, and that if you do not lend him he will take it ill of you,
do you not think that such a man would be very improper to make a friend
of?" "There is no doubt of it," said Critobulus. "And if we found
another," continued Socrates, "who was saving of what he had, but who, on
the other hand, was so covetous that it would be quite unfit to have
anything to do with him, because he would always be very ready to receive
and never to give again?" "In my opinion," said Critobulus, "this would
be a worse friend than the former. And if we should find a man who was
so carried away with the desire of enriching himself that he applied his
mind to nothing else, but getting all he could scrape together?" "We
ought not to have anything to do with him neither," answered Critobulus,
"for he would be good to no man but himself." "If we found a quarrelsome
man," continued Socrates, "who was every day like to engage all his
friends in new broils and squabbles, what would you think of him?" "That
he ought to be avoided," answered Critobulus. "And if a man," said
Socrates, "were free from all these faults, and were only of a humour to
desire to receive kindnesses, but never to concern himself to return
them, what would you think of him?" "That neither he, too, would be
proper to make a friend of," replied Critobulus; "and indeed, after
having rejected so many, I can scarce tell whom we should take." "We
ought to take," said Socrates, "a man who were the reverse of all those
we have mentioned, who would be temperate in his manners, faithful in his
promises, and sincere in all his actions; who would think it a point of
honour not to be outdone in civilities so that it would be of advantage
to have to do with him." "But how can we be certain of all this," said
Critobulus, "before we have tried him?" "When we would give our judgment
of statuaries, we have no regard," replied Socrates, "to what they say of
themselves, but consider their works; and he who has already made good
statues is the person of whom we have the best opinion for those he shall
make for the future. Apply this to the question you asked me, and be
assured that a man who has served his former friends well will be likely
to show no less affection for those that come after; as we may strongly
conjecture that a groom, whom we have formerly seen dress horses very
well, is capable of dressing others." "But," said Critobulus, "when we
have found a man worthy of our choice, how ought we to contract a
friendship with him?" "In the first place," answered Socrates, "we must
inquire whether the gods approve of it." "But supposing they do not
dissuade us, how are we to take this precious prey?" "Not by hunting, as
we catch hares," said Socrates; "nor in nets, as we take birds, nor by
force, as we take our enemies; for it is very difficult to gain any man's
friendship against his will, or stop him by force, and detain him in
prison as a slave, seeing such ill-usage would oblige him rather to wish
us ill than to love us." "What, then, ought we to do?" pursued
Critobulus. "It is reported," replied Socrates, "that there are some
words so powerful that they who know them make themselves loved by
pronouncing them, and that there are likewise other charms for the same
purpose." "And where can one learn these words?" added Critobulus. "Have
you not read in Homer," answered Socrates, "what the Syrens said to
enchant Ulysses? The beginning of it is thus--

    'Oh, stay! oh, pride of Greece, Ulysses, stay!'

"You say true," continued Critobulus; "but did not they say as much to
the others, to stop them too?" "Not at all," said Socrates, "they
enchanted with these words only the generous men who were in love with
virtue." "I begin to understand you," said Critobulus, "and seeing this
charm, which is so powerful to enchant and captivate the mind, is nothing
but praise, you mean that we ought to praise a man in such a manner that
he may not distrust we laugh at him; otherwise, instead of gaining his
affection, we shall incur his hate; for it would be insupportable to a
man, who knows he is little and weak, to be praised for his graceful
appearance, for being well-shaped, and of a robust constitution." "But
do you know no other charms?" "No," answered Socrates; "but I have
indeed heard it said, that Pericles knew a great many, by means of which
he charmed the Republic, and gained the favour and esteem of all."
Critobulus continued, "What was it that Themistocles did to make himself
so esteemed?" "He used no other charms," said Socrates, "than the
eminent services he rendered to the State." "Which is as much as to
say," replied Critobulus, "that to gain the friendship of the great, we
must render ourselves capable to perform great actions."

"And could you think it possible," said Socrates, "that any one should
share in the friendship of men of merit without being possessed of one
good quality?" "Why not?" answered Critobulus; "I have seen despicable
rhetoricians beloved by the most famous orators, and persons who knew
nothing of war live in familiarity with great generals." "But have you
seen men who are fit for nothing (for that is the question we speak of)
get any friends of consequence?" "I confess I have not," answered
Critobulus; "nevertheless, since it is impossible for a man of no worth
whatever to have the friendship of men of condition and merit, tell me
whether the man who acquires the character of worth and merit obtains, at
the same time, the friendship of all who possess that excellent
character?" "The reason, I suppose, why you ask this question," answered
Socrates, "is because you frequently observe dissensions among those who
equally cherish honour, and would all of them rather die than commit a
base action; and you are surprised, that instead of living in friendship,
they disagree among themselves, and are sometimes more difficult to
reconcile than the vilest of all man." "This is a misfortune," added
Critobulus, "that arrives not among private men only; for dissensions,
nay, even wars, will happen sometimes, to break out in the best-governed
republics, where virtue is in the highest repute, and where vice is held
in the utmost contempt. Now, when I revolve these considerations in my
mind, I know not where to go in search of friends; for it is impossible,
we see, for the wicked to cultivate a true friendship among themselves.
Can there subsist a true and lasting friendship amongst the ungrateful,
the idle, the covetous, the treacherous, and the dissolute? No, for
persons of such a character will mutually expose themselves to hatred and
contempt; to hatred, because of the hurtful effects of their vices; to
contempt, on account of the deformity of them. Neither, on the other
hand, can we expect, as you have well observed, to find friendship
between a virtuous man and a person of the opposite character. For how
can they who commit crimes be in good amity with those that abhor them?
But what puzzles me most, my dear Socrates, is to see men of merit and
virtue harassing one another, and endeavouring, to the utmost of their
power, to crush and ruin their antagonists, when, in different interests,
both are contending for the most lucrative posts of the Republic. I am
quite at a loss to account for such a conduct on the principles of
friendship; for when I daily observe the noblest affections of the mind
rooted up by the sordid views of interest, I am in a great doubt whether
there is any real friendship and affection in the world." "My dear
friend," replied Socrates, "this matter is very intricate; for, if I
mistake not, Nature has placed in men the principles both of friendship
and dissension. Of friendship, because they have need of one another,
they have compassion of their miseries, they relieve one another in their
necessities, and they are grateful for the assistances which they lend
one another: of dissension, because one and the same thing being
agreeable to many they contend to have it, and endeavour to prejudice and
thwart one another in their designs. Thus strife and anger beget war,
avarice stifles benevolence, envy produces hate. But friendship
overcoming all these difficulties, finds out the virtuous, and unites
them together. For, out of a motive of virtue they choose rather to live
quietly in a mean condition, than to gain the empire of the whole earth
by the calamities of war. When they are pinched with hunger or thirst,
they endure them with constancy, till they can relieve themselves without
being troublesome to any one. When at any time their desires for the
enjoyments of love grow violent and headstrong, then reason, or
self-government, lays hold on the reins, checks the impetuosity of the
passion, keeps it within due bounds, and will not allow them to
transgress the great rule of their duty. They enjoy what is lawfully
their own, and are so far from usurping the rights and properties of
others, that they even give them part of what they have. They agree
their differences in such a manner, that all are gainers, and no man has
reason to complain. They are never transported with anger so far as to
commit any action of which they may afterwards repent. Envy is a passion
they are ignorant of, because they live in a mutual communication of what
they possess, and consider what belongs to their friends as things in
their own possession. From hence you see that the virtuous do not only
not oppose, but that they aid one another in the employments of the
Republic; for they who seek for honours and great offices, only to have
an opportunity of enriching themselves, and exercising a cruel tyranny,
or to live an easy and effeminate life, are certainly very wicked and
unjust, nor can they ever hope to live in friendship with any man.

"But why should he who desires not any authority, but only the better to
defend himself from the wicked, or to assist his friends, or be
serviceable to his country; why should such a man, I say, not agree with
another, whose intentions are the same with his own? Is it because he
would be less capable to serve the Republic, if he had virtuous
associates in the administration of affairs? If, in the tournaments and
other games, the most strong were permitted to enter into a league
against the weaker, they would infallibly be victors in all the courses,
and win all the prizes; for which reason they are not suffered to do so.
Therefore, in affairs of State, since no man is hindered from joining
with whom he pleases, to do good to the Republic, is it not more
advantageous, when we concern ourselves in the government, to make
friendship with men of honour and probity, who are generally, too, the
most knowing and capable, and to have them for our associates than to
make them our adversaries? For it is manifest, that when a man is
engaged in a combat, he ought to have some to assist him, and that he
will have need of a great many, if those whom he opposes be valiant and
powerful. Besides, he must be liberal, and give presents to those who
espouse his quarrel, to encourage them to make a more resolute and
vigorous defence. Now, it is beyond all dispute, that it is much better
to oblige the good, though they are but a few, than the wicked, of whom
there is a great number, because the former are easily gained over to
your side; whereas the latter are hardly won by the best favours, and
those in the greatest abundance, too, to espouse your interest.

"However it be, Critobulus, take courage, endeavour only to become
virtuous, and then boldly pursue the friendship of honest men; this is a
sort of chase in which I may be helpful to you, because I am naturally
inclined to love. I attack briskly those I love, and lay out all my
skill to make myself beloved by them. I endeavour to kindle in their
minds a flame like mine, and to make them desire my company, as ardently
as I long for theirs. You stand in need of this address when you would
contract a friendship with any one. Hide not, then, the secrets of your
soul from me, but let me know who they are for whom you have a regard:
for, having made it my study to please those who were agreeable to me, I
believe that, by long experience, I have now got some considerable
insight into the pursuits and ways of men." "I have longed a great
while," said Critobulus, "to learn this art, especially if it may be
employed to gain me the friendship of those whose persons are not only
comely and genteel, but whose minds are replenished and adorned with all
virtue." Socrates replied: "But my method forbids to use violence, and I
am of opinion that all men fled from the wretch Scylla, because she
detained them by force: whereas the Syrens did no violence to any man,
and employed only their tuneful voices to detain those who passed near
them, so that all stopped to hear, and suffered themselves to be
insensibly charmed by the music of their songs." "Be sure," said
Critobulus, "that I will use no violence to them whose friendship I would
gain, and therefore delay no longer to teach me your art." "Will you
give me your word likewise," said Socrates, "that you will not even give
them a kiss?" "I promise you," said Critobulus, "I will not, unless they
are very beautiful persons." "You mistake the matter," replied Socrates;
"the beautiful permit not those liberties; but the ugly grant them freely
enough, because they know very well that should any beauty be ascribed to
them, it is only in consideration of that of the soul." "I will not
transgress in this point," said Critobulus; "only impart to me the secret
you know to gain friends."

"When you would contract a friendship with any one," said Socrates, "you
must give me leave to tell him that you have a great esteem for him, and
that you desire to be his friend." "With all my heart," answered
Critobulus; "for sure no man can wish ill to a man who esteems him." "And
if I add besides," continued Socrates, "that because you set a great
value on his merit you have much affection for his person, will you not
take it amiss?" "Not at all," said Critobulus; "for I am sensible we
have a great kindness for those who bear us goodwill." "I may, then,"
said Socrates, "speak in that manner to those whom you desire to love:
but will you likewise give me leave to advance that your greatest
pleasure is to have good friends, that you take great care of them, that
you behold their good actions with as much joy as if you yourself had
performed them, and that you rejoice at their good fortune as much as at
your own: that you are never weary when you are serving them, and that
you believe it the glory of a man of honour to surpass his friends in
benefits, and his enemies in valour? By this means I think I shall be
very useful to you in procuring you good friends." "Why do you ask me
leave," said Critobulus, "as if you might not say of me whatever you
please?" "No, indeed," answered Socrates, "for I remember what Aspasia
once said, that match-makers are successful in their business when they
tell truth of the persons in whose behalf they court, but that the
marriages made by their lies are unfortunate, because they who are
deceived hate one another, and hate yet more the person that put them
together. And therefore, for the same reason, I think I ought not to
tell lies in your praise." "You are then so far only my friend," replied
Critobulus, "that if I have any good qualities to make myself be
esteemed, you will assist me; if not, you will invent nothing in my
behalf." "And do you think," said Socrates, "that I should do you more
service in giving you false praises, that are not your due, than by
exhorting you to merit the praise of all men? If you doubt of this,
consider the consequences of it. If, for instance, I should tell the
owner of a ship that you are an excellent pilot, and he upon that should
give you the conduct of the vessel, what hopes could you have that you
should not perish? Or if I should say, publicly, that you are an
experienced general, or a great politician, and if you, by that character
which I should unjustly have obtained for you, should be promoted to the
supreme magistracy, to what dangers would you expose your own life, and
the fortune of the State? Or if I should make any private person believe
that you were a good economist, and he should trust you afterwards with
the care of his family, would not you be the ruin of his estate, and
expose yourself to ridicule and contempt? Which is as much as to say,
Critobulus, that the shortest and surest way to live with honour in the
world is to be in reality what we would appear to be: and if you observe,
you will find that all human virtues increase and strengthen themselves
by the practice and experience of them. Take my advice, then, and labour
to acquire them: but if you are of a different opinion, pray let me know
it." "I might well be ashamed," answered Critobulus, "to contradict you:
for no good nor solid objection can be brought against so rational an
assertion."



