CHAPTER III. SOCRATES RECONCILES CHAEREPHON AND CHAERECRATES, TWO
BROTHERS WHO WERE FORMERLY AT VARIANCE.


Two brothers, whose names were Chaerephon and Chaerecrates, were at
enmity with each other. Socrates was acquainted with them, and had a
great mind to make them friends. Meeting therefore with Chaerecrates, he
accosted him thus:--"Are you, too, one of those who prefer the being rich
to the having a brother, and who do not consider that riches, being
inanimate things, have need of being defended, whereas a brother is
himself a good defence, and, after all, that there is more money than
brothers? For is it not extravagant in such men to imagine that a
brother does them wrong because they enjoy not his estate? Why say they
not likewise, that all the world does them wrong, because they are not in
possession of what belongs to the rest of mankind? But they believe,
with great reason, that it is better to live in society and to be ensured
of a moderate estate than to have the sole possession of all that is
their neighbours', and to be exposed to the dangers that are inseparable
from solitude. Nevertheless, they are not of the same opinion as to the
company of their brothers. If they are rich they buy themselves slaves
to serve them, they procure themselves friends to stand by them; but for
their brothers they neglect them; as if a brother were not so fit to make
a friend of as another person. And yet it is of great efficacy towards
the begetting and establishing of friendships to have been born of the
same parents and brought up together, since even beasts, we see, retain
some inclination for those who have come from the same dams, and have
been bred up and nourished together. Besides, a man who has a brother is
the more regarded for it, and men are more cautious to offend him."
Chaerecrates answered him thus:--

"You are indeed in the right to say that a good brother is a great
happiness; and, unless there be a very strong cause of dissension, I
think that brothers ought a little to bear with one another, and not part
on a slight occasion; but when a brother fails in all things, and is
quite the reverse of what he ought to be, would you have a man do what is
impossible and continue in good amity with such a person?" Socrates
replied, "Does your brother give offence to all the world as well as to
you? Does nobody speak well of him?" "That," said Chaerecrates, "is one
of the chief causes of the hatred I bear him, for he is sly enough to
please others; but whenever we two happen to meet you would think his
sole design were to fall out with me." Socrates replied, "Does not this
proceed from what I am going to say? When any man would make use of a
horse, and knows not how to govern him, he can expect nothing from him
but trouble. Thus, if we know not in what manner to behave ourselves
toward our brother, do you think we can expect anything from him but
uneasiness?" "Why do you imagine," said Chaerecrates, "that I am
ignorant in what manner I ought to carry myself to a brother, since I can
show him as much love and respect, both in my words and actions, as he
can show me in his? But when I see a man endeavour to disoblige me all
manner of ways, shall I express any goodwill for that man? No; this is
what I cannot do, and will not so much as endeavour it." "I am
astonished to hear you talk after this manner," said Socrates; "pray tell
me, if you had a dog that were good to keep your flocks, who should fawn
on your shepherds, and grin his teeth and snarl whenever you come in his
way, whether, instead of being angry with him, you would not make much of
him to bring him to know you? Now, you say that a good brother is a
great happiness; you confess that you know how to oblige, and yet you put
it not in practice to reconcile yourself with Chaerephon." "I fear I
have not skill enough to compass it." "I think," said Socrates, "there
will be no need of any extraordinary skill in the matter; and am certain
that you have enough to engage him to wish you well, and to have a great
value for you." "Pray," cried Chaerecrates, "if you know any art I have
to make myself beloved, let me know it immediately, for hitherto I never
perceived any such thing." "Answer me," said Socrates. "If you desired
that one of your friends should invite you to his feast when he offered a
sacrifice, what course would you take?" "I would begin first to invite
him to mine." "And if you would engage him to take care of your affairs
in your absence on a journey, what would you do?" "I would first, during
his absence, take care of his." "And if you would have a foreigner
entertain you in his family when you come into his country, what method
would you take?" "I would make him welcome at my house when he came to
this town, and would endeavour to further the dispatch of his business,
that he might do me the like favour when I should be in the city where he
lives." "Strange," said Socrates, "that you, who know the common methods
of ingratiating yourself, will not be at the pains of practising them.
Why do you scruple to begin to practise those methods? Is it because you
are afraid that, should you begin with your brother, and first do him a
kindness, you would appear to be of a mean-spirited and cringing
disposition? Believe me, my friend, you will never, on that account,
appear such. On the contrary, I take it to be the part of an heroic and
generous soul to prevent our friends with kindness and our enemies with
valour. Indeed, had I thought that Chaerephon had been more proper than
you to propose the reconciliation, I would have endeavoured to have
persuaded him to prevent you; but I take you to be more fit to manage
this matter, and believe you will bring it to pass rather than he." "What
you say is absurd and unworthy of you," replied Chaerecrates. "Would you
have me break the ice; I, who am the younger brother? Do you forget that
among all nations the honour to begin is reserved to the elder?" "How do
you mean?" said Socrates. "Must not a younger brother give the
precedency to the older? Must he not rise up when he comes in, give him
the best place, and hold his peace to let him speak? Delay, therefore,
no longer to do what I desire you; go and try to appease your brother. He
will receive you with open arms; it is enough that he is a friend to
honour, and of a generous temper, for as there is no readier way to gain
the goodwill of the mean and poor than by being liberal to them, so
nothing has more influence on the mind of a man of honour and note than
to treat him with respect and friendship." Chaerecrates objected: "But
when I have done what you say, if my brother should not be better
tempered, what then?" "What harm would it be to you?" said Socrates. "It
will show your goodness, and that you love him, and make him appear to be
ill-natured, and not deserving to be obliged by any man. But I am of
opinion this will not happen, and when he sees that you attack him with
civilities and good offices, I am certain he will endeavour to get the
better of you in so kind and generous a contention. You are now in the
most wretched condition imaginable. It is as if the hands which God has
given us reciprocally to aid each other were employed only to hinder one
another, or as if the feet, which by the divine providence were made to
assist each other to walk, were busied only in preventing one another
from going forward. Would it not, then, be a great ignorance, and at the
same time a great misfortune, to turn to our disadvantage what was made
only for our utility? Now, it is certain that God has given us brothers
only for our good; and that two brothers are a greater advantage to one
another than it can be to either of them to have two hands, two feet, two
eyes, and other the like members, which are double in our body, and which
Nature has designed as brothers. For the hands cannot at the same time
reach two things several fathoms distant from one another; the feet
cannot stretch themselves from the end of one fathom to another; the
eyes, which seem to discover from so far, cannot, at the same time, see
the fore and hind-part of one and the same object; but when two brothers
are good friends, no distance of place can hinder them from serving each
other."



