CHAPTER VIII. SOCRATES PERSUADES EUTHERUS TO ABANDON HIS FORMER WAY OF
LIVING, AND TO BETAKE HIMSELF TO SOME MORE USEFUL AND HONOURABLE
EMPLOYMENT.


Another time, meeting with Eutherus, one of his old friends, whom he had
not seen for a great while before, he inquired of him from whence he
came? "At present," answered Eutherus, "I come not from abroad; but
towards the end of the war I returned from a voyage I had made, for,
after having lost all the estate I had upon the frontiers, and my father
having left me nothing in Attica, I was forced to work for my living, and
I believe it better to do so than to be troublesome to others; besides, I
can no longer borrow anything, because I have nothing left to mortgage."
"And how much longer," said Socrates, "do you think you shall be able to
work for your living?" "Alas! but a short while," answered Eutherus.
"Nevertheless," replied Socrates, "when you come to be old it will cost
you something to maintain yourself, and yet you will not then be able to
earn anything." "You say very true." "You had best, then," continued
Socrates, "employ yourself now in business that will enable you to lay by
something for your old age, and get into the service of some rich man,
who has occasion for an economist, to have the inspection over his
workmen, to gather in his fruits, to preserve what belongs to him, that
he may reward you for the service you do him." "I should find it very
difficult," replied Eutherus, "to submit to be a slave." "Yet," said
Socrates, "the magistrates in republics, and all that are in employments,
are not, therefore, reputed slaves; on the contrary, they are esteemed
honourable." "Be that as it will," said Eutherus, "I can never think of
entering into any office where I might be liable to blame, for I would
not like to be censured by another." "But where," said Socrates, "will
you find any employment in which a man is absolutely perfect, and
altogether free from blame? For it is very difficult to be so exact as
not to fail sometimes, and even though we should not have failed, it is
hard to escape the censure of bad judges; and I should think it a very
odd and surprising thing if in that very employment wherein you say you
are now engaged you were so dexterous and expert as that no man should
find anything amiss.

"What you are, therefore, to observe is to avoid those who make it their
business to find fault without reason, and to have to do with more
equitable persons; to undertake what you can actually perform, to reject
what you find yourself unfit to do; and when you have taken in hand to do
anything, to accomplish it in a manner the most excellent and perfect you
can. Thus you will be less subject to be blamed, will find relief to
your poverty, lead an easier life, be out of danger, and will
sufficiently provide for the necessities of your old age."



CHAPTER IX. IN WHAT MANNER SOCRATES TAUGHT HIS FRIEND CRITO TO RID
HIMSELF OF SOME INFORMERS, WHO TOOK THE ADVANTAGE OF HIS EASY TEMPER.


One day Crito, happening to meet Socrates, complained to him that it was
very difficult for a man who would keep what he had to live in Athens;
"for," said he, "I am now sued by some men, though I never did them the
least injury, but only because they know that I had rather give them a
little money than embroil myself in the troubles of law." Socrates said
to him, "Do you keep dogs to hinder the wolves from coming at your
flocks?" "You need not doubt but I do," answered Crito. "Ought you not
likewise," replied Socrates, "to keep a man who were able to drive away
all those that trouble you without cause?" "I would with all my heart,"
said Crito, "but that I fear that in the end he, too, would turn against
me." "Why so?" said Socrates; "is it not better to serve a man like you,
and to receive favours from him, than to have him for an enemy? You may
be certain that there are in this city many men who would think
themselves very happy to be honoured with your friendship."

After this they happened to see a certain person name Archedemus, who was
a man of very good parts, eloquent, and extremely skilful in the
management of affairs; but withal very poor and in a low condition, for
he was not of that sordid disposition to take all he could get, by what
means soever, but he was a lover of justice and of honest men, and
abhorred to make rich, or to raise himself by informing and backbiting;
for he held that nothing was more base than that wretched practice of
those miscreants called sycophants or informers. Crito cast an eye upon
him, and as often as they brought him any corn, or wine, or oil, or any
other thing from his country-houses, he sent him some of it; when he
offered sacrifices he invited him to the feasts, and showed him many
civilities of the like nature. Archedemus, seeing the doors of that
house open to him at all times, and that he always found so favourable a
reception, laid aside all his former dependences, and trusted himself
wholly to Crito; then he made it his business immediately to inquire into
the characters of those sycophants who had slandered Crito or informed
against him, and found them to be guilty of many crimes, and that they
had a great number of enemies. This encouraged him to take them to task,
and he prosecuted one of them for a crime which would have subjected him
to a corporal punishment, or at least to a pecuniary mulct. This fellow,
who knew his case to be bad, and that he could not justify himself,
employed all sorts of stratagems to get rid of Archedemus, who
nevertheless would not quit his hold till the other had discharged Crito,
and given him money besides, in name of trouble and charges. He managed
several of his affairs with like success, which made Crito be thought
happy in having him; and as when a shepherd has an excellent dog, the
other shepherds are glad to bring their flocks near his that they may be
safe likewise, so several of Crito's friends began to make their court to
him, and begged him to lend them Archedemus to defend them. He, for his
part, was glad to oblige Crito; and it was observed at length that not
only Crito lived undisturbed, but all his friends likewise; and if any
one reproached Archedemus that self-interest had made him his master's
creature, and to adore him and be so faithful and zealous in his service
he would answer him thus:--"Which of the two do you think most
dishonourable--to do services to men of quality from whom we have
received favours, and to enter into their friendship to declare war
against bad men, or to endeavour to prejudice men of honour, and to make
them our enemies, that bad men may be our friends?" From thenceforward
Crito contracted a strict friendship with Archedemus, and all his friends
had likewise a great respect for him.



