CHAPTER IX

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION


I will bring this work to a close by a brief recapitulation of its more
salient points.

A dimension is defined as "an independent direction in space." A flat
surface is two-dimensional and the space we know is three-dimensional.
The direction of the fourth dimension must be at right angles to every
direction which can be drawn in our space and four-dimensional space is
such that through any point in it, four, and only four, lines can be
drawn mutually at right angles.

From every point in our space a line can be drawn running off in the
direction of four space.

Consequently every point in our space is absolutely accessible from the
direction of the fourth dimension.

The best way of drawing conclusions as to the properties of four space
is by means of the analogy of the two-dimensional world; since four
space is to three space as the latter is to two space.

The fact that we cannot perceive four space, or picture its nature to
ourselves, is no proof that it is non-existent.

I suggest as a working hypothesis that four space is a reality and
that Man possesses at least one other vehicle of Consciousness--a
four-dimensional one--besides his physical body. In this vehicle he is
embodied after discarding the physical vehicle at death and also during
temporary absences from the body during life.

This hypothesis is likely to prove of importance in two respects.
First, it provides Psychic Research with a working hypothesis which may
be essential to its development as a science. Secondly the adoption of
some such hypothesis should go far to remove the principle cause of
recent cleavage between Religious and Scientific thought.

The hypothesis is capable of throwing light on a number of "Psychic"
phenomena which are otherwise very obscure. It affords us a means of
conceiving a mode of existence which is real and yet imperceptible to
our senses, thus surmounting one of the chief difficulties in the way
of conceiving of post-mortem existence.

In the realm of Clairvoyance it enables us to form some idea of the
nature of the faculty of internal vision. With regard to Clairvoyance
in space, it also helps us to some slight extent, although this
phenomenon presents special difficulties of its own.

Other varieties of "out of the body" experiences are much elucidated by
its aid.

The phenomena with which it is most closely connected, however, are
those known under the general title of "apparent penetration of matter
by matter."

To these it affords by far the simplest and probably the only
explanation and, if they are regarded as irrefutably established, it
will be difficult to avoid the conclusion that four space is a reality.

The _locus classicus_ of such phenomena is the Slade-Zöllner
investigation, but this is worthless as evidence. The literature of the
subject abounds with records of similar occurrences.

The hypothesis also seems to offer a possible means of explaining the
paradoxical rigidity of the impalpable structure discovered by Crawford.

The hypothesis may also have a certain significance, even in the realm
of pure Philosophy. It enables us to conceive of the simultaneous
existence of a series of three space simultaneities and, consequently,
is of interest in the consideration of Time and of the possibility of
Prevision.

It also works in well with a certain view of the nature of Vitality.

As regards its relation to ordinary physical science, we find nothing
to conflict with it, but, on the contrary that there are a certain
number of indications that four space is, as I suggest, more than a
mere mathematical concept. It is possible that it may some day come to
be recognised as having some significance in the theory of the nature
of electrons and of ether, while recent views on "Relativity" strongly
indicate that Physicists will soon regard the four-dimensionality of
the Universe as a common place.

       *       *       *       *       *

If the four-dimensional hypothesis is correct there should exist
some sort of connecting link between the physical body and the
four-dimensional vehicle.

The function of this link would be to deflect sensory impressions
out of three space into four space thus enabling them to reach the
Consciousness resident in the latter. Such a link must therefore be,
in some way, intermediate between ordinary matter and four-dimensional
matter.

That is to say, it must possess some degree of four-dimensional
complexity. This may reasonably be supposed to endow it with peculiar
properties.

If such a connecting link be found to exist in practice, it would tend
to confirm the hypothesis.

The experiments of de Rochas, of Joire, of MacDougal, of Baraduc, of
Kilner, and of Crawford seem to indicate that such a connecting link
does, in fact, exist.

This is confirmed by the testimony of clairvoyants, which, though not
of a nature to be rated too highly or accepted lightly, should be
allowed some weight.

The attempt to formulate an hypothesis of this nature is not repugnant
to Religion. Nor is there anything in this particular hypothesis which
can be held to conflict with Religious doctrines.

On the other hand, the acceptance of such an hypothesis would cut the
ground from under the feet of those who seek to maintain that matter is
the only reality and that therefore Spirit and the Spiritual life are
mere illusions.

       *       *       *       *       *

No writer can expect to bring all his readers to his way of thinking.
Indeed it would be unfortunate if he were to do so, as the effect
would be to eliminate that element of critical discussion which is so
fruitful a source of progress.

Consequently, I do not anticipate that every reader will agree with
me. All I venture to hope is that I may have made good my contention
that the four-dimensional concepts, in spite of the scorn poured on
them as a result of the Zöllner fiasco, are worthy of very careful
consideration as a tentative working hypothesis by those who are
seeking to clear up the many obscure problems presented by Psychical
Research.

If this little book is thought worthy of criticism, I shall welcome
it. Its purpose will have been amply served if it succeeds in arousing
interest in what will prove, I believe, a very fruitful field of
speculation and research.




APPENDIX.


To illustrate how the analogy of the relation between two and
three-dimensional space enables us to determine some of the properties
of four-dimensional figures:


(1)

 "Any figure in a space of a given dimensionality generates a
 corresponding figure in the next higher space, by moving in a
 direction at right angles to any direction that can be drawn within
 itself.[7] Or, in general, space of any dimensionality generates, by
 such a movement, the next higher space."

Thus, the lowest sort of space is space of zero dimensions, _i.e._,
a mathematical point. If it moves a distance of one inch, it traces
out a Line one inch long--that is to say a one space "figure." If
this moves at right angles to itself for a distance of one inch, it
traces out a two space figure, viz., a square of side one inch. If this
again moves a distance of one inch in a direction at right angles to
every direction that can be drawn within it, that is, in a direction
perpendicular to itself, it traces out a cube of side one inch, _i.e._,
a three space figure or "solid."

We must, therefore, conclude, from analogy, that if the cube were
itself to move, a distance of one inch, in a direction at right angles
to every direction that can be drawn in our space--in the unknown
direction, that is, of the fourth dimension--it would generate a
"higher solid" of side one inch. The higher solid thus generated is
called a "Tesseract" and its properties are quite well known.


(2)

 "Every figure, in a space of a given dimensionality, contains an
 infinite number of the 'corresponding' figures--see (1)--in the next
 lower space."

Since a point is defined as having "position but no magnitude," it
follows that it would require an infinite number of points to make up a
line.

Similarly a line has length, but no breadth or thickness, and it would
therefore require an infinite number of lines laid side by side to make
up a surface.

Again a surface has, theoretically, no thickness, and it would
therefore require an infinite number of surfaces superimposed on one
another to make up a solid.

We must therefore conclude, by analogy, that it would require an
infinite number of solids to make up a "higher solid."

In particular, a Tesseract must be supposed to contain an infinite
number of cubes, and, in general, four space must be conceived of as
containing an infinite number of three spaces.


(3)

 "The Boundaries of a figure in a space of any dimensionality are
 themselves figures in the next lower space."

Thus a Line (one space) is bounded by Points (zero space).

A surface (two space) is bounded by Lines (one space).

A solid (three space) is bounded by Surfaces (two space).

We must conclude therefore that "higher solids" (four space) are
bounded by Solids (three space).

[Illustration: _Fig. 10_]

To take the special case with which we are already familiar. The line
AB, is bounded by the points A and B. (Fig. 10). The square, A B C D,
is bounded by four lines AB, BC, CD, DA. The cube, A B C D E F G H, is
bounded by six surfaces, namely, ABCD, CDEF, EFGH, GHAB, ADEH, BCFG.

Similarly we must conclude that a tesseract is bounded by cubes.

We shall see later that there are eight of them.


(4)

We may put (3) in a slightly different way, by saying that:

 "Two adjacent portions of space, of any dimensionality, are separated
 by a space of the next lower dimensionality."

The portions AB and BC of the line AC are separated by the point B.
(Fig. 11.) The portions ABEF and BCDE of the fig. ACDF are separated by
the line EB. The portions ABEFGHIM and BCDEMIKL of the solid ACDFGHKL
are separated by the surface BIME.

[Illustration: _Fig. 11_]

Similarly we must suppose that any two adjacent portions of four space
are separated by a three space figure.

Or, again, to alter it slightly, "any space is no more than a boundary
between two adjacent portions of the next higher space." Whence it
follows that the whole of our three space is but the boundary between
two adjacent portions of four space.


(5)

 "A tesseract, which is the four-dimensional analogue of the cube,
 is bounded by Eight cubes. It has Twenty-four plane square faces,
 Thirty-two linear edges, and Sixteen corner points."

This may at first sight seem difficult to grasp.

In reality however, it is quite simple.

We have only to remember that the tesseract is generated by the
movement of a cube, in a direction at right angles to every direction
that can be drawn in the cube, and that whenever a figure of a given
dimensionality moves thus it generates a figure of the next higher
dimensionality.

Thus every point in the cube will trace out a line, every line a
surface, and every surface a solid, and, since the distance moved is
equal to the length of the side of the cube, these surfaces will be
squares and the solids will be cubes.

But let us first consider the analogous case of the generation of the
cube by the movement of a square.

Let A B C D represent the original position of the square. It moves,
a distance equal to one of its sides, in a direction at right angles
to every direction that can be drawn within itself--at right angles,
_i.e._, to every one of its sides--and finally comes to rest in the
position E F G H.

[Illustration: _Fig. 12_]

Every side has traced out another square and we have, in addition, the
old square ABCD, with which we started and the new square EFGH, with
which we end.

Thus even if we had no idea how many sides, edges, and corners a cube
had we could deduce them.

We should say:--

Every side of the original square has traced out a new square--that
makes 4--and we also have the original square and the "final" square
making a total of 6. A cube, therefore, must be bounded by 6 square
surfaces.

Similarly we should reflect that the original square and the final
square have each 4 linear edges, making 8, and that each of the 4
corner points of the original square would trace out a line, making new
lines, and we would therefore conclude that a cube must have 8 + 4 = 12
edges.

Finally, since in a uniform motion no new points will be generated, we
should expect the cube to have a total of 8 corner points, _i.e._, the
four corners of the original square and the four corners of the final
square.

Now let us apply the same methods to the generation of the tesseract by
the movement of a cube.

Observe that just as in the case of the square generating the cube we
had the original square to start with and what I called the "final"
square to end up with, so, in this case, we shall start and end up with
a cube.

In the process of the movement every face of the cube will generate
a new cube--that means 6 new cubes, since the cube must have had 6
faces--and there will also be the original cube and the final cube,
making a total of 8 cubes all told. A tesseract must therefore be
bounded by 8 cubes.

Similarly each line of the original cube will trace out a square.
This, since a cube has 12 edges, gives us 12 new squares plus 6 from
the original and 6 from the final cube, or a total of 24. A tesseract
therefore has 24 plane square faces. Again each point of the original
cube will trace out a line, making 8 new lines, and there will also be
12 lines in the original and 12 in the final cube, making a total of 32.

Finally, there will be 8 points in the original cube and 8 in the final
cube, but none will have been produced on the way. So a tesseract will
therefore have 16 corner points.

There is no reason why this process should not be continued
indefinitely. For a tesseract may be supposed to move, in distance
equal to the length of one of its edges, in a direction not contained
in itself and will generate a _five_ dimensional figure, bounded by
ten tesseracts, and having in it 40 cubes, 80 squares, 80 lines, and
32 corner points. Thus a whole series of Higher Space figures may be
produced. But these are of little practical interest, and I shall not
deal with them here.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 7: NOTE.--The figures thus produced are not necessarily the
strict analogues of the figures which generate them. For instance a
circle, moving in a direction perpendicular to itself, would generate
a cylinder; whereas the three-dimensional analogue of a circle is a
sphere.]


  E. AUSTIN AND SON, LTD.,

  PRINTERS,

  --  CLIFTON, BRISTOL.  --




INDEX


  Anæsthesia, 146, 147

  Apologetics, Christian, 177

  Apport.
    Two-dimensional analogue of, 15, 16
    Discussion of evidence for, 62, 73 sqq.

  Astral plane, 35, 53

  Aura, 142, 143, 161


  Cantilever, Crawford's, 86-91, 145

  Carrington, Hereward, 71, 74, 77, 113-141

  Change--in a two dimensional world, 17, 20

  Clairvoyance, 42, 48

  Crawford, 86, 145, 147


  Death. Loss of weight at, 143

  Dimension. Definition of, 3

  Direct Voice, 62

  Disembodiment, cases of, 58, 150-154

  Dreams, 54, 55

  Electricity. Hinton's theories of, 127

  Etheric double, 35, 62, 147-148

  Energy, conservation of, 117, 120

  Ether. Hinton's analogy, 127

  Exteriorisation of Sensibility, 141


  Faith and Reason, 169

  Fatalism, 107-109

  Flatland, 7


  Geometry. Possible break down of, 124, 126


  Hair-trigger theory, 116, 141

  Hallucination, 50, 51

  Hypothesis. Need of, 24-38
    Valid, 29
    True, 29

  Hyslop, Dr., 77


  Internal Vision, 46-49


  Kilner, Dr., 142-143


  Levitation, 86, 91, 145

  Light. Theories, of 29, 30


  Materialists, 32, 176, 177

  Milan Committee, 83


  Occultists 32, 34

  One-dimensional space, 7


  Palladino, Eusapia, 74, 83

  Parallaxes, Negative, 126

  Peters, Dr., 83

  Phantasms, 52, 55, 57

  Pogorelsky, 84

  Poincaré, 124

  Postvision, 42, 52

  Prevision, 39, 42, 52, 103-107

  Psycho-analysis, 55


  Reason and Faith, 169

  Reichenbach, 140

  Relativity, 133-135

  Religion, 32, 168-180

  Richet, 31

  Rotation in four space, 129


  Sambor, 84

  Secondary personality, 41

  Sensibility. Exteriorisation of, 141

  Slade, 64, 73 sqq.

  Space. Objectivity of, 109-112

  Spectrum, 43

  Symmetry, 131-133


  Telekinesis, 39, 86

  Telepathy, 39, 41

  Television, 46, 48, 111

  Tesseract, 188, 189, 191

  Theologians, 32

  Theosophists, 35, 159, 160

  Time, 92-103
    Measurement of, 94
    Bergson's views on, 96, 98
    Subjective, 99

  Two-dimensional world, analogy of, 7 sqq.


  Ultra-violet light, 43, 144, 160


  Vitality, 113-141

  Vortices. Four-dimensional, 127


  Will, 113-141


  Zero-dimensional space, 7

  Zöllner, 1, 62, 73 sqq.

