CHAPTER V. THE POSITION OF WOMEN.


In the long series of moral revolutions that have been described in the
foregoing chapters, I have more than once had occasion to refer to the
position that was assigned to woman in the community, and to the virtues
and vices that spring directly from the relations of the sexes. I have
not, however, as yet discussed these questions with a fulness at all
corresponding to their historical importance, and I propose, in
consequence, before concluding this volume, to devote a few pages to their
examination. Of all the many questions that are treated in this work,
there is none which I approach with so much hesitation, for there is
probably none which it is so difficult to treat with clearness and
impartiality, and at the same time without exciting any scandal or
offence. The complexity of the problem, arising from the very large place
which exceptional institutions or circumstances, and especially the
influence of climate and race, have had on the chastity of nations, I have
already noticed, and the extreme delicacy of the matters with which this
branch of ethics is connected must be palpable to all. The first duty of
an historian, however, is to truth; and it is absolutely impossible to
present a true picture of the moral condition of different ages, and to
form a true estimate of the moral effects of different religions, without
adverting to the department of morals, which has exhibited most change,
and has probably exercised most influence.

It is natural that, in the period when men are still perfect barbarians,
when their habits of life are still nomadic, and when, war and the chase,
being their sole pursuits, the qualities that are required in these form
their chief measure of excellence, the inferiority of women to men should
be regarded as undoubted, and their position should be extremely degraded.
In all those qualities which are then most prized, women are indisputably
inferior. The social qualities in which they are especially fitted to
excel have no sphere for their display. The ascendancy of beauty is very
faint, and, even if it were otherwise, few traces of female beauty could
survive the hardships of the savage life. Woman is looked upon merely as
the slave of man, and as the minister to his passions. In the first
capacity, her life is one of continual, abject, and unrequited toil. In
the second capacity, she is exposed to all the violent revulsions of
feeling that follow, among rude men, the gratification of the animal
passions.

Even in this early stage, however, we may trace some rudiments of those
moral sentiments which are destined at a later period to expand. The
institution of marriage exists. The value of chastity is commonly in some
degree felt, and appears in the indignation which is displayed against the
adulterer. The duty of restraining the passions is largely recognised in
the female, though the males are only restricted by the prohibition of
adultery.

The first two steps which are taken towards the elevation of woman are
probably the abandonment of the custom of purchasing wives, and the
construction of the family on the basis of monogamy. In the earliest
periods of civilisation, the marriage contract was arranged between the
bridegroom and the father of the bride, on the condition of a sum of money
being paid by the former to the latter. This sum, which is known in the
laws of the barbarians as the “mundium,”(552) was in fact a payment to the
father for the cession of his daughter, who thus became the bought slave
of her husband. It is one of the most remarkable features of the ancient
laws of India, that they forbade this gift, on the ground that the parent
should not sell his child;(553) but there can be little doubt that this
sale was at one time the ordinary type of marriage. In the Jewish writings
we find Jacob purchasing Leah and Rachel by certain services to their
father; and this custom, which seems to have been at one time general in
Judea,(554) appears in the age of Homer to have been general in Greece. At
an early period, however, of Greek history, the purchase-money was
replaced by the dowry, or sum of money paid by the father of the bride for
the use of his daughter;(555) and this, although it passed into the hands
of the husband, contributed to elevate the wife, in the first place, by
the dignity it gave her, and, in the next place, by special laws, which
both in Greece and Rome secured it to her in most cases of
separation.(556) The wife thus possessed a guarantee against ill-usage by
her husband. She ceased to be his slave, and became in some degree a
contracting party. Among the early Germans, a different and very
remarkable custom existed. The bride did not bring any dowry to her
husband, nor did the bridegroom give anything to the father of the bride;
but he gave his gift to the bride herself, on the morning after the first
night of marriage, and this, which was called the “Morgengab,” or morning
gift, was the origin of the jointure.(557)

Still more important than the foregoing was the institution of monogamy,
by which, from its earliest days, the Greek civilisation proclaimed its
superiority to the Asiatic civilisations that had preceded it. We may
regard monogamy either in the light of our intuitive moral sentiment on
the subject of purity, or in the light of the interests of society. In its
Oriental or polygamous stage, marriage is regarded almost exclusively, in
its lowest aspect, as a gratification of the passions; while in European
marriages the mutual attachment and respect of the contracting parties,
the formation of a household, and the long train of domestic feelings and
duties that accompany it, have all their distinguished place among the
motives of the contract, and the lower element has comparatively little
prominence. In this way it may be intelligibly said, without any reference
to utilitarian considerations, that monogamy is a higher state than
polygamy. The utilitarian arguments in its defence are also extremely
powerful, and may be summed up in three sentences. Nature, by making the
number of males and females nearly equal, indicates it as natural. In no
other form of marriage can the government of the family, which is one of
the chief ends of marriage, be so happily sustained, and in no other does
woman assume the position of the equal of man.

Monogamy was the general system in Greece, though there are said to have
been slight and temporary deviations into the earlier system, after some
great disasters, when an increase of population was ardently desired.(558)
A broad line must, however, be drawn between the legendary or poetical
period, as reflected in Homer and perpetuated in the tragedians, and the
later historical period. It is one of the most remarkable, and to some
writers one of the most perplexing, facts in the moral history of Greece,
that in the former and ruder period women had undoubtedly the highest
place, and their type exhibited the highest perfection. Moral ideas, in a
thousand forms, have been sublimated, enlarged, and changed, by advancing
civilisation; but it may be fearlessly asserted that the types of female
excellence which are contained in the Greek poems, while they are among
the earliest, are also among the most perfect in the literature of
mankind. The conjugal tenderness of Hector and Andromache; the unwearied
fidelity of Penelope, awaiting through the long revolving years the return
of her storm-tossed husband, who looked forward to her as to the crown of
all his labours; the heroic love of Alcestis, voluntarily dying that her
husband might live; the filial piety of Antigone; the majestic grandeur of
the death of Polyxena; the more subdued and saintly resignation of
Iphigenia, excusing with her last breath the father who had condemned her;
the joyous, modest, and loving Nausicaa, whose figure shines like a
perfect idyll among the tragedies of the Odyssey—all these are pictures of
perennial beauty, which Rome and Christendom, chivalry and modern
civilisation, have neither eclipsed nor transcended. Virgin modesty and
conjugal fidelity, the graces as well as the virtues of the most perfect
womanhood, have never been more exquisitely pourtrayed. The female figures
stand out in the canvas almost as prominently as the male ones, and are
surrounded by an almost equal reverence. The whole history of the Siege of
Troy is a history of the catastrophes that followed a violation of the
nuptial tie. Yet, at the same time, the position of women was in some
respects a degraded one. The custom of purchase-money given to the father
of the bride was general. The husbands appear to have indulged largely,
and with little or no censure, in concubines.(559) Female captives of the
highest rank were treated with great harshness. The inferiority of women
to men was strongly asserted, and it was illustrated and defended by a
very curious physiological notion, that the generative power belonged
exclusively to men, women having only a very subordinate part in the
production of their children.(560) The woman Pandora was said to have been
the author of all human ills.

In the historical age of Greece, the legal position of women had in some
respects slightly improved, but their moral condition had undergone a
marked deterioration. Virtuous women lived a life of perfect seclusion.
The foremost and most dazzling type of Ionic womanhood was the courtesan,
while, among the men, the latitude accorded by public opinion was almost
unrestricted.

The facts in moral history, which it is at once most important and most
difficult to appreciate, are what may be called the facts of feeling. It
is much easier to show what men did or taught than to realise the state of
mind that rendered possible such actions or teaching; and in the case
before us we have to deal with a condition of feeling so extremely remote
from that of our own day, that the difficulty is preeminently great. Very
sensual, and at the same time very brilliant societies, have indeed
repeatedly existed, and the histories of both France and Italy afford many
examples of an artistic and intellectual enthusiasm encircling those who
were morally most frail; but the peculiarity of Greek sensuality is, that
it grew up, for the most part, uncensured, and indeed even encouraged,
under the eyes of some of the most illustrious of moralists. If we can
imagine Ninon de l’Enclos at a time when the rank and splendour of
Parisian society thronged her drawing-rooms, reckoning a Bossuet or a
Fénelon among her followers—if we can imagine these prelates publicly
advising her about the duties of her profession, and the means of
attaching the affections of her lovers—we shall have conceived a relation
scarcely more strange than that which existed between Socrates and the
courtesan Theodota.

In order to reconstruct, as far as possible, the modes of feeling of the
Greek moralists, it will be necessary in the first place to say a few
words concerning one of the most delicate, but at the same time most
important, problems with which the legislator and the moralist have to
deal.

It was a favourite doctrine of the Christian Fathers, that concupiscence,
or the sensual passion, was “the original sin” of human nature; and it
must be owned that the progress of knowledge, which is usually extremely
opposed to the ascetic theory of life, concurs with the theological view,
in showing the natural force of this appetite to be far greater than the
well-being of man requires. The writings of Malthus have proved, what the
Greek moralists appear in a considerable degree to have seen, that its
normal and temperate exercise in the form of marriage, would produce, if
universal, the utmost calamities to the world, and that, while nature
seems in the most unequivocal manner to urge the human race to early
marriages, the first condition of an advancing civilisation in populous
countries is to restrain or diminish them. In no highly civilised society
is marriage general on the first development of the passions, and the
continual tendency of increasing knowledge is to render such marriages
more rare. It is also an undoubted truth that, however much moralists may
enforce the obligation of extra-matrimonial purity, this obligation has
never been even approximately regarded; and in all nations, ages, and
religions a vast mass of irregular indulgence has appeared, which has
probably contributed more than any other single cause to the misery and
the degradation of man.

There are two ends which a moralist, in dealing with this question, will
especially regard—the natural duty of every man doing something for the
support of the child he has called into existence, and the preservation of
the domestic circle unassailed and unpolluted. The family is the centre
and the archetype of the State, and the happiness and goodness of society
are always in a very great degree dependent upon the purity of domestic
life. The essentially exclusive nature of marital affection, and the
natural desire of every man to be certain of the paternity of the child he
supports, render the incursions of irregular passions within the domestic
circle a cause of extreme suffering. Yet it would appear as if the
excessive force of these passions would render such incursions both
frequent and inevitable.

Under these circumstances, there has arisen in society a figure which is
certainly the most mournful, and in some respects the most awful, upon
which the eye of the moralist can dwell. That unhappy being whose very
name is a shame to speak; who counterfeits with a cold heart the
transports of affection, and submits herself as the passive instrument of
lust; who is scorned and insulted as the vilest of her sex, and doomed,
for the most part, to disease and abject wretchedness and an early death,
appears in every age as the perpetual symbol of the degradation and the
sinfulness of man. Herself the supreme type of vice, she is ultimately the
most efficient guardian of virtue. But for her, the unchallenged purity of
countless happy homes would be polluted, and not a few who, in the pride
of their untempted chastity, think of her with an indignant shudder, would
have known the agony of remorse and of despair. On that one degraded and
ignoble form are concentrated the passions that might have filled the
world with shame. She remains, while creeds and civilisations rise and
fall, the eternal priestess of humanity, blasted for the sins of the
people.

In dealing with this unhappy being, and with all of her sex who have
violated the law of chastity, the public opinion of most Christian
countries pronounces a sentence of extreme severity. In the Anglo-Saxon
nations especially, a single fault of this kind is sufficient, at least in
the upper and middle classes, to affix an indelible brand which no time,
no virtues, no penitence can wholly efface. This sentence is probably, in
the first instance, simply the expression of the religious feeling on the
subject, but it is also sometimes defended by powerful arguments drawn
from the interests of society. It is said that the preservation of
domestic purity is a matter of such transcendent importance that it is
right that the most crushing penalties should be attached to an act which
the imagination can easily transfigure, which legal enactments can never
efficiently control, and to which the most violent passions may prompt. It
is said, too, that an anathema which drives into obscurity all evidences
of sensual passions is peculiarly fitted to restrict their operation; for,
more than any other passions, they are dependent on the imagination, which
is readily fired by the sight of evil. It is added, that the emphasis with
which the vice is stigmatised produces a corresponding admiration for the
opposite virtue, and that a feeling of the most delicate and scrupulous
honour is thus formed among the female population, which not only
preserves from gross sin, but also dignifies and ennobles the whole
character.

In opposition to these views, several considerations of much weight have
been urged. It is argued that, however persistently society may ignore
this form of vice, it exists nevertheless, and on the most gigantic scale,
and that evil rarely assumes such inveterate and perverting forms as when
it is shrouded in obscurity and veiled by an hypocritical appearance of
unconsciousness. The existence in England of certainly not less than fifty
thousand unhappy women,(561) sunk in the very lowest depths of vice and
misery, shows sufficiently what an appalling amount of moral evil is
festering uncontrolled, undiscussed, and unalleviated, under the fair
surface of a decorous society. In the eyes of every physician, and indeed
in the eyes of most continental writers who have adverted to the subject,
no other feature of English life appears so infamous as the fact that an
epidemic, which is one of the most dreadful now existing among mankind,
which communicates itself from the guilty husband to the innocent wife,
and even transmits its taint to her offspring, and which the experience of
other nations conclusively proves may be vastly diminished, should be
suffered to rage unchecked because the Legislature refuses to take
official cognisance of its existence, or proper sanitary measures for its
repression.(562) If the terrible censure which English public opinion
passes upon every instance of female frailty in some degree diminishes the
number, it does not prevent such instances from being extremely numerous,
and it immeasurably aggravates the suffering they produce. Acts which in
other European countries would excite only a slight and transient emotion,
spread in England, over a wide circle, all the bitterness of unmitigated
anguish. Acts which naturally neither imply nor produce a total subversion
of the moral feelings, and which, in other countries, are often followed
by happy, virtuous, and affectionate lives, in England almost invariably
lead to absolute ruin. Infanticide is greatly multiplied, and a vast
proportion of those whose reputations and lives have been blasted by one
momentary sin, are hurled into the abyss of habitual prostitution—a
condition which, owing to the sentence of public opinion and the neglect
of legislators, is in no other European country so hopelessly vicious or
so irrevocable.(563)

It is added, too, that the immense multitude who are thus doomed to the
extremity of life-long wretchedness are not always, perhaps not generally,
of those whose dispositions seem naturally incapable of virtue. The
victims of seduction are often led aside quite as much by the ardour of
their affections, and by the vivacity of their intelligence, as by any
vicious propensities.(564) Even in the lowest grades, the most
dispassionate observers have detected remains of higher feelings, which,
in a different moral atmosphere, and under different moral husbandry,
would have undoubtedly been developed.(565) The statistics of prostitution
show that a great proportion of those who have fallen into it have been
impelled by the most extreme poverty, in many instances verging upon
starvation.(566)

These opposing considerations, which I have very briefly indicated, and
which I do not propose to discuss or to estimate, will be sufficient to
exhibit the magnitude of the problem. In the Greek civilisation,
legislators and moralists endeavoured to meet it by the cordial
recognition of two distinct orders of womanhood(567)—the wife, whose first
duty was fidelity to her husband; the hetæra, or mistress, who subsisted
by her fugitive attachments. The wives of the Greeks lived in almost
absolute seclusion. They were usually married when very young. Their
occupations were to weave, to spin, to embroider, to superintend the
household, to care for their sick slaves. They lived in a special and
retired part of the house. The more wealthy seldom went abroad, and never
except when accompanied by a female slave; never attended the public
spectacles; received no male visitors except in the presence of their
husbands, and had not even a seat at their own tables when male guests
were there. Their pre-eminent virtue was fidelity, and it is probable that
this was very strictly and very generally observed. Their remarkable
freedom from temptations, the public opinion which strongly discouraged
any attempt to seduce them, and the ample sphere for illicit pleasures
that was accorded to the other sex, all contributed to protect it. On the
other hand, living, as they did, almost exclusively among their female
slaves, being deprived of all the educating influence of male society, and
having no place at those public spectacles which were the chief means of
Athenian culture, their minds must necessarily have been exceedingly
contracted. Thucydides doubtless expressed the prevailing sentiment of his
countrymen when he said that the highest merit of woman is not to be
spoken of either for good or for evil; and Phidias illustrated the same
feeling when he represented the heavenly Aphrodite standing on a tortoise,
typifying thereby the secluded life of a virtuous woman.(568)

In their own restricted sphere their lives were probably not unhappy.
Education and custom rendered the purely domestic life that was assigned
to them a second nature, and it must in most instances have reconciled
them to the extra-matrimonial connections in which their husbands too
frequently indulged. The prevailing manners were very gentle. Domestic
oppression is scarcely ever spoken of; the husband lived chiefly in the
public place; causes of jealousy and of dissension could seldom occur; and
a feeling of warm affection, though not a feeling of equality, must
doubtless have in most cases spontaneously arisen. In the writings of
Xenophon we have a charming picture of a husband who had received into his
arms his young wife of fifteen, absolutely ignorant of the world and of
its ways. He speaks to her with extreme kindness, but in the language that
would be used to a little child. Her task, he tells her, is to be like a
queen bee, dwelling continually at home and superintending the work of her
slaves. She must distribute to each their tasks, must economise the family
income, and must take especial care that the house is strictly orderly—the
shoes, the pots, and the clothes always in their places. It is also, he
tells her, a part of her duty to tend her sick slaves; but here his wife
interrupted him, exclaiming, “Nay, but that will indeed be the most
agreeable of my offices, if such as I treat with kindness are likely to be
grateful, and to love me more than before.” With a very tender and
delicate care to avoid everything resembling a reproach, the husband
persuades his wife to give up the habits of wearing high-heeled boots, in
order to appear tall, and of colouring her face with vermilion and white
lead. He promises her that if she faithfully performs her duties he will
himself be the first and most devoted of her slaves. He assured Socrates
that when any domestic dispute arose he could extricate himself admirably,
if he was in the right; but that, whenever he was in the wrong, he found
it impossible to convince his wife that it was otherwise.(569)

We have another picture of Greek married life in the writings of Plutarch,
but it represents the condition of the Greek mind at a later period than
that of Xenophon. In Plutarch the wife is represented not as the mere
housekeeper, or as the chief slave of her husband, but as his equal and
his companion. He enforces, in the strongest terms, reciprocity of
obligations, and desires that the minds of women should be cultivated to
the highest point.(570) His precepts of marriage, indeed, fall little if
at all below any that have appeared in modern days. His letter of
consolation to his wife, on the death of their child, breathes a spirit of
the tenderest affection. It is recorded of him that, having had some
dispute with the relations of his wife, she feared that it might impair
their domestic happiness, and she accordingly persuaded her husband to
accompany her on a pilgrimage to Mount Helicon, where they offered up
together a sacrifice to Love, and prayed that their affection for one
another might never be diminished.

In general, however, the position of the virtuous Greek woman was a very
low one. She was under a perpetual tutelage: first of all to her parents,
who disposed of her hand, then to her husband, and in her days of
widowhood to her sons. In cases of inheritance her male relations were
preferred to her. The privilege of divorce, which, in Athens, at least,
she possessed as well as her husband, appears to have been practically
almost nugatory, on account of the shock which public declarations in the
law court gave to the habits which education and public opinion had
formed. She brought with her, however, a dowry, and the recognised
necessity of endowing daughters was one of the causes of those frequent
expositions which were perpetrated with so little blame. The Athenian law
was also peculiarly careful and tender in dealing with the interests of
female orphans.(571) Plato had argued that women were equal to men; but
the habits of the people were totally opposed to this theory. Marriage was
regarded chiefly in a civic light, as the means of producing citizens, and
in Sparta it was ordered that old or infirm husbands should cede their
young wives to stronger men, who could produce vigorous soldiers for the
State. The Lacedæmonian treatment of women, which differed in many
respects from that which prevailed in the other Greek States, while it was
utterly destructive of all delicacy of feeling or action, had undoubtedly
the effect of producing a fierce and masculine patriotism; and many fine
examples are recorded of Spartan mothers devoting their sons on the altar
of their country, rejoicing over their deaths when nobly won, and infusing
their own heroic spirit into the armies of the people. For the most part,
however, the names of virtuous women seldom appear in Greek history. The
simple modesty which was evinced by Phocion’s wife, in the period when her
husband occupied the foremost position in Athens,(572) and a few instances
of conjugal and filial affection, have been recorded; but in general the
only women who attracted the notice of the people were the hetæræ, or
courtesans.(573)

In order to understand the position which these last assumed in Greek
life, we must transport ourselves in thought into a moral latitude totally
different from our own. The Greek conception of excellence was the full
and perfect development of humanity in all its organs and functions, and
without any tinge of asceticism. Some parts of human nature were
recognised as higher than others; and to suffer any of the lower appetites
to obscure the mind, restrain the will and engross the energies of life,
was acknowledged to be disgraceful; but the systematic repression of a
natural appetite was totally foreign to Greek modes of thought.
Legislators, moralists, and the general voice of the people, appear to
have applied these principles almost unreservedly to intercourse between
the sexes, and the most virtuous men habitually and openly entered into
relations which would now be almost universally censured.

The experience, however, of many societies has shown that a public opinion
may accord, in this respect, almost unlimited licence to one sex, without
showing any corresponding indulgence to the other. But, in Greece, a
concurrence of causes had conspired to bring a certain section of
courtesans into a position they have in no other society attained. The
voluptuous worship of Aphrodite gave a kind of religious sanction to their
profession. Courtesans were the priestesses in her temples, and those of
Corinth were believed by their prayers to have averted calamities from
their city. Prostitution is said to have entered into the religious rites
of Babylon, Biblis, Cyprus, and Corinth, and these as well as Miletus,
Tenedos, Lesbos, and Abydos became famous for their schools of vice, which
grew up under the shadow of the temples.(574)

In the next place, the intense æsthetic enthusiasm that prevailed was
eminently fitted to raise the most beautiful to honour. In a land and
beneath a sky where natural beauty developed to the highest point, there
arose a school of matchless artists both in painting and in sculpture, and
public games and contests were celebrated, in which supreme physical
perfection was crowned by an assembled people. In no other period of the
world’s history was the admiration of beauty in all its forms so
passionate or so universal. It coloured the whole moral teaching of the
time, and led the chief moralists to regard virtue simply as the highest
kind of supersensual beauty. It appeared in all literature, where the
beauty of form and style was the first of studies. It supplied at once the
inspiration and the rule of all Greek art. It led the Greek wife to pray,
before all other prayers, for the beauty of her children. It surrounded
the most beautiful with an aureole of admiring reverence. The courtesan
was often the queen of beauty. She was the model of the statues of
Aphrodite, that commanded the admiration of Greece. Praxiteles was
accustomed to reproduce the form of Phryne, and her statue, carved in
gold, stood in the temple of Apollo at Delphi; and when she was accused of
corrupting the youth of Athens, her advocate, Hyperides, procured her
acquittal by suddenly unveiling her charms before the dazzled eyes of the
assembled judges. Apelles was at once the painter and the lover of Laïs,
and Alexander gave him, as the choicest gift, his own favourite concubine,
of whom the painter had become enamoured while pourtraying her. The chief
flower-painter of antiquity acquired his skill through his love of the
flower-girl Glycera, whom he was accustomed to paint among her garlands.
Pindar and Simonides sang the praises of courtesans, and grave
philosophers made pilgrimages to visit them, and their names were known in
every city.(575)

It is not surprising that, in such a state of thought and feeling, many of
the more ambitious and accomplished women should have betaken themselves
to this career, nor yet that they should have attained the social position
which the secluded existence and the enforced ignorance of the Greek wives
had left vacant. The courtesan was the one free woman of Athens, and she
often availed herself of her freedom to acquire a degree of knowledge
which enabled her to add to her other charms an intense intellectual
fascination. Gathering around her the most brilliant artists, poets,
historians, and philosophers, she flung herself unreservedly into the
intellectual and æsthetic enthusiasms of her time, and soon became the
centre of a literary society of matchless splendour. Aspasia, who was as
famous for her genius as for her beauty, won the passionate love of
Pericles. She is said to have instructed him in eloquence, and to have
composed some of his most famous orations; she was continually consulted
on affairs of state; and Socrates, like other philosophers, attended her
assemblies. Socrates himself has owned his deep obligations to the
instructions of a courtesan named Diotima. The courtesan Leontium was
among the most ardent disciples of Epicurus.(576)

Another cause probably contributed indirectly to the elevation of this
class, to which it is extremely difficult to allude in an English book,
but which it is impossible altogether to omit, even in the most cursory
survey of Greek morals. Irregular female connections were looked upon as
ordinary and not disgraceful incidents in the life of a good man, for they
were compared with that lower abyss of unnatural love, which was the
deepest and strangest taint of Greek civilisation. This vice, which never
appears in the writings of Homer and Hesiod, doubtless arose under the
influence of the public games, which, accustoming men to the contemplation
of absolutely nude figures,(577) awoke an unnatural passion,(578) totally
remote from all modern feelings, but which in Greece it was regarded as
heroic to resist.(579) The popular religion in this, as in other cases,
was made to bend to the new vice. Hebe, the cup-bearer of the gods, was
replaced by Ganymede, and the worst vices of earth were transported to
Olympus.(580) Artists sought to reflect the passion in their statues of
the Hermaphrodite, of Bacchus, and the more effeminate Apollo; moralists
were known to praise it as the bond of friendship, and it was spoken of as
the inspiring enthusiasm of the heroic Theban legion of Epaminondas.(581)
In general, however, it was stigmatised as unquestionably a vice, but it
was treated with a levity we can now hardly conceive. We can scarcely have
a better illustration of the extent to which moral ideas and feelings have
changed, than the fact that the first two Greeks who were considered
worthy of statues by their fellow-countrymen are said to have been
Harmodius and Aristogeiton, who were united by an impure love, and who
were glorified for a political assassination.(582)

It is probable that this cause conspired with the others to dissociate the
class of courtesans from the idea of supreme depravity with which they
have usually been connected. The great majority, however, were sunk in
this, as in all other ages, in abject degradation;(583) comparatively few
attained the condition of hetæræ, and even of these it is probable that
the greater number exhibited the characteristics which in all ages have
attached to their class. Faithlessness, extreme rapacity, and extravagant
luxury, were common among them; but yet it is unquestionable that there
were many exceptions. The excommunication of society did not press upon or
degrade them; and though they were never regarded with the same honour as
married women, it seems generally to have been believed that the wife and
the courtesan had each her place and her function in the world, and her
own peculiar type of excellence. The courtesan Leæna, who was a friend of
Harmodius, died in torture rather than reveal the conspiracy of her
friend, and the Athenians, in allusion to her name, caused the statue of a
tongueless lioness to be erected to commemorate her constancy.(584) The
gentle manners and disinterested affection of a courtesan named Bacchis
were especially recorded, and a very touching letter paints her character,
and describes the regret that followed her to the tomb.(585) In one of the
most remarkable of his pictures of Greek life, Xenophon describes how
Socrates, having heard of the beauty of the courtesan Theodota, went with
his disciples to ascertain for himself whether the report was true; how
with a quiet humour he questioned her about the sources of the luxury of
her dwelling, and how he proceeded to sketch for her the qualities she
should cultivate in order to attach her lovers. She ought, he tells her,
to shut the door against the insolent, to watch her lovers in sickness, to
rejoice greatly when they succeed in anything honourable, to love tenderly
those who love her. Having carried on a cheerful and perfectly
unembarrassed conversation with her, with no kind of reproach on his part,
either expressed or implied, and with no trace either of the timidity or
effrontery of conscious guilt upon hers, the best and wisest of the Greeks
left his hostess with a graceful compliment to her beauty.(586)

My task in describing this aspect of Greek life has been an eminently
unpleasing one, and I should certainly not have entered upon even the
baldest and most guarded disquisition on a subject so difficult, painful,
and delicate, had it not been absolutely indispensable to a history of
morals to give at least an outline of the progress that has been effected
in this sphere. What I have written will sufficiently explain why Greece,
which was fertile, beyond all other lands, in great men, was so remarkably
barren of great women. It will show, too, that while the Greek moralists
recognised, like ourselves, the distinction between the higher and the
lower sides of our nature, they differed very widely from modern public
opinion in the standard of morals they enforced. The Christian doctrine,
that it is criminal to gratify a powerful and a transient physical
appetite, except under the condition of a lifelong contract, was
altogether unknown. Strict duties were imposed upon Greek wives. Duties
were imposed at a later period, though less strictly, upon the husband.
Unnatural love was stigmatised, but with a levity of censure which to a
modern mind appears inexpressibly revolting. Some slight legal
disqualifications rested upon the whole class of hetæræ, and, though more
admired, they were less respected than women who had adopted a domestic
life; but a combination of circumstances had raised them, in actual worth
and in popular estimation, to an unexampled elevation, and an aversion to
marriage became very general, and extra-matrimonial connections were
formed with the most perfect frankness and publicity.

If we now turn to the Roman civilisation, we shall find that some
important advances had been made in the condition of women. The virtue of
chastity has, as I have shown, been regarded in two different ways. The
utilitarian view, which commonly prevails in countries where a political
spirit is more powerful than a religious spirit, regards marriage as the
ideal state, and to promote the happiness, sanctity, and security of this
state is the main object of all its precepts. The mystical view which
rests upon the natural feeling of shame, and which, as history proves, has
prevailed especially where political sentiment is very low, and religious
sentiment very strong, regards virginity as its supreme type, and marriage
as simply the most pardonable declension from ideal purity. It is, I
think, a very remarkable fact, that at the head of the religious system of
Rome we find two sacerdotal bodies which appear respectively to typify
these ideas. The Flamens of Jupiter and the Vestal Virgins were the two
most sacred orders in Rome. The ministrations of each were believed to be
vitally important to the State. Each could officiate only within the walls
of Rome. Each was appointed with the most imposing ceremonies. Each was
honoured with the most profound reverence. But in one important respect
they differed. The Vestal was the type of virginity, and her purity was
guarded by the most terrific penalties. The Flamen, on the other hand, was
the representative of Roman marriage in its strictest and holiest form. He
was necessarily married. His marriage was celebrated with the most solemn
rites. It could only be dissolved by death. If his wife died, he was
degraded from his office.(587)

Of these two orders, there can be no question that the Flamen was the most
faithful expression of the Roman sentiments. The Roman religion was
essentially domestic, and it was a main object of the legislator to
surround marriage with every circumstance of dignity and solemnity.
Monogamy was, from the earliest times, strictly enjoined; and it was one
of the great benefits that have resulted from the expansion of Roman
power, that it made this type dominant in Europe. In the legends of early
Rome we have ample evidence both of the high moral estimate of women, and
of their prominence in Roman life. The tragedies of Lucretia and of
Virginia display a delicacy of honour, a sense of the supreme excellence
of unsullied purity, which no Christian nation could surpass. The legends
of the Sabine women interceding between their parents and their husbands,
and thus saving the infant republic, and of the mother of Coriolanus
averting by her prayers the ruin impending over her country, entitled
women to claim their share in the patriotic glories of Rome. A temple of
Venus Calva was associated with the legend of Roman ladies, who, in an
hour of danger, cut off their long tresses to make bowstrings for the
soldiers.(588) Another temple preserved to all posterity the memory of the
filial piety of that Roman woman who, when her mother was condemned to be
starved to death, obtained permission to visit her in her prison, and was
discovered feeding her from her breast.(589)

The legal position, however, of the Roman wife was for a long period
extremely low. The Roman family was constituted on the principle of the
uncontrolled authority of its head, both over his wife and over his
children, and he could repudiate the former at will. Neither the custom of
gifts to the father of the bride, nor the custom of dowries, appears to
have existed in the earliest period of Roman history; but the father
disposed absolutely of the hand of his daughter, and sometimes even
possessed the power of breaking off marriages that had been actually
contracted.(590) In the forms of marriage, however, which were usual in
the earlier periods of Rome, the absolute power passed into the hands of
the husband, and he had the right, in some cases, of putting her to
death.(591) Law and public opinion combined in making matrimonial purity
most strict. For five hundred and twenty years, it was said, there was no
such thing as a divorce in Rome.(592) Manners were so severe, that a
senator was censured for indecency because he had kissed his wife in the
presence of their daughter.(593) It was considered in a high degree
disgraceful for a Roman mother to delegate to a nurse the duty of suckling
her child.(594) Sumptuary laws regulated with the most minute severity all
the details of domestic economy.(595) The courtesan class, though probably
numerous and certainly uncontrolled, were regarded with much contempt. The
disgrace of publicly professing themselves members of it was believed to
be a sufficient punishment;(596) and an old law, which was probably
intended to teach in symbol the duties of married life, enjoined that no
such person should touch the altar of Juno.(597) It was related of a
certain ædile, that he failed to obtain redress for an assault which had
been made upon him, because it had occurred in a house of ill-fame, in
which it was disgraceful for a Roman magistrate to be found.(598) The
sanctity of female purity was believed to be attested by all nature. The
most savage animals became tame before a virgin.(599) When a woman walked
naked round a field, caterpillars and all loathsome insects fell dead
before her.(600) It was said that drowned men floated on their backs, and
drowned women on their faces; and this, in the opinion of Roman
naturalists, was due to the superior purity of the latter.(601)

It was a remark of Aristotle, that the superiority of the Greeks to the
barbarians was shown, among other things, in the fact that the Greeks did
not, like other nations, regard their wives as slaves, but treated them as
helpmates and companions. A Roman writer has appealed, on the whole with
greater justice, to the treatment of wives by his fellow countrymen, as a
proof of the superiority of Roman to Greek civilisation. He has observed
that while the Greeks kept their wives in a special quarter in the
interior of their houses, and never permitted them to sit at banquets
except with their relatives, or to see any male except in the presence of
a relative, no Roman ever hesitated to lead his wife with him to the
feast, or to place the mother of the family at the head of his table.(602)
Whether, in the period when wives were completely subject to the rule of
their husbands, much domestic oppression occurred, it is now impossible to
say. A temple dedicated to a goddess named Viriplaca, whose mission was to
appease husbands, was worshipped by Roman women on the Palatine;(603) and
a strange and improbable, if not incredible story, is related by Livy, of
the discovery during the Republic, of a vast conspiracy by Roman wives to
poison their husbands.(604) On the whole, however, it is probable that the
Roman matron was from the earliest period a name of honour;(605) that the
beautiful sentence of a jurisconsult of the Empire, who defined marriage
as a lifelong fellowship of all divine and human rights,(606) expressed
most faithfully the feelings of the people, and that female virtue had in
every age a considerable place in Roman biographies.(607)

I have already enumerated the chief causes of that complete dissolution of
Roman morals which began shortly after the Punic wars, which contributed
very largely to the destruction of the Republic, and which attained its
climax under the Cæsars. There are few examples in history of a revolution
pervading so completely every sphere of religious, domestic, social, and
political life. Philosophical scepticism corroded the ancient religions.
An inundation of Eastern luxury and Eastern morals submerged all the old
habits of austere simplicity. The civil wars and the Empire degraded the
character of the people, and the exaggerated prudery of republican manners
only served to make the rebound into vice the more irresistible. In the
fierce outburst of ungovernable and almost frantic depravity that marked
this evil period, the violations of female virtue were infamously
prominent. The vast multiplication of slaves, which is in every age
peculiarly fatal to moral purity; the fact that a great proportion of
those slaves were chosen from the most voluptuous provinces of the Empire;
the games of Flora, in which races of naked courtesans were exhibited; the
pantomimes, which derived their charms chiefly from the audacious
indecencies of the actors; the influx of the Greek and Asiatic hetæræ who
were attracted by the wealth of the metropolis; the licentious paintings
which began to adorn every house; the rise of Baiæ, which rivalled the
luxury and surpassed the beauty of the chief centres of Asiatic vice,
combining with the intoxication of great wealth suddenly acquired, with
the disruption, through many causes, of all the ancient habits and
beliefs, and with the tendency to pleasure which the closing of the paths
of honourable political ambition by the imperial despotism, naturally
produced, had all their part in preparing those orgies of vice which the
writers of the Empire reveal. Most scholars will, I suppose, retain a
vivid recollection of the new insight into the extent and wildness of
human guilt which they obtained when they first opened the pages of
Suetonius or Lampridius; and the sixth Satire of Juvenal paints with a
fierce energy, though probably with the natural exaggeration of a
satirist, the extent to which corruption had spread among the women. It
was found necessary, under Tiberius, to make a special law prohibiting
members of noble houses from enrolling themselves as prostitutes.(608) The
extreme coarseness of the Roman disposition prevented sensuality from
assuming that æsthetic character which had made it in Greece the parent of
Art, and had very profoundly modified its influence, while the passion for
gladiatorial shows often allied it somewhat unnaturally with cruelty.
There have certainly been many periods in history when virtue was more
rare than under the Cæsars; but there has probably never been a period
when vice was more extravagant or uncontrolled. Young emperors especially,
who were surrounded by swarms of sycophants and panders, and who often
lived in continual dread of assassination, plunged with the most reckless
and feverish excitement into every variety of abnormal lust. The reticence
which has always more or less characterised modern society and modern
writers was unknown, and the unblushing, undisguised obscenity of the
Epigrams of Martial, of the Romances of Apuleius and Petronius, and of
some of the Dialogues of Lucian, reflected but too faithfully the spirit
of their time.

There had arisen, too, partly through vicious causes, and partly, I
suppose, through the unfavourable influence which the attraction of the
public institutions exercised on domestic life, a great and general
indisposition towards marriage, which Augustus attempted in vain to arrest
by his laws against celibacy, and by conferring many privileges on the
fathers of three children.(609) A singularly curious speech is preserved,
which is said to have been delivered on this subject, shortly before the
close of the Republic, by Metellus Numidicus, in order, if possible, to
overcome this indisposition. “If, Romans,” he said, “we could live without
wives, we should all keep free from that source of trouble; but since
nature has ordained that men can neither live sufficiently agreeably with
wives, nor at all without them, let us consider the perpetual endurance of
our race rather than our own brief enjoyment.”(610)

In the midst of this torrent of corruption a great change was passing over
the legal position of Roman women. They had at first been in a condition
of absolute subjection or subordination to their relations. They arrived,
during the Empire, at a point of freedom and dignity which they
subsequently lost, and have never altogether regained. The Romans
recognised two distinct classes of marriages: the stricter, and, in the
eyes of the law, more honourable, forms, which placed the woman “in the
hand” of her husband and gave him an almost absolute authority over her
person and her property; and a less strict form, which left her legal
position unchanged. The former, which were general during the Republic,
were of three kinds—the “confarreatio,” which was celebrated and could
only be dissolved by the most solemn religious ceremonies, and was
jealously restricted to patricians; the “coemptio,” which was purely
civil, and derived its name from a symbolical sale; and the “usus,” which
was effected by the mere cohabitation of a woman with a man without
interruption for the space of a year. Under the Empire, however, these
kinds of marriage became almost wholly obsolete; a laxer form, resting
upon a simple mutual agreement, without any religious or civil ceremony,
was general, and it had this very important consequence, that the woman so
married remained, in the eyes of the law, in the family of her father, and
was under his guardianship, not under the guardianship of her husband. But
the old _patria potestas_ had become completely obsolete, and the
practical effect of the general adoption of this form of marriage was the
absolute legal independence of the wife. With the exception of her dowry,
which passed into the hands of her husband, she held her property in her
own right; she inherited her share of the wealth of her father, and she
retained it altogether independently of her husband. A very considerable
portion of Roman wealth thus passed into the uncontrolled possession of
women. The private man of business of the wife was a favourite character
with the comedians, and the tyranny exercised by rich wives over their
husbands—to whom it is said they sometimes lent money at high interest—a
continual theme of satirists.(611)

A complete revolution had thus passed over the constitution of the family.
Instead of being constructed on the principle of autocracy, it was
constructed on the principle of coequal partnership. The legal position of
the wife had become one of complete independence, while her social
position was one of great dignity. The more conservative spirits were
naturally alarmed at the change, and two measures were taken to arrest it.
The Oppian law was designed to restrain the luxury of women; but, in spite
of the strenuous exertions of Cato, this law was speedily repealed.(612) A
more important measure was the Voconian law, which restricted within very
narrow limits the property which women might inherit; but public opinion
never fully acquiesced in it, and by several legal subterfuges its
operation was partially evaded.(613)

Another and a still more important consequence resulted from the changed
form of marriage. Being looked upon merely as a civil contract, entered
into for the happiness of the contracting parties, its continuance
depended upon mutual consent. Either party might dissolve it at will, and
the dissolution gave both parties a right to remarry. There can be no
question that under this system the obligations of marriage were treated
with extreme levity. We find Cicero repudiating his wife Terentia, because
he desired a new dowry;(614) Augustus compelling the husband of Livia to
repudiate her when she was already pregnant, that he might marry her
himself;(615) Cato ceding his wife, with the consent of her father, to his
friend Hortensius, and resuming her after his death;(616) Mæcenas
continually changing his wife;(617) Sempronius Sophus repudiating his
wife, because she had once been to the public games without his
knowledge;(618) Paulus Æmilius taking the same step without assigning any
reason, and defending himself by saying, “My shoes are new and well made,
but no one knows where they pinch me.”(619) Nor did women show less
alacrity in repudiating their husbands. Seneca denounced this evil with
especial vehemence, declaring that divorce in Rome no longer brought with
it any shame, and that there were women who reckoned their years rather by
their husbands than by the consuls.(620) Christians and Pagans echoed the
same complaint. According to Tertullian, “divorce is the fruit of
marriage.”(621) Martial speaks of a woman who had already arrived at her
tenth husband;(622) Juvenal, of a woman having eight husbands in five
years.(623) But the most extraordinary recorded instance of this kind is
related by St. Jerome, who assures us that there existed at Rome a wife
who was married to her twenty-third husband, she herself being his
twenty-first wife.(624)

These are, no doubt, extreme cases; but it is unquestionable that the
stability of married life was very seriously impaired. It would be easy,
however, to exaggerate the influence of legal changes in affecting it. In
a purer state of public opinion a very wide latitude of divorce might
probably have been allowed to both parties, without any serious
consequence. The right of repudiation, which the husband had always
possessed, was, as we have seen, in the Republic never or very rarely
exercised. Of those who scandalised good men by the rapid recurrence of
their marriages, probably most, if marriage had been indissoluble, would
have refrained from entering into it, and would have contented themselves
with many informal connections, or, if they had married, would have
gratified their love of change by simple adultery. A vast wave of
corruption had flowed in upon Rome, and under any system of law it would
have penetrated into domestic life. Laws prohibiting all divorce have
never secured the purity of married life in ages of great corruption, nor
did the latitude which was accorded in imperial Rome prevent the existence
of a very large amount of female virtue.

I have observed, in a former chapter, that the moral contrasts shown in
ancient life surpass those of modern societies, in which we very rarely
find clusters of heroic or illustrious men arising in nations that are in
general very ignorant or very corrupt. I have endeavoured to account for
this fact by showing that the moral agencies of antiquity were in general
much more fitted to develop virtue than to repress vice, and that they
raised noble natures to almost the highest conceivable point of
excellence, while they entirely failed to coerce or to attenuate the
corruption of the depraved. In the female life of Imperial Rome we find
these contrasts vividly displayed. There can be no question that the moral
tone of the sex was extremely low—lower, probably, than in France under
the Regency, or in England under the Restoration—and it is also certain
that frightful excesses of unnatural passion, of which the most corrupt of
modern courts present no parallel, were perpetrated with but little
concealment on the Palatine. Yet there is probably no period in which
examples of conjugal heroism and fidelity appear more frequently than in
this very age, in which marriage was most free and in which corruption was
so general. Much simplicity of manners continued to co-exist with the
excesses of an almost unbridled luxury. Augustus, we are told, used to
make his daughters and granddaughters weave and spin, and his wife and
sister made most of the clothes he wore.(625) The skill of wives in
domestic economy, and especially in spinning, was frequently noticed in
their epitaphs.(626) Intellectual culture was much diffused among
them,(627) and we meet with several noble specimens, in the sex, of large
and accomplished minds united with all the gracefulness of intense
womanhood, and all the fidelity of the truest love. Such were Cornelia,
the brilliant and devoted wife of Pompey,(628) Marcia, the friend, and
Helvia, the mother of Seneca. The Northern Italian cities had in a great
degree escaped the contamination of the times, and Padua and Brescia were
especially noted for the virtue of their women.(629) In an age of
extravagant sensuality a noble lady, named Mallonia, plunged her dagger in
her heart rather than yield to the embraces of Tiberius.(630) To the
period when the legal bond of marriage was most relaxed must be assigned
most of those noble examples of the constancy of Roman wives, which have
been for so many generations household tales among mankind. Who has not
read with emotion of the tenderness and heroism of Porcia, claiming her
right to share in the trouble which clouded her husband’s brow; how,
doubting her own courage, she did not venture to ask Brutus to reveal to
her his enterprise till she had secretly tried her power of endurance by
piercing her thigh with a knife; how once, and but once in his presence,
her noble spirit failed, when, as she was about to separate from him for
the last time, her eye chanced to fall upon a picture of the parting
interview of Hector and Andromache?(631) Paulina, the wife of Seneca,
opened her own veins in order to accompany her husband to the grave; when
much blood had already flowed, her slaves and freedmen bound her wounds,
and thus compelled her to live; but the Romans ever after observed with
reverence the sacred pallor of her countenance—the memorial of her
act.(632) When Pætus was condemned to die by his own hand, those who knew
the love which his wife Arria bore him, and the heroic fervour of her
character, predicted that she would not long survive him. Thrasea, who had
married her daughter, endeavoured to dissuade her from suicide by saying,
“If I am ever called upon to perish, would you wish your daughter to die
with me?” She answered, “Yes, if she will have then lived with you as long
and as happily as I with Pætus.” Her friends attempted, by carefully
watching her, to secure her safety, but she dashed her head against the
wall with such force that she fell upon the ground, and then, rising up,
she said, “I told you I would find a hard way to death if you refuse me an
easy way.” All attempts to restrain her were then abandoned, and her death
was perhaps the most majestic in antiquity. Pætus for a moment hesitated
to strike the fatal blow; but his wife, taking the dagger, plunged it
deeply into her own breast, and then, drawing it out, gave it, all reeking
as it was, to her husband, exclaiming, with her dying breath, “My Pætus,
it does not pain.”(633)

The form of the elder Arria towers grandly above her fellows, but many
other Roman wives in the days of the early Cæsars and of Domitian
exhibited a very similar fidelity. Over the dark waters of the Euxine,
into those unknown and inhospitable regions from which the Roman
imagination recoiled with a peculiar horror, many noble ladies freely
followed their husbands, and there were some wives who refused to survive
them.(634) The younger Arria was the faithful companion of Thrasea during
his heroic life, and when he died she was only persuaded to live that she
might bring up their daughters.(635) She spent the closing days of her
life with Domitian in exile;(636) while her daughter, who was as
remarkable for the gentleness as for the dignity of her character,(637)
went twice into exile with her husband Helvidius, and was once banished,
after his death, for defending his memory.(638) Incidental notices in
historians, and a few inscriptions which have happened to remain, show us
that such instances were not uncommon, and in Roman epitaphs no feature is
more remarkable than the deep and passionate expressions of conjugal love
that continually occur.(639) It would be difficult to find a more touching
image of that love, than the medallion which is so common on the Roman
sarcophagi, in which husband and wife are represented together, each with
an arm thrown fondly over the shoulder of the other, united in death as
they had been in life, and meeting it with an aspect of perfect calm,
because they were companions in the tomb.

In the latter days of the Pagan Empire some measures were taken to repress
the profligacy that was so prevalent. Domitian enforced the old Scantinian
law against unnatural love.(640) Vespasian moderated the luxury of the
court; Macrinus caused those who had committed adultery to be bound
together and burnt alive.(641) A practice of men and women bathing
together was condemned by Hadrian, and afterwards by Alexander Severus,
but was only finally suppressed by Constantine. Alexander Severus and
Philip waged an energetic war against panders.(642) The extreme excesses
of this, as of most forms of vice, were probably much diminished after the
accession of the Antonines; but Rome continued to be a centre of very
great corruption till the influence of Christianity, the removal of the
court to Constantinople, and the impoverishment that followed the
barbarian conquests, in a measure corrected the evil.

Among the moralists, however, some important steps were taken. One of the
most important was a very clear assertion of the reciprocity of that
obligation to fidelity in marriage which in the early stages of society
had been imposed almost exclusively upon wives.(643) The legends of
Clytemnestra and of Medea reveal the feelings of fierce resentment which
were sometimes produced among Greek wives by the almost unlimited
indulgence that was accorded to their husbands;(644) and it is told of
Andromache, as the supreme instance of her love of Hector, that she cared
for his illegitimate children as much as for her own.(645) In early Rome,
the obligations of husbands were never, I imagine, altogether unfelt; but
they were rarely or never enforced, nor were they ever regarded as bearing
any kind of equality to those imposed upon the wife. The term adultery,
and all the legal penalties connected with it, were restricted to the
infractions by a wife of the nuptial tie. Among the many instances of
magnanimity recorded of Roman wives, few are more touching than that of
Tertia Æmilia, the faithful wife of Scipio. She discovered that her
husband had become enamoured of one of her slaves; but she bore her pain
in silence, and when he died she gave liberty to her captive, for she
could not bear that she should remain in servitude whom her dear lord had
loved.(646)

Aristotle had clearly asserted the duty of husbands to observe in marriage
the same fidelity as they expected from their wives,(647) and at a later
period both Plutarch and Seneca enforced this duty in the strongest and
most unequivocal manner.(648) The degree to which, in theory at least, it
won its way in Roman life is shown by its recognition as a legal maxim by
Ulpian,(649) and by its appearance in a formal judgment of Antoninus Pius,
who, while issuing, at the request of a husband, a condemnation for
adultery against a guilty wife, appended to it this remarkable condition:
“Provided always it is established that by your life you gave her an
example of fidelity. It would be unjust that a husband should exact a
fidelity he does not himself keep.”(650)

Another change, which may be dimly descried in the later Pagan society,
was a tendency to regard purity rather in a mystical point of view, as
essentially good, than in the utilitarian point of view. This change
resulted chiefly from the rise of the Neoplatonic and Pythagorean
philosophies, which concurred in regarding the body, with its passions, as
essentially evil, and in representing all virtue as a purification from
its taint. Its most important consequence was a somewhat stricter view of
pre-nuptial unchastity, which in the case of men, and when it was not
excessive, and did not take the form of adultery, had previously been
uncensured, or was looked upon with a disapprobation so slight as scarcely
to amount to censure. The elder Cato had expressly justified it;(651) and
Cicero has left us an extremely curious judgment on the subject, which
shows at a glance the feelings of the people, and the vast revolution
that, under the influence of Christianity, has been effected in, at least,
the professions of mankind. “If there be any one,” he says, “who thinks
that young men should be altogether restrained from the love of
courtesans, he is indeed very severe. I am not prepared to deny his
position; but he differs not only from the licence of our age, but also
from the customs and allowances of our ancestors. When, indeed, was this
not done? When was it blamed? When was it not allowed? When was that which
is now lawful not lawful?”(652) Epictetus, who on most subjects was among
the most austere of the Stoics, recommends his disciples to abstain, “as
far as possible,” from pre-nuptial connections, and at least from those
which were adulterous and unlawful, but not to blame those who were less
strict.(653) The feeling of the Romans is curiously exemplified in the
life of Alexander Severus, who, of all the emperors, was probably the most
energetic in legislating against vice. When appointing a provincial
governor, he was accustomed to provide him with horses and servants, and,
if he was unmarried, with a concubine, “because,” as the historian very
gravely observes, “it was impossible that he could exist without
one.”(654)

What was written among the Pagans in opposition to these views was not
much, but it is worthy of notice, as illustrating the tendency that had
arisen. Musonius Rufus distinctly and emphatically asserted that no union
of the sexes other than marriage was permissible.(655) Dion Chrysostom
desired prostitution to be suppressed by law. The ascetic notion of the
impurity even of marriage may be faintly traced. Apollonius of Tyana
lived, on this ground, a life of celibacy.(656) Zenobia refused to cohabit
with her husband, except so far as was necessary for the production of an
heir.(657) Hypatia is said, like many Christian saints, to have maintained
the position of a virgin wife.(658) The belief in the impurity of all
corporeal things, and in the duty of rising above them, was in the third
century strenuously enforced.(659) Marcus Aurelius and Julian were both
admirable representatives of the best Pagan spirit of their time. Each of
them lost his wife early, each was eulogised by his biographer for the
virtue he manifested after her death; but there is a curious and
characteristic difference in the forms which that virtue assumed. Marcus
Aurelius, we are told, did not wish to bring into his house a stepmother
to rule over his children, and accordingly took a concubine.(660) Julian
ever after lived in perfect continence.(661)

The foregoing facts, which I have given in the most condensed form, and
almost unaccompanied by criticism or by comment, will be sufficient, I
hope, to exhibit the state of feeling of the Romans on this subject, and
also the direction in which that feeling was being modified. Those who are
familiar with this order of studies will readily understand that it is
impossible to mark out with precision the chronology of a moral sentiment;
but there can be no question that in the latter days of the Roman Empire
the perceptions of men on this subject became more subtle and more refined
than they had previously been, and it is equally certain that the Oriental
philosophies which had superseded Stoicism largely influenced the change.
Christianity soon constituted itself the representative of the new
tendency. It regarded purity as the most important of all virtues, and it
strained to the utmost all the vast agencies it possessed, to enforce it.
In the legislation of the first Christian emperors we find many traces of
a fiery zeal. Panders were condemned to have molten lead poured down their
throats. In the case of rape, not only the ravisher, but even the injured
person, if she consented to the act, was put to death.(662) A great
service was done to the cause both of purity and of philanthropy, by a law
which permitted actresses, on receiving baptism, to abandon their
profession, which had been made a form of slavery, and was virtually a
slavery to vice.(663) Certain musical girls, who were accustomed to sing
or play at the banquets of the rich, and who were regarded with extreme
horror by the Fathers, were suppressed, and a very stringent law forbade
the revival of the class.(664)

Side by side with the civil legislation, the penitential legislation of
the Church was exerted in the same direction. Sins of unchastity probably
occupy a larger place than any others in its enactments. The cases of
unnatural love, and of mothers who had made their daughters courtesans,
were punished by perpetual exclusion from communion, and a crowd of minor
offences were severely visited. The ascetic passion increased the
prominence of this branch of ethics, and the imaginations of men were soon
fascinated by the pure and noble figures of the virgin martyrs of the
Church, who on more than one occasion fully equalled the courage of men,
while they sometimes mingled with their heroism traits of the most
exquisite feminine gentleness. For the patient endurance of excruciating
physical suffering, Christianity produced no more sublime figure than
Blandina, the poor servant-girl who was martyred at Lyons; and it would be
difficult to find in all history a more touching picture of natural purity
than is contained in one simple incident of the martyrdom of St. Perpetua.
It is related of that saint that she was condemned to be slaughtered by a
wild bull, and, as she fell half dead from its horns upon the sand of the
arena, it was observed that even in that awful moment her virgin modesty
was supreme, and her first instinctive movement was to draw together her
dress, which had been torn in the assault.(665)

A crowd of very curious popular legends also arose, which, though they are
for the most part without much intrinsic excellence, have their importance
in history, as showing the force with which the imaginations of men were
turned in this direction, and the manner in which Christianity was
regarded as the great enemy of the passions of the flesh. Thus, St. Jerome
relates an incredible story of a young Christian, being, in the Diocletian
persecution, bound with ribands of silk in the midst of a lovely garden,
surrounded by everything that could charm the ear and the eye, while a
beautiful courtesan assailed him with her blandishments, against which he
protected himself by biting out his tongue and spitting it in her
face.(666) Legends are recounted of young Christian men assuming the garb
and manners of libertines, that they might obtain access to maidens who
had been condemned to vice, exchanging dresses with them, and thus
enabling them to escape.(667) St. Agnes was said to have been stripped
naked before the people, who all turned away their eyes except one young
man, who instantly became blind.(668) The sister of St. Gregory of Nyssa
was afflicted with a cancer in her breast, but could not bear that a
surgeon should see it, and was rewarded for her modesty by a miraculous
cure.(669) To the fabled zone of beauty the Christian saints opposed their
zones of chastity, which extinguished the passion of the wearer, or would
only meet around the pure.(670) Dæmons were said not unfrequently to have
entered into the profligate. The garment of a girl who was possessed was
brought to St. Pachomius, and he discovered from it that she had a
lover.(671) A courtesan accused St. Gregory Thaumaturgus of having been
her lover, and having refused to pay her what he had promised. He paid the
required sum, but she was immediately possessed by a daemon.(672) The
efforts of the saints to reclaim courtesans from the path of vice created
a large class of legends. St. Mary Magdalene, St. Mary of Egypt, St. Afra,
St. Pelagia, St. Thais, and St. Theodota, in the early Church, as well as
St. Marguerite of Cortona, and Clara of Rimini, in the middle ages, had
been courtesans.(673) St. Vitalius, it is said, was accustomed every night
to visit the dens of vice in his neighbourhood, to give the inmates money
to remain without sin for that night, and to offer up prayers for their
conversion.(674) It is related of St. Serapion, that, as he was passing
through a village in Egypt, a courtesan beckoned to him. He promised at a
certain hour to visit her. He kept his appointment, but declared that
there was a duty which his order imposed on him. He fell down on his knees
and began repeating the Psalter, concluding every psalm with a prayer for
his hostess. The strangeness of the scene, and the solemnity of his tone
and manner, overawed and fascinated her. Gradually her tears began to
flow. She knelt beside him and began to join in his prayers. He heeded her
not, but hour after hour continued in the same stern and solemn voice,
without rest and without interruption, to repeat his alternate prayers and
psalms, till her repentance rose to a paroxysm of terror, and, as the grey
morning streaks began to illumine the horizon, she fell half dead at his
feet, imploring him with broken sobs to lead her anywhere where she might
expiate the sins of her past.(675)

But the services rendered by the ascetics in imprinting on the minds of
men a profound and enduring conviction of the importance of chastity,
though extremely great, were seriously counterbalanced by their noxious
influence upon marriage. Two or three beautiful descriptions of this
institution have been culled out of the immense mass of the patristic
writings;(676) but, in general, it would be difficult to conceive anything
more coarse or more repulsive than the manner in which they regarded
it.(677) The relation which nature has designed for the noble purpose of
repairing the ravages of death, and which, as Linnæus has shown, extends
even through the world of flowers, was invariably treated as a consequence
of the fall of Adam, and marriage was regarded almost exclusively in its
lowest aspect. The tender love which it elicits, the holy and beautiful
domestic qualities that follow in its train, were almost absolutely
omitted from consideration.(678) The object of the ascetic was to attract
men to a life of virginity, and, as a necessary consequence, marriage was
treated as an inferior state. It was regarded as being necessary, indeed,
and therefore justifiable, for the propagation of the species, and to free
men from greater evils; but still as a condition of degradation from which
all who aspired to real sanctity should fly. To “cut down by the axe of
Virginity the wood of Marriage,” was, in the energetic language of St.
Jerome, the end of the saint;(679) and if he consented to praise marriage,
it was merely because it produced virgins.(680) Even when the bond had
been formed, the ascetic passion retained its sting. We have already seen
how it embittered other relations of domestic life. Into this, the holiest
of all, it infused a tenfold bitterness. Whenever any strong religious
fervour fell upon a husband or a wife, its first effect was to make a
happy union impossible. The more religious partner immediately desired to
live a life of solitary asceticism, or at least, if no ostensible
separation took place, an unnatural life of separation in marriage. The
immense place this order of ideas occupies in the hortatory writings of
the Fathers, and in the legends of the saints, must be familiar to all who
have any knowledge of this department of literature. Thus—to give but a
very few examples—St. Nilus, when he had already two children, was seized
with a longing for the prevailing asceticism, and his wife was persuaded,
after many tears, to consent to their separation.(681) St. Ammon, on the
night of his marriage, proceeded to greet his bride with an harangue upon
the evils of the married state, and they agreed, in consequence, at once
to separate.(682) St. Melania laboured long and earnestly to induce her
husband to allow her to desert his bed, before he would consent.(683) St.
Abraham ran away from his wife on the night of his marriage.(684) St.
Alexis, according to a somewhat later legend, took the same step, but many
years after returned from Jerusalem to his father’s house, in which his
wife was still lamenting her desertion, begged and received a lodging as
an act of charity, and lived there unrecognised and unknown till his
death.(685) St. Gregory of Nyssa—who was so unfortunate as to be
married—wrote a glowing eulogy of virginity, in the course of which he
mournfully observed that this privileged state could never be his. He
resembled, he assures us, an ox that was ploughing a field, the fruit of
which he must never enjoy; or a thirsty man, who was gazing on a stream of
which he never can drink; or a poor man, whose poverty seems the more
bitter as he contemplates the wealth of his neighbours; and he proceeded
to descant in feeling terms upon the troubles of matrimony.(686) Nominal
marriages, in which the partners agreed to shun the marriage bed, became
not uncommon. The emperor Henry II., Edward the Confessor, of England, and
Alphonso II., of Spain, gave examples of it. A very famous and rather
picturesque history of this kind is related by Gregory of Tours. A rich
young Gaul, named Injuriosus, led to his home a young bride to whom he was
passionately attached. That night, she confessed to him, with tears, that
she had vowed to keep her virginity, and that she regretted bitterly the
marriage into which her love for him had betrayed her. He told her that
they should remain united, but that she should still observe her vow; and
he fulfilled his promise. When, after several years, she died, her
husband, in laying her in the tomb, declared, with great solemnity, that
he restored her to God as immaculate as he had received her; and then a
smile lit up the face of the dead woman, and she said, “Why do you tell
that which no one asked you?” The husband soon afterwards died, and his
corpse, which had been laid in a distinct compartment from that of his
wife in the tomb, was placed side by side with it by the angels.(687)

The extreme disorders which such teaching produced in domestic life, and
also the extravagances which grew up among some heretics, naturally
alarmed the more judicious leaders of the Church, and it was ordained that
married persons should not enter into an ascetic life, except by mutual
consent.(688) The ascetic ideal, however, remained unchanged. To abstain
from marriage, or in marriage to abstain from a perfect union, was
regarded as a proof of sanctity, and marriage was viewed in its coarsest
and most degraded form. The notion of its impurity took many forms, and
exercised for some centuries an extremely wide influence over the Church.
Thus, it was the custom during the middle ages to abstain from the
marriage bed during the night after the ceremony, in honour of the
sacrament.(689) It was expressly enjoined that no married persons should
participate in any of the great Church festivals if the night before they
had lain together, and St. Gregory the Great tells of a young wife who was
possessed by a dæmon, because she had taken part in a procession of St.
Sebastian, without fulfilling this condition.(690) The extent to which the
feeling on the subject was carried is shown by the famous vision of
Alberic in the twelfth century, in which a special place of torture,
consisting of a lake of mingled lead, pitch, and resin is represented as
existing in hell for the punishment of married people who had lain
together on Church festivals or fast days.(691)

Two other consequences of this way of regarding marriage were a very
strong disapproval of second marriages, and a very strong desire to secure
celibacy in the clergy. The first of these notions had existed, though in
a very different form, and connected with very different motives, among
the early Romans, who were accustomed, we are told, to honour with the
crown of modesty those who were content with one marriage, and to regard
many marriages as a sign of illegitimate intemperance.(692) This opinion
appears to have chiefly grown out of a very delicate and touching feeling
which had taken deep root in the Roman mind, that the affection a wife
owes her husband is so profound and so pure that it must not cease even
with his death; that it should guide and consecrate all her subsequent
life, and that it never can be transferred to another object. Virgil, in
very beautiful lines, puts this sentiment into the mouth of Dido;(693) and
several examples are recorded of Roman wives, sometimes in the prime of
youth and beauty, upon the death of their husbands, devoting the remainder
of their lives to retirement and to the memory of the dead.(694) Tacitus
held up the Germans as in this respect a model to his countrymen,(695) and
the epithet “univiræ” inscribed on many Roman tombs shows how this
devotion was practised and valued.(696) The family of Camillus was
especially honoured for the absence of second marriages among its
members.(697) “To love a wife when living,” said one of the latest Roman
poets, “is a pleasure; to love her when dead is an act of religion.”(698)
In the case of men, the propriety of abstaining from second marriages was
probably not felt so strongly as in the case of women, and what feeling on
the subject existed was chiefly due to another motive—affection for the
children, whose interests, it was thought, might be injured by a
stepmother.(699)

The sentiment which thus recoiled from second marriages passed with a
vastly increased strength into ascetic Christianity, but it was based upon
altogether different grounds. We find, in the first place, that an
affectionate remembrance of the husband had altogether vanished from the
motives of the abstinence. In the next place, we may remark that the
ecclesiastical writers, in perfect conformity with the extreme coarseness
of their views about the sexes, almost invariably assumed that the motive
to second or third marriages must be simply the force of the animal
passions. The Montanists and the Novatians absolutely condemned second
marriages.(700) The orthodox pronounced them lawful, on account of the
weakness of human nature, but they viewed them with the most emphatic
disapproval,(701) partly because they considered them manifest signs of
incontinence, and partly because they regarded them as inconsistent with
their doctrine that marriage is an emblem of the union of Christ with the
Church. The language of the Fathers on this subject appears to a modern
mind most extraordinary, and, but for their distinct and reiterated
assertion that they considered these marriages permissible,(702) would
appear to amount to a peremptory condemnation. Thus—to give but a few
samples—digamy, or second marriage, is described by Athenagoras as “a
decent adultery.”(703) “Fornication,” according to Clement of Alexandria,
“is a lapse from one marriage into many.”(704) “The first Adam,” said St.
Jerome, “had one wife; the second Adam had no wife. They who approve of
digamy hold forth a third Adam, who was twice married, whom they
follow.”(705) “Consider,” he again says, “that she who has been twice
married, though she be an old, and decrepit, and poor woman, is not deemed
worthy to receive the charity of the Church. But if the bread of charity
is taken from her, how much more that bread which descends from
heaven!”(706) “Digamists,” according to Origen, “are saved in the name of
Christ, but are by no means crowned by him.”(707) “By this text,” said St.
Gregory Nazianzen, speaking of St. Paul’s comparison of marriage to the
union of Christ with the Church, “second marriages seem to me to be
reproved. If there are two Christs there may be two husbands or two wives.
If there is but one Christ, one Head of the Church, there is but one
flesh—a second is repelled. But if he forbids a second, what is to be said
of third marriages? The first is law, the second is pardon and indulgence,
the third is iniquity; but he who exceeds this number is manifestly
bestial.”(708) Digamists were excluded from the priesthood and from the
distributions of Church charity; a period of penance was imposed on them
before they were admitted to communion,(709) and two English statutes of
the Middle Ages withheld the benefit of clergy from any prisoner who had
“married two wives or one widow.”(710) The Council of Illiberis, in the
beginning of the fourth century, while in general condemning baptism by
laymen, permitted it in case of extreme necessity; but provided that even
in that case the officiating layman must not have been twice married.(711)
Among the Greeks fourth marriages were at one time deemed absolutely
unlawful, and much controversy was excited by the Emperor Leo the Wise,
who, having had three wives, had taken a mistress, but afterwards, in
defiance of the religious feelings of his people, determined to raise her
to the position of a wife.(712)

The subject of the celibacy of the clergy, in which the ecclesiastical
feelings about marriage were also shown, is an extremely large one, and I
shall not attempt to deal with it, except in a most cursory manner.(713)
There are two facts connected with it which every candid student must
admit. The first is, that in the earliest period of the Church, the
privilege of marriage was accorded to the clergy. The second is, that a
notion of the impurity of marriage existed, and that it was felt that the
clergy, as pre-eminently the holy class, should have less licence than
laymen. The first form this feeling took appears in the strong conviction
that a second marriage of a priest, or the marriage of a priest with a
widow, was unlawful and criminal.(714) This belief seems to have existed
from the earliest period of the Church, and was retained with great
tenacity and unanimity through many centuries. In the next place, we find
from an extremely early date an opinion, that it was an act of virtue, at
a later period that it was an act of duty, for priests after ordination to
abstain from cohabiting with their wives. The Council of Nice refrained,
by the advice of Paphnutius, who was himself a scrupulous celibate, from
imposing this last rule as a matter of necessity;(715) but in the course
of the fourth century it was a recognised principle that clerical
marriages were criminal. They were celebrated, however, habitually, and
usually with the greatest openness. The various attitudes assumed by the
ecclesiastical authorities in dealing with this subject form an extremely
curious page of the history of morals, and supply the most crushing
evidence of the evils which have been produced by the system of celibacy.
I can at present, however, only refer to the vast mass of evidence which
has been collected on the subject, derived from the writings of Catholic
divines and from the decrees of Catholic Councils during the space of many
centuries. It is a popular illusion, which is especially common among
writers who have little direct knowledge of the middle ages, that the
atrocious immorality of monasteries, in the century before the
Reformation, was a new fact, and that the ages when the faith of men was
undisturbed, were ages of great moral purity. In fact, it appears, from
the uniform testimony of the ecclesiastical writers, that ecclesiastical
immorality in the eighth and three following centuries was little if at
all less outrageous than in any other period, while the Papacy, during
almost the whole of the tenth century, was held by men of infamous lives.
Simony was nearly universal.(716) Barbarian chieftains married at an early
age, and totally incapable of restraint, occupied the leading positions in
the Church, and gross irregularities speedily became general. An Italian
bishop of the tenth century epigrammatically described the morals of his
time, when he declared, that if he were to enforce the canons against
unchaste people administering ecclesiastical rites, no one would be left
in the Church except the boys; and if he were to observe the canons
against bastards, these also must be excluded.(717) The evil acquired such
magnitude that a great feudal clergy, bequeathing the ecclesiastical
benefices from father to son, appeared more than once likely to
arise.(718) A tax called “Culagium,” which was in fact a licence to
clergymen to keep concubines, was during several centuries systematically
levied by princes.(719) Sometimes the evil, by its very extension,
corrected itself. Priestly marriages were looked upon as normal events not
implying any guilt, and in the eleventh century several instances are
recorded in which they were not regarded as any impediment to the power of
working miracles.(720) But this was a rare exception. From the earliest
period a long succession of Councils as well as such men as St. Boniface,
St. Gregory the Great, St. Peter Damiani, St. Dunstan, St. Anselm,
Hildebrand and his successors in the Popedom, denounced priestly marriage
or concubinage as an atrocious crime, and the habitual life of the priests
was, in theory at least, generally recognised as a life of sin.

It is not surprising that, having once broken their vows and begun to live
what they deemed a life of habitual sin, the clergy should soon have sunk
far below the level of the laity. We may not lay much stress on such
isolated instances of depravity as that of Pope John XXIII., who was
condemned among many other crimes for incest, and for adultery;(721) or
the abbot-elect of St. Augustine, at Canterbury, who in 1171 was found, on
investigation, to have seventeen illegitimate children in a single
village;(722) or an abbot of St. Pelayo, in Spain, who in 1130 was proved
to have kept no less than seventy concubines;(723) or Henry III., Bishop
of Liège, who was deposed in 1274 for having sixty-five illegitimate
children;(724) but it is impossible to resist the evidence of a long chain
of Councils and ecclesiastical writers, who conspire in depicting far
greater evils than simple concubinage. It was observed that when the
priests actually took wives the knowledge that these connections were
illegal was peculiarly fatal to their fidelity, and bigamy and extreme
mobility of attachments were especially common among them. The writers of
the middle ages are full of accounts of nunneries that were like brothels,
of the vast multitude of infanticides within their walls, and of that
inveterate prevalence of incest among the clergy, which rendered it
necessary again and again to issue the most stringent enactments that
priests should not be permitted to live with their mothers or sisters.
Unnatural love, which it had been one of the great services of
Christianity almost to eradicate from the world, is more than once spoken
of as lingering in the monasteries; and, shortly before the Reformation,
complaints became loud and frequent of the employment of the confessional
for the purposes of debauchery.(725) The measures taken on the subject
were very numerous and severe. At first, the evil chiefly complained of
was the clandestine marriage of priests, and especially their intercourse
with wives whom they had married previous to their ordination. Several
Councils issued their anathemas against priests “who had improper
relations with their wives;” and rules were made that priests should
always sleep in the presence of a subordinate clerk; and that they should
only meet their wives in the open air and before at least two witnesses.
Men were, however, by no means unanimous in their way of regarding this
matter. Synesius, when elected to a bishopric, at first declined, boldly
alleging as one of his reasons, that he had a wife whom he loved dearly,
and who, he hoped, would bear him many sons, and that he did not mean to
separate from her or visit her secretly as an adulterer.(726) A Bishop of
Laon, at a later date, who was married to a niece of St. Rémy, and who
remained with his wife till after he had a son and a daughter, quaintly
expressed his penitence by naming them respectively Latro and
Vulpecula.(727) St. Gregory the Great describes the virtue of a priest,
who, through motives of piety, had discarded his wife. As he lay dying,
she hastened to him to watch the bed which for forty years she had not
been allowed to share, and, bending over what seemed the inanimate form of
her husband, she tried to ascertain whether any breath still remained,
when the dying saint, collecting his last energies, exclaimed, “Woman,
begone; take away the straw; there is fire yet.”(728) The destruction of
priestly marriage is chiefly due to Hildebrand, who pursued this object
with the most untiring resolution. Finding that his appeals to the
ecclesiastical authorities and to the civil rulers were insufficient, he
boldly turned to the people, exhorted them, in defiance of all Church
traditions, to withdraw their obedience from married priests, and kindled
among them a fierce fanaticism of asceticism, which speedily produced a
fierce persecution of the offending pastors. Their wives, in immense
numbers, were driven forth with hatred and with scorn; and many crimes,
and much intolerable suffering, followed the disruption. The priests
sometimes strenuously resisted. At Cambrai, in A.D. 1077, they burnt alive
as a heretic a zealot who was maintaining the doctrines of Hildebrand. In
England, half a century later, they succeeded in surprising a Papal legate
in the arms of a courtesan, a few hours after he had delivered a fierce
denunciation of clerical unchastity.(729) But Papal resolution supported
by popular fanaticism won the victory. Pope Urban II. gave licence to the
nobles to reduce to slavery the wives whom priests had obstinately refused
to abandon, and after a few more acts of severity priestly marriage became
obsolete. The extent, however, of the disorders that still existed, is
shown by the mournful confessions of ecclesiastical writers, by the
uniform and indignant testimony of the poets and prose satirists who
preceded the Reformation, by the atrocious immoralities disclosed in the
monasteries at the time of their suppression, and by the significant
prudence of many lay Catholics, who were accustomed to insist that their
priest should take a concubine for the protection of the families of his
parishioners.(730)

It is scarcely possible to conceive a more demoralising influence than a
priesthood living such a life as I have described. In Protestant
countries, where the marriage of the clergy is fully recognised, it has,
indeed, been productive of the greatest and the most unequivocal benefits.
Nowhere, it may be confidently asserted, does Christianity assume a more
beneficial or a more winning form than in those gentle clerical households
which stud our land, constituting, as Coleridge said, “the one idyll of
modern life,” the most perfect type of domestic peace, the centre of
civilisation in the remotest village. Notwithstanding some class
narrowness and professional bigotry, notwithstanding some unworthy, but
half unconscious mannerism, which is often most unjustly stigmatised as
hypocrisy, it would be difficult to find in any other quarter so much
happiness at once diffused and enjoyed, or so much virtue attained with so
little tension or struggle. Combining with his sacred calling a warm
sympathy with the intellectual, social, and political movements of his
time, possessing the enlarged practical knowledge of a father of a family,
and entering with a keen zest into the occupations and the amusements of
his parishioners, a good clergyman will rarely obtrude his religious
convictions into secular spheres, but yet will make them apparent in all.
They will be revealed by a higher and deeper moral tone, by a more
scrupulous purity in word and action, by an all-pervasive gentleness,
which refines, and softens, and mellows, and adds as much to the charm as
to the excellence of the character in which it is displayed. In visiting
the sick, relieving the poor, instructing the young, and discharging a
thousand delicate offices for which a woman’s tact is especially needed,
his wife finds a sphere of labour which is at once intensely active and
intensely feminine, and her example is not less beneficial than her
ministrations.

Among the Catholic priesthood, on the other hand, where the vow of
celibacy is faithfully observed, a character of a different type is
formed, which with very grave and deadly faults combines some of the
noblest excellences to which humanity can attain. Separated from most of
the ties and affections of earth, viewing life chiefly through the
distorted medium of the casuist or the confessional, and deprived of those
relationships which more than any others soften and expand the character,
the Catholic priests have been but too often conspicuous for their fierce
and sanguinary fanaticism, and for their indifference to all interests
except those of their Church; while the narrow range of their sympathies,
and the intellectual servitude they have accepted, render them peculiarly
unfitted for the office of educating the young, which they so persistently
claim, and which, to the great misfortune of the world, they were long
permitted to monopolise. But, on the other hand, no other body of men have
ever exhibited a more single-minded and unworldly zeal, refracted by no
personal interests, sacrificing to duty the dearest of earthly objects,
and confronting with undaunted heroism every form of hardship, of
suffering, and of death.

That the middle ages, even in their darkest periods, produced many good
and great men of the latter type it would be unjust and absurd to deny. It
can hardly, however, be questioned that the extreme frequency of illicit
connections among the clergy tended during many centuries most actively to
lower the moral tone of the laity, and to counteract the great services in
the cause of purity which Christian teaching had undoubtedly effected. The
priestly connections were rarely so fully recognised as to enable the
mistress to fill a position like that which is now occupied by the wife of
a clergyman, and the spectacle of the chief teachers and exemplars of
morals living habitually in an intercourse which was acknowledged to be
ambiguous or wrong, must have acted most injuriously upon every class of
the community. Asceticism, proclaiming war upon human nature, produced a
revulsion towards its extreme opposite, and even when it was observed it
was frequently detrimental to purity of mind. The habit of continually
looking upon marriage in its coarsest light, and of regarding the
propagation of the species as its one legitimate end, exercised a
peculiarly perverting influence upon the imagination. The exuberant piety
of wives who desired to live apart from their husbands often drove the
latter into serious irregularities.(731) The notion of sin was introduced
into the dearest of relationships,(732) and the whole subject was
distorted and degraded. It is one of the great benefits of Protestantism
that it did much to banish these modes of thought and feeling from the
world, and to restore marriage to its simplicity and its dignity. We have
a gratifying illustration of the extent to which an old superstition has
declined, in the fact that when Goldsmith, in his great romance, desired
to depict the harmless eccentricities of his simple-minded and unworldly
vicar, he represented him as maintaining that opinion concerning the
sinfulness of the second marriage of a clergyman which was for many
centuries universal in the Church.

Another injurious consequence, resulting, in a great measure, from
asceticism, was a tendency to depreciate extremely the character and the
position of women. In this tendency we may detect in part the influence of
the earlier Jewish writings, in which an impartial observer may find
evident traces of the common Oriental depreciation of women. The custom of
purchase-money to the father of the bride was admitted. Polygamy was
authorised,(733) and practised by the wisest man on an enormous scale. A
woman was regarded as the origin of human ills. A period of purification
was appointed after the birth of every child; but, by a very significant
provision, it was twice as long in the case of a female as of a male
child.(734) “The badness of men,” a Jewish writer emphatically declared,
“is better than the goodness of women.”(735) The types of female
excellence exhibited in the early period of Jewish history are in general
of a low order, and certainly far inferior to those of Roman history or
Greek poetry; and the warmest eulogy of a woman in the Old Testament is
probably that which was bestowed upon her who, with circumstances of the
most aggravated treachery, had murdered the sleeping fugitive who had
taken refuge under her roof.

The combined influence of the Jewish writings, and of that ascetic feeling
which treated women as the chief source of temptation to man, was shown in
those fierce invectives, which form so conspicuous and so grotesque a
portion of the writings of the Fathers, and which contrast so curiously
with the adulation bestowed upon particular members of the sex. Woman was
represented as the door of hell, as the mother of all human ills. She
should be ashamed at the very thought that she is a woman. She should live
in continual penance, on account of the curses she has brought upon the
world. She should be ashamed of her dress, for it is the memorial of her
fall. She should be especially ashamed of her beauty, for it is the most
potent instrument of the dæmon. Physical beauty was indeed perpetually the
theme of ecclesiastical denunciations, though one singular exception seems
to have been made; for it has been observed that in the middle ages the
personal beauty of bishops was continually noticed upon their tombs.(736)
Women were even forbidden by a provincial Council, in the sixth century,
on account of their impurity, to receive the Eucharist into their naked
hands.(737) Their essentially subordinate position was continually
maintained.

It is probable that this teaching had its part in determining the
principles of legislation concerning the sex. The Pagan laws during the
Empire had been continually repealing the old disabilities of women, and
the legislative movement in their favour continued with unabated force
from Constantine to Justinian, and appeared also in some of the early laws
of the barbarians.(738) But in the whole feudal legislation women were
placed in a much lower legal position than in the Pagan Empire.(739) In
addition to the personal restrictions which grew necessarily out of the
Catholic doctrines concerning divorce, and concerning the subordination of
the weaker sex, we find numerous and stringent enactments, which rendered
it impossible for women to succeed to any considerable amount of property,
and which almost reduced them to the alternative of marriage or a
nunnery.(740) The complete inferiority of the sex was continually
maintained by the law; and that generous public opinion which in Rome had
frequently revolted against the injustice done to girls, in depriving them
of the greater part of the inheritance of their fathers, totally
disappeared. Wherever the canon law has been the basis of legislation, we
find laws of succession sacrificing the interests of daughters and of
wives,(741) and a state of public opinion which has been formed and
regulated by these laws; nor was any serious attempt made to abolish them
till the close of the last century. The French revolutionists, though
rejecting the proposal of Siéyès and Condorcet to accord political
emancipation to women, established at least an equal succession of sons
and daughters, and thus initiated a great reformation of both law and
opinion, which sooner or later must traverse the world.

In their efforts to raise the standard of purity, the Christian teachers
derived much assistance from the incursions and the conquests of the
barbarians. The dissolution of vast retinues of slaves, the suspension of
most public games, and the general impoverishment that followed the
invasions, were all favourable to female virtue; and in this respect the
various tribes of barbarians, however violent and lawless, were far
superior to the more civilised community. Tacitus, in a very famous work,
had long before pourtrayed in the most flattering colours the purity of
the Germans. Adultery, he said, was very rare among them. The adulteress
was driven from the house with shaven hair, and beaten ignominiously
through the village. Neither youth, nor beauty, nor wealth could enable a
woman who was known to have sinned to secure a husband. Polygamy was
restricted to the princes, who looked upon a plurality of wives rather as
a badge of dignity than as a gratification of the passions. Mothers
invariably gave suck to their own children. Infanticide was forbidden.
Widows were not allowed to re-marry. The men feared captivity, much more
for their wives than for themselves; they believed that a sacred and
prophetic gift resided in women; they consulted them as oracles, and
followed their counsels.(742)

It is generally believed, and it is not improbable, that Tacitus in this
work intended to reprove the dissolute habits of his fellow-countrymen,
and considerably over-coloured the virtue of the barbarians. Of the
substantial justice, however, of his picture we have much evidence.
Salvian, who, about three centuries later, witnessed and described the
manners of the barbarians who had triumphed over the Empire, attested in
the strongest language the contrast which their chastity presented to the
vice of those whom they had subdued.(743) The Scandinavian mythology
abounds in legends exhibiting the clear sentiment of the heathen tribes on
the subject of purity, and the awful penalties threatened in the next
world against the seducers.(744) The barbarian women were accustomed to
practise medicine and to interpret dreams, and they also very frequently
accompanied their husbands to battle, rallied their broken forces, and
even themselves took part in the fight.(745) Augustus had discovered that
it was useless to keep barbarian chiefs as hostages, and that the one way
of securing the fidelity of traitors was by taking their wives, for these,
at least, were never sacrificed. Instances of female heroism are said to
have occurred in the conquered nations, which might rival the most
splendid in the Roman annals. When Marius had vanquished an army of the
Teutons, their wives besought the conqueror to permit them to become the
servants of the Vestal Virgins, in order that their honour, at least,
might be secure in slavery. Their request was refused, and that night they
all perished by their own hands.(746) A powerful noble once solicited the
hand of a Galatian lady named Camma, who, faithful to her husband,
resisted all his entreaties. Resolved at any hazard to succeed, he caused
her husband to be assassinated, and when she took refuge in the temple of
Diana, and enrolled herself among the priestesses, he sent noble after
noble to induce her to relent. After a time, he ventured himself into her
presence. She feigned a willingness to yield, but told him it was first
necessary to make a libation to the goddess. She appeared as a priestess
before the altar, bearing in her hand a cup of wine, which she had
poisoned. She drank half of it herself, handed the remainder to her guilty
lover, and when he had drained the cup to the dregs, burst into a fierce
thanksgiving, that she had been permitted to avenge, and was soon to
rejoin, her murdered husband.(747) Another and still more remarkable
instance of conjugal fidelity was furnished by a Gaulish woman named
Epponina. Her husband, Julius Sabinus, had rebelled against Vespasian; he
was conquered, and might easily have escaped to Germany, but could not
bear to abandon his young wife. He retired to a villa of his own,
concealed himself in subterranean cellars that were below it, and
instructed a freedman to spread the report that he had committed suicide,
while, to account for the disappearance of his body, he set fire to the
villa. Epponina, hearing of the suicide, for three days lay prostrate on
the ground without eating. At length the freedman came to her, and told
her that the suicide was feigned. She continued her lamentations by day,
but visited her husband by night. She became with child, but owing, it is
said, to an ointment, she succeeded in concealing her state from her
friends. When the hour of parturition was at hand, she went alone into the
cellar, and without any assistance or attendance was delivered of twins,
whom she brought up underground. For nine years she fulfilled her task,
when Sabinus was discovered, and, to the lasting disgrace of Vespasian,
was executed, in spite of the supplications of his wife, who made it her
last request that she might be permitted to die with him.(748)

The moral purity of the barbarians was of a kind altogether different from
that which the ascetic movement inculcated. It was concentrated
exclusively upon marriage. It showed itself in a noble conjugal fidelity;
but it was little fitted for a life of celibacy, and did not, as we have
seen, prevent excessive disorders among the priesthood. The practice of
polygamy among the barbarian kings was also for some centuries unchecked,
or at least unsuppressed, by Christianity. The kings Caribert and
Chilperic had both many wives at the same time.(749) Clotaire married the
sister of his first wife during the lifetime of the latter, who, on the
intention of the king being announced, is reported to have said, “Let my
lord do what seemeth good in his sight, only let thy servant live in thy
favour.”(750) Theodebert, whose general goodness of character is warmly
extolled by the episcopal historian, abandoned his first wife on account
of an atrocious crime which she had committed; took, during her lifetime,
another, to whom he had previously been betrothed; and upon the death of
this second wife, and while the first was still living, took a third,
whom, however, at a later period he murdered.(751) St. Columbanus was
expelled from Gaul chiefly on account of his denunciations of the polygamy
of King Thierry.(752) Dagobert had three wives, as well as a multitude of
concubines.(753) Charlemagne himself had at the same time two wives, and
he indulged largely in concubines.(754) After this period examples of this
nature became rare. The Popes and the bishops exercised a strict
supervision over domestic morals, and strenuously, and in most cases
successfully, opposed the attempts of kings and nobles to repudiate their
wives.

But, notwithstanding these startling facts, there can be no doubt that the
general purity of the barbarians was from the first superior to that of
the later Romans, and it appears in many of their laws. It has been very
happily observed,(755) that the high value placed on this virtue is well
illustrated by the fact that in the Salic code, while a charge of
cowardice falsely brought against a man was only punished by a fine of
three solidi, a charge of unchastity falsely brought against a woman was
punished by a fine of forty-five. The Teutonic sentiment was shown in a
very stern legislation against adultery and rape,(756) and curiously
minute precautions were sometimes taken to guard against them. A law of
the Spanish Visigoths prohibited surgeons from bleeding any free woman
except in the presence of her husband, of her nearest relative, or at
least of some properly appointed witness, and a Salic law imposed a fine
of fifteen pieces of gold upon any one who improperly pressed her
hand.(757)

Under the influence of Christianity, assisted by the barbarians, a vast
change passed gradually over the world. The vice we are considering was
probably more rare; it certainly assumed less extravagant forms, and it
was screened from observation with a new modesty. The theory of morals had
become clearer, and the practice was somewhat improved. The extreme
grossness of literature had disappeared, and the more glaring violations
of marriage were always censured and often repressed. The penitential
discipline, and the exhortations of the pulpit, diffused abroad an
immeasurably higher sense of the importance of purity than Pagan antiquity
had known. St. Gregory the Great, following in the steps of some Pagan
philosophers,(758) strenuously urged upon mothers the duty of themselves
suckling their children; and many minute and stringent precepts were made
against extravagances of dress and manners. The religious institutions of
Greece and Asia Minor, which had almost consecrated prostitution, were for
ever abolished, and the courtesan sank into a lower stage of degradation.

Besides these changes, the duty of reciprocal fidelity in marriage was
enforced with a new earnestness. The contrast between the levity with
which the frailty of men has in most ages been regarded, and the extreme
severity with which women who have been guilty of the same offence have
generally been treated, forms one of the most singular anomalies in moral
history, and appears the more remarkable when we remember that the
temptation usually springs from the sex which is so readily pardoned; that
the sex which is visited with such crushing penalties is proverbially the
most weak; and that, in the case of women, but not in the case of men, the
vice is very commonly the result of the most abject misery and poverty.
For this disparity of censure several reasons have been assigned. The
offence can be more surely and easily detected, and therefore more
certainly punished, in the case of women than of men; and, as the duty of
providing for his children falls upon the father, the introduction into
the family of children who are not his own is a special injury to him,
while illegitimate children who do not spring from adultery will probably,
on account of their father having entered into no compact to support them,
ultimately become criminals or paupers, and therefore a burden to
society.(759) It may be added, I think, that several causes render the
observance of this virtue more difficult for one sex than for the other;
that its violation, when every allowance has been made for the moral
degradation which is a result of the existing condition of public opinion,
is naturally more profoundly prejudicial to the character of women than of
men; and also that much of our feeling on these subjects is due to laws
and moral systems which were formed by men, and were in the first instance
intended for their own protection.

The passages in the Fathers, asserting the equality of the obligation
imposed upon both sexes, are exceedingly unequivocal;(760) and although
the doctrine itself had been anticipated by Seneca and Plutarch, it had
probably never before, and it has never since, been so fully realised as
in the early Church. It cannot, however, be said that the conquest has
been retained. At the present day, although the standard of morals is far
higher than in Pagan Rome, it may be questioned whether the inequality of
the censure which is bestowed upon the two sexes is not as great as in the
days of Paganism, and that inequality is continually the cause of the most
shameful and the most pitiable injustice. In one respect, indeed, a great
retrogression resulted from chivalry, and long survived its decay. The
character of the seducer, and especially of the passionless seducer who
pursues his career simply as a kind of sport, and under the influence of
no stronger motive than vanity or a spirit of adventure, has been
glorified and idealised in the popular literature of Christendom in a
manner to which we can find no parallel in antiquity. When we reflect that
the object of such a man is by the coldest and most deliberate treachery
to blast the lives of innocent women; when we compare the levity of his
motive with the irreparable injury he inflicts; and when we remember that
he can only deceive his victim by persuading her to love him, and can only
ruin her by persuading her to trust him, it must be owned that it would be
difficult to conceive a cruelty more wanton and more heartless, or a
character combining more numerous elements of infamy and of dishonour.
That such a character should for many centuries have been the popular
ideal of a considerable section of literature, and the boast of numbers
who most plume themselves upon their honour, is assuredly one of the most
mournful facts in history, and it represents a moral deflection certainly
not less than was revealed in ancient Greece by the position that was
assigned to the courtesan.

The fundamental truth, that the same act can never be at once venial for a
man to demand, and infamous for a woman to accord, though nobly enforced
by the early Christians, has not passed into the popular sentiment of
Christendom. The mystical character, however, which the Church imparted to
marriage has been extremely influential. Partly by raising it into a
sacrament, and partly by representing it as, in some mysterious and not
very definable sense, an image of the union of Christ with His Church, a
feeling was fostered that a lifelong union of one man and one woman is,
under all circumstances, the single form of intercourse between the sexes
which is not illegitimate; and this conviction has acquired the force of a
primal moral intuition.

There can, I think, be little doubt that, in the stringency with which it
is usually laid down, it rests not upon the law of nature, but upon
positive law, although unassisted nature is sufficient to lead men many
steps in its direction. Considering the subject simply in the light of
unaided reason, two rules comprise the whole duty of man. He must abstain
from whatever injures happiness or degrades character. Under the first
head, he must include the more remote as well as the immediate
consequences of his act. He must consider how his partner will be affected
by the union, the light in which society will view the connection, the
probable position of the children to be born, the effect of these births,
and also the effect of his example upon the well-being of society at
large. Some of the elements of this calculation vary in different stages
of society. Thus, public opinion in one age will reprobate, and therefore
punish, connections which, in another age, are fully sanctioned; and the
probable position of the children, as well as the effect of the births
upon society, will depend greatly upon particular and national
circumstances.

Under the second head is comprised the influence of this intercourse in
clouding or developing the moral feelings, lowering or elevating the tone
of character, exciting or allaying the aberrations of the imagination,
incapacitating men for pure affections or extending their range, making
the animal part of our nature more or less predominant. We know, by the
intuition of our moral nature, that this predominance is always a
degraded, though it is not always an unhappy, condition. We also know that
it is a law of our being, that powerful and beautiful affections, which
had before been latent, are evoked in some particular forms of union,
while other forms of union are peculiarly fitted to deaden the affections
and to pervert the character.

In these considerations we have ample grounds for maintaining that the
lifelong union of one man and of one woman should be the normal or
dominant type of intercourse between the sexes. We can prove that it is on
the whole most conducive to the happiness, and also to the moral
elevation, of all parties. But beyond this point it would, I conceive, be
impossible to advance, except by the assistance of a special revelation.
It by no means follows that because this should be the dominant type it
should be the only one, or that the interests of society demand that all
connections should be forced into the same die. Connections, which were
confessedly only for a few years, have always subsisted side by side with
permanent marriages; and in periods when public opinion, acquiescing in
their propriety, inflicts no excommunication on one or both of the
partners, when these partners are not living the demoralising and
degrading life which accompanies the consciousness of guilt, and when
proper provision is made for the children who are born, it would be, I
believe, impossible to prove, by the light of simple and unassisted
reason, that such connections should be invariably condemned. It is
extremely important, both for the happiness and for the moral well-being
of men, that lifelong unions should not be effected simply under the
imperious prompting of a blind appetite. There are always multitudes who,
in the period of their lives when their passions are most strong, are
incapable of supporting children in their own social rank, and who would
therefore injure society by marrying in it, but are nevertheless perfectly
capable of securing an honourable career for their illegitimate children
in the lower social sphere to which these would naturally belong. Under
the conditions I have mentioned, these connections are not injurious, but
beneficial, to the weaker partner; they soften the differences of rank,
they stimulate social habits, and they do not produce upon character the
degrading effect of promiscuous intercourse, or upon society the injurious
effects of imprudent marriages, one or other of which will multiply in
their absence. In the immense variety of circumstances and characters,
cases will always appear in which, on utilitarian grounds, they might seem
advisable.

It is necessary to dwell upon such considerations as these, if we would
understand the legislation of the Pagan Empire or the changes that were
effected by Christianity. The legislators of the Empire distinctly
recognised these connections, and made it a main object to authorise,
dignify, and regulate them. The unlimited licence of divorce practically
included them under the name of marriage, while that name sheltered them
from stigma, and prevented many of the gravest evils of unauthorised
unions. The word concubine also, which in the Republic had the same
signification as among ourselves, represented in the Empire a strictly
legal union—an innovation which was chiefly due to Augustus, and was
doubtless intended as part of the legislation against celibacy, and also,
it may be, as a corrective of the licentious habits that were general.
This union was in essentials merely a form of marriage, for he who, having
a concubine, took to himself either a wife or another concubine, was
legally guilty of adultery. Like the commonest form of marriage, it was
consummated without any ceremony, and was dissoluble at will. Its
peculiarities were that it was contracted between men of patrician rank
and freedwomen, who were forbidden by law to intermarry; that the
concubine, though her position was perfectly recognised and honourable,
did not share the rank of her partner, that she brought no dowry, and that
her children followed her rank, and were excluded from the rank and the
inheritance of their father.(761)

Against these notions Christianity declared a direct and implacable
warfare, which was imperfectly reflected in the civil legislation, but
appeared unequivocally in the writings of the Fathers, and in most of the
decrees of the Councils.(762) It taught, as a religious dogma, invariable,
inflexible, and independent of all utilitarian calculations, that all
forms of intercourse of the sexes, other than lifelong unions, were
criminal. By teaching men to regard this doctrine as axiomatic, and
therefore inflicting severe social penalties and deep degradation on
transient connections, it has profoundly modified even their utilitarian
aspect, and has rendered them in most countries furtive and disguised.
There is probably no other branch of ethics which has been so largely
determined by special dogmatic theology, and there is none which would be
so deeply affected by its decay.

As a part of the same movement, the purely civil marriage of the later
Pagan Empire was gradually replaced by religious marriages. There is a
manifest propriety in invoking a divine benediction upon an act which
forms so important an epoch in life, and the mingling of a religious
ceremony impresses a deeper sense of the solemnity of the contract. The
essentially religious and even mystical character imparted by Christianity
to marriage rendered the consecration peculiarly natural, but it was only
very gradually that it came to be looked upon as absolutely necessary. As
I have already noticed, it was long dispensed with in the marriage of
slaves; and even in the case of freemen, though generally performed, it
was not made compulsory till the tenth century.(763) In addition to its
primary object of sanctifying marriage, it became in time a powerful
instrument in securing the authority of the priesthood, who were able to
compel men to submit to the conditions they imposed in the formation of
the most important contract of life; and the modern authorisation of civil
marriages, by diminishing greatly the power of the Catholic priesthood
over domestic life, has been one of the most severe blows ecclesiastical
influence has undergone.

The absolute sinfulness of divorce was at the same time strenuously
maintained by the Councils, which in this, as in many other points,
differed widely from the civil law. Constantine restricted it to three
cases of crime on the part of the husband, and three on the part of the
wife; but the habits of the people were too strong for his enactments,
and, after one or two changes in the law, the full latitude of divorce
reappeared in the Justinian Code. The Fathers, on the other hand, though
they hesitated a little about the case of a divorce which followed an act
of adultery on the part of the wife,(764) had no hesitation whatever in
pronouncing all other divorces to be criminal, and periods of penitential
discipline were imposed upon Christians who availed themselves of the
privileges of the civil law.(765) For many centuries this duality of
legislation continued. The barbarian laws restricted divorce by imposing
severe fines on those who repudiated their wives. Charlemagne pronounced
divorce to be criminal, but did not venture to make it penal, and he
practised it himself. On the other hand, the Church threatened with
excommunication, and in some cases actually launched its thunders against,
those who were guilty of it. It was only in the twelfth century that the
victory was definitely achieved, and the civil law, adopting the principle
of the canon law, prohibited all divorce.(766)

I do not propose in the present work to examine how far this total
prohibition has been for the happiness or the moral well-being of men. I
will simply observe that, though it is now often defended, it was not
originally imposed in Christian nations, upon utilitarian grounds, but was
based upon the sacramental character of marriage, upon the belief that
marriage is the special symbol of the perpetual union of Christ with His
Church, and upon a well-known passage in the Gospels. The stringency of
the Catholic doctrine, which forbids the dissolution of marriage even in
the case of adultery, has been considerably relaxed by modern legislation,
and there can, I think, be little doubt that further steps will yet be
taken in the same direction; but the vast change that was effected in both
practice and theory since the unlimited licence of the Pagan Empire must
be manifest to all.

It was essential, or at least very important, that a union which was so
solemn and so irrevocable should be freely contracted. The sentiment of
the Roman patriots towards the close of the Republic was that marriage
should be regarded as a means of providing children for the State, and
should be entered into as a matter of duty with that view, and the laws of
Augustus had imposed many disqualifications on those who abstained from
it. Both of these inducements to marriage passed away under the influence
of Christianity. The popular sentiment disappeared with the decline of
civic virtues. The laws were rescinded under the influence of the ascetic
enthusiasm which made men regard the state of celibacy as pre-eminently
holy.

There was still one other important condition to be attained by
theologians in order to realise their ideal type of marriage. It was to
prevent the members of the Church from intermarrying with those whose
religious opinions differed from their own. Mixed marriages, it has been
truly said, may do more than almost any other influence to assuage the
rancour and the asperity of sects, but it must be added that a
considerable measure of tolerance must have been already attained before
they become possible. In a union in which each partner believes and
realises that the other is doomed to an eternity of misery there can be no
real happiness, no sympathy, no trust; and a domestic agreement that some
of the children should be educated in one religion and some in the other
would be impossible when each parent believed it to be an agreement that
some children should be doomed to hell.

The domestic unhappiness arising from differences of belief was probably
almost or altogether unknown in the world before the introduction of
Christianity; for, although differences of opinion may have before
existed, the same momentous consequences were not attached to them. It has
been the especial bane of periods of great religious change, such as the
conversion of the Roman Empire, or the Reformation, or our own day when
far more serious questions than those which agitated the sixteenth century
are occupying the attention of a large proportion of thinkers and
scholars, and when the deep and widening chasm between the religious
opinions of most highly educated men, and of the immense majority of
women, is painfully apparent. While a multitude of scientific discoveries,
critical and historical researches, and educational reforms have brought
thinking men face to face with religious problems of extreme importance,
women have been almost absolutely excluded from their influence. Their
minds are usually by nature less capable than those of men of impartiality
and suspense, and the almost complete omission from female education of
those studies which most discipline and strengthen the intellect increases
the difference, while at the same time it has been usually made a main
object to imbue them with a passionate faith in traditional opinions, and
to preserve them from all contact with opposing views. But contracted
knowledge and imperfect sympathy are not the sole fruits of this
education. It has always been the peculiarity of a certain kind of
theological teaching that it inverts all the normal principles of
judgment, and absolutely destroys intellectual diffidence. On other
subjects we find, if not a respect for honest conviction, at least some
sense of the amount of knowledge that is requisite to entitle men to
express an opinion on grave controversies. A complete ignorance of the
subject-matter of a dispute restrains the confidence of dogmatism; and an
ignorant person, who is aware that, by much reading and thinking in
spheres of which he has himself no knowledge, his educated neighbour has
modified or rejected opinions which that ignorant person had been taught,
will, at least if he is a man of sense or modesty, abstain from
compassionating the benighted condition of his more instructed friend. But
on theological questions this has never been so. Unfaltering belief being
taught as the first of duties, and all doubt being usually stigmatised as
criminal or damnable, a state of mind is formed to which we find no
parallel in other fields. Many men and most women, though completely
ignorant of the very rudiments of biblical criticism, historical research,
or scientific discoveries, though they have never read a single page, or
understood a single proposition of the writings of those whom they
condemn, and have absolutely no rational knowledge either of the arguments
by which their faith is defended, or of those by which it has been
impugned, will nevertheless adjudicate with the utmost confidence upon
every polemical question; denounce, hate, pity, or pray for the conversion
of all who dissent from what they have been taught; assume, as a matter
beyond the faintest possibility of doubt, that the opinions they have
received without enquiry must be true, and that the opinions which others
have arrived at by enquiry must be false, and make it a main object of
their lives to assail what they call heresy in every way in their power,
except by examining the grounds on which it rests. It is probable that the
great majority of voices that swell the clamour against every book which
is regarded as heretical are the voices of those who would deem it
criminal even to open that book, or to enter into any real, searching, and
impartial investigation of the subject to which it relates. Innumerable
pulpits support this tone of thought, and represent, with a fervid
rhetoric well fitted to excite the nerves and imaginations of women, the
deplorable condition of all who deviate from a certain type of opinions or
of emotions; a blind propagandism or a secret wretchedness penetrates into
countless households, poisoning the peace of families, chilling the mutual
confidence of husband and wife, adding immeasurably to the difficulties
which every searcher into truth has to encounter, and diffusing far and
wide intellectual timidity, disingenuousness, and hypocrisy.

These domestic divisions became very apparent in the period of the
conversion of the Roman Empire; and a natural desire to guard intact the
orthodoxy and zeal of the converts, and to prevent a continual
discordance, stimulated the Fathers in their very vehement denunciations
of all mixed marriages. We may also trace in these denunciations the
outline of a very singular doctrine, which was afterwards suffered to fall
into obscurity, but was revived in the last century in England in a
curious and learned work of the nonjuror Dodwell.(767) The union of Christ
and His Church had been represented as a marriage; and this image was not
regarded as a mere metaphor or comparison, but as intimating a mysterious
unity, which, though not susceptible of any very clear definition, was not
on that account the less real. Christians were the “limbs of Christ,” and
for them to join themselves in marriage with those who were not of the
Christian fold was literally, it was said, a species of adultery or
fornication. The intermarriage of the Israelites, the chosen seed of the
ancient world, with the Gentiles, had been described in the Old Testament
as an act of impurity;(768) and in the opinion of some, at least, of the
Fathers, the Christian community occupied towards the unbelievers a
position analogous to that which the Jews had occupied towards the
Gentiles. St. Cyprian denounced the crime of those “who prostitute the
limbs of Christ in marriage with the Gentiles.”(769) Tertullian described
the intermarriage as fornication;(770) and after the triumph of the
Church, the intermarriage of Jews and Christians was made a capital
offence, and was stigmatised by the law as adultery.(771) The civil law
did not prohibit the orthodox from intermarrying with heretics, but many
councils in strong terms denounced such marriages as criminal.

The extreme sanctity attributed to virginity, the absolute condemnation of
all forms of sexual connection other than marriage, and the formation and
gradual realisation of the Christian conception of marriage as a permanent
union of a man and woman of the same religious opinions, consecrated by
solemn religious services, carrying with it a deep religious
signification, and dissoluble only by death, were the most obvious signs
of Christian influence in the sphere of ethics we are examining. Another
very important result of the new religion was to raise to a far greater
honour than they had previously possessed, the qualities in which women
peculiarly excel.

There are few more curious subjects of enquiry than the distinctive
differences between the sexes, and the manner in which those differences
have affected the ideal types of different ages, nations, philosophies,
and religions. Physically, men have the indisputable superiority in
strength, and women in beauty. Intellectually, a certain inferiority of
the female sex can hardly be denied when we remember how almost
exclusively the foremost places in every department of science,
literature, and art have been occupied by men, how infinitesimally small
is the number of women who have shown in any form the very highest order
of genius, how many of the greatest men have achieved their greatness in
defiance of the most adverse circumstances, and how completely women have
failed in obtaining the first position, even in music or painting, for the
cultivation of which their circumstances would appear most propitious. It
is as impossible to find a female Raphael, or a female Handel, as a female
Shakspeare or Newton. Women are intellectually more desultory and volatile
than men; they are more occupied with particular instances than with
general principles; they judge rather by intuitive perceptions than by
deliberate reasoning or past experience. They are, however, usually
superior to men in nimbleness and rapidity of thought, and in the gift of
tact or the power of seizing speedily and faithfully the finer inflexions
of feeling, and they have therefore often attained very great eminence in
conversation, as letter-writers, as actresses, and as novelists.

Morally, the general superiority of women over men, is, I think,
unquestionable. If we take the somewhat coarse and inadequate criterion of
police statistics, we find that, while the male and female populations are
nearly the same in number, the crimes committed by men are usually rather
more than five times as numerous as those committed by women;(772) and
although it may be justly observed that men, as the stronger sex, and the
sex upon whom the burden of supporting the family is thrown, have more
temptations than women, it must be remembered, on the other hand, that
extreme poverty which verges upon starvation is most common among women,
whose means of livelihood are most restricted, and whose earnings are
smallest and most precarious. Self-sacrifice is the most conspicuous
element of a virtuous and religious character, and it is certainly far
less common among men than among women, whose whole lives are usually
spent in yielding to the will and consulting the pleasures of another.
There are two great departments of virtue: the impulsive, or that which
springs spontaneously from the emotions; and the deliberative, or that
which is performed in obedience to the sense of duty; and in both of these
I imagine women are superior to men. Their sensibility is greater, they
are more chaste both in thought and act, more tender to the erring, more
compassionate to the suffering, more affectionate to all about them. On
the other hand, those who have traced the course of the wives of the poor,
and of many who, though in narrow circumstances, can hardly be called
poor, will probably admit that in no other class do we so often find
entire lives spent in daily persistent self-denial, in the patient
endurance of countless trials, in the ceaseless and deliberate sacrifice
of their own enjoyments to the well-being or the prospects of others.
Women, however, though less prone than men to intemperance and brutality,
are in general more addicted to the petty forms of vanity, jealousy,
spitefulness, and ambition, and they are also inferior to men in active
courage. In the courage of endurance they are commonly superior; but their
passive courage is not so much fortitude which bears and defies, as
resignation which bears and bends. In the ethics of intellect they are
decidedly inferior. To repeat an expression I have already employed, women
very rarely love truth, though they love passionately what they call “the
truth,” or opinions they have received from others, and hate vehemently
those who differ from them. They are little capable of impartiality or of
doubt; their thinking is chiefly a mode of feeling; though very generous
in their acts, they are rarely generous in their opinions or in their
judgments. They persuade rather than convince, and value belief rather as
a source of consolation than as a faithful expression of the reality of
things. They are less capable than men of perceiving qualifying
circumstances, of admitting the existence of elements of good in systems
to which they are opposed, of distinguishing the personal character of an
opponent from the opinions he maintains. Men lean most to justice and
women to mercy. Men excel in energy, self-reliance, perseverance, and
magnanimity; women in humility, gentleness, modesty, and endurance. The
realising imagination which causes us to pity and to love is more
sensitive in women than in men, and it is especially more capable of
dwelling on the unseen. Their religious or devotional realisations are
incontestably more vivid; and it is probable that, while a father is most
moved by the death of a child in his presence, a mother generally feels
most the death of a child in some distant land. But, though more intense,
the sympathies of women are commonly less wide than those of men. Their
imaginations individualise more; their affections are, in consequence,
concentrated rather on leaders than on causes; and if they care for a
great cause, it is generally because it is represented by a great man, or
connected with some one whom they love. In politics, their enthusiasm is
more naturally loyalty than patriotism. In history, they are even more
inclined than men to dwell exclusively upon biographical incidents or
characteristics as distinguished from the march of general causes. In
benevolence, they excel in charity, which alleviates individual suffering,
rather than in philanthropy, which deals with large masses and is more
frequently employed in preventing than in allaying calamity.

It was a remark of Winckelmann that “the supreme beauty of Greek art is
rather male than female;” and the justice of this remark has been amply
corroborated by the greater knowledge we have of late years attained of
the works of the Phidian period, in which art achieved its highest
perfection, and in which, at the same time, force and freedom, and
masculine grandeur, were its pre-eminent characteristics. A similar
observation may be made of the moral ideal of which ancient art was simply
the expression. In antiquity the virtues that were most admired were
almost exclusively those which are distinctively masculine. Courage,
self-assertion, magnanimity, and, above all, patriotism, were the leading
features of the ideal type; and chastity, modesty, and charity, the
gentler and the domestic virtues, which are especially feminine, were
greatly undervalued. With the single exception of conjugal fidelity, none
of the virtues that were very highly prized were virtues distinctively or
pre-eminently feminine. With this exception, nearly all the most
illustrious women of antiquity were illustrious chiefly because they
overcame the natural conditions of their sex. It is a characteristic fact
that the favourite female ideal of the artists appears to have been the
Amazon.(773) We may admire the Spartan mother, and the mother of the
Gracchi, repressing every sign of grief when their children were
sacrificed upon the altar of their country, we may wonder at the majestic
courage of a Porcia and an Arria; but we extol them chiefly because, being
women, they emancipated themselves from the frailty of their sex, and
displayed an heroic fortitude worthy of the strongest and the bravest of
men. We may bestow an equal admiration upon the noble devotion and charity
of a St. Elizabeth of Hungary, or of a Mrs. Fry, but we do not admire them
because they displayed these virtues, although they were women, for we
feel that their virtues were of the kind which the female nature is most
fitted to produce. The change from the heroic to the saintly ideal, from
the ideal of Paganism to the ideal of Christianity, was a change from a
type which was essentially male to one which was essentially feminine. Of
all the great schools of philosophy no other reflected so faithfully the
Roman conception of moral excellence as Stoicism, and the greatest Roman
exponent of Stoicism summed up its character in a single sentence when he
pronounced it to be beyond all other sects the most emphatically
masculine.(774) On the other hand, an ideal type in which meekness,
gentleness, patience, humility, faith, and love are the most prominent
features, is not naturally male but female. A reason probably deeper than
the historical ones which are commonly alleged, why sculpture has always
been peculiarly Pagan and painting peculiarly Christian, may be found in
the fact, that sculpture is especially suited to represent male beauty, or
the beauty of strength, and painting female beauty, or the beauty of
softness; and that Pagan sentiment was chiefly a glorification of the
masculine qualities of strength, and courage, and conscious virtue, while
Christian sentiment is chiefly a glorification of the feminine qualities
of gentleness, humility, and love. The painters whom the religious feeling
of Christendom has recognised as the most faithful exponents of Christian
sentiment have always been those who infused a large measure of feminine
beauty even into their male characters; and we never, or scarcely ever,
find that the same artist has been conspicuously successful in delineating
both Christian and Pagan types. Michael Angelo, whose genius loved to
expatiate on the sublimity of strength and defiance, failed signally in
his representations of the Christian ideal; and Perugino was equally
unsuccessful when he sought to pourtray the features of the heroes of
antiquity.(775) The position that was gradually assigned to the Virgin as
the female ideal in the belief and the devotion of Christendom, was a
consecration or an expression of the new value that was attached to the
feminine virtues.

The general superiority of women to men in the strength of their religious
emotions, and their natural attraction to a religion which made personal
attachment to its Founder its central duty, and which imparted an
unprecedented dignity and afforded an unprecedented scope to their
characteristic virtues, account for the very conspicuous position that
female influence assumed in the great work of the conversion of the Roman
Empire. In no other important movement of thought was it so powerful or so
acknowledged. In the ages of persecution female figures occupy many of the
foremost places in the ranks of martyrdom, and Pagan and Christian writers
alike attest the alacrity with which women flocked to the Church, and the
influence they exercised in its favour over the male members of their
families. The mothers of St. Augustine, St. Chrysostom, St. Basil, St.
Gregory Nazianzen, and Theodoret, had all a leading part in the conversion
of their sons. St. Helena, the mother of Constantine, Flacilla, the wife
of Theodosius the Great, St. Pulcheria, the sister of Theodosius the
Younger, and Placidia, the mother of Valentinian III., were among the most
conspicuous defenders of the faith. In the heretical sects the same zeal
was manifested, and Arius, Priscillian, and Montanus were all supported by
troops of zealous female devotees. In the career of asceticism women took
a part little if at all inferior to men, while in the organisation of the
great work of charity they were pre-eminent. For no other field of active
labour are women so admirably suited as for this; and although we may
trace from the earliest period, in many creeds and ages, individual
instances of their influence in allaying the sufferings of the
distressed,(776) it may be truly said that their instinct and genius of
charity had never before the dawn of Christianity obtained full scope for
action. Fabiola, Paula, Melania, and a host of other noble ladies devoted
their time and fortunes mainly to founding and extending vast institutions
of charity, some of them of a kind before unknown in the world. The
Empress Flacilla was accustomed to tend with her own hands the sick in the
hospitals,(777) and a readiness to discharge such offices was deemed the
first duty of a Christian wife.(778) From age to age the impulse thus
communicated has been felt. There has been no period, however corrupt,
there has been no Church, however superstitious, that has not been adorned
by many Christian women devoting their entire lives to assuaging the
sufferings of men; and the mission of charity thus instituted has not been
more efficacious in diminishing the sum of human wretchedness, than in
promoting the moral dignity of those by whom it was conducted.

Among the Collyridian heretics, women were admitted to the priesthood.
Among the orthodox, although this honour was not bestowed upon them, they
received a religious consecration, and discharged some minor
ecclesiastical functions under the name of deaconesses.(779) This order
may be traced to the Apostolic period.(780) It consisted of elderly
virgins, who were set apart by a formal ordination, and were employed in
assisting as catechists and attendants at the baptism of women, in
visiting the sick, ministering to martyrs in prison, preserving order in
the congregations, and accompanying and presenting women who desired an
interview with the bishop. It would appear, from the evidence of some
councils, that abuses gradually crept into this institution, and the
deaconesses at last faded into simple nuns, but they were still in
existence in the East in the twelfth century. Besides these, widows, when
they had been but once married, were treated with peculiar honour, and
were made the special recipients of the charity of the Church. Women
advanced in years, who, either from their single life or from bereavement,
have been left without any male protector in the world, have always been
peculiarly deserving of commiseration. With less strength, and commonly
with less means, and less knowledge of the world than men, they are liable
to contract certain peculiarities of mind and manner to which an excessive
amount of ridicule has been attached, and age in most cases furnishes them
with very little to compensate for the charms of which it has deprived
them. The weight and dignity of matured wisdom, which make the old age of
one sex so venerable, are more rarely found in that of the other, and even
physical beauty is more frequently the characteristic of an old man than
of an old woman. The Church laboured steadily to cast a halo of reverence
around this period of woman’s life, and its religious exercises have done
very much to console and to occupy it.

In accordance with these ideas, the Christian legislators contributed
largely to improve the legal position of widows in respect to
property,(781) and Justinian gave mothers the guardianship of their
children, destroying the Pagan rule that guardianship could only be
legally exercised by men.(782) The usual subservience of the sex to
ecclesiastical influence, the numerous instances of rich widows devoting
their fortunes, and mothers their sons, to the Church, had no doubt some
influence in securing the advocacy of the clergy; but these measures had a
manifest importance in elevating the position of women who have had, in
Christian lands, a great, though not, I think, altogether a beneficial
influence, in the early education of their sons.

Independently of all legal enactments, the simple change of the ideal type
by bringing specially feminine virtues into the forefront was sufficient
to elevate and ennoble the sex. The commanding position of the mediæval
abbesses, the great number of female saints, and especially the reverence
bestowed upon the Virgin, had a similar effect. It is remarkable that the
Jews, who, of the three great nations of antiquity, certainly produced in
history and poetry the smallest number of illustrious women, should have
furnished the world with its supreme female ideal, and it is also a
striking illustration of the qualities which prove most attractive in
woman that one of whom we know nothing except her gentleness and her
sorrow should have exercised a magnetic power upon the world incomparably
greater than was exercised by the most majestic female patriots of
Paganism. Whatever may be thought of its theological propriety, there can
be little doubt that the Catholic reverence for the Virgin has done much
to elevate and purify the ideal of woman, and to soften the manners of
men. It has had an influence which the worship of the Pagan goddesses
could never possess, for these had been almost destitute of moral beauty,
and especially of that kind of moral beauty which is peculiarly feminine.
It supplied in a great measure the redeeming and ennobling element in that
strange amalgam of religious, licentious, and military feeling which was
formed around women in the age of chivalry, and which no succeeding change
of habit or belief has wholly destroyed.

It can hardly, I think, be questioned that in the great religious
convulsions of the sixteenth century the feminine type followed
Catholicism, while Protestantism inclined more to the masculine type.
Catholicism alone retained the Virgin worship, which at once reflected and
sustained the first. The skill with which it acts upon the emotions by
music, and painting, and solemn architecture, and imposing pageantry, its
tendency to appeal to the imagination rather than to the reason, and to
foster modes of feeling rather than modes of thought, its assertion of
absolute and infallible certainty, above all, the manner in which it
teaches its votary to throw himself perpetually on authority, all tended
in the same direction. It is the part of a woman to lean, it is the part
of a man to stand. A religion which prescribes to the distracted mind
unreasoning faith in an infallible Church, and to the troubled conscience
an implicit trust in an absolving priesthood, has ever had an especial
attraction to a feminine mind. A religion which recognises no authority
between man and his Creator, which asserts at once the dignity and the
duty of private judgment, and which, while deepening immeasurably the
sense of individual responsibility, denudes religion of meretricious
ornaments, and of most æsthetic aids, is pre-eminently a religion of men.
Puritanism is the most masculine form that Christianity has yet assumed.
Its most illustrious teachers differed from the Catholic saints as much in
the moral type they displayed as in the system of doctrines they held.
Catholicism commonly softens, while Protestantism strengthens, the
character; but the softness of the first often degenerates into weakness,
and the strength of the second into hardness. Sincerely Catholic nations
are distinguished for their reverence, for their habitual and vivid
perceptions of religious things, for the warmth of their emotions, for a
certain amiability of disposition, and a certain natural courtesy and
refinement of manner that are inexpressibly winning. Sincerely Protestant
nations are distinguished for their love of truth, for their firm sense of
duty, for the strength and the dignity of their character. Loyalty and
humility, which are especially feminine, flourish chiefly in the first;
liberty and self-assertion in the second. The first are most prone to
superstition, and the second to fanaticism. Protestantism, by purifying
and dignifying marriage, conferred a great benefit upon women; but it must
be owned that neither in its ideal type, nor in the general tenor of its
doctrines or devotions, is it as congenial to their nature as the religion
it superseded.

Its complete suppression of the conventual system was also, I think, very
far from a benefit to women or to the world. It would be impossible to
conceive any institution more needed than one which would furnish a
shelter for the many women who, from poverty, or domestic unhappiness, or
other causes, find themselves cast alone and unprotected into the battle
of life, which would secure them from the temptations to gross vice, and
from the extremities of suffering, and would convert them into agents of
active, organised, and intelligent charity. Such an institution would be
almost free from the objections that may justly be urged against
monasteries, which withdraw strong men from manual labour, and it would
largely mitigate the difficulty of providing labour and means of
livelihood for single women, which is one of the most pressing, in our own
day one of the most appalling, of social problems. Most unhappily for
mankind, this noble conception was from the first perverted. Institutions
that might have had an incalculable philanthropic value were based upon
the principle of asceticism, which makes the sacrifice, not the promotion,
of earthly happiness its aim, and binding vows produced much misery and
not a little vice. The convent became the perpetual prison of the daughter
whom a father was disinclined to endow, or of young girls who, under the
impulse of a transient enthusiasm, or of a transient sorrow, took a step
which they never could retrace, and useless penances and contemptible
superstitions wasted the energies that might have been most beneficially
employed. Still it is very doubtful whether, even in the most degraded
period, the convents did not prevent more misery than they inflicted, and
in the Sisters of Charity the religious orders of Catholicism have
produced one of the most perfect of all the types of womanhood. There is,
as I conceive, no fact in modern history more deeply to be deplored than
that the Reformers, who in matters of doctrinal innovations were often so
timid, should have levelled to the dust, instead of attempting to
regenerate, the whole conventual system of Catholicism.

The course of these observations has led me to transgress the limits
assigned to this history. It has been, however, my object through this
entire work to exhibit not only the nature but also the significance of
the moral facts I have recorded, by showing how they have affected the
subsequent changes of society. I will conclude this chapter, and this
work, by observing that of all the departments of ethics the questions
concerning the relations of the sexes and the proper position of women are
those upon the future of which there rests the greatest uncertainty.
History tells us that, as civilisation advances, the charity of men
becomes at once warmer and more expansive, their habitual conduct both
more gentle and more temperate, and their love of truth more sincere; but
it also warns us that in periods of great intellectual enlightenment, and
of great social refinement, the relations of the sexes have often been
most anarchical. It is impossible to deny that the form which these
relations at present assume has been very largely affected by special
religious teaching, which, for good or for ill, is rapidly waning in the
sphere of government, and also, that certain recent revolutions in
economical opinion and industrial enterprise have a most profound bearing
upon the subject. The belief that a rapid increase of population is always
eminently beneficial, which was long accepted as an axiom by both
statesmen and moralists, and was made the basis of a large part of the
legislation of the first and of the decisions of the second, has now been
replaced by the directly opposite doctrine, that the very highest interest
of society is not to stimulate but to restrain multiplication, diminishing
the number of marriages and of children. In consequence of this belief,
and of the many factitious wants that accompany a luxurious civilisation,
a very large and increasing proportion of women are left to make their way
in life without any male protector, and the difficulties they have to
encounter through physical weakness have been most unnaturally and most
fearfully aggravated by laws and customs which, resting on the old
assumption that every woman should be a wife, habitually deprive them of
the pecuniary and educational advantages of men, exclude them absolutely
from very many of the employments in which they might earn a subsistence,
encumber their course in others by a heartless ridicule or by a steady
disapprobation, and consign, in consequence, many thousands to the most
extreme and agonising poverty, and perhaps a still larger number to the
paths of vice. At the same time a momentous revolution, the effects of
which can as yet be but imperfectly descried, has taken place in the chief
spheres of female industry that remain. The progress of machinery has
destroyed its domestic character. The distaff has fallen from the hand.
The needle is being rapidly superseded, and the work which, from the days
of Homer to the present century, was accomplished in the centre of the
family, has been transferred to the crowded manufactory.(783)

The probable consequences of these things are among the most important
questions that can occupy the moralist or the philanthropist, but they do
not fall within the province of the historian. That the pursuits and
education of women will be considerably altered, that these alterations
will bring with them some modifications of the type of character, and that
the prevailing moral notions concerning the relations of the sexes will be
subjected in many quarters to a severe and hostile criticism, may safely
be predicted. Many wild theories will doubtless be propounded. Some real
ethical changes may perhaps be effected, but these, if I mistake not, can
only be within definite and narrow limits. He who will seriously reflect
upon our clear perceptions of the difference between purity and impurity,
upon the laws that govern our affections, and upon the interests of the
children who are born, may easily convince himself that in this, as in all
other spheres, there are certain eternal moral landmarks which never can
be removed.





INDEX.


Abortion, diversities of moral judgment respecting, i. 92.
  History of the practice of, ii. 20, 24

Abraham the Hermit, St., ii. 110

Acacius, his ransom of Persian slaves, ii. 72

Adultery, laws concerning, ii. 313

Æschylus, his views of human nature, i. 196.
  His violation of dramatic probabilities, 229

Affections, the, all forms of self-love, according to some Utilitarians,
            i. 9.
  Subjugation of the, to the reason, taught by the Stoics, &c., 177, 187.
  Considered by the Stoics as a disease, 188.
  Evil consequences of their suppression, 191

Africa, sacrifices of children to Saturn in, ii. 31.
  Effect of the conquest of Genseric of, 82

Agapæ, or love feasts, of the Christians, how regarded by the pagans, i.
            415; ii. 79.
  Excesses of the, and their suppression, 150

Agnes, St., legend of, ii. 319

Agricultural pursuits, history of the decline of, in Italy, i. 266.
  Efforts to relieve the agriculturists, 267

Albigenses, their slow suicides, ii. 49

Alexander the Great: effect of his career on Greek cosmopolitanism, i. 229

Alexandria, foundation of, i. 230.
  Effect of the increasing importance of, on Roman thought, 319.
  The Decian persecution at, 451.
  Excesses of the Christian sects of, ii. 196, 197, _note_

Alexis, St., his legend, ii. 322

Alimentus, Cincius, his work written in Greek, i. 230

Almsgiving, effects of indiscriminate, ii. 90, 91

Amafanius, wrote the first Latin work on philosophy, i. 175, _note_.

Ambrose, St., his miraculous dream, i. 379.
  His dissection of the pagan theory of the decline of the Roman empire,
              409.
  His ransom of Italians from the Goths, ii. 72.
  His commendation of disobedience to parents, 132

American Indians, suicide of the, ii. 54

Ammon, St., his refusal to wash himself, ii. 110.
  Deserts his wife, 322

Amour, William de St., his denunciation of the mendicant orders, ii. 96

Amphitheatres, history and remains of Roman, i. 273

Anaxagoras, on the death of his son, i. 191.
  On his true country, 201

Anchorites. _See_ Ascetics; Monasticism

Angelo, Michael, in what he failed, ii. 363

Anglo-Saxon nations, their virtues and vices, i. 153

Animals, lower, Egyptian worship of, i. 166, _note_.
  Humanity to animals probably first advocated by Plutarch, 244.
  Animals employed in the arena at Rome, 280.
  Instances of kindness to, 288, 307.
  Legends of the connection of the saints and the animal world, ii. 161.
  Pagan legends of the intelligence of animals, 161, 162.
  Legislative protection of them, 162.
  Views as to the souls of animals, 162.
  Moral duty of kindness to animals taught by pagans, 166.
  Legends in the lives of the saints in connection with animals, 168.
  Progress in modern times of humanity to animals, 172

Antigonus of Socho, his doctrine of virtue, i. 183, _note_

Antioch, charities of, ii. 80.
  Its extreme vice and asceticism, 153

Antisthenes, his scepticism, i. 162

Antoninus, the philosopher, his prediction, i. 427

Antoninus the Pious, his death, i. 207.
  His leniency towards the Christians, 438, 439.
  Forged letter of, 439, _note_.
  His charity, ii. 77

Antony, St., his flight into the desert, ii. 103.
  His mode of life, 110.
  His dislike to knowledge, 115.
  Legend of his visit to Paul the hermit, 157, 158

Aphrodite, the celestial and earthly, i. 106

Apollonius of Tyana, his conversation with an Egyptian priest respecting
            the Greek and Egyptian modes of worshipping the deity, i. 166,
            _note_.
  Miracles attributed to him, 372.
  His humanity to animals, ii. 165

Apollonius, the merchant, his dispensary for monks, ii. 81

Apuleius, his condemnation of suicide, i. 213.
  His disquisition on the doctrine of dæmons, 323.
  Practical form of his philosophy, 329.
  Miracles attributed to him, 372.
  His defence of tooth-powder, ii. 148

Archytas of Tarentum, his speech on the evils of sensuality, i. 200,
            _note_

Argos, story of the sons of the priestess of Juno at, i. 206

Arians, their charges against the Catholics, i. 418, _note_

Aristides, his gentleness, i. 228

Aristotle, his admission of the practice of abortion, i. 92.
  Emphasis with which he dwelt upon the utility of virtue, 124.
  His patriotism, 200.
  His condemnation of suicide, 212.
  His opinions as to the duties of Greeks to barbarians, 229

Arius, death of, ii. 196

Arnobius, on the miracles of Christ, i. 375

Arrian, his humanity to animals, ii. 164

Arsenius, St., his penances, ii. 107, 114, _note_.
  His anxiety to avoid distractions, 125, _note_

Ascetics, their estimate of the dreadful nature of sin, i. 113.
  Decline of asceticism and evanescence of the moral notions of which it
              was the expression, 113.
  Condition of society to which it belongs, 130.
  Decline of the ascetic and saintly qualities with civilisation, 130.
  Causes of the ascetic movement, ii. 102.
  Its rapid extension, 103-105.
  Penances attributed to the saints of the desert, 107-109.
  Miseries and joys of the hermit life, 113 _et seq._
  Dislike of the monks to knowledge, 115.
  Their hallucinations, 116.
  Relations of female devotees with the anchorites, 120.
  Ways in which the ascetic life affected both the ideal type and realised
              condition of morals, 122, _et seq._
  Extreme animosity of the ascetics to everything pagan, 136, 137.
  Decline of the civic virtues caused by asceticism, 139.
  Moral effects of asceticism on self-sacrifice, 154, 155.
  Moral beauty of some of the legends of the ascetics, 156.
  Legends of the connection between the saints and the animal world, 161.
  Practical form of asceticism in the West, 177.
  Influence of asceticism on chastity, 319, 320.
  On marriage, 320.
  On the estimate of women, 337

Asella, story of her asceticism, ii. 133

Asia Minor, destruction of the churches of, ii. 14

Aspasia, the Athenian courtesan, ii. 293

Asses, feast of, ii. 173

Association, Hartley’s doctrine of, i. 22.
  Partly anticipated by Hutcheson and Gay, 23.
  Illustrations of the system of association, 26-30.
  The theory, how far selfish, 30.
  The essential and characteristic feature of conscience wholly
              unaccounted for by the association of ideas, 66

Astrology, belief in, rapidly gaining ground in the time of the elder
            Pliny, i. 171, and _note_

Atticus, his suicide, i. 215, and _note_

Augustine, St., on original sin, i. 209.
  His belief in contemporary miracles, 378.
  On the decline of the Roman empire, 410.
  His condemnation of virgin suicides, ii. 47

Augustus, his solemn degradation of the statue of Neptune, i. 169.
  His mode of discouraging celibacy, 232.
  Miraculous stories related of him, 258.
  His superstition, 376.
  Advice of Mæcenas to him, 399.
  His consideration for the religious customs of the Jews, 406

Aulus Gellius, his account of the rhetoricians, i. 313.
  Compared with Helvétius, 313

Aurelius, Marcus, on a future state, i. 184.
  On posthumous fame, 186.
  Denied that all vices are the same, 192, _note_.
  On the sacred spirit dwelling in man, 198.
  His submissive gratitude, 199.
  His practical application of the precepts of the Stoics, 202.
  His wavering views as to suicide, 213.
  His charity to the human race, 241.
  Mild and more religious spirit of his stoicism, 245.
  His constant practice of self-examination, 249.
  His life and character, 249-255.
  Compared and contrasted with Plutarch, 253.
  His discouragement of the games of the arena, 286.
  His humanity, 308.
  His disbelief of exorcism, 384.
  His law against religious terrorism, 422.
  His persecution of the Christians, 439, 440.
  His benevolence, ii. 77.
  His view of war, 258

Austin, Mr., his view of the foundation of the moral law, i. 17, _note_.
  His advocacy of the unselfish view of the love we ought to bear to God,
              18, _note_.
  Character of his “Lectures on Jurisprudence,” 22, _note_

Avarice, association of ideas to the passion of, i. 25

Avitus, St., legend of, ii. 159

Babylas, St., miracles performed by his bones, i. 382, and _note_.
  His death, ii. 9

Bacchus, suppression of the rites of, at Rome, i. 401

Bacon, Lord, great movement of modern thought caused by, i. 125.
  His objection to the Stoics’ view of death, 202

Bacon, Roger, his life and works, ii. 210

Bain, Mr., on pleasure, i. 12, _note_.
  His definition of conscience, 29, _note_.

Balbus, Cornelius, his elevation to the consulate, i. 232

Baltus on the exorcists, i. 381, _note_.

Baptism, Augustinian doctrine of, i. 96

Barbarians, causes of the conversion of the, i. 410

Basil, St., his hospital, ii. 80.
  His labours for monachism, 106

Bassus, Ventidius, his elevation to the consulate, i. 232

Bathilda, Queen, her charity, ii. 245

Bear-gardens in England, ii. 175, _note_.

Beauty, analogies between virtue and, i. 77.
  Their difference, 79.
  Diversities existing in our judgments of virtue and beauty, 79.
  Causes of these diversities, 79.
  Virtues to which we can, and to which we cannot, apply the term
              beautiful, 82, 83.
  Pleasure derived from beauty compared with that from the grotesque, or
              eccentric, 85.
  The prevailing cast of female beauty in the north, contrasted with the
              southern type, 144, 145, 152.
  Admiration of the Greeks for beauty, ii. 292

Bees, regarded by the ancients as emblems or models of chastity, i. 108,
            _note_.

Beggars, causes of vast numbers of, ii. 94.
  Old English laws for the suppression of mendicancy, 96.
  Enactments against them in various parts of Europe, 98

Benedict, St., his system, 183

Benefices, military use of, ii. 270

Benevolence; Hutcheson’s theory that all virtue is resolved into
            benevolence, i. 4.
  Discussions in England, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, as
              to the existence of, 20.
  Various views of the source from which it springs, 22.
  Association of ideas producing the feeling of, 26.
  Hartley on benevolence quoted, 27, _note_.
  Impossibility of benevolence becoming a pleasure if practised only with
              a view to that end, 37.
  Application to benevolence of the theory, that the moral unity of
              different ages is a unity not of standard but of tendency,
              100.
  Influenced by our imaginations, 132, 133.
  Imperfectly recognised by the Stoics, 188, 192

Bentham, Jeremy, on the motives of human actions, i. 8, _note_.
  On the pleasures and pains of piety quoted, 9, _note_.
  On charity, 10, _note_.
  On vice, 13, _note_.
  On the sanctions of morality, 19, and _note_, 21.
  Throws benevolence as much as possible into the background, 21.
  Makes no use of the doctrine of association, 25, _note_.
  His definition of conscience, 29, _note_.
  On interest and disinterestedness, 32, _note_.
  On the value and purity of a pleasure, 90, _note_.

Besarion, St., his penances, ii. 108

Biography, relative importance of, among Christians and Pagans, i. 174

Blandina, martyrdom of, i. 442

Blesilla, story of her slow suicide, ii. 48

Blondel, his denunciation of the forgeries of the Sibylline books, i. 377

Boadicea, her suicide, ii. 53, _note_

Bolingbroke’s “Reflections on Exile,” i. 201, _note_

Bona Dea, story and worship of, i. 94, _note_.
  Popularity of her worship among the Romans, 106, 386

Boniface, St., his missionary labours, ii. 247

Bonnet, his philosophy, i. 71

Bossuet, on the nature of the love we should bear to God, i. 18, _note_

Brephotrophia, in the early church, ii. 32

Brotherhood, effect of Christianity in promoting, ii. 61

Brown, on the motive for the practice of virtue, i. 8, _note_.
  On theological Utilitarianism, 16, _note_

Brunehaut, Queen, her crimes, approved of by the Pope, ii. 236, 237.
  Her end, 237

Brutus, his extortionate usury, i. 193, 194

Buckle, Thomas, his remarks on morals, i. 74, _note_.
  On the difference between mental and physical pleasures, 90, _note_.
  His views of the comparative influence of intellectual and moral
              agencies in civilisation, 103, _note_

Bull-baiting in England, ii. 175, _note_

Bulgarians, their conversion to Christianity, ii. 180

Butler, Bishop, maintains the reality of the existence of benevolence in
            our nature, i. 20, 21, _note_.
  On the pleasure derived from virtue, 32, _note_.
  His analysis of moral judgments, 76.
  His definition of conscience, 83

Byzantine Empire, general sketch of the moral condition of the, ii. 13,
            14.
  Moral condition of the empire during the Christian period, 147

Cædmon, story of the origin of his “Creation of the World,” ii. 204

Cæsar, Julius, denies the immortality of the soul, i. 182.
  His condemnation of suicide, 213.
  His colonial policy, 233.
  His multiplication of gladiatorial shows, 273

Caligula, his intoxication with his imperial dignity, i. 259.
  His superstitious fears, 367

Calvinists: tendency of the Supralapsarian to deny the existence of a
            moral sense, i. 17, _note_

Camma, conjugal fidelity of, ii. 341

Capital punishment, aversion to, ii. 39

Carlyle, Thomas, on self-sacrifice, i. 57, _note_.
  The influence of conscience on the happiness of men, 62

Carneades, his expulsion from Rome proposed by Cato, i. 399

Carpocrates, licentiousness of the followers of, i. 417

Carthage, effect of the destruction of, on the decadence of Rome, i. 169.
  The Decian persecution at, 452

Carthaginians, the, amongst the most prominent of Latin writers, i. 235

Cassius, the tyrannicide, his suicide, i. 215

Castellio, his exposure of the forgeries of the Sibylline books, i. 377

Catacombs, the, i. 453, 455

Catholicism, Roman, the system of education adopted by, contrasted with
            that of the English public schools, i. 114.
  Conflict of the priests with political economists on the subject of
              early marriages, 114, 115.
  The teaching of, on many points the extreme antithesis of that of the
              pagan philosophers, 208.
  Its view of death, 208, 210.
  Little done by it for humanity to animals, ii. 173, 177, 188.
  Influence on despotism, 186.
  Its total destruction of religious liberty, 194-199.
  Causes of the indifference to truth manifested in its literature, 241.
  Protestantism contrasted with it, 368

Cato, his refusal to consult the oracles, i. 165, _note_.
  His stoicism, 185.
  His inhumanity to his slaves, 193.
  His study of the “Phædon” the night he committed suicide, 212.
  His opposition to Greek philosophy, 231.
  His view of pre-nuptial chastity, ii. 314

Cattle plague, theological notions respecting the, i. 356

Catullus, on the death of a sparrow, ii. 165, _note_

Cautinus, Bishop, his drunkenness, ii. 236

Celibacy among the ancients, i. 106.
  The Catholic monastic system, 107.
  How discouraged by Augustus, 232.
  Celibacy the primal virtue of the Christians of the fourth and fifth
              centuries, ii. 122.
  Effect of this upon moral teaching, 122, 123.
  History of the celibacy of the clergy, 328, 336

Celsus calls the Christians Sibyllists, i. 376.
  And jugglers, 384

Celts, Spanish, their worship of death, i. 206, 207.
  Causes of their passion for suicide, 207, _note_.
  Their lamentations on the birth of men, 207, _note_

Censors, Roman, minute supervision of the, i. 168

Character, influence of, on opinion, i. 172.
  Governed in a great measure by national circumstances, 172

Chariot races, passion for, at Constantinople, ii. 37

Charity, a form of self-love, according to the Utilitarians, i. 9, and
            _note_.
  Impossibility of charity becoming a pleasure if practised only with a
              view to that end, 36.
  Charity of the Stoics, 191.
  Cicero’s emphatic assertion of the duty, 240.
  Exertions of the Christians in the cause of charity, ii. 75, 79.
  Inadequate place given to this movement in history, 84, 85.
  Christian charity, in what it consists, 73.
  Laws of the Romans, 73.
  Pagan examples of charity, 78.
  Noble enthusiasm of the Christians in the cause of charity, 78, 79.
  Charity enjoined as a matter of justice, 81.
  Theological notions of charity, 85, 90, 91.
  Evils of Catholic charity, 93-94.
  Legends respecting the virtue, 245, and _note_

Charlemagne, his law respecting Sunday, ii. 245.
  Fascination exercised by him over the popular imagination, 271, 272.
  His polygamy, 343

Charles V., the Emperor, his law against beggars, ii. 97

Charles Martel, his defeat of the Mohammedans, at Poictiers, ii. 273

Charondas, law of, on second marriages, ii. 325, _note_

Chastity, in Utilitarian systems, i. 12, 49.
  Sketch of the history of, 103-107.
  The Catholic monastic system, 107.
  Modern judgments of, ii. 282, 283.
  Cato’s views, 314.
  Mystical views, 315.
  Services of the ascetics in enforcing the duty of chastity, 318-320

Children, charge of murdering infants, among the early Christians, i. 417.
  Abortion, ii. 20-24.
  Infanticide, 24, 26.
  Exposed children, 32.
  Institutions of the Romans for the benefit of children, 77

Chilon, his closing hours, i. 207

Cholera, theological notions respecting the, i. 356

Christian and pagan virtues compared, i. 190

Christianity; distinctions between the pagan and Christian conceptions of
            death, i. 208.
  The importance of Christianity not recognised by pagan writers, 336.
  Causes of this, 338.
  Examination of the theory which ascribes part of the teaching of the
              later pagan moralists to Christian influence, 340.
  Theory which attributes the conversion of Rome to evidences of miracles,
              346.
  Opinion of the pagans about the credulity of the Christians, 347.
  Incapacity of the Christians of the third century for judging historic
              miracles, 375.
  And for judging prophecies, 376.
  Contemporary miracles represented as existing among them, 377.
  Christian miracles had probably little weight with the pagans, 385.
  Progress of Christianity to what due, 386, 387.
  Singular adaptation of it to the wants of the time, 387.
  Heroism it inspired, 390.
  Explanation of the conversion of the Roman Empire, 393.
  Account of the persecutions of the Christians, 395.
  Reasons why the Christians were more persecuted than the Jews, 403, 406,
              407.
  The first cause of the persecution of the Christians, 406.
  Charges of immorality brought against them, 414.
  Due in a great measure to Jews and heretics, 416, 417.
  The disturbance of domestic life caused by female conversions, 418.
  Antipathy of the Romans to every system which employed religious
              terrorism, 421.
  Christian intolerance of pagan worship, 423.
  And of diversity of belief, 424-427.
  History of the persecutions, 429.
  Nero’s, 429.
  Domitian’s, 431.
  Condition of the Christians under the Antonines, 434.
  Become profoundly obnoxious to the people, 436.
  Marcus Aurelius, 439, 440.
  Introduction of Christianity into France, 442, and _note_.
  Attitude of the rulers towards it from M. Aurelius to Decius, 451, _et
              seq._
  Condition of the Church on the eve of the Decian persecution, 448.
  Gallus, 454.
  Valerian, 454.
  Gallienus, 455.
  Erection of churches in the Empire, 457.
  Persecutions of Diocletian and Galerius, 458.
  End of the persecutions, 463.
  Massacre of Christians in Phrygia, 464.
  Moral efficacy of the Christian sense of sin, ii. 3.
  Dark views of human nature not common in the early Church, 5.
  The penitential system, 6.
  Empire Christianity attained in eliciting disinterested enthusiasm, 8.
  Great purity of the early Christians, 10, 11.
  The promise of the Church for many centuries falsified, 12.
  The first consequence of Christianity a new sense of the sanctity of
              human life, 17.
  Influence in the protection of infant life, 20-32.
  In the suppression of gladiatorial shows, 34.
  Its effect upon persecutions, 40, _et seq._
  The penal code not lightened by it, 42.
  Condemnation of suicide, 43.
  Second consequence of Christianity Teaches universal brotherhood, 61.
  Slavery, 61-66.
  Ransom of captives, 72.
  Charity, 73.
  Exertions of the Christians in the cause of charity, 75, 79.
  Their exertions when the Empire was subverted, 81, 82, 88.
  Theological notions concerning insanity, 85-90.
  Almsgiving, 90-92.
  Beneficial effect of Christianity in supplying pure images to the
              imagination, 99.
  Summary of the philanthropic achievements of Christianity, 100.
  Ways in which the ascetic mode of life affected both the ideal type and
              realised condition of morals, 122, _et seq._
  History of the relations of Christianity to the civic virtues, 140.
  Improvements effected by Christianity in the morals of the people, 153.
  Attitude of Christianity to the barbarians, 178.
  How it achieved their conversion, 179-181.
  Tendency of the barbarians to adulterate it, 181.
  Legends of the conflict between the old gods and the new faith, 181.
  Fierce hatred of rival sects, and total destruction of religious
              liberty, 194, 200.
  Polytheistic and idolatrous form of Christianity in mediæval times, 229.
  The doctrine of purgatory, 232.
  Benefits conferred by the monasteries, 243-245.
  The observance of Sunday, 245.
  Influence of Christianity upon war, 254, 259.
  Upon the consecration of secular rank, 260, _et seq._
  Upon the condition of women, 316, _et seq._
  Strong assertion of the equality of obligation in marriage, 345, 346.
  Relation of Christianity to the female virtues, 358, _et seq._

Chrysippus on the immortality of the soul, i. 183

Chrysostom, St., his labours for monachism, ii. 107.
  His treatment of his mother, 132

Cicero on the evidence of a Divine element within us, i. 56, _note_.
  His definition of conscience, 83.
  His conception of the Deity, 164.
  His opinion of the popular beliefs, 165.
  Instance of his love of truth, 176, _note_.
  His desire for posthumous reputation, 185, _note_.
  His declaration as to virtue concealing itself from the world, 185.
  His belief in the immortality of the soul, 204.
  His view of death, 205, 206.
  His complacency on the approach of death, 207.
  His conception of suicide, 213.
  His maintenance of the doctrine of universal brotherhood, 240.
  How he regarded the games of the arena, 285.
  His friendship with his freedman Tiro, 323.
  His remarks on charity, ii. 79.
  His rules respecting almsgiving, 92

Circumcelliones, atrocities of the, ii. 41.
  Their custom of provoking martyrdom, 49

Civic virtues, predominance accorded to, in ancient ethics, i. 200

Civilisation, refining influence of, on taste, i. 79.
  Pleasures of a civilised and semi-civilised society compared, 86.
  Views of Mill and Buckle on the comparative influence of intellectual
              and moral agencies in, 102, _note_.
  Effect of education in diminishing cruelty, and producing charity, 134.
  Moral enthusiasm appropriate to different stages of civilisation, 136.
  Increase of veracity with civilisation, 137.
  Each stage of civilisation specially appropriate to some virtue, 147

Clarke, on moral judgments, i. 77

Classical literature, preservation of, ii. 199.
  Manner in which it was regarded by the Church, 200-204

Claudius, his delight in gladiatorial shows, i. 280.
  His decree as to slaves, 307

Claver, Father, his remark on some persons who had delivered a criminal
            into the hands of justice, i. 41, _note_

Cleanthes, his suicide, i. 212

Clemency, Seneca’s distinction between it and pity, i. 189

Clement of Alexandria, on the two sources of all the wisdom of antiquity,
            i. 344.
  On the Sibylline books, 376.
  On wigs, ii. 149

Clemens, Flavius, put to death, i. 433

Cleombrotus, his suicide, i. 212, _note_

Clergy, corruption of the, from the fourth century, ii. 150, 237.
  Submission of the Eastern, but independence of the Western, clergy to
              the civil power, 264-268.
  History of their celibacy, 328

Climate, effects of, in stimulating or allaying the passions, i. 144

Clotaire, his treatment of Queen Brunehaut, ii. 237

Clotilda, her conversion of her husband, i. 410; ii. 180

Clovis, his conversion, i. 410; ii. 180.
  Gregory of Tours’ account of his acts, 240, 241

Cock-fighting among the ancients and moderns, ii. 164, and _note_, 175,
            _note_

Cock-throwing, ii. 164, _note_, 175, _note_

Coemgenus, St., legend of, ii. 111, _note_

Coleridge, S. T., his remarks on the practice of virtue as a pleasure, i.
            28, _note_.
  His admiration for Hartley, 28, _note_.
  On the binding ground of the belief of God and a hereafter, i. 55,
              _note_

Colman, St., his animal companions, ii. 170.
  His girdle, 319, _note_

Colonies, Roman, the cosmopolitan spirit forwarded by the aggrandisement
            of the, i. 233

Colosseum, the, i. 275.
  Games at the dedication of the, 280

Columbanus, St., his missionary labours, ii. 246

Comedy, Roman, short period during which it flourished, i. 277

Comet, a temple erected by the Romans in honour of a, i. 367

Commodus, his treatment of the Christians, i. 443

Compassion, theory that it is the cause of our acts of barbarity, i. 71,
            72

Concubines, Roman, ii. 350

Concupiscence, doctrine of the Fathers respecting, ii. 281

Condillac, cause of the attractiveness of utilitarianism to, i. 71.
  Connection with Locke, i. 122, _note_

Confessors, power of the, in the early Church, i. 390, and _note_

Congo, Helvétius, on a custom of the people of, i. 102, _note_

Conquerors, causes of the admiration of, i. 94, 95

Conscience, association of ideas generating, i. 28.
  Recognised by the disciples of Hartley, 29.
  Definitions of Hobbes, Locke, Bentham, and Bain, 29, _note_.
  The rewards and punishments of conscience, 60-62.
  Unique position of, in our nature, 83.
  As defined by Cicero, the Stoics, St. Paul, and Butler, 83

Consequences, remote, weakness of the utilitarian doctrine of, i. 42-44

“Consolations,” literature of, leading topics of, i. 204

Constantine, the Emperor, his foundation of the empire of the East, ii.
            12.
  His humane policy towards children, 29, 30.
  His sanction of the gladiatorial shows, 35.
  His laws mitigating the severity of punishments, 42.
  His treatment of slaves, 64.
  His law respecting Sunday, 244.
  Magnificence of his court at Constantinople, 265

Conventual system, effect of the suppression of the, on women, ii. 369

Cordeilla, or Cordelia, her suicide, ii. 53, _note_

Corinth, effect of the conquest of, on the decadence of Rome, i. 169

Cornelia, a vestal virgin, incident of her execution, ii. 318, _note_

Cornelius, the bishop, martyrdom of, i. 454

Cornutus, his disbelief in a future state, i. 183

Corporations, moral qualities of, i. 152

Councils of the Church, character of the, ii. 197, _note_

Courtesans, Greek, ii. 287.
  Causes of their elevation, 291-294.
  How regarded by the Romans, 300

Cousin, Victor, his criticism of the Scotch moralists, i. 74, _note_.
  His objection against Locke, 75, _note_

Crantor, originates the literature of “Consolations,” i. 204

Cremutius Cordus, trial of, i. 448, _note_

Crime, value attached by the monks to pecuniary compensations for, ii.
            213.
  Catalogue of crimes of the seventh century, 237-239

Criminals, causes of our indulgent judgment of, i. 135

Critical spirit, the, destroyed by Neoplatonism, i. 330

Cromaziano, his history of suicide, i. 216, _note_

Cruelty, origin and varieties of, i. 132, 134.
  Cruelty to animals, utilitarian doctrine concerning, 46, 47

Crusius, his adherence to the opinion of Ockham as to the foundation of
            the moral law, i. 17, _note_

Cudworth, his analysis of moral judgments, i. 76

Culagium, a tax levied on the clergy, ii. 330

Cumberland, Bishop, his unselfish view of virtue, i. 19, _note_

Cynics, account of the later, i. 309

Cyprian, St., his evasion of persecution by flight, i. 452.
  His exile and martyrdom, 455

Cyzicus deprived of its freedom, i. 259

Dæmons, Apuleius’ disquisition on the doctrine of, i. 323.
  The doctrine supersedes the Stoical naturalism, i. 331.
  The dæmons of the Greeks and Romans, 380.
  And of the Christians, 382

Dale, Van, his denial of the supernatural character of the oracles, i. 374

Dead, Roman worship of the, i. 168

Death, calmness with which some men of dull and animal natures can meet,
            i. 89.
  Frame of mind in which a man should approach death, according to
              Epictetus, 195.
  Preparation for death one of the chief ends of the philosophy of the
              ancients, 202.
  Bacon’s objection to the Stoics’ view of, 202.
  The Irish legend of the islands of life and death, 203.
  The literature of “Consolations,” 204.
  Death not regarded by the philosophers as penal, 205.
  Popular terrors of death, 205, 206.
  Instances of tranquil pagan deaths, 207.
  Distinctions between the pagan and Christian conceptions of death, 208

Decius, persecution of the Christians under, i. 449, 450

Defoe, Daniel, his tract against beggars, ii. 98, and _note_

Delphi, oracle of, its description of the best religion, i. 167

Deogratias, his ransom of prisoners, ii. 72

Despotism, Helvétius’ remarks on the moral effects of, i. 129, _note_

Diagoras, his denial of the existence of the gods, i. 162

Diodorus, the philosopher, his suicide, i. 215

Dion Chrysostom, his denunciation of images of the Deity, i. 166, 167,
            _note_.
  His life and works, 312

Dionysius of Halicarnassus, on the creed of the Romans, i. 167

Disinterestedness, Bentham’s remarks on, quoted, i. 32, _note_

Disposition, what constitutes, according to the theory of association, i.
            30

Divination, a favourite subject of Roman ridicule, i. 166.
  Belief of the ancients in, 363

Divorce, unbounded liberty of, among the Romans, ii. 306-308.
  Condemned by the Church, 350, 351

Docetæ, their tenets, ii. 102

Dog-star, legend of the, ii. 162

Dolphin, legends of the, ii. 162, and _note_

Domestic laws, Roman, changes in, i. 297, 298

Domestic virtues, destruction of the, by the ascetics, ii. 125

Domitian, his law respecting suicide, i. 219.
  Anecdote of his cruelty, 289.
  His law as to slaves, 307.
  His persecution of the Stoics and Christians, 431, 432

Domitilla, banishment of, i. 433

Domnina, her suicide with her daughters, ii. 46

Donatists, their intolerance, ii. 195

Dowry of women, rise of the, ii. 277 and _note_

Dreams, opinions of the Romans concerning, i. 366, 367, _note_

Dumont, M., on vengeance quoted, i. 41, _note_

Duty, theory of morals must explain what is, and the notion of there being
            such a thing as, i. 5.
  Paley on the difference between it and prudence, 15, 16, _note_.
  Distinction between natural duties and those resting on positive law,
              93.
  Duty a distinct motive, 180

Dwarfs, combats of, in the arena, i. 281

Earthquakes, how regarded by the ancients, i. 369.
  Cause of persecutions of the Christians, 408

Easter controversy, bitterness of the, ii. 198

Eclectic school of philosophy, rise of the, i. 242.
  Its influence on the Stoics, 245

Eclipses, opinions of the ancients concerning, i. 366

Education, importance ascribed to, by the theory of the association of
            ideas, i. 30.
  Contrast between that adopted by the Catholic priesthood and that of the
              English public schools, 114.
  Its influence on the benevolent feelings, 133, 134.
  Two distinct theories of, 187

Egypt, the cradle of monachism, ii. 105.
  The Mohammedan conquest of, 143.
  Triumphs of the Catholics in, 196

Egyptians, their reverence for the vulture, i. 108, _note_.
  Their kindness to animals, 289.
  Contrast of the spirit of their religion with that of the Greeks, 324.
  Difference between the Stoical and Egyptian pantheism, 325

Elephants, legends of, ii. 161

Emperors, Roman, apotheosis of, i. 170, 257

Endura, the Albigensian practice of, ii. 49

England, national virtues and vices of, i. 153.
  Ancient amusements of, ii. 174, 175, _note_

Ephrem, St., his charity, ii. 81

Epictetus, his disbelief in a future state, i. 183.
  His life and works, 184, and _note_.
  On the frame of mind in which a man should approach death, 195.
  His views of the natural virtue of man, 198.
  On suicide, 214, _note_, 220.
  On universal brotherhood, 254.
  His stoicism tempered by a milder and more religious spirit, 245, 246.
  His remarks on national religious beliefs, 405

Epicureans, their faith preserved unchanged at Athens, i. 128, and _note_.
  Their scepticism, 162.
  Roman Epicureans, 162, 163.
  Epicureanism the expression of a type of character different from
              Stoicism, 171, 172.
  But never became a school of virtue in Rome, 175.
  Destructive nature of its functions, 176.
  Esteemed pleasure as the ultimate end of our actions, 186.
  Encouraged physical science, 193.
  Their doctrine as to suicide, 214, 215, _note_

Epicurus, the four canons of, i. 14.
  Vast place occupied by his system in the moral history of man, 171.
  His character, 175, 176, _note_.
  Lucretius’ praise of him, 197.
  His view of death, 205.
  Discovery of one of his treatises at Herculaneum, 205, _note_

Epidemics, theological notions respecting, i. 356

Epiphanius, St., his miraculous stories, i. 378.
  His charges against the Gnostics, 417.
  Legend of him and St. Hilarius, ii. 159

Epponina, story of her conjugal fidelity, ii. 342

Error, the notion of the guilt of, ii. 190-193

Essenes, virginity their ideal of sanctity, i. 109, ii. 102

Euhemerus, his explanation of the legends, i. 163

Euphrates the Stoic, his answer to Pliny the Younger, i. 202.
  Has permission from Hadrian to commit suicide, 218, _note_

Euphraxia, St., ii. 110

Euripides, beauty of the gentler virtues inculcated in the plays of, i.
            228

Eusebius, on the allegorical and mythical interpretations of paganism, i.
            163, _note_.
  His account of the Christian persecutions, i. 463

Eusebius, St., his penances, ii. 108

Eustathius, condemnation of, by the council of Gangra, ii. 131

Evagrius, his inhumanity to his parents, ii. 125

Evil, views of Hobbes and the Utilitarians of the essence and origin of,
            i. 8-10

Excellence, supreme, how far it is conducive to happiness, i. 56

Excommunication, penalties of, ii. 7

Executioners, always regarded as unholy, i. 41

Exorcism, among the early Christians, i. 378, 380.
  Origin of the notions of possession and exorcism, 380.
  Jews the principal exorcists, 380.
  Belief of the early Christians in, 382.
  Contempt of the pagans for it, 384.
  Ulpian’s law against exorcists, 384.
  Probable explanation of possession and exorcism, 385.
  Speedy decline of exorcism, 385.
  The practice probably had no appreciable influence in provoking
              persecution of the Christians, 420

Experience, general statement of the doctrine which bases morals upon, i.
            5

Fabianus, martyrdom of, i. 446

Fabiola, founded the first public hospital, ii. 80

Fabius, his self-sacrifice, i. 185

Fabius Pictor, his works written in Greek, i. 230

Faculty, moral, the term, i. 75

Fairies, belief in, i. 348, 349

Fatalism, Æschylus the poet of, i. 196

Felicitas, St., her martyrdom, i. 444.
  In prison, ii. 9

Fénelon, on the unselfish love we should bear to God, i. 18, _note_

Fetishism, latent, the root of a great part of our opinions, i. 350

Fidenæ, accident at the amphitheatre at, i. 275

Fights, sham, in Italy in the middle ages, ii. 37, 38

Fire, regarded by the ancients as an emblem of virginity, i. 108, _note_

Fish, symbol of the early Christians, i. 376

Flamens of Jupiter, ii. 298

Flora, games of, i. 276

Forethought, brought into a new position by industrial habits, i. 140

Foundlings, hospitals for, ii. 23, _note_, 32.
  In ancient times, 28, 29.
  Adversaries of, 98, and _note_

France, condition of, under the Merovingian kings, ii. 236, _note_

Francis of Assisi, St., story of his death from asceticism, ii. 49.
  His kindness to animals, 172

Franks, cause of their conversion, i. 410

Frédégonde, Queen, her crimes, ii. 236, 237

Freedmen, influence of, at Rome, i. 233.
  Condition of the freedmen of the Romans, 236

Frenchmen, the chief national virtues and causes of their influence in
            Europe, i. 152.
  Compared with Anglo-Saxon nations, 153

Friendship, Utilitarian view of, i. 10

Galerius, his persecution of the Christians, i. 458, 461.
  His illness, 462.
  Relents towards the Christians, 462

Galilæans, their indifference to death, i. 392, _note_

Gall, St., legend of, ii. 182.
  His missionary labours, 247

Gallienus, proclaims toleration to the Christians, i. 455, 457

Gallus, the Emperor, persecutions of the Christians under, i. 454

Gambling-table, moral influence of the, i. 148

Gaul, introduction of Christianity into, i. 442.
  Foundation of the monastic system in, ii. 106.
  Long continuance of polygamy among the kings of, 343

Gay, his view of the origin of human actions, quoted, i. 8, _note_.
  His suggestion of the theory of association, 23, 24

Genseric, effect of his conquest of Africa upon Italy, ii. 82.
  His capture of Rome, 83

George of Cappadocia, his barbarity, ii. 195

Germanicus, the Emperor, fury of the populace with the gods, in
            consequence of the death of, i. 169

Germanus, St., his charity, ii. 245

Germany, conversion of, to Christianity, ii. 246.
  Marriage customs of the early Germans, 278.
  Their chastity, 340, 341

Gervasius, St., recovery of his remains, i. 379.

Girdles of chastity, ii. 319, _note_

Gladiatorial shows, influence of Christianity on the suppression of, i.
            34.
  Reasons why the Romans saw nothing criminal in them, 101.
  History and effect on the Romans of, 271-283.
  How regarded by moralists and historians, 284.
  The passion for them not inconsistent with humanity in other spheres,
              288.

Gnostics, accusations against the, by the early Fathers, i. 417.
  Their tenets, ii. 102

God, the Utilitarian view of the goodness of, i. 9, and _note_.
  Question of the disinterestedness of the love we should bear to, 18.
  Our knowledge of Him derived from our own moral nature, 55.
  Early traces of an all-pervading soul of nature in Greece, 161, 162,
              170.
  Philosophic definitions of the Deity, 162, _note_.
  Pantheistic conception of, by the Stoics and Platonists, 163.
  Recognition of Providence by the Roman moralists, 196.
  Two aspects under which the Stoics worshipped the Divinity—providence
              and moral goodness, 198

Gods, the, of the ancients, i. 161, _et seq._
  Euhemerus’ theory of the explanation of the prevailing legends of the
              gods, 163.
  Views of Cicero of the popular beliefs, 165.
  Opinions of the Stoics, of Ovid, and of Horace, 166.
  Nature of the gods of the Romans, 167.
  Decline of Roman reverence for the gods, 168, 169

Good, pleasure equivalent to, according to the Utilitarians, i. 8, _note_,
            9

Gracchi, colonial policy of the, i. 233

Grazers, sect of, ii. 109

Greeks, ancient, their callous murder of children, i. 45, 46.
  Low state of female morality among them.
  Their enforcement of monogamy, 104.
  Celibacy of some of their priests and priestesses, 105.
  Early traces of a religion of nature, 161.
  Universal providence attributed to Zeus, 161.
  Scepticism of the philosophers, 161, 162.
  Importance of biography in the moral teaching of the, i. 74.
  Difference between the teaching of the Roman moralists and the Greek
              poets, 195.
  On death, and future punishment, 205, 206.
  Greek suicides, 212.
  Gentleness and humanity of the Greek character, 227.
  Influence on Roman character, 227, 228.
  The Greek spirit at first as far removed from cosmopolitanism as that of
              Rome, 228.
  Causes of Greek cosmopolitanism, 229.
  Extent of Greek influence at Rome, 230.
  Gladiatorial shows among them, 276.
  Spirit of their religion contrasted with that of the Egyptians, 324.
  Their intolerance of foreign religions, 406.
  Condition and fall of their empire of the East, ii. 12-14.
  Their practice of infanticide, 25-27.
  Their treatment of animals, 164.
  Their treatment of prisoners taken in war, 257, 258.
  Their marriage customs, 277.
  Women in the poetic age, 278.
  Peculiarity of Greek feelings on the position of women, 280, 281.
  Unnatural forms assumed by vice amongst them, 294

Gregory the Great, his contempt for Pagan literature, ii. 201, _note_.
  His attitude towards Phocas, 264

Gregory of Nyssa, St., his eulogy of virginity, ii. 322

Gregory of Tours, manner in which he regarded events, ii. 240-242, 261,
            277

Grotesque, or eccentric, pleasure derived from the, compared with that
            from beauty, i. 85

Gundebald, his murders approved of by his bishop, ii. 237

Gunpowder, importance of the invention of, i. 126

Guy, Brother, his society for protection and education of children, ii.
            33, and _note_

Hadrian, the Emperor, his view of suicide, i. 219.
  Gives Euphrates permission to destroy himself, 218, _note_.
  His laws respecting slaves, 307.
  His leniency towards Christianity, 438.
  His benevolence, ii. 77

Hair, false, opinions of the Fathers on, ii. 149

Hall, Robert, on theological Utilitarianism, i. 15 _note_

“Happiness, the greatest, for the greatest number,” theory of the, i. 3.
  The sole end of human actions, according to the Utilitarians, 8, _note_.
  The best man seldom the happiest, 69.
  Mental compared with physical happiness, 87.
  Influence of health and temperament on happiness, 88, and _note_

Hartley, his doctrine of association, i. 22.
  Coleridge’s admiration for him, 28, _note_.
  On animal food, 48, _note_.
  His attempt to evade the conclusion to which his view leads, quoted, 67,
              _note_.
  His definition of conscience, 82

Hegesias, the orator of death, i. 215

Heliogabalus, his blasphemous orgies, i. 260

Hell, monkish visions of, ii. 221 and _note_.
  Glimpses of the infernal regions furnished by the “Dialogues” of St.
              Gregory, 221.
  Modern publications on this subject, 223, _note_

Helvétius, on the origin of human actions, i. 8, _note_.
  On customs of the people of Congo and Siam, 102, _note_.
  Compared with Aulus Gellius, 313

Herbert, of Cherbury, Lord, his profession of the doctrine of innate
            ideas, i. 123

Hercules, meaning of, according to the Stoics, i. 163

Hereford, Nicholas of, his opposition to indiscriminate alms, ii. 96

Heresy, punishment of death for, i. 98; ii. 40

Hermits. _See_ Asceticism; Monasticism

Heroism, the Utilitarian theory unfavourable to, i. 66.
  War, the school of heroism, 173

Hilarius, St., legend of him and St. Epiphanius, ii. 159

Hildebrand, his destruction of priestly marriage, ii. 322

Hippopotamus, legend of the, ii. 161

Historical literature, scantiness of, after the fall of the Roman empire,
            ii. 235

Hobbes, Thomas, his opinions concerning the essence and origin of virtue,
            i. 7, 8, _note_.
  His view of the origin of human actions, quoted, 8, _note_.
  His remarks on the goodness which we apprehend in God, quoted, 9,
              _note_.
  And on reverence, 9, _note_.
  On charity, 9, 10, _note_.
  On pity, 10, _note_.
  Review of the system of morals of his school, 11.
  Gives the first great impulse to moral philosophy in England, 19,
              _note_.
  His denial of the reality of pure benevolence, 20, 21.
  His definition of conscience, 29, _note_.
  His theory of compassion, 72, _note_

Holidays, importance of, to the servile classes, ii. 244

Homer, his views of human nature and man’s will, i. 196

Horace, his ridicule of idols, i. 166.
  His description of the just man, 197

Hospitality enjoined by the Romans, ii. 79

Hospitals, foundation of the first, ii. 80, 81

Human life, its sanctity recognised by Christianity, ii. 18.
  Gradual acquirement of this sense, 18

Human nature, false estimate of, by the Stoics, i. 192

Hume, David, his theory of virtue, i. 4.
  Misrepresented by many writers, 4.
  His recognition of the reality of benevolence in our nature, 20, and
              _note_.
  His comment on French licentiousness in the eighteenth century, 50,
              _note_.
  His analysis of the moral judgments, 76.
  Lays the foundation for a union of the schools of Clarke and
              Shaftesbury, 77

Humility, new value placed upon it by monachism, ii. 185, 187

Hutcheson, Francis, his doctrine of a “moral sense,” i. 4.
  Establishes the reality of the existence of benevolence in our nature,
              20.
  His analysis of moral judgments, 76

Hypatia, murder of, ii. 196

Iamblichus, his philosophy, i. 330

Ideas, confused association of. Question whether our, are derived
            exclusively from sensation or whether they spring in part from
            the mind itself, 122.
  The latter theory represented by the Platonic doctrine of pre-existence,
              122.
  Doctrine of innate ideas, 122

Idols and idolatry, views of the Roman philosophers of, i. 166.
  Discussion between Apollonius of Tyana and an Egyptian priest
              respecting, 166, _note_.
  Idols forbidden by Numa, 166, _note_.
  Plutarch on the vanity of, 166, _note_

Ignatius, St., his martyrdom, i. 438

Ignis fatuus, legend of the, ii. 224, _note_

Imagination, sins of, i. 44.
  Relation of the benevolent feelings to it, 132, 133.
  Deficiency of imagination the cause of the great majority of
              uncharitable judgments, 134-136.
  Feebleness of the imagination a source of legends and myths, 347.
  Beneficial effects of Christianity in supplying pure images to the
              imagination, 299

Imperial system of the Romans, its effect on their morals, i. 257.
  Apotheosis of the emperors, 257

India, ancient, admiration for the schools of, i. 229

Inductive, ambiguity of the term, as applied to morals, i. 73

Industrial truth, characteristics of, i. 137.
  Influence of the promotion of industrial life upon morals, 139-140

Infanticide, history of the practice of, ii. 24.
  Efforts of the Church to suppress it, 29.
  Roman laws relating to, 31.
  Causes of, in England, 285

Infants, Augustinian doctrine of the damnation of unbaptised, i. 96.
  The Sacrament given to, in the early Church, ii. 6

Insanity, alleged increase of, ii. 60.
  Theological notions concerning, 86.
  The first lunatic asylums, 88

Insurance societies among the poor of Greece and Rome, ii. 78

Intellectual progress, its relations to moral progress, i. 149-151

Interest, self-, human actions governed exclusively by, according to the
            Utilitarians, i. 7, 8, _note_.
  Summary of the relations of virtue and public and private, 117

Intuition, rival claims of, and utility to be regarded as the supreme
            regulator of moral distinctions, i. 1, 2.
  Various names by which the theory of intuition is known, 2, 3.
  Views of the moralists of the school of, 3.
  Summary of their objections to the Utilitarian theory, i. 69.
  The intuitive school, 74, 75.
  Doctrines of Butler, Adam Smith, and others, 76-77.
  Analogies of beauty and virtue, 77.
  Distinction between the higher and lower parts of our nature, 83.
  Moral judgments, and their alleged diversities, 91.
  General moral principles alone revealed by intuition, 99.
  Intuitive morals not unprogressive, 102, 103.
  Difficulty of both the intuitive and utilitarian schools in finding a
              fixed frontier line between the lawful and the illicit, 116,
              117.
  The intuitive and utilitarian schools each related to the general
              condition of society, 122.
  Their relations to metaphysical schools, 123, 124.
  And to the Baconian philosophy, 125.
  Contrasts between ancient and modern civilisations, 126, 127.
  Practical consequences of the opposition between the two schools, 127

Inventions, the causes which accelerate the progress of society in modern
            times, i. 126

Ireland, why handed over by the Pope to England, ii. 217

Irenæus, his belief that all Christians had the power of working miracles,
            i. 378

Irish, characteristics of the, i. 138.
  Their early marriages and national improvidences, 146.
  Absence of moral scandals among the priesthood, 146.
  Their legend of the islands of life and death, 203.
  Their missionary labours, ii. 246.
  Their perpendicular burials, 253

Isidore, St., legend of, ii. 205

Isis, worship of, at Rome, i. 387.
  Suppression of the worship, 402

Italians, characteristics of the, i. 138, 144

Italy, gigantic development of mendicancy in, ii. 98.
  Introduction of monachism into, 106

James, the Apostle, Eusebius’ account of him, ii. 105

James, St., of Venice, his kindness to animals, ii. 172

Jenyns, Soame, his adherence to the opinion of Ockham, i. 17, _note_

Jerome, St., on exorcism, i. 382.
  On the clean and unclean animals in the ark, ii. 104.
  Legend of, 115.
  Encouraged inhumanity of ascetics to their relations, 134.
  His legend of SS. Paul and Antony, 158

Jews, their law regulating marriage and permitting polygamy, i. 103.
  Their treatment of suicides, 218, _note_.
  Influence of their manners and creed at Rome, 235, 337.
  Became the principal exorcists, 380, 381, _note_.
  Spread of their creed in Rome, 386.
  Reasons why they were persecuted less than the Christians, 402, 407.
  How regarded by the pagans, and how the Christians were regarded by the
              Jews, 415.
  Charges of immorality brought against the Christians by the Jews, 417.
  Domitian’s taxation of them, 432.
  Their views of the position of women, ii. 337

Joffre, Juan Gilaberto, his foundation of a lunatic asylum in Valencia,
            ii. 89

John, St., at Patmos, i. 433

John, St., of Calama, story of, ii. 128

John XXIII., Pope, his crimes, ii. 331

Johnson, Dr., his adherence to the opinion of Ockham, i. 17, _note_

Julian, the Emperor, his tranquil death, i. 207, and _note_.
  Refuses the language of adulation, 259.
  His attempt to resuscitate paganism, 331.
  Attitude of the Church towards him, ii. 261.
  Joy at his death, 262

Julien l’Hospitalier, St., legend of, ii. 84, _note_

Jupiter Ammon, fountain of, deemed miraculous, i. 366, and _note_

Justinian, his laws respecting slavery, ii. 65

Justin Martyr, his recognition of the excellence of many parts of the
            pagan writings, i. 344.
  On the “seminal logos,” 344.
  On the Sibylline books, 376.
  Cause of his conversion to Christianity, 415.
  His martyrdom, 441

Juvenal, on the natural virtue of man, i. 197

Kames, Lord, on our moral judgments, i. 77.
  Notices the analogies between our moral and æsthetical judgments, 77

King’s evil, ceremony of touching for the, i. 363, _note_

Labienus, his works destroyed, i. 448, _note_

Lactantius, character of his treatise, i. 463

Lætorius, story of, i. 259

Laughing condemned by the monks of the desert, ii. 115, _note_

Law, Roman, its relation to Stoicism, i. 294, 295.
  Its golden age not Christian, but pagan, ii. 42

Lawyers, their position in literature, i. 131, _note_

Legacies forbidden to the clergy, ii. 151.
  Power of making bequests to the clergy enlarged by Constantine, 215

Leibnitz, on the natural or innate powers of man, i. 121, _note_

Leo the Isaurian, Pope, his compact with Pepin, ii. 266

Leonardo da Vinci, his kindness to animals, ii. 172, _note_

Licentiousness, French, Hume’s comments on, i. 50, _note_.

Locke, John, his view of moral good and moral evil, i. 8, _note_.
  His theological utilitarianism, 16, _note_.
  His view of the sanctions of morality, 19.
  His invention of the phrase “association of ideas,” 23.
  His definition of conscience, 29, _note_.
  Cousin’s objections against him, 75, _note_.
  His refutation of the doctrine of a natural moral sense, 123, 124.
  Rise of the sensual school out of his philosophy, 123, _note_.
  Famous formulary of his school, 124

Lombard, Peter, character of his “Sentences,” ii. 226.
  His visions of heaven and hell, 228

Longinus, his suicide, i. 219

Love terms Greek, in vogue with the Romans, i. 231, _note_

Lucan, failure of his courage under torture, i. 194.
  His sycophancy, 194.
  His cosmopolitanism, 240

Lucius, the bishop, martyrdom of, i. 454

Lucretius, his scepticism, i. 162.
  His disbelief in the immortality of the soul, i. 182, _note_.
  His praise of Epicurus, 197.
  His suicide, 215.
  On a bereaved cow, ii. 165

Lunatic asylums, the first, ii. 89

Luther’s wife, her remark on the sensuous creed she had left, i. 52

Lyons, persecution of the Christians at, i. 441

Macarius, St., miracle attributed to, ii. 40, _note_.
  His penances, 108, 109.
  Legend of his visit to an enchanted garden, 158.
  Other legends of him, 158, 159, 170, 220

Macedonia, effect of the conquest of, on the decadence of Rome, i. 169

Mackintosh, Sir James, theory of morals advocated by, i. 4.
  Fascination of Hartley’s doctrine of association over his mind, 29

Macrianus, persuades the Emperor Valerian to persecute the Christians, i.
            455

Macrina Cælia, her benevolence to children, ii. 77

Magdalen asylums, adversaries of, ii. 98, and _note_

Mallonia, virtue of, ii. 309

Malthus, on charity, ii. 92, _note_

Mandeville, his “Enquiry into the Origin of Moral Virtue.” His thesis that
            “private vices are public benefits,” i. 7.
  His opposition to charity schools, ii. 98

Manicheans, their tenets, ii. 102.
  Their prohibition of animal food, 167

Manilius, his conception of the Deity, i. 163

Manufactures, influence upon morals, i. 139

Marcellinus, Tullius, his self-destruction, i. 222

Marcia, mistress of Commodus, her influence in behalf of toleration to the
            Christians, i. 443

Marcian, St., legend of the visit of St. Avitus to him, ii. 159

Marcus, St., story of, and his mother, ii. 128

Marriage, how regarded by the Jews, Greeks, Romans, and Catholics, i. 103,
            104.
  Statius’ picture of the first night of marriage, 107, _note_.
  Reason why the ancient Jews attached a certain stigma to virginity, 109.
  Conflict of views of the Catholic priest and the political economist on
              the subject of early marriages, 114.
  Results in some countries of the difficulties with which legislators
              surround marriage, 144.
  Early marriages the most conspicuous proofs of Irish improvidence, 144.
  Influence of asceticism on, ii. 320.
  Notions of its impurity, 324.
  Second marriages, 324

Marseilles, law of, respecting suicide, i. 218, _note_.
  Epidemic of suicide among the women of, ii. 55

Martial, sycophancy of his epigrams, i. 194

Martin of Tours, St., establishes monachism in Gaul, ii. 106

Martyrdom, glories of, i. 390.
  Festivals of the Martyrs, 390, _note_.
  Passion for, 391.
  Dissipation of the people at the festivals, ii. 150

Mary, St., of Egypt, ii. 110

Mary, the Virgin, veneration of, ii. 367, 368, 390

Massilians, wine forbidden to women by the, i. 96, _note_

Maternal affection, strength of, ii. 25, _note_

Maurice, on the social penalties of conscience, i. 60, _note_

Mauricus, Junius, his refusal to allow gladiatorial shows at Vienna, i.
            286

Maxentius, instance of his tyranny, ii. 46

Maximilianus, his martyrdom, ii. 248

Maximinus, Emperor, his persecution of the Christians, i. 446

Maximus of Tyre, account of him and his discourses, i. 312.
  His defence of the ancient creeds, 323.
  Practical form of his philosophy, 329

Medicine, possible progress of, i. 158, 159

Melania, St., her bereavement, ii. 10.
  Her pilgrimage through the Syrian and Egyptian hermitages, 120

Milesians, wine forbidden by the, to women, i. 94, _note_

Military honour pre-eminent among the Romans, i. 172, 173.
  History of the decadence of Roman military virtue, 268

Mill, J., on association, 25, _note_, _et seq._

Mill, J. S., quoted, i. 29, 47, 90, 102

Minerva, meaning of, according to the Stoics, i. 163

Miracles, general incredulity on the subject of, at the present time, i.
            346, 348.
  Miracles not impossible, 347.
  Established by much evidence, 347.
  The histories of them always decline with education, 348.
  Illustration of this in the belief in fairies, 348.
  Conceptions of savages, 349.
  Legends, formation and decay of, 350-352.
  Common errors in reasoning about miracles, 356.
  Predisposition to the miraculous in some states of society, 362.
  Belief of the Romans in miracles, 363-367.
  Incapacity of the Christians of the third century for judging historic
              miracles, 375.
  Contemporary miracles believed in by the early Christians, 378.
  Exorcism, 378.
  Neither past nor contemporary Christian miracles had much weight upon
              the pagans, 378

Missionary labours, ii. 246

Mithra, worship of, in Rome, i. 386

Mohammedans, their condemnation of suicide, ii. 53.
  Their lunatic asylums, 89.
  Their religion, 251.
  Effects of their military triumphs on Christianity, 252

Molinos, his opinion on the love we should bear to God, condemned, i. 18,
            _note_

Monastic system, results of the Catholic monastic system, i. 107.
  Suicide of monks, ii. 52.
  Exertions of the monks in the cause of charity, 84.
  Causes of the monastic movement, 102.
  History of the rapid propagation of it in the West, 183.
  New value placed by it on obedience and humility, 185, 269.
  Relation of it to the intellectual virtues, 188.
  The monasteries regarded as the receptacles of learning, 199.
  Fallacy of attributing to the monasteries the genius that was displayed
              in theology, 208.
  Other fallacies concerning the services of the monks, 208-212.
  Value attached by monks to pecuniary compensations for crime, 213.
  Causes of their corruption, 217.
  Benefits conferred by the monasteries, 243

Monica, St., i. 94, _note_

Monogamy, establishment of, ii. 372

Monophysites, the cause, to some extent, of the Mohammedan conquest of
            Egypt, ii. 143

Montanists, their tenets, ii. 102

Moral distinctions, rival claims of intuition and utility to be regarded
            as the supreme regulators of, i. 1

Moral judgments, alleged diversities of, i. 91.
  Are frequently due to intellectual causes, 92.
  Instances of this in usury and abortion, 92.
  Distinction between natural duties and others resting on positive law,
              93.
  Ancient customs canonised by time, 93.
  Anomalies explained by a confused association of ideas, 94, 95.
  Moral perceptions overridden by positive religions, 95.
  Instances of this in transubstantiation and the Augustinian and
              Calvinistic doctrines of damnation, 96, 97.
  General moral principles alone revealed by intuition, 99.
  The moral unity of different ages a unity not of standard but of
              tendency, 100.
  Application of this theory to the history of benevolence, 100.
  Reasons why acts regarded in one age as criminal are innocent in
              another, 101.
  Views of Mill and Buckle on the comparative influence of intellectual
              and moral agencies in civilisation, 102, 103, _note_.
  Intuitive morals not unprogressive, 102, 103.
  Answers to miscellaneous objections against the theory of natural moral
              perceptions, 109.
  Effect of the condition of society on the standard, but not the essence,
              of virtue, 110.
  Occasional duty of sacrificing higher duties to lower ones, 110, _et
              seq._
  Summary of the relations of virtue and public and private interest, 117.
  Two senses of the word natural, 119

Moral law, foundation of the, according to Ockham and his adherents, i.
            17, _note_.
  Various views of the sanctions of morality, 19.
  Utilitarian theological sanctions, 53.
  The reality of the moral nature the one great question of natural
              theology, 56.
  Utilitarian secular sanctions, 57.
  The Utilitarian theory subversive of morality, 66.
  Plausibility and danger of theories of unification in morals, 72.
  Our knowledge of the laws of moral progress nothing more than
              approximate or general, 136

“Moral sense,” Hutcheson’s doctrine of a, i. 4

Moral system, what it should be, to govern society, i. 194

Morals, each of the two schools of, related to the general condition of
            society, i. 122.
  Their relations to metaphysical schools, 123, 124.
  And to the Baconian philosophy, 125.
  Contrast between ancient and modern civilisations, 125-127.
  Causes that lead societies to elevate their moral standard, and
              determine their preference of some particular kind of
              virtues, 130.
  The order in which moral feelings are developed, 130.
  Danger in proposing too absolutely a single character as a model to
              which all men must conform, 155.
  Remarks on moral types, 156.
  Results to be expected from the study of the relations between our
              physical and moral nature, 158.
  Little influence of Pagan religions on morals, 161

More, Henry, on the motive of virtue, i. 76

Musonius, his suicide, i. 220

Mutius, history of him and his son, ii. 125

Mysticism of the Romans, causes producing, i. 318

Myths, formation of, i. 351

Naples, mania for suicide at, ii. 55

Napoleon, the Emperor, his order of the day respecting suicide, i. 219,
            _note_

Nations, causes of the difficulties of effecting cordial international
            friendships, i. 156

Natural moral perceptions, objections to the theory of, i. 116.
  Two senses of the word natural, 118.
  Reid, Sedgwick, and Leibnitz on the natural or innate powers of man,
              121, _note_.
  Locke’s refutation of the doctrine of a natural moral sense, 124

Neoplatonism, account of, i. 325.
  Its destruction of the active duties and critical spirit, 329

Neptune, views of the Stoics of the meaning of the legends of, i. 163.
  His statue solemnly degraded by Augustus, 169

Nero, his singing and acting, i. 259.
  His law about slaves, 307.
  His persecution of the Christians, 429

Newman, Dr., on venial sin, i. 111, and _note_ on pride, ii. 188

Nicodemus, apocryphal gospel of, ii. 221

Nilus, St., deserts his family, ii. 322

Nitria, number of anchorites in the desert of, ii. 105

Nolasco, Peter, his works of mercy, ii. 73.
  His participation in the Albigensian massacres, 95

Novatians, their tenets, ii. 102

Numa, legend of his prohibition of idols, i. 166, _note_

Oath, sanctity of an, among the Romans, i. 168

Obedience, new value placed on it by monachism, ii. 185, 186, 269

Obligation, nature of, i. 64, 65

Ockham, his opinion of the foundation of the moral law, i. 17, and _note_

Odin, his suicide, ii. 53

O’Neale, Shane, his charity, ii. 96

Opinion, influence of character on, i. 171, 172

Oracles, refuted and ridiculed by Cicero, i. 165.
  Plutarch’s defence of their bad poetry, 165, _note_.
  Refusal of Cato and the Stoics to consult them, 165.
  Ridiculed by the Roman wits, 166.
  Answer of the oracle of Delphi as to the best religion, 167.
  Theory of the oracles in the ’De Divinatione’ of Cicero, 368, and
              _note_.
  Van Dale’s denial of their supernatural character, 374.
  Books of oracles burnt under the republic and empire, 447, and _note_

Origen, his desire for martyrdom, i. 391

Orphanotrophia, in the early Church, ii. 32

Otho, the Emperor, his suicide, i. 219.
  Opinion of his contemporaries of his act, 219, _note_

Ovid, object of his “Metamorphoses,” i. 166.
  His condemnation of suicide, 213, and _note_.
  His humanity to animals, ii. 165

Oxen, laws for the protection of, ii. 162

Oxyrinchus, ascetic life in the city of, ii. 105

Pachomius, St., number of his monks, ii. 105

Pætus and Arria, history of, ii. 310

Pagan religions, their feeble influence on morals, i. 161

Pagan virtues, the, compared with Christian, i. 190

Paiderastia, the, of the Greeks, ii. 294

Pain, equivalent to evil, according to the Utilitarians, i. 8, _note_

Palestine, foundation of monachism in, ii. 106.
  Becomes a hot-bed of debauchery, 152

Paley, on the obligation of virtue, i. 14, _note_.
  On the difference between an act of prudence and an act of duty, 16,
              _note_.
  On the love we ought to bear to God, 18, _note_.
  On the religious sanctions of morality, 19.
  On the doctrine of association, 25, _note_.
  On flesh diet, 49, _note_.
  On the influence of health on happiness, 88, _note_.
  On the difference in pleasures, 90, _note_

Pambos, St., story of, ii. 116, _note_

Pammachus, St., his hospital, ii. 80

Panætius, the founder of the Roman Stoics, his disbelief in the
            immortality of the soul, i. 183

Pandars, punishment of, ii. 316

Parents, reason why some savages did not regard their murder as criminal,
            i. 101

Parthenon, the, at Athens, i. 105

Pascal, his advocacy of piety as a matter of prudence, i. 17, _note_.
  His adherence to the opinion of Ockham as to the foundation of the moral
              law, 17, _note_.
  His thought on the humiliation created by deriving pleasure from certain
              amusements, i. 86, _note_

Patriotism, period when it flourished, i. 136.
  Peculiar characteristic of the virtue, 177, 178.
  Causes of the predominance occasionally accorded to civic virtues, 200.
  Neglect or discredit into which they have fallen among modern teachers,
              201.
  Cicero’s remarks on the duty of every good man, 201.
  Unfortunate relations of Christianity to patriotism, ii. 140.
  Repugnance of the theological to the patriotic spirit, 145

Paul, St., his definition of conscience, i. 83

Paul, the hermit, his flight to the desert, ii. 102.
  Legend of the visit of St. Antony to him, 158

Paul, St. Vincent de, his foundling hospitals, ii. 34

Paula, story of her asceticism and inhumanity, ii. 133, 134

Paulina, her devotion to her husband, ii. 310

Pelagia, St., her suicide, ii. 46.
  Her flight to the desert, 121, and _note_

Pelagius, ii. 223

Pelican, legend of the, ii. 161

Penances of the saints of the desert, ii. 107, _et seq._

Penitential system, the, of the early church, ii. 6, 7

Pepin, his compact with Pope Leo, ii. 267

Peregrinus the Cynic, his suicide, i. 220

Pericles, his humanity, i. 228

Perpetua, St., her martyrdom, i. 391, 444; ii. 317

Persecutions, Catholic doctrines justifying, i. 98.
  Why Christianity was not crushed by them, 395.
  Many causes of persecution, 395-397.
  Reasons why the Christians were more persecuted than the Jews, 403, 406,
              407.
  Causes of the persecutions, 406, _et seq._
  History of the persecutions, 429.
  Nero, 429.
  Domitian, 431.
  Trajan, 437.
  Marcus Aurelius, 439, 440.
  From M. Aurelius to Decius, 442, _et seq._
  Gallus, 454.
  Valerian, 454.
  Diocletian and Galerius, 458-463.
  End of the persecutions, 463.
  General considerations on their history, 463-468

Petronian law, in favour of slaves, i. 307

Petronius, his scepticism, i. 162.
  His suicide, 215.
  His condemnation of the show of the arena, 286

Philip the Arab, his favour to Christianity, i. 445

Philosophers, efforts of some, to restore the moral influence of religion
            among the Romans, i. 169.
  The true moral teachers, 171

Philosophical truth, characteristics of, i. 139, 140.
  Its growth retarded by the opposition of theologians, 140

Philosophy, causes of the practical character of most ancient, i. 202.
  Its fusion with religion, 352.
  Opinions of the early Church concerning the pagan writings, 332.
  Difference between the moral teaching of a philosophy and that of a
              religion, ii. 1.
  Its impotency to restrain vice, 4

Phocas, attitude of the Church towards him, ii. 263

Phocion, his gentleness, i. 228

Physical science affects the belief in miracles, i. 354, 355

Piety, utilitarian view of the causes of the pleasures and pains of, i. 9,
            and _note_.
  A matter of prudence, according to theological Utilitarianism, 16

Pilate, Pontius, story of his desire to enrol Christ among the Roman gods,
            i. 429

Pilgrimages, evils of, ii. 152

Pior, St., story of, ii. 129

Pirates, destruction of, by Pompey, i. 234

Pity, a form of self-love, according to some Utilitarians, i. 9, 10,
            _note_.
  Adam Smith’s theory, 10, _note_.
  Seneca’s distinction between it and clemency, 189.
  Altar to Pity at Athens, 228.
  History of Marcus Aurelius’ altar to Beneficentia at Rome, 228, _note_

Plato, his admission of the practice of abortion, i. 92.
  Basis of his moral system, 105.
  Cause of the banishment of the poets from his republic, 161, 162.
  His theory that vice is to virtue what disease is to health, 179, and
              _note_.
  Reason for his advocacy of community of wives, 200.
  His condemnation of suicide, 212, and _note_.
  His remarks on universal brotherhood, 241.
  His inculcation of the practice of self-examination, 248

Platonic school, its ideal, i. 322

Platonists, their more or less pantheistic conception of the Deity, i.
            163.
  Practical nature of their philosophy, 329.
  The Platonic ethics ascendant in Rome, 331

Pleasure the only good, according to the Utilitarians, i. 7.
  Illustrations of the distinction between the higher and lower parts of
              our nature in our pleasures, 83-85.
  Pleasures of a civilised compared with those of a semi-civilised
              society, 86.
  Comparison of mental and physical pleasures, 87, 88.
  Distinction in kind of pleasure, and its importance in morals, 89-91.
  Neglected or denied by Utilitarian writers, 89, _note_

Pliny, the elder, on the probable happiness of the lower animals, i. 87,
            _note_.
  On the Deity, 164.
  On astrology, 171, and _note_, 164, _note_.
  His disbelief in the immortality of the soul, 182.
  His advocacy of suicide, 215.
  Never mentions Christianity, 336.
  His opinion of earthquakes, 369.
  And of comets, 369.
  His facility of belief, 370.
  His denunciation of finger rings, ii. 148

Pliny, the younger, his desire for posthumous reputation, i. 185, _note_.
  His picture of the ideal of Stoicism, 186.
  His letter to Trajan respecting the Christians, 437.
  His benevolence, 242; ii. 77

Plotinus, his condemnation of suicide, i. 214.
  His philosophy, 330

Plutarch, his defence of the bad poetry of the oracles, 165, _note_.
  His mode of moral teaching, 175.
  Basis of his belief in the immortality of the soul, 204.
  On superstitious fear of death, 206.
  His letter on the death of his little daughter, 242.
  May justly be regarded as the leader of the eclectic school, 243.
  His philosophy and works compared with those of Seneca, 243.
  His treatise on “The Signs of Moral Progress,” 249.
  Compared and contrasted with Marcus Aurelius, 253.
  How he regarded the games of the arena, 286.
  His defence of the ancient creeds, 322.
  Practical nature of his philosophy, 329.
  Never mentions Christianity, 336.
  His remarks on the domestic system of the ancients, 419.
  On kindness to animals, ii. 165, 166.
  His picture of Greek married life, 289

Pluto, meaning of, according to the Stoics, i. 163

Po, miracle of the subsidence of the waters of the, i. 382, _note_

Pœmen, St., story of, and of his mother, ii. 129.
  Legend of him and the lion, 169

Political economy, what it has accomplished respecting almsgiving, ii. 90

Political judgments, moral standard of most men in, lower than in private
            judgments, i. 151

Political truth, or habit of “fair play,” the characteristic of free
            communities, i. 139.
  Highly civilised form of society to which it belongs, 139.
  Its growth retarded by the opposition of theologians, 140

Polybius, his praise of the devotion and purity of creed of the Romans, i.
            167

Polycarp, St., martyrdom of, i. 441

Polygamy, long continuance of, among the kings of Gaul, ii. 343

Pompeii, gladiatorial shows at, i. 276, _note_

Pompey, his destruction of the pirates, i. 234.
  His multiplication of gladiatorial shows, 273

Poor-law system, elaboration of the, ii. 96.
  Its pernicious results, 97, 99, 105

Poppæa, Empress, a Jewish proselyte, i. 386

Porcia, heroism of, ii. 309

Porphyry, his condemnation of suicides, i. 214.
  His description of philosophy, i. 326.
  His adoption of Neoplatonism, i. 330

Possevin, his exposure of the Sibylline books, i. 377

Pothinus, martyrdom of, i. 442

Power, origin of the desire of, i. 23, 26

Praise, association of ideas leading to the desire for even posthumous, i.
            26

Prayer, reflex influence upon the minds of the worshippers, i. 36

Preachers, Stoic, among the Romans, i. 308, 309

Pride, contrasted with vanity, i. 195.
  The leading moral agent of Stoicism, i. 195

Prometheus, cause of the admiration bestowed upon, i. 35

Prophecies, incapacity of the Christians of the third century for judging
            prophecies, i. 376

Prophecy, gift of, attributed to the vestal virgins of Rome, i. 107.
  And in India to virgins, 107, _note_

Prosperity, some crimes conducive to national, i. 58

Prostitution, ii. 282-286.
  How regarded by the Romans, 314

Protagoras, his scepticism, i. 162

Protasius, St., miraculous discovery of his remains, i. 379

Prudentius, on the vestal virgins at the gladiatorial shows, i. 291

Purgatory, doctrine of, ii. 232-235

Pythagoras, sayings of, i. 53.
  Chastity the leading virtue of his school, 106.
  On the fables of Hesiod and Homer, 161.
  His belief in an all-pervading soul of nature, 162.
  His condemnation of suicide, 212.
  Tradition of his journey to India, 229, _note_.
  His inculcation of the practice of self-examination, 248.
  His opinion of earthquakes, 369.
  His doctrine of kindness to animals, ii. 165

Quakers, compared with the early Christians, ii. 12, and _note_

Quintilian, his conception of the Deity, i. 164

Rank, secular, consecration of, ii. 260, _et seq_

Rape, punishment for, ii. 316

Redbreast, legend of the, ii. 224, _note_

Regulus, the story of, i. 212

Reid, basis of his ethics, i. 76.
  His distinction between innate faculties evolved by experience and
              innate ideas independent of experience, 121, _note_

Religion, theological utilitarianism subverts natural, i. 54-56.
  Answer of the oracle of Delphi as to the best, 167.
  Difference between the moral teaching of a philosophy and that of a
              religion, ii. 1.
  Relations between positive religion and moral enthusiasm, 141

Religions, pagan, their small influence on morals, i. 161.
  Oriental, passion for, among the Romans, 318

Religious liberty totally destroyed by the Catholics, ii. 194-199

Repentance for past sin, no place for, in the writings of the ancients, i.
            195

Reputation, how valued among the Romans, i. 185, 186

Resurrection of souls, belief of the Stoics in the, i. 164

Revenge, Utilitarian notions as to the feeling of, i. 41, and _note_.
  Circumstances under which private vengeance is not regarded as criminal,
              i. 101

Reverence, Utilitarian views of, i. 9, and _note_.
  Causes of the diminution of the spirit of, among mankind, 141, 142

Rhetoricians, Stoical, account of the, of Rome, i. 310

Ricci, his work on Mendicancy, ii. 98

Rochefoucauld La, on pity, quoted, i. 10, _note_.
  And on friendship, 10, 11, _note_

Rogantianus, his passive life, i. 330

Roman law, its golden age not Christian, but pagan, ii. 42

Romans, abortion how regarded by the, i. 92.
  Their law forbidding women to taste wine, 93, 94, _note_.
  Reasons why they did not regard the gladiatorial shows as criminal, 101.
  Their law of marriage and ideal of female morality, 104.
  Their religious reverence for domesticity, 106.
  Sanctity of, and gifts attributed to, their vestal virgins, 106.
  Character of their cruelty, 134.
  Compared with the modern Italian character in this respect, 134.
  Scepticism of their philosophers, 162-167.
  The religion of the Romans never a source of moral enthusiasm, 167.
  Its characteristics, 168.
  Causes of the disappearance of the religious reverence of the people,
              169.
  Efforts of some philosophers and emperors to restore the moral influence
              of religion, 169.
  Consummation of Roman degradation, 170.
  Belief in astrological fatalism, 170, 171.
  The stoical type of military and patriotic enthusiasm pre-eminently
              Roman, 172-174, 178.
  Importance of biography in their moral teaching, 178.
  Epicureanism never became a school of virtue among them, 175.
  Unselfish love of country of the Romans, 178.
  Character of Stoicism in the worst period of the Roman Empire, 181.
  Main features of their philosophy, 185, _et seq._
  Difference between the Roman moralists and the Greek poets, 195.
  The doctrine of suicide the culminating point of Roman Stoicism, 222.
  The type of excellence of the Roman people, 224, 225.
  Contrast between the activity of Stoicism and the luxury of Roman
              society, 225, 226.
  Growth of a gentler and more cosmopolitan spirit in Rome, 227.
  Causes of this change, 228, _et seq._
  Extent of Greek influence at Rome, 228.
  The cosmopolitan spirit strengthened by the destruction of the power of
              the aristocracy, 231, 232.
  History of the influence of freedmen in the state, 233.
  Effect of the aggrandisement of the colonies, the attraction of many
              foreigners to Rome, and the increased facilities for
              travelling, on the cosmopolitan spirit, 233, _et seq._
  Foreigners among the most prominent of Latin writers, 235.
  Results of the multitudes of emancipated slaves, 235, 236.
  Endeavours of Roman statesmen to consolidate the empire by admitting the
              conquered to the privileges of the conquerors, 238.
  The Stoical philosophy quite capable of representing the cosmopolitan
              spirit, 239.
  Influence of eclectic philosophy on the Roman Stoics, 244.
  Life and character of Marcus Aurelius, 249-255.
  Corruption of the Roman people, 255.
  Causes of their depravity, 256.
  Decadence of all the conditions of republican virtue, 256.
  Effects of the Imperial system on morals, 257-261.
  Apotheosis of the emperors, 257.
  Moral consequences of slavery, 262.
  Increase of idleness and demoralising employments, 262.
  Increase also of sensuality, 263.
  Destruction of all public spirit, 264.
  The interaction of many states which in new nations sustains national
              life prevented by universal empire, 264.
  The decline of agricultural pursuits, 265.
  And of the military virtues, 268.
  History and effects of the gladiatorial shows, 271.
  Other Roman amusements, 276.
  Effects of the arena upon the theatre, 277.
  Nobles in the arena, 283.
  Effects of Stoicism on the corruption of society, 291.
  Roman law greatly extended by it, 294.
  Change in the relation of Romans to provincials, 297.
  Changes in domestic legislation, 297.
  Roman slavery, 300-308.
  The Stoics as consolers, advisers, and preachers, 308.
  The Cynics and rhetoricians, 309, 310.
  Decadence of Stoicism in the empire, 317.
  Causes of the passion for Oriental religions, 318-320.
  Neoplatonism, 325.
  Review of the history of Roman philosophy, 332-335.
  History of the conversion of Rome to Christianity, 336.
  State of Roman opinion on the subject of miracles, 365.
  Progress of the Jewish and Oriental religions in Rome, 386, 387.
  The conversion of the Roman empire easily explicable, 393.
  Review of the religious policy of Rome, 397.
  Its division of religion into three parts, according to Eusebius, 403.
  Persecutions of the Christians, 406, _et seq._
  Antipathy of the Romans to every religious system which employed
              religious terrorism, 420.
  History of the persecutions, 429.
  General sketch of the moral condition of the Western Empire, ii. 14.
  Rise and progress of the government of the Church of Rome, 14, 15.
  Roman practice of infanticide, 27.
  Relief of the indigent, 73.
  Distribution of corn, 74.
  Exertions of the Christians on the subversion of the empire, 82.
  Inadequate place given to this movement, 85.
  Horrors caused by the barbarian invasions prevented to some extent by
              Christian charity, 81-84.
  Influence of Christianity in hastening the fall of the empire, 140, 141.
  Roman treatment of prisoners of war, 256-258.
  Despotism of the pagan empire, 260.
  Condition of women under the Romans, 297.
  Their concubines, 350

Rome, an illustration of crimes conducive to national prosperity, i. 58,
            _note_.
  Conversion of, 336.
  Three popular errors concerning its conversion, 339.
  Capture of the city by the barbarians, ii. 82

Romuald, St., his treatment of his father, ii. 135

Rope-dancing of the Romans, i. 291

Sabinus, Saint, his penances, ii. 108

Sacrament, administration of the, in the early Church, ii. 6

Salamis, Brutus’ treatment of the citizens of, i. 194

Sallust, his stoicism and rapacity, i. 194

Sanctuary, right of, accorded to Christian churches, ii. 40

Savage, errors into which the deceptive appearances of nature doom him, i.
            54.
  First conceptions formed of the universe, 349.
  The ethics of savages, 120, 121

Scepticism of the Greek and Roman philosophers, i. 162-166.
  Influence of, on intellectual progress, ii. 193

Scholastica, St., the legend of, ii. 136, _note_

Scifi, Clara, the first Franciscan nun, ii. 135

Sectarian animosity, chief cause of, i. 134

Sedgwick, Professor, on the expansion of the natural or innate powers of
            men, i. 121, _note_

Sejanus, treatment of his daughter by the senate, i. 107, _note_

Self-denial, the Utilitarian theory unfavourable to, i. 66

Self-examination, history of the practice of, i. 247-249

Self-sacrifice, asceticism the great school of, ii. 155

Seneca, his conception of the Deity, i. 163, _note_, 164.
  His distinction between the affections and diseases, 189, _note_.
  And between clemency and pity, 189.
  His virtues and vices, i. 194.
  On the natural virtue of man and power of his will, 197.
  On the Sacred Spirit dwelling in man, 198.
  On death, 205.
  His tranquil end, 207.
  Advocates suicide, 213, 220.
  His description of the self-destruction of a friend, 222.
  His remarks on universal brotherhood, 241.
  His stoical hardness tempered by new doctrines, 244.
  His practice of self-examination, 248.
  His philosophy and works compared with those of Plutarch, 243, 244.
  How he regarded the games of the arena, 286.
  His exhortations on the treatment of slaves, 306.
  Never mentions Christianity, 336.
  Regarded in the middle ages as a Christian, 340.
  On religious beliefs, 405

Sensuality, why the Mohammedans people Paradise with images of, i. 108.
  Why some pagans deified it, 108.
  Fallacy of judging the sensuality of a nation by the statistics of its
              illegitimate births, 144.
  Influence of climate upon public morals, 144.
  Of large towns, 145.
  And of early marriages, 146.
  Absence of moral scandals among the Irish priesthood, 146, 147.
  Speech of Archytas of Tarentum on the evils of, 200, _note_.
  Increase of sensuality in Rome, 263.
  Abated by Christianity, ii. 153.
  The doctrine of the Fathers respecting concupiscence, 281.

Serapion, the anthropomorphite, i. 52.
  Number of his monks, ii. 105.
  His interview with the courtesan, 320

Sertorius, his forgery of auspicious omens, i. 166.

Severus, Alexander, refuses the language of adulation, i. 259.
  His efforts to restore agricultural pursuits, 267.
  Murder of, 444.
  His leniency towards Christianity, 444.
  His benevolence, ii. 77

Severus, Cassius, exile of, i. 448, _note_

Severus, Septimus, his treatment of the Christians, i. 443

Sextius, his practice of self-examination, i. 248

Shaftesbury, maintains the reality of the existence of benevolence in our
            nature, i. 20.
  On virtue, 76, 77

Sibylline books, forged by the early Christians, i. 376, 377

Silius Italicus, his lines commemorating the passion of the Spanish Celts
            for suicide, i. 207, _note_.
  His self-destruction, 221

Silvia, her filthiness, ii. 110

Simeon, Bishop of Jerusalem, his martyrdom, i. 438

Simeon Stylites, St., his penance, ii. 111.
  His inhumanity to his parents, ii. 130

Sin, the theological doctrine on the subject, i. 111, 112.
  Conception of sin by the ancients, 195.
  Original, taught by the Catholic Church, 209, 210.
  Examination of the Utilitarian doctrine of the remote consequences of
              secret sins, 43, 44

Sisoes, the abbot, stories of, ii. 126, 127

Sixtus, Bishop of Rome, his martyrdom, i. 455

Sixtus V., Pope, his efforts to suppress mendicancy, ii. 97

Slavery, circumstances under which it has been justified, i. 101.
  Origin of the word servus, 102, _note_.
  Crusade of England against, 153.
  Character of that of the Romans, 235.
  Moral consequence of slavery, 262.
  Three stages of slavery at Rome, 300.
  Review of the condition of slaves, 300-306.
  Opinion of philosophers as to slavery, 306.
  Laws enacted in favour of slaves, 306.
  Effects of Christianity upon the institution of slavery, ii. 61.
  Consecration of the servile virtue, 68.
  Impulse given to manumission, 70.
  Serfdom in Europe, 70, 71, _note_.
  Extinction of slavery in Europe, 71.
  Ransom of captives, 72

Smith, Adam, his theory of pity, quoted, i. 10, _note_.
  His recognition of the reality of benevolence in our nature, 20.
  His analysis of moral judgment, 76

Smyrna, persecution of the Christians at, i. 441

Socrates, his view of death, i. 205.
  His closing hours, 207.
  His advice to a courtesan, ii. 296

Soul, the immortality of the, resolutely excluded from the teaching of the
            Stoics, i. 181.
  Character of their first notions on the subject, 182.
  The belief in the reabsorption of the soul in the parent Spirit, 183.
  Belief of Cicero and Plutarch in the immortality of the, 204.
  But never adopted as a motive by the Stoics, 204.
  Increasing belief in the, 331.
  Vague belief of the Romans in the, 168

Sospitra, story of, i. 373

Spain, persecution of the Christians in, i. 461.
  Almost complete absence of infanticide in, ii. 25, _note_.
  The first lunatic asylums in Europe established in, 89, 90

Spaniards, among the most prominent of Latin writers, i. 235.
  Their suicides, ii. 54

Spartans, their intense patriotism, i. 178.
  Their legislature continually extolled as a model, 201.
  Condition of their women, ii. 290

Spinoza, his remark on death, i. 203
  Anecdote of him, 289

Staël, Madame de, on suicide, ii. 59

Statius, on the first night of marriage, i. 107, _note_

Stewart, Dugald, on the pleasures of virtue, i. 32, _note_

Stilpo, his scepticism and banishment, i. 162.
  His remark on his ruin, 191.

Stoics, their definition of conscience, i. 83.
  Their view of the animation of the human fœtus, 92.
  Their system of ethics favourable to the heroic qualities, 128.
  Historical fact in favour of the system, 128.
  Their belief in an all-pervading soul of nature, 162.
  Their pantheistic conception of the Deity, 163.
  Their conception and explanation of the prevailing legends of the gods,
              163.
  Their opinion as to the final destruction of the universe by fire, and
              the resuscitation of souls, 164.
  Their refusal to consult the oracles, 165.
  Stoicism the expression of a type of character different from
              Epicureanism, 172.
  Rome pre-eminently the home of Stoicism, 172.
  Account of the philosophy of the Stoics, 177.
  Its two essentials—the unselfish ideal and the subjugation of the
              affections to the reason, 177.
  The best example of the perfect severance of virtue and interest, 181.
  Their views concerning the immortality of the soul, 182-184.
  Taught men to sacrifice reputation, and do good in secret, 186.
  And distinguished the obligation from the attraction of virtue, 186.
  Taught also that the affections must be subordinate to the reason,
              187-191.
  Their false estimate of human nature, 192.
  Their love of paradox, 192.
  Imperfect lives of many eminent Stoics, 193.
  Their retrospective tendencies, 193.
  Their system unfitted for the majority of mankind, 194.
  Compared with the religious principle, 195.
  The central composition of this philosophy, the dignity of man, 195.
  High sense of the Stoics of the natural virtue of man, and of the power
              of his will, 195, 196.
  Their recognition of Providence, 196.
  The two aspects under which they worshipped God, 198.
  The Stoics secured from quietism by their habits of public life,
              199-201.
  Their view of humanity, 202.
  Their preparations for, and view of, death, 202.
  Their teaching as to suicide, 212, 213, _et seq._
  Contrast between Stoicism and Roman luxury, 225, 226.
  The Stoical philosophy quite capable of representing the cosmopolitan
              spirit, 239, 240.
  Stoicism not capable of representing the softening movement of
              civilisation, 241.
  Influence of the eclectic spirit on it, 244.
  Stoicism becomes more essentially religious, 245.
  Increasingly introspective character of later Stoicism, 247.
  Marcus Aurelius the best example of later Stoicism, 249-255.
  Effects of Stoicism on the corruption of Roman Society, 291, 292.
  It raised up many good Emperors, 292.
  It produced a noble opposition under the worst Emperors, 293.
  It greatly extended Roman law, 294.
  The Stoics considered as the consolers of the suffering, advisers of the
              young, and as popular preachers, 308.
  Rapid decadence of Stoicism, 317, 318.
  Difference between the Stoical and Egyptian pantheism, 324.
  Stoical naturalism superseded by the theory of dæmons, 331.
  Theory that the writings of the Stoics were influenced by Christianity
              examined, 332.
  Domitian’s persecution of them, 432

Strozzi, Philip, his suicide, ii. 56

Suffering, a courageous endurance of, probably the first form of virtue in
            savage life, i. 130

Suicide, attitude adopted by Pagan philosophy and Catholicism towards, i.
            211, _et seq._
  Eminent suicides, 215.
  Epidemic of suicides at Alexandria, 216.
  And of girls at Miletus, 216, _note_.
  Grandeur of the Stoical ideal of suicide, 216.
  Influences conspiring towards suicide, 217.
  Seneca on self-destruction, 217, 218, 220.
  Laws respecting it, 218, _note_.
  Eminent instances of self-destruction, 219, 221.
  The conception of, as an euthanasia, 221.
  Neoplatonist doctrine concerning, 331.
  Effect of the Christian condemnation of the practice of, ii. 43-61.
  Theological doctrine on, 45, _note_.
  The only form of, permitted in the early Church, 47.
  Slow suicides, 48.
  The Circumcelliones, 49.
  The Albigenses, 49.
  Suicides of the Jews, 50.
  Treatment of corpses of suicides, 50.
  Authorities for the history of suicides, 50, _note_.
  Reaction against the mediæval laws on the subject, 51.
  Later phases of its history, 54.
  Self-destruction of witches, 54.
  Epidemics of insane suicide, 55.
  Cases of legitimate suicide, 55.
  Suicide in England and France, 58

Sunday, importance of the sanctity of the, ii. 244.
  Laws respecting it, 245

Superstition, possibility of adding to the happiness of man by the
            diffusion of, i. 50-53.
  Natural causes which impel savages to superstition, i. 55.
  Signification of the Greek word for, 205

Swan, the, consecrated to Apollo, i. 206

Sweden, cause of the great number of illegitimate births in, i. 144

Swinburne, Mr., on annihilation, i. 182, _note_

Symmachus, his Saxon prisoners, i. 287

Synesius, legend of him and Evagrius, ii. 214.
  Refuses to give up his wife, 332

Syracuse, gladiatorial shows at, i. 275

Tacitus, his doubts about the existence of Providence, i. 171, _note_

Telemachus, the monk, his death in the arena, ii. 37

Telesphorus, martyrdom of, i. 446, _note_

Tertia Æmilia, story of, ii. 313

Tertullian, his belief in dæmons, i. 382.
  And challenge to the Pagans, 383

Testament, Old, supposed to have been the source of pagan writings, i. 344

Thalasius, his hospital for blind beggars, ii. 81

Theatre, scepticism of the Romans extended by the, i. 170.
  Effects of the gladiatorial shows upon the, 277

Theft, reasons why some savages do not regard it as criminal, i. 102.
  Spartan law legalising it, 102

Theodebert, his polygamy, ii. 343

Theodoric, his court at Ravenna, ii. 201, 202, _note_

Theodorus, his denial of the existence of the gods, i. 162

Theodorus, St., his inhumanity to his mother, ii. 128

Theodosius the Emperor, his edict forbidding gladiatorial shows, ii. 36.
  Denounced by the Ascetics, 139.
  His law respecting Sunday, 245

Theological utilitarianism, theories of, i. 14-17

Theology, sphere of inductive reasoning in, 357

Theon, St., legend of, and the wild beasts, ii. 168

Theurgy rejected by Plotinus, i. 330.
  All moral discipline resolved into, by Iamblichus, 330

Thrace, celibacy of societies of men in, i. 106

Thrasea, mildness of his Stoicism, i. 245

Thrasea and Aria, history of, ii. 311

Thriftiness created by the industrial spirit, i. 140

Tiberius the Emperor, his images invested with a sacred character, i. 260.
  His superstitions, 367, and _note_

Timagenes, exiled from the palace by Tiberius, i. 448, _note_

Titus, the Emperor, his tranquil end, i. 207.
  Instance of his amiability, 287

Tooth-powder, Apuleius’ defence of, ii. 148

Torments, future, the doctrine of, made by the monks a means of extorting
            money, ii. 216.
  Monastic legends of, 220

Tragedy, effects of the gladiatorial shows upon, among the Romans, i. 277

Trajan, the Emperor, his gladiatorial shows, i. 287.
  Letter of Pliny to, respecting the Christians, 437.
  Trajan’s answer, 437.
  His benevolence to children, ii. 77.
  Legend of St. Gregory and the Emperor, 223

Transmigration of souls, doctrine of, of the ancients, ii. 166

Travelling, increased facilities for, of the Romans, i. 234

Trinitarian monks, their works of mercy, ii. 73

Troubadours, one of their services to mankind, ii. 232

’Truce of God,’ importance of the, ii. 254

Truth, possibility of adding to the happiness of men by diffusing abroad,
            or sustaining, pleasing falsehoods, i. 52.
  Saying of Pythagoras, 53.
  Growth of, with civilisation, 137.
  Industrial, political, and philosophical, 137-140.
  Relation of monachism to the abstract love of truth, ii. 189.
  Causes of the mediæval decline of the love of truth, 212

Tucker, his adoption of the doctrine of the association of ideas, i. 25,
            _note_

Turks, their kindness to animals, i. 289

Types, moral, i. 156.
  All characters cannot be moulded in one type, 158

Ulpian on suicide, i. 218, _note_
  Unselfishness of the Stoics, i. 177

Usury, diversities of moral judgment respecting, i. 92

Utilitarian school. _See_ Morals; Virtue; Vice

Utility, rival claims of, and intuition to be regarded as the supreme
            regulators of moral distinctions, i. 1, 2.
  Various names by which the theory of utility is known, 3.
  Views of the moralists of the school of, 3, _et seq._

Valerian, his persecutions of the Christians, i. 454

Valerius Maximus, his mode of moral teaching, i. 174

Vandals, their conquest of Africa, ii. 150

Varro, his conception of the Deity, i. 163.
  On popular religious beliefs, 167

Venus, effect of the Greek worship of, on the condition of women, ii. 291,
            _note_

Vespasian, his dying jest, i. 259.
  Effect of his frugality on the habits of the Romans, 292.
  Miracle attributed to him, 347.
  His treatment of philosophers, 448, _note_

Vice, Mandeville’s theory of the origin of, i. 7.
  And that “private vices were public benefits,” 7.
  Views of the Utilitarians as to, 12.
  The degrees of virtue and vice do not correspond to the degrees of
              utility, or the reverse, 40-42.
  The suffering caused by vice not proportioned to its criminality, 57-59.
  Plato’s ethical theory of virtue and vice, 179.
  Grote’s summary of this theory, 179, _note_.
  Conception of the ancients of sin, 195.
  Moral efficacy of the Christian sense of sin, ii. 3, 4

Virgil, his conception of the Deity, i. 163.
  His epicurean sentiment, 193, _note_.
  On suicide, 213.
  His interest in animal life, ii. 165

Virginity, how regarded by the Greeks, i. 105.
  Æschylus’ prayer to Athene, 105.
  Bees and fire emblems of virginity, 108, _note_.
  Reason why the ancient Jews attached a certain stigma to virginity, 109.
  Views of Essenes, 109

Virgins, Vestal, sanctity and gifts attributed to the, i. 106, 107, and
            _note_.
  Executions of, 407, and _note_.
  Reasons for burying them alive, ii. 41.
  How regarded by the Romans, 297

Virtue, Hume’s theory of the criterion, essential element, and object of,
            i. 4.
  Motive to virtue according to the doctrine which bases morals upon
              experience, 6.
  Mandeville’s the lowest and most repulsive form of this theory, 6, 7.
  Views of the essence and origin of virtue adopted by the school of
              Utilitarians, 7-9.
  Views of the Utilitarians of, 12.
  Association of ideas in which virtue becomes the supreme object of our
              affections, 27.
  Impossibility of virtue bringing pleasure if practised only with that
              end, 35, 36.
  The utility of virtue not denied by intuitive moralists, 39.
  The degrees of virtue and vice do not correspond to the degrees of
              utility, or the reverse, 53.
  The rewards and punishments of conscience, 59, 60.
  The self-complacency of virtuous men, 64, 65, and _note_.
  The motive to virtue, according to Shaftesbury and Henry More, 76.
  Analogies of beauty and virtue, 77.
  Their difference, 78.
  Diversities existing in our judgments of virtue and beauty, 79, 80.
  Virtues to which we can and cannot apply the term beautiful, 82.
  The standard, though not the essence, of virtue, determined by the
              condition of society, 109.
  Summary of the relations of virtue to public and private interest, 117.
  Emphasis with which the utility of virtue was dwelt upon by Aristotle,
              124.
  Growth of the gentler virtues, 132.
  Forms of the virtue of truth, industrial, political, and philosophical,
              137.
  Each stage of civilisation is specially appropriate to some virtue, 147.
  National virtues, 151.
  Virtues, naturally grouped together according to principles of affinity
              or congruity, 153.
  Distinctive beauty of a moral type, 154.
  Rudimentary virtues differing in different ages, nations, and classes,
              154, 155.
  Four distinct motives leading men to virtue, 178-180.
  Plato’s fundamental proposition that vice is to virtue what disease is
              to health, 179.
  Stoicism the best example of the perfect severance of virtue and
              self-interest, 181.
  Teachings of the Stoics that virtue should conceal itself from the
              world, 186.
  And that the obligation should be distinguished from the attraction of
              virtue, 186.
  The eminent characteristics of pagan goodness, 190.
  All virtues are the same, according to the Stoics, 192.
  Horace’s description of a just man, 197.
  Interested and disinterested motives of Christianity to virtue, ii. 3.
  Decline of the civic virtues caused by asceticism, 139.
  Influence of this change on moral philosophy, 146.
  The importance of the civic virtues exaggerated by historians, 147.
  Intellectual virtues, 188.
  Relation of monachism to these virtues, 189, _et seq._

Vitalius, St., legend of, and the courtesan, ii. 320

Vivisection, ii. 176.
  Approved by Bacon, 176, _note_

Volcanoes, how regarded by the early monks, ii. 221

Vultures, why made an emblem of nature by the Egyptians, i. 108, _note_

War, its moral grandeur, i. 95.
  The school of the heroic virtues, 173.
  Difference between foreign and civil wars, 232.
  Antipathy of the early Christians to a military life, ii. 248.
  Belief in battle being the special sphere of Providential interposition,
              249.
  Effects of the military triumphs of the Mohammedans, 251.
  Influences of Christianity upon war considered, 254.
  Improved condition of captives taken in war, 256

Warburton, on morals, i. 15, _note_, 17, _note_

Waterland, on the motives to virtue and cause of our love of God, quoted,
            i. 9, _note_, 15, _note_

Wealth, origin of the desire to possess, i. 23.
  Associations leading to the desire for, for its own sake, 25

Western Empire, general sketch of the moral condition of the, ii. 14

Widows, care of the early Church for, ii. 366

Will, freedom of the human, sustained and deepened by the ascetic life,
            ii. 123

Wine, forbidden to women, i. 93, 94, _note_

Witchcraft, belief in the reality of, i. 363.
  Suicide common among witches, ii. 54

Wollaston, his analysis of moral judgments, i. 76

Women, law of the Romans forbidding women to taste wine, i. 93, 94,
            _note_.
  Standards of female morality of the Jews, Greeks, and Romans, 103, 104.
  Virtues and vices growing out of the relations of the sexes, 143.
  Female virtue, 143.
  Effects of climate on this virtue, 144.
  Of large towns, 146.
  And of early marriages, 145.
  Reason for Plato’s advocacy of community of wives, 200.
  Plutarch’s high sense of female excellence, 244.
  Female gladiators at Rome, 281, and _note_.
  Relations of female devotees with the anchorites, ii. 120, 128, 150.
  Their condition in savage life, 276.
  Cessation of the sale of wives, 276.
  Rise of the dowry, 277.
  Establishment of monogamy, 278.
  Doctrine of the Fathers as to concupiscence, 281.
  Nature of the problem of the relations of the sexes, 282.
  Prostitution, 282-284.
  Recognition in Greece of two distinct orders of womanhood—the wife and
              the hetæra, 287.
  Condition of Roman women, 297, _et seq._
  Legal emancipation of women in Rome, 304.
  Unbounded liberty of divorce, 306.
  Amount of female virtue in Imperial Rome, 308-312.
  Legislative measures to repress sensuality, 312.
  To enforce the reciprocity of obligation in marriage, 312.
  And to censure prostitution, 315.
  Influence of Christianity on the position of women, 316, _et seq._
  Marriages, 320.
  Second marriages, 324.
  Low opinion of women, produced by asceticism, 338.
  The canon law unfavourable to their proprietary rights, 338, 339.
  Barbarian heroines and laws, 341-344.
  Doctrine of equality of obligation in marriage, 346.
  The duty of man towards woman, 347.
  Condemnation of transitory connections, 350.
  Roman concubines, 351.
  The sinfulness of divorce maintained by the Church, 350-353.
  Abolition of compulsory marriages, 353.
  Condemnation of mixed marriages, 353, 354.
  Education of women, 355.
  Relation of Christianity to the female virtues, 358.
  Comparison of male and female characteristics, 358.
  The Pagan and Christian ideal of woman contrasted, 361-363.
  Conspicuous part of woman in the early Church, 363-365.
  Care of widows, 367.
  Worship of the Virgin, 368, 369.
  Effect of the suppression of the conventual system on women, 369.
  Revolution going on in the employments of women, 373

Xenocrates, his tenderness, ii. 163

Xenophanes, his scepticism, i. 162

Xenophon, his picture of Greek married life, ii. 288

Zadok, the founder of the Sadducees, i. 183, _note_

Zeno, vast place occupied by his system in the moral history of man, i.
            171.
  His suicide, 212.
  His inculcation of the practice of self-examination, 248

Zeus, universal providence attributed by the Greeks to, i. 161






FOOTNOTES


    1 There is a remarkable passage of Celsus, on the impossibility of
      restoring a nature once thoroughly depraved, quoted by Origen in his
      answer to him.

    2 This is well shown by Pressensé in his _Hist. des Trois premiers
      Siècles_.

    3 See a great deal of information on this subject in Bingham’s
      _Antiquities of the Christian Church_ (Oxford, 1853), vol. v. pp.
      370-378. It is curious that those very noisy contemporary divines
      who profess to resuscitate the manners of the primitive Church, and
      who lay so much stress on the minutest ceremonial observances, have
      left unpractised what was undoubtedly one of the most universal, and
      was believed to be one of the most important, of the institutions of
      early Christianity. Bingham shows that the administration of the
      Eucharist to infants continued in France till the twelfth century.

    4 See Cave’s _Primitive Christianity_, part i. ch. xi. At first the
      Sacrament was usually received every day; but this custom soon
      declined in the Eastern Church, and at last passed away in the West.

    5 Plin. _Ep._ x. 97.

    6 The whole subject of the penitential discipline is treated minutely
      in Marshall’s _Penitential Discipline of the Primitive Church_
      (first published in 1714, and reprinted in the library of
      Anglo-Catholic Theology), and also in Bingham, vol. vii. Tertullian
      gives a graphic description of the public penances, _De Pudicit._ v.
      13.

    7 Eusebius, _H. E._ viii, 7.

    8 St. Chrysostom tells this of St. Babylas. See Tillemont, _Mém. pour
      servir à l’Hist. eccl._ tome iii. p. 403.

    9 In the preface to a very ancient Milanese missal it is said of St.
      Agatha that as she lay in the prison cell, torn by the instruments
      of torture, St. Peter came to her in the form of a Christian
      physician, and offered to dress her wounds; but she refused, saying
      that she wished for no physician but Christ. St. Peter, in the name
      of that Celestial Physician, commanded her wounds to close, and her
      body became whole as before. (Tillemont, tome iii. p. 412.)

   10 See her acts in Ruinart.

   11 St. Jerome, _Ep._ xxxix.

   12 “Definitio brevis et vera virtutis: ordo est amoris.”—_De Civ. Dei_,
      xv. 22.

   13 Besides the obvious points of resemblance in the common, though not
      universal, belief that Christians should abstain from all weapons
      and from all oaths, the whole teaching of the early Christians about
      the duty of simplicity, and the wickedness of ornaments in dress
      (see especially the writings of Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus,
      and Chrysostom, on this subject), is exceedingly like that of the
      Quakers. The scruple of Tertullian (_De Coronâ_) about Christians
      wearing laurel wreaths in the festivals, because laurel was called
      after Daphne, the lover of Apollo, was much of the same kind as that
      which led the Quakers to refuse to speak of Tuesday or Wednesday,
      lest they should recognise the gods Tuesco or Woden. On the other
      hand, the ecclesiastical aspects and the sacramental doctrines of
      the Church were the extreme opposites of Quakerism.

   14 See the masterly description of the relations of the English to the
      Irish in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, in Froude’s _History of
      England_, ch. xxiv.; and also Lord Macaulay’s description of the
      feelings of the Master of Stair towards the Highlanders. (_History
      of England_, ch. xviii.)

   15 See on the views of Aristotle, Labourt, _Recherches historiques sur
      les Enfanstrouvés_ (Paris, 1848), p. 9.

   16 See Gravina, _De Ortu et Progressu Juris Civilis_, lib. i. 44.

   17 “Nunc uterum vitiat quæ vult formosa videci,
      Raraque in hoc ævo est, quæ velit esse parens.”

      Ovid, _De Nuce_, 22-23.

      The same writer has devoted one of his elegies (ii. 14) to
      reproaching his mistress Corinna with having been guilty of this
      act. It was not without danger, and Ovid says,

      “Sæpe suos utero quæ necit ipsa perit.”

      A niece of Domitian is said to have died in consequence of having,
      at the command of the emperor, practised it (Sueton. _Domit._
      xxii.). Plutarch notices the custom (_De Sanitate tuenda_), and
      Seneca eulogises Helvia (_Ad Helv._ xvi.) for being exempt from
      vanity and having never destroyed her unborn offspring. Favorinus,
      in a remarkable passage (Aulus Gellius, _Noct. Att._ xii. 1), speaks
      of the act as “publica detestatione communique odio dignum,” and
      proceeds to argue that it is only a degree less criminal for mothers
      to put out their children to nurse. Juvenal has some well-known and
      emphatic lines on the subject:—

      “Sed jacet aurato vix ulla puerpera lecto;
      Tantum artes hujus, tantum medicamina possunt,
      Quæ steriles facit, atque homines in ventre necandos
      Conducit.”

      _Sat._ vi. 592-595.

      There are also many allusions to it in the Christian writers. Thus
      Minucius Felix (_Octavius_, xxx.): “Vos enim video procreatos filios
      nunc feris et avibus exponere, nunc adstrangulatos misero mortis
      genere elidere. Sunt quæ in ipsis visceribus, medicaminibus epotis,
      originem futuri hominis extinguant, et parricidium faciant antequam
      pariant.”

   18 See Labourt, _Recherches sur les Enfans trouvés_, p. 25.

   19 Among the barbarian laws there is a very curious one about a daily
      compensation for children who had been killed in the womb on account
      of the daily suffering of those children in hell. “Propterea
      diuturnam judicaverunt antecessores nostri compositionem et judices
      postquam religio Christianitatis inolevit in mundo. Quia diuturnam
      postquam incarnationem suscepit anima, quamvis ad nativitatis lucem
      minima pervenisset, patitur pœnam, quia sine sacramento
      regenerationis abortivo modo tradita est ad inferos.”—_Leges
      Bajuvariorum_, tit. vii. cap. xx. in Canciani, _Leges Barbar._ vol.
      ii. p. 374. The first foundling hospital of which we have undoubted
      record is that founded at Milan, by a man named Datheus, in A.D.
      789. Muratori has preserved (_Antich. Ital._ Diss. xxxvii.) the
      charter embodying the motives of the founder, in which the following
      sentences occur: “Quia frequenter per luxuriam hominum genus
      decipitur, et exinde malum homicidii generatur, dum concipientes ex
      adulterio, ne prodantur in publico, fetos teneros necant, _et absque
      baptismatis lavacro parvulos ad Tartara mittunt_, quia nullum
      reperiunt locum, quo servare vivos valeant,” &c. Henry II. of
      France, 1556, made a long law against women who, “advenant le temps
      de leur part et délivrance de leur enfant, occultement s’en
      délivrent, puis le suffoquent et autrement suppriment _sans leur
      avoir fait empartir le Saint Sacrement du Baptême_.”—Labourt,
      _Recherches sur les Enfans trouvés_, p. 47. There is a story told of
      a Queen of Portugal (sister to Henry V. of England, and mother of
      St. Ferdinand) that, being in childbirth, her life was despaired of
      unless she took a medicine which would accelerate the birth but
      probably sacrifice the life of the child. She answered that “she
      would not purchase her temporal life by sacrificing the eternal
      salvation of her son.”—Bollandists, _Act. Sanctor._, June 5th.

   20 Tillemont, _Mémoires pour servir à l’Histoire ecclésiastique_
      (Paris, 1701), tome x. p. 41. St. Clem. Alexand. says that infants
      in the womb and exposed infants have guardian angels to watch over
      them. (_Strom._ v.)

   21 There is an extremely large literature devoted to the subject of
      infanticide, exposition, foundlings, &c. The books I have chiefly
      followed are Terme et Monfalcon, _Histoire des Enfans trouvés_
      (Paris, 1840); Remacle, _Des Hospices d’Enfans trouvés_ (1838);
      Labourt, _Recherches historiques sur les Enfans trouvés_ (Paris,
      1848); Kœnigswarter, _Essai sur la Législation des Peuples anciens
      et modernes relative aux Enfans nés hors Mariage_ (Paris, 1842).
      There are also many details on the subject in Godefroy’s Commentary
      to the laws about children in the Theodosian Code, in Malthus, _On
      Population_, in Edward’s tract _On the State of Slavery in the Early
      and Middle Ages of Christianity_, and in most ecclesiastical
      histories.

   22 It must not; however, be inferred from this that infanticide
      increases in direct proportion to the unchastity of a nation.
      Probably the condition of civilised society in which it is most
      common, is where a large amount of actual unchastity coexists with
      very strong social condemnation of the sinner, and where, in
      consequence, there is an intense anxiety to conceal the fall. A
      recent writer on Spain has noticed the almost complete absence of
      infanticide in that country, and has ascribed it to the great
      leniency of public opinion towards female frailty. Foundling
      hospitals, also, greatly influence the history of infanticide; but
      the mortality in them was long so great that it may be questioned
      whether they have diminished the number of the deaths, though they
      have, as I believe, greatly diminished the number of the murders of
      children. Lord Kames, writing in the last half of the eighteenth
      century, says: “In Wales, even at present, and in the Highlands of
      Scotland, it is scarce a disgrace for a young woman to have a
      bastard. In the country last mentioned, the first instance known of
      a bastard child being destroyed by its mother through shame is a
      late one. The virtue of chastity appears to be thus gaining ground,
      as the only temptation a woman can have to destroy her child is to
      conceal her frailty.”—_Sketches of the History of Man—On the
      Progress of the Female Sex._ The last clause is clearly inaccurate,
      but there seems reason for believing that maternal affection is
      generally stronger than want, but weaker than shame.

   23 See Warburton’s _Divine Legation_, vii. 2.

   24 Ælian, _Varia Hist._ ii. 7. Passages from the Greek imaginative
      writers, representing exposition as the avowed and habitual practice
      of poor parents, are collected by Terme et Monfalcon, _Hist. des
      Enfans trouvés_, pp. 39-45. Tacitus notices with praise (_Germania_,
      xix.) that the Germans did not allow infanticide. He also notices
      (_Hist._ v. 5) the prohibition of infanticide among the Jews, and
      ascribes it to their desire to increase the population.

   25 Dion. Halic. ii.

_   26 Ad Nat._ i. 15.

   27 The well-known jurisconsult Paulus had laid down the proposition,
      “Necare videtur non tantum is qui partum perfocat sed et is qui
      abjicit et qui alimonia denegat et qui publicis locis misericordiæ
      causa exponit quam ipse non habet.” (_Dig._ lib. xxv. tit. iii. 1.
      4.) These words have given rise to a famous controversy between two
      Dutch professors, named Noodt and Bynkershoek, conducted on both
      sides with great learning, and on the side of Noodt with great
      passion. Noodt maintained that these words are simply the expression
      of a moral truth, not a judicial decision, and that exposition was
      never illegal in Rome till some time after the establishment of
      Christianity. His opponent argued that exposition was legally
      identical with infanticide, and became, therefore, illegal when the
      power of life and death was withdrawn from the father. (See the
      works of Noodt (Cologne, 1763) and of Bynkershoek (Cologne, 1761)).
      It was at least certain that exposition was notorious and avowed,
      and the law against it, if it existed, inoperative. Gibbon (_Decline
      and Fall_, ch. xliv.) thinks the law censured but did not punish
      exposition. See, too, Troplong, _Influence du Christianisme sur le
      Droit_, p. 271.

   28 Quintilian speaks in a tone of apology, if not justification, of the
      exposition of the children of destitute parents (_Decl._ cccvi.),
      and even Plutarch speaks of it without censure. (_De Amor. Prolis._)
      There are several curious illustrations in Latin literature of the
      different feelings of fathers and mothers on this matter. Terence
      (_Heauton._ Act. iii. Scene 5) represents Chremes as having, as a
      matter of course, charged his pregnant wife to have her child killed
      provided it was a girl. The mother, overcome by pity, shrank from
      doing so, and secretly gave it to an old woman to expose it, in
      hopes that it might be preserved. Chremes, on hearing what had been
      done, reproached his wife for her womanly pity, and told her she had
      been not only disobedient but irrational, for she was only
      consigning her daughter to the life of a prostitute. In Apuleius
      (_Metam._ lib. x.) we have a similar picture of a father starting
      for a journey, leaving his wife in childbirth, and giving her his
      parting command to kill her child if it should be a girl, which she
      could not bring herself to do. The girl was brought up secretly. In
      the case of weak or deformed infants infanticide seems to have been
      habitual. “Portentosos fœtus extinguimus, liberos quoque, si debiles
      monstrosique editi sunt, mergimus. Non ira, sed ratio est, a sanis
      inutilia secernere.”—Seneca, _De Ira_, i. 15. Terence has introduced
      a picture of the exposition of an infant into his _Andria_, Act. iv.
      Scene 5. See, too, Suet. _August._ lxv. According to Suetonius
      (_Calig._ v.), on the death of Germanicus, women exposed their
      new-born children in sign of grief. Ovid had dwelt with much feeling
      on the barbarity of these practices. It is a very curious fact,
      which has been noticed by Warburton, that Chremes, whose sentiments
      about infants we have just seen, is the very personage into whose
      mouth Terence has put the famous sentiment, “Homo sum, humani nihil
      a me alienum puto.”

   29 That these were the usual fates of exposed infants is noticed by
      several writers. Some, too, both Pagan and Christian (Quintilian,
      _Decl._ cccvi.; Lactantius, Div. Inst. vi. 20, &c.), speak of the
      liability to incestuous marriages resulting from frequent
      exposition. In the Greek poets there are several allusions to rich
      childless men adopting foundlings, and Juvenal says it was common
      for Roman wives to palm off foundlings on their husbands for their
      sons. (_Sat._ vi. 603.) There is an extremely horrible declamation
      in Seneca the Rhetorician (_Controvers._ lib. v. 33) about exposed
      children who were said to have been maimed and mutilated, either to
      prevent their recognition by their parents, or that they might gain
      money as beggars for their masters.

   30 See passages on this point cited by Godefroy in his _Commentary to
      the Law __“__De Expositis,__”__ Codex Theod._ lib. v. tit. 7.

_   31 Codex Theod._ lib. xi. tit. 27.

_   32 Codex Theod._ lib. v. tit. 7, lex. 1.

_   33 Ibid._ lib. v. tit. 8, lex 1.

   34 See Godefroy’s _Commentary to the Law_.

   35 In a letter to the younger Pliny. (_Ep._ x. 72.)

   36 See on this point Muratori, _Antich. Ital._ Diss. xxxvii.

   37 See on these laws, Wallon, _Hist. de l’Esclavage_, tome iii. pp. 52,
      53.

   38 See _Cod. Theod._ lib. iii. tit. 3, lex 1, and the Commentary.

   39 On the very persistent denunciation of this practice by the Fathers,
      see many examples in Terme et Monfalcon.

   40 This is a mere question of definition, upon which lawyers have
      expended much learning and discussion. Cujas thought the Romans
      considered infanticide a crime, but a crime generically different
      from homicide. Godefroy maintains that it was classified as
      homicide, but that, being esteemed less heinous than the other forms
      of homicide, it was only punished by exile. See the Commentary to
      _Cod. Theod._ lib. ix. tit. 14, l. 1.

_   41 Cod. Theod._ lib. ix. tit. 15.

_   42 Ibid._ lib. ix. tit. 14, lex 1.

_   43 Corp. Juris_, lib. viii. tit. 52, lex 2.

_   44 Leges Wisigothorum_ (lib. vi. tit. 3, lex 7) and other laws (lib.
      iv. tit. 4) condemned exposition.

   45 “Si quis infantem necaverit ut homicida teneatur.”—_Capit._ vii.
      168.

   46 It appears, from a passage of St. Augustine, that Christian virgins
      were accustomed to collect exposed children and to have them brought
      into the church. See Terme et Monfalcon, _Hist. des Enfans trouvés_,
      p. 74.

   47 Compare Labourt, _Rech. sur les Enfans trouvés_, pp. 32, 33;
      Muratori, _Antichità Italiane_, Dissert. xxxvii. Muratori has also
      briefly noticed the history of these charities in his _Carità
      Christiana_, cap. xxvii.

   48 The first seems to have been the hospital of Sta. Maria in Sassia,
      which had existed with various changes from the eighth century, but
      was made a foundling hospital and confided to the care of Guy of
      Montpellier in A.D. 1204. According to one tradition, Pope Innocent
      III. had been shocked at hearing of infants drawn in the nets of
      fishermen from the Tiber. According to another, he was inspired by
      an angel. Compare Remacle, _Hospices d’Enfans trouvés_, pp. 36-37,
      and Amydemus, _Pietas Romana_ (a book written A.D. 1624, and
      translated in part into English in A.D. 1687), Eng. trans, pp. 2, 3.

   49 For the little that is known about this missionary of charity,
      compare Remacle, _Hospices d’Enfans trouvés_, pp. 34-44; and
      Labourt, _Recherches historiques sur les Enfans trouvés_, pp. 38-41.

   50 E.g. the amphitheatre of Verona was only built under Diocletian.

   51 “Quid hoc triumpho pulchrius?... Tantam captivorum multitudinem
      bestiis objicit ut ingrati et perfidi non minus doloris ex ludibrio
      sui quam ex ipsa morte patiantur.”—Incerti, _Panegyricus Constant_.
      “Puberes qui in manus venerunt, quorum nec perfidia erat apta
      militiæ nec ferocia servituti ad pœnas spectaculo dati sævientes
      bestias multitudine sua fatigarunt.”—Eumenius, _Paneg. Constant._
      xi.

_   52 Cod. Theod._ lib. xv. tit. 12, lex 1. Sozomen, i. 8.

   53 This, at least, is the opinion of Godefroy, who has discussed the
      subject very fully. (_Cod. Theod._ lib. xv. tit. 12.)

   54 Libanius, _De Vita Sua_, 3.

_   55 Cod. Theod._ lib. xv. tit. 12, l. 2.

   56 Ibid. lib. ix. tit. 40, l. 8.

   57 Ibid. lib. ix. tit. 40, l. 11.

   58 Ibid. lib. xv. tit. 12, l. 3.

   59 Symmach. _Ex._ x. 61.

   60 M. Wallon has traced these last shows with much learning. (_Hist. de
      l’Esclavage_, tome iii. pp. 421-429.)

   61 He wavered, however, on the subject, and on one occasion condemned
      them. See Wallon, tome iii. p. 423.

   62 Theodoret, v. 26.

   63 Muller, _De Genio Ævi Theodosiani_ (1797), vol. ii. p. 88; Milman,
      _Hist. of Early Christianity_, vol. iii. pp. 343-347.

   64 See on these fights Ozanam’s _Civilisation in the Fifth Century_
      (Eng. trans.), vol. i. p. 130.

   65 Nieupoort, _De Ritibus Romanorum_, p. 169.

   66 See a very unequivocal passage, _Inst. Div._ vi. 20. Several earlier
      testimonies on the subject are given by Barbeyrac, _Morale des
      Pères_, and in many other books.

   67 See two laws enacted in A.D. 380 (_Cod. Theod._ ix. tit. 35, l. 4)
      and A.D. 389 (_Cod. Theod._ ix. tit. 35, l. 5). Theodosius the
      Younger made a law (ix. tit. 35, l. 7) excepting the Isaurian
      robbers from the privileges of these laws.

   68 There are, of course, innumerable miracles punishing guilty men, but
      I know none assisting the civil power in doing so. As an example of
      the miracles in defence of the innocent, I may cite one by St.
      Macarius. An innocent man, accused of a murder, fled to him. He
      brought both the accused and accusers to the tomb of the murdered
      man, and asked him whether the prisoner was the murderer. The corpse
      answered in the negative; the bystanders implored St. Macarius to
      ask it to reveal the real culprit; but St. Macarius refused to do
      so. (_Vitæ Patrum_, lib. ii. cap. xxviii.)

   69 “Ut quam clementissime et ultra sanguinis effusionem puniretur.”

_   70 Quæstœ. Romanæ_, xcvi.

   71 Tillemont, _Mém. d’Hist. ecclés_. tome vi. pp. 88-98. The Donatists
      after a time, however, are said to have overcome their scruples, and
      used swords.

   72 Under the Christian kings, the barbarians multiplied the number of
      capital offences, but this has usually been regarded as an
      improvement. The Abbé Mably says: “Quoiqu’il nous reste peu
      d’ordonnances faites sous les premiers Mérovingiens, nous voyons
      qu’avant la fin du sixième siècle, les François avoient déjà adopté
      la doctrine salutaire des Romains au sujet de la prescription; et
      que renonçant à cette humanité cruelle qui les enhardissoit au mal,
      ils infligèrent peine de mort contre l’inceste, le vol et le meurtre
      qui jusques-là n’avoient été punis que par l’exil, ou dont on se
      rachetoit par une composition. Les François, en réformant
      quelques-unes de leurs lois civiles, portèrent la sévérité aussi
      loin que leurs pères avoient poussé l’indulgence.”—Mably, _Observ.
      sur l’Hist. des François_, liv. i. ch. iii. See, too, Gibbon’s
      _Decline and Fall_, ch. xxxviii.

   73 The whole of the sixth volume of Godefroy’s edition (folio) of the
      Theodosian code is taken up with laws of these kinds.

   74 Mme. de Staël, _Réflexions sur le Suicide_.

   75 The following became the theological doctrine on the subject: “Est
      vere homicida et reus homicidii qui se interficiendo innocentum
      hominem interfecerit.”—Lisle, _Du Suicide_, p. 400. St. Augustine
      has much in this strain. Lucretia, he says, either consented to the
      act of Sextius, or she did not. In the first case she was an
      adulteress, and should therefore not be admired. In the second case
      she was a murderess, because in killing herself she killed an
      innocent and virtuous woman. (_De Civ. Dei_, i. 19.)

   76 Justin Martyr, Tertullian, and Cyprian are especially ardent in this
      respect; but their language is, I think, in their circumstances,
      extremely excusable. Compare Barbeyrac, _Morale des Pères_, ch. ii.
      § 8; ch. viii. §§ 34-39. Donne’s _Biathanatos_ (ed. 1644), pp.
      58-67. Cromaziano, _Istoria critica e filosofica del Suicidio
      ragionato_ (Venezia, 1788), pp. 135-140.

   77 Ambrose, _De Virginibus_, iii. 7.

   78 Eusebius, _Eccles. Hist._ viii. 12.

   79 Eusebius, _Eccles. Hist._ viii. 14. Bayle, in his article upon
      Sophronia, appears to be greatly scandalised at this act, and it
      seems that among the Catholics it is not considered right to admire
      this poor lady as much as her sister suicides. Tillemont remarks:
      “Comme on ne voit pas que l’église romaine l’ait jamais honorée,
      nous n’avons pas le mesme droit de justifier son action.”—_Hist.
      ecclés._ tome v. pp. 404, 405.

   80 Especially Barbeyrac in his _Morale des Pères_. He was answered by
      Ceillier, Cromaziano, and others. Matthew of Westminster relates of
      Ebba, the abbess of a Yorkshire convent which was besieged by the
      Danes, that she and all the other nuns, to save their chastity,
      deformed themselves by cutting off their noses and upper lips. (A.D.
      870.)

_   81 De Civ. Dei_, i. 22-7.

   82 This had been suggested by St. Augustine. In the case of Pelagia,
      Tillemont finds a strong argument in support of this view in the
      astounding, if not miraculous, fact that, having thrown herself from
      the top of the house, she was actually killed by the fall! “Estant
      montée tout au haut de sa maison, fortifiée par le mouvement que
      J.-C. formoit dans son cœur et par le courage qu’il luy inspiroit,
      elle se précipita de là du haut en bas, et échapa ainsi à tous les
      piéges de ses ennemis. Son corps en tombant à terre frapa, dit S.
      Chrysostome, les yeux du démon plus vivement qu’un éclair.... Ce qui
      marque encore que Dieu agissoit en tout ceci c’est qu’au lieu que
      ces chutes ne sont pas toujours mortelles, ou que souvent ne brisant
      que quelques membres, elles n’ostent la vie que longtemps après, ni
      l’un ni l’autre n’arriva en cette rencontre; mais Dieu retira
      aussitost l’âme de la sainte, en sorte que sa mort parut autant
      l’effet de la volonté divine que de sa chute.”—_Hist. ecclés._ tome
      v. pp. 401-402.

   83 “Et virginitatis coronam et nuptiarum perdidit voluptatem.”—_Ep._
      xxii.

   84 “Quis enim siccis oculis recordetur viginti annorum adolescentulam
      tam ardenti fide crucis levasse vexillum ut magis amissam
      virginitatem quam mariti doleret interitum?”—_Ep._ xxxix.

   85 For a description of these penances, see _Ep._ xxxviii.

_   86 Ep._ xxxix.

   87 St. Jerome gave some sensible advice on this point to one of his
      admirers. (_Ep._ cxxv.)

   88 Hase, _St. François d’Assise_, pp. 137-138. St. Palæmon is said to
      have died of his austerities. (_Vit. S. Pachomii._)

   89 St. Augustine and St. Optatus have given accounts of these suicides
      in their works against the Donatists.

   90 See Todd’s _Life of St. Patrick_, p. 462.

   91 The whole history of suicide in the dark ages has been most minutely
      and carefully examined by M. Bourquelot, in a very interesting
      series of memoirs in the third and fourth volumes of the
      _Bibliothèque de l’École des Chartes_. I am much indebted to these
      memoirs in the following pages. See, too, Lisle, _Du Suicide,
      Statistique, Médecine, Histoire, et Législation_. (Paris, 1856.) The
      ferocious laws here recounted contrast remarkably with a law in the
      Capitularies (lib. vi. lex 70), which provides that though mass may
      not be celebrated for a suicide, any private person may, through
      charity, cause prayers to be offered up for his soul. “Quia
      incomprehensibilia sunt judicia Dei, et profunditatem consilii ejus
      nemo potest investigare.”

   92 See the very interesting work of the Abbé Bourret, _l’École
      chrétienne de Séville sous la monarchie des Visigoths_ (Paris,
      1855), p. 196.

   93 Roger of Wendover, A.D. 665.

   94 Esquirol, _Maladies mentales_, tome i. p. 591.

   95 Lea’s _History of Sacerdotal Celibacy_ (Philadelphia, 1867), p. 248.

   96 “Per lo corso di molti secoli abbiamo questo solo suicidio donnesco,
      e buona cosa è non averne più d’uno; perchè io non credo che la
      impudicizia istessa sia peggiore di questa disperata
      castità.”—Cromaziano, _Ist. del. Suicidio_, p. 126. Mariana, who,
      under the frock of a Jesuit, bore the heart of an ancient Roman,
      treats the case in a very different manner. “Ejus uxor Maria
      Coronelia cum mariti absentiam non ferret, ne pravis cupiditatibus
      cederet, vitam posuit, ardentem forte libidinem igne extinguens
      adacto per muliebria titione; dignam meliori seculo fœminam, insigne
      studium castitatis.”—_De Rebus Hispan._ xvi. 17.

   97 A number of passages are cited by Bourquelot.

   98 This is noticed by St. Gregory Nazianzen in a little poem which is
      given in Migne’s edition of _The Greek Fathers_, tome xxxvii. p.
      1459. St. Nilus and the biographer of St. Pachomius speak of these
      suicides, and St. Chrysostom wrote a letter of consolation to a
      young monk, named Stagirius, which is still extant, encouraging him
      to resist the temptation. See Neander, _Ecclesiastical Hist._ vol.
      iii. pp. 319, 320.

   99 Bourquelot. Pinel notices (_Traité médico-philosophique sur
      l’Aliénation mentale_ (2nd ed.), pp. 44-46) the numerous cases of
      insanity still produced by strong religious feeling; and the history
      of the movements called “revivals,” in the present century, supplies
      much evidence to the same effect. Pinel says, religious insanity
      tends peculiarly to suicide (p. 265).

  100 Orosius notices (_Hist._ v. 14) that of all the Gauls conquered by
      Q. Marcius, there were none who did not prefer death to slavery. The
      Spaniards were famous for their suicides, to avoid old age as well
      as slavery. Odin, who, under different names, was the supreme
      divinity of most of the Northern tribes, is said to have ended his
      earthly life by suicide. Boadicea, the grandest figure of early
      British history, and Cordeilla, or Cordelia, the most pathetic
      figure of early British romance, were both suicides. (See on the
      first, Tacitus, _Ann._ xiv. 35-37, and on the second Geoffrey of
      Monmouth, ii. 15—a version from which Shakspeare has considerably
      diverged, but which is faithfully followed by Spenser. (_Faëry
      Queen_, book ii. canto 10.))

  101 “In our age, when the Spaniards extended that law which was made
      only against the cannibals, that they who would not accept the
      Christian religion should incur bondage, the Indians in infinite
      numbers escaped this by killing themselves, and never ceased till
      the Spaniards, by some counterfeitings, made them think that they
      also would kill themselves, and follow them with the same severity
      into the next life.”—Donne’s _Biathanatos_, p. 56 (ed. 1644). On the
      evidence of the early travellers on this point, see the essay on
      “England’s Forgotten Worthies,” in Mr. Froude’s _Short Studies_.

  102 Lisle, pp. 427-434. Sprenger has noticed the same tendency among the
      witches he tried. See Calmeil, _De la Folie_ (Paris, 1845), tome i.
      pp. 161, 303-305.

  103 On modern suicides the reader may consult Winslow’s _Anatomy of
      Suicide_; as well as the work of M. Lisle, and also Esquirol,
      _Maladies mentales_ (Paris, 1838), tome i. pp. 526-676.

  104 Hecker’s _Epidemics of the Middle Ages_ (London, 1844), p. 121.
      Hecker in his very curious essay on this mania, has preserved a
      verse of their song:—

      “Allu mari mi portati
      Se voleti che mi sanati,
      Allu mari, alla via,
      Così m’ama la donna mia,
      Allu mari, allu mari,
      Mentre campo, t’aggio amari.”

  105 Cromaziano, _Ist. del Suicidio_ caps. viii, ix.

  106 Cromaziano, pp. 92-93.

  107 Montesquieu, and many Continental writers, have noticed this, and
      most English writers of the eighteenth century seem to admit the
      charge. There do not appear, however, to have been any accurate
      statistics, and the general statements are very untrustworthy.
      Suicides were supposed to be especially numerous under the
      depressing influence of English winter fogs. The statistics made in
      the present century prove beyond question that they are most
      numerous in summer.

_  108 Utopia_, book ii. ch. vi.

  109 A sketch of his life, which was rather curious, is given by
      Cromaziano, pp. 148-151. There is a long note on the early
      literature in defence of suicide, in Dumas, _Traité du Suicide_
      (Amsterdam, 1723), pp. 148-149. Dumas was a Protestant minister who
      wrote against suicide. Among the English apologists for suicide
      (which he himself committed) was Blount, the translator of the _Life
      of Apollonius of Tyana_, and Creech, an editor of Lucretius.
      Concerning the former there is a note in Bayle’s _Dict._ art.
      “Apollonius.” The latter is noticed by Voltaire in his _Lettres
      Philos._ He wrote as a memorandum on the margin of his “Lucretius,”
      “N.B. When I have finished my Commentary I must kill myself;” which
      he accordingly did—Voltaire says to imitate his favourite author.
      (Voltaire, _Dict. phil._ art. “Caton.”)

_  110 Essais_, liv. ii. ch. xiii.

_  111 Lettres persanes_, lxxvi.

_  112 Nouvelle Héloïse_, partie iii. let. 21-22. Esquirol gives a curious
      illustration of the way the influence of Rousseau penetrated through
      all classes. A little child of thirteen committed suicide, leaving a
      writing beginning: “Je lègue mon âme a Rousseau, mon corps à la
      terre.”—_Maladies mentales_, tome i. p. 588.

  113 In general, however, Voltaire was extremely opposed to the
      philosophy of despair, but he certainly approved of some forms of
      suicide. See the articles “Caton” and “Suicide,” in his _Dict.
      philos._

  114 Lisle, _Du Suicide_, pp. 411, 412.

  115 “Le monde est vide depuis les Romains.”—St.-Just, _Procés de
      Danton_.

  116 This fact has been often noticed. The reader may find many
      statistics on the subject in Lisle, _Du Suicide_, and Winslow’s
      _Anatomy of Suicide_.

  117 “There seems good reason to believe, that with the progress of
      mental development through the ages, there is, as in the case with
      other forms of organic development, a correlative degeneration going
      on, and that an increase of insanity is a penalty which an increase
      of our present civilisation necessarily pays.”—Maudsley’s
      _Physiology of Mind_, p. 201.

_  118 Cod. Theod._ lib. ix. tit. 12.

  119 Some commentators imagine (see Muratori, _Antich. Ital. Diss._ xiv.)
      that among the Pagans the murder of a man’s own slave was only
      assimilated to the crime of murdering the slave of another man,
      while in the Christian law it was defined as homicide, equivalent to
      the murder of a freeman. I confess, however, this point does not
      appear to me at all clear.

  120 See Godefroy’s _Commentary_ on these laws.

  121 Exodus xxi. 21

  122 “Quas vilitates vitæ dignas legum observatione non credidit.”—_Cod.
      Theod._ lib. ix. tit. 7. See on this law, Wallon, tome iii. pp. 417,
      418.

      Dean Milman observes, “In the old Roman society in the Eastern
      Empire this distinction between the marriage of the freeman and the
      concubinage of the slave was long recognised by Christianity itself.
      These unions were not blessed, as the marriages of their superiors
      had soon begun to be, by the Church. Basil the Macedonian (A.D.
      867-886) first enacted that the priestly benediction should hallow
      the marriage of the slave; but the authority of the emperor was
      counteracted by the deep-rooted prejudices of centuries.”—_Hist. of
      Latin Christianity_, vol. ii. p. 15.

_  123 Cod. Theod._ lib. ii. tit. 25.

  124 Ibid. lib. iv. tit. 7.

  125 Ibid. lib. ix. tit. 9.

_  126 Corpus Juris_, vi. 1.

_  127 Cod. Theod._ lib. vi. tit. 2.

  128 See on all this legislation, Wallon, tome iii.; Champagny, _Charité
      chrétienne_, pp. 214-224.

  129 It is worthy of notice, too, that the justice of slavery was
      frequently based by the Fathers, as by modern defenders of slavery,
      on the curse of Ham. See a number of passages noticed by Moehler,
      _Le Christianisme et l’Esclavage_ (trad. franç.), pp. 151-152.

  130 The penalty, however, appears to have been reduced to two years’
      exclusion from communion. Muratori says: “In più consili si truova
      decretato, ‘excommunicatione vel pœnitentiæ biennii esse
      subjiciendum qui servum proprium sine conscientia judicis
      occiderit.’ ”—_Antich. Ital._ Diss. xiv.

      Besides the works which treat generally of the penitential
      discipline, the reader may consult with fruit Wright’s letter _On
      the Political Condition of the English Peasantry_, and Moehler, p.
      186.

  131 On the great multitude of emancipated slaves who entered, and at one
      time almost monopolised, the ecclesiastical offices, compare
      Moehler, _Le Christianisme et l’Esclavage_, pp. 177-178. Leo the
      Great tried to prevent slaves being raised to the priestly office,
      because it would degrade the latter.

  132 See a most admirable dissertation on this subject in Le Blant,
      _Inscriptions chrétiennes de la Gaule_, tome ii. pp. 284-299;
      Gibbon’s _Decline and Fall_, ch. xxxviii.

  133 Champagny, _Charité chrétienne_, p. 210. These numbers are, no
      doubt, exaggerated; see Wallon, _Hist. de l’Esclavage_, tome iii. p.
      38.

  134 See Schmidt, _La Société civile dans le Monde romain_, pp. 246-248.

  135 Muratori has devoted two valuable dissertations (_Antich. Ital._
      xiv. xv.) to mediæval slavery.

  136 Ozanam’s _Hist. of Civilisation in the Fifth Century_ (Eng. trans.),
      vol. ii. p. 43. St. Adelbert, Archbishop of Prague at the end of the
      tenth century, was especially famous for his opposition to the slave
      trade. In Sweden, the abolition of slavery in the thirteenth century
      was avowedly accomplished in obedience to Christian principles.
      (Moehler, _Le Christianisme et l’Esclavage_, pp. 194-196; Ryan’s
      _History of the Effects of Religion upon Mankind_, pp. 142, 143.)

  137 Salvian, in a famous passage (_De Gubernatione Dei_, lib. v.),
      notices the multitudes of poor who voluntarily became “coloni” for
      the sake of protection and a livelihood. The coloni, who were
      attached to the soil, were much the same as the mediæval serfs. We
      have already noticed them coming into being, apparently when the
      Roman emperors settled barbarian prisoners to cultivate the desert
      lands of Italy; and before the barbarian invasions their numbers
      seem to have much increased. M. Guizot has devoted two chapters to
      this subject. (_Hist. de la Civilisation en France_, vii. viii.)

  138 See Finlay’s _Hist. of Greece_, vol. i. p. 241.

  139 Moehler, p. 181.

  140 “Non v’era anticamente signor secolare, vescovo, abbate, capitolo di
      canonici e monistero che non avesse al suo servigio molti servi.
      Molto frequentemente solevano i secolari manometterli. Non cosi le
      chiese, e i monisteri, non per altra cagione, a mio credere, se non
      perchè la manumissione è una spezie di alienazione, ed era dai
      canoni proibito l’alienare i beni delle chiese.”—Muratori,
      _Dissert._ xv. Some Councils, however, recognised the right of
      bishops to emancipate Church slaves. Moehler, _Le Christianisme et
      l’Esclavage_, p. 187. Many peasants placed themselves under the
      dominion of the monks, as being the best masters, and also to obtain
      the benefit of their prayers.

  141 Muratori; Hallam’s _Middle Ages_, ch. ii. part ii.

  142 See on this subject, Ryan, pp. 151-152; Cibrario, _Economica
      politica del Medio Evo_, lib. iii. cap. ii., and especially Le
      Blant, _Inscriptions chrétiennes de la Gaule_, tome ii. pp. 284-299.

  143 About 5/6ths of a bushel. See Hume’s _Essay on the Populousness of
      Ancient Nations_.

  144 The history of these distributions is traced with admirable learning
      by M. Naudet in his _Mémoire sur les Secours publics dans
      l’Antiquité_ (_Mém. de l’Académie des Inscrip. et Belles-lettres_,
      tome xiii.), an essay to which I am much indebted. See, too,
      Monnier, _Hist. de l’Assistance publique_; B. Dumas, _Des Secours
      publics chez les Anciens_; and Schmidt, _Essai sur la Société civile
      dans le Monde romain et sur sa Transformation par le Christianisme_.

  145 Livy, ii. 9; Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ xxxi. 41.

  146 Dion Cassius, xxxviii. 1-7.

  147 Xiphilin, lxviii. 2; Pliny, _Ep._ vii. 31.

  148 Spartian. _Sept. Severus_.

  149 Suet. _August._ 41; Dion Cassius, li, 1.

  150 “Afflictos civitatis relevavit; puellas puerosque natos parentibus
      egestosis sumptu publico per Italiæ oppida ali jussit.”—Sext.
      Aurelius Victor, _Epitome_, “Nerva.” This measure of Nerva, though
      not mentioned by any other writer, is confirmed by the evidence of
      medals. (Naudet, p. 75.)

  151 Plin. _Panegyr._ xxvi. xxviii.

  152 We know of this charity from an extant bronze tablet. See Schmidt,
      _Essai historique sur la Société romaine_, p. 428.

  153 Plin. _Ep._ i. 8; iv. 13.

  154 Schmidt, p. 428.

  155 Spartianus, _Hadrian_.

  156 Capitolinus, _Antoninus_.

  157 Capitolinus, _Anton._, _Marc. Aurel._

  158 Lampridius, _A. Severus_.

  159 See Friedlænder, _Hist. des Mœurs romaines_, iii. p. 157.

  160 Seneca (_De Ira_, lib. i. cap. 16) speaks of institutions called
      valetudinaria, which most writers think were private infirmaries in
      rich men’s houses. The opinion that the Romans had public hospitals
      is maintained in a very learned and valuable, but little-known work,
      called _Collections relative to the Systematic Relief of the Poor_.
      (London, 1815.)

  161 See Tacit. _Annal._ xii. 58; Pliny, v. 7; x. 79.

  162 Cornelius Nepos, _Epaminondas_, cap. iii.

  163 Plutarch, _Cimon_.

  164 Diog. Laërt. _Bias_.

  165 Tac. _Annal._ iv. 63.

  166 See Pliny, _Ep._ x. 94, and the remarks of Naudet, pp. 38, 39.

_  167 De Offic._ i. 14, 15.

  168 Lucian describes this in his famous picture of Peregrinus; and
      Julian, much later, accused the Christians of drawing men into the
      Church by their charities. Socrates (_Hist. Eccl._ vii. 17) tells a
      story of a Jew who, pretending to be a convert to Christianity, had
      been often baptised in different sects, and had amassed a
      considerable fortune by the gifts he received on those occasions. He
      was at last miraculously detected by the Novatian bishop Paul. There
      are several instances in the _Lives of the Saints_ of judgments
      falling on those who duped benevolent Christians.

  169 See on this subject Chastel, _Études historiques sur la Charité_
      (Paris, 1853); Martin Doisy, _Hist. de la Charité pendant les quatre
      premiers Siècles_ (Paris, 1848); Champagny, _Charité chrétienne_;
      Tollemer, _Origines de la Charité catholique_ (Paris, 1863); Ryan,
      _History of the Effects of Religion upon Mankind_ (Dublin, 1820);
      and the works of Bingham and of Cave. I am also indebted, in this
      part of my subject, to Dean Milman’s histories, Neander’s
      _Ecclesiastical History_, and _Private Life of the Early
      Christians_, and to Migne’s _Encyclopédie_.

  170 See the famous epistle of Julian to Arsacius, where he declares that
      it is shameful that “the Galileans” should support not only their
      own, but also the heathen poor; and also the comments of Sozomen,
      _Hist. eccl._ v. 16.

  171 The conduct of the Christians, on the first of these occasions, is
      described by Pontius, _Vit. Cypriani_, ix. 19. St. Cyprian organised
      their efforts. On the Alexandrian famines and pestilences, see
      Eusebius, _H. E._ vii. 22; ix. 8.

  172 The effects of this conquest have been well described by Sismondi,
      _Hist. de la Chute de l’Empire Romain_, tome i. pp. 258-260.
      Theodoric afterwards made some efforts to re-establish the
      distribution, but it never regained its former proportions. The
      pictures of the starvation and depopulation of Italy at this time
      are appalling. Some fearful facts on the subject are collected by
      Gibbon, _Decline and Fall_, ch. xxxvi.; Chateaubriand, vime _Disc._
      2de partie.

_  173 Cod. Theod._ ix. xl. 15-16. The first of these laws was made by
      Theodosius, A.D. 392; the second by Honorius, A.D. 398.

  174 Cibrario, _Economica politica del Medio Evo_, lib. ii. cap. iii. The
      most remarkable of these saints was St. Julien l’Hospitalier, who
      having under a mistake killed his father and mother, as a penance
      became a ferryman of a great river, and having embarked on a very
      stormy and dangerous night at the voice of a traveller in distress,
      received Christ into his boat. His story is painted on a window of
      the thirteenth century, in Rouen Cathedral. See Langlois, _Essai
      historique sur la Peinture sur verre_, pp. 32-37.

  175 The fact of leprosy being taken as the image of sin gave rise to
      some curious notions of its supernatural character, and to many
      legends of saints curing leprosy by baptism. See Maury, _Légendes
      pieuses du Moyen-Age_, pp. 64-65.

  176 See on these hospitals Cibrario, _Econ. Politica del Medio Evo_,
      lib. iii. cap. ii.

  177 Calmeil observes: “On a souvent constaté depuis un demi-siècle que
      la folie est sujette à prendre la teinte des croyances religieuses,
      des idées philosophiques ou superstitieuses, des préjugés sociaux
      qui ont cours, qui sont actuellement en vogue parmi les peuples ou
      les nations; que cette teinte varie dans un même pays suivant le
      caractère des événements relatifs à la politique extérieure, le
      caractère des événements civils, la nature des productions
      littéraires, des représentations théâtrales, suivant la tournure, la
      direction, le genre d’élan qu’y prennent l’industrie, les arts et
      les sciences.”—_De la Folie_, tome i. pp. 122-123.

  178 Milman’s _History of Latin Christianity_, vol. vii. pp. 353, 354.

      “Venit de Anglia virgo decora valde, pariterque facunda, dicens,
      Spiritum Sanctum incarnatum in redemptionem mulierum, et baptizavit
      mulieres in nomine Patris, Filii et sui. Quæ mortua ducta fuit in
      Mediolanum, ibi et cremata.”—_Annales Dominicanorum Colmariensium_
      (in the “Rerum Germanic. Scriptores”).

  179 “Martin Gonçalez, du diocèse de Cuenca, disoit qu’il etoit frère de
      l’archange S. Michel, la première vérité et l’échelle du ciel; que
      c’étoit pour lui que Dieu réservoit la place que Lucifer avoit
      perdue; que tous les jours il s’élevoit au plus haut de l’Empirée et
      descendoit ensuite au plus profond des enfers; qu’a la fin du monde,
      qui étoit proche, il iroit au devant de l’Antichrist et qu’il le
      terrasseroit, ayant á sa main la croix de Jésus-Christ et sa
      couronne d’épines. L’archevêque de Tolède, n’ayant pu convertir ce
      fanatique obstiné, ni l’empêcher de dogmatiser, l’avoit enfin livré
      au bras séculier.”—Touron, _Hist. des Hommes illustres de l’ordre de
      St. Dominique_, Paris, 1745 (_Vie d’Eyméricus_), tome ii. p. 635.

  180 Calmeil, _De la Folie_, tome i. p. 134.

  181 Ibid. tome i. pp. 242-247.

  182 Calmeil, tome i. p. 247.

  183 See Esquirol, _Maladies mentales_.

  184 Gibbon, _Decline and Fall_, ch. xxxvii.

  185 Purchas’s _Pilgrims_, ii. 1452.

  186 Desmaisons’ _Asiles d’Aliénés en Espagne_, p. 53.

  187 Leo Africanus, _Description of Africa_, book iii.

  188 I have taken these facts from a very interesting little work,
      Desmaisons, _Des Asiles d’Aliénés en Espagne; Recherches historiques
      et médicales_ (Paris, 1859). Dr. Desmaisons conjectures that the
      Spaniards took their asylums from the Mohammedans; but, as it seems
      to me, he altogether fails to prove his point. His work, however,
      contains some curious information on the history of lunatic asylums.

  189 Amydemus, _Pietas Romana_ (Oxford, 1687), p. 21; Desmaisons, p. 108.

  190 Pinel, _Traité médico-philosophique_, pp. 241, 242.

  191 See the dreadful description in Pinel, pp. 200-202.

  192 Malthus, who is sometimes, though most unjustly, described as an
      enemy to all charity, has devoted an admirable chapter (_On
      Population_, book iv. ch. ix.) to the “direction of our charity;”
      but the fullest examination of this subject with which I am
      acquainted is the very interesting work of Duchâtel, _Sur la
      Charité_.

  193 This is very tersely expressed by a great Protestant writer: “I give
      no alms to satisfy the hunger of my brother, but to fulfil and
      accomplish the will and command of my God.”—Sir T. Brown, _Religio
      Medici_, part ii. § 2. A saying almost exactly similar is, if I
      remember right, ascribed to St. Elizabeth of Hungary.

  194 See Butler’s _Lives of the Saints_.

  195 Campion’s _Historie of Ireland_, book ii. chap. x.

  196 He wrote his _Perils of the Last Times_ in the interest of the
      University of Paris, of which he was a Professor, and which was at
      war with the mendicant orders. See Milman’s _Latin Christianity_,
      vol. vi. pp. 348-356; Fleury, _Eccl. Hist._ lxxxiv. 57.

  197 Henry de Knyghton, _De Eventibus Angliæ_.

  198 There was some severe legislation in England on the subject after
      the Black Death. Eden’s _History of the Working Classes_, vol. i. p.
      34. In France, too, a royal ordinance of 1350 ordered men who had
      been convicted of begging three times to be branded with a hot iron.
      Monteil, _Hist. des Français_, tome i. p. 434.

  199 Eden, vol. i. pp. 83-87.

  200 Ibid. pp. 101-103.

  201 Ibid. pp. 127-130.

  202 Morighini, _Institutions pieuses de Rome_.

  203 Eden, _History of the Labouring Classes_, i. 83.

  204 Locke discussed the great increase of poverty, and a bill was
      brought in suggesting some remedies, but did not pass. (Eden, vol.
      i. pp. 243-248.)

  205 In a very forcible letter addressed to the Irish Catholic clergy.

  206 This tract, which is extremely valuable for the light it throws upon
      the social condition of England at the time, was written in
      opposition to a bill providing that the poor in the poor-houses
      should do wool, hemp, iron, and other works. Defoe says that wages
      in England were higher than anywhere on the Continent, though the
      amount of mendicancy was enormous. “The reason why so many pretend
      to want work is, that they can live so well with the pretence of
      wanting work.... I affirm of my own knowledge, when I have wanted a
      man for labouring work, and offered nine shillings per week to
      strolling fellows at my door, they have frequently told me to my
      face they could get more a-begging.”

_  207 Reforma degl’ Instituti pii di Modena_ (published first anonymously
      at Modena). It has been reprinted in the library of the Italian
      economists.

_  208 Essay on Charity Schools._

  209 Magdalen asylums have been very vehemently assailed by M. Charles
      Comte, in his _Traité de Législation_. On the subject of Foundling
      Hospitals there is a whole literature. They were violently attacked
      by, I believe, Lord Brougham, in the _Edinburgh Review_, in the
      early part of this century. Writers of this stamp, and indeed most
      political economists, greatly exaggerate the forethought of men and
      women, especially in matters where the passions are concerned. It
      may be questioned whether one woman in a hundred, who plunges into a
      career of vice, is in the smallest degree influenced by a
      consideration of whether or not charitable institutions are provided
      for the support of aged penitents.

_  210 Apol._ ch. xlii.

  211 On these penances, see Bingham, _Antiq._ book vii. Bingham, I think,
      justly divides the history of asceticism into three periods. During
      the first, which extends from the foundation of the Church to A.D.
      250, there were men and women who, with a view to spiritual
      perfection, abstained from marriage, relinquished amusements,
      accustomed themselves to severe fasts, and gave up their property to
      works of charity; but did this in the middle of society and without
      leading the life of either a hermit or a monk. During the second
      period, which extended from the Decian persecution, anchorites were
      numerous, but the custom of a common or cœnobitic life was unknown.
      It was originated in the time of Constantine by Pachomius.

  212 This is expressly stated by St. Jerome (_Vit. Pauli_).

  213 See on this subject some curious evidence in Neander’s _Life of
      Chrysostom_. St. Chrysostom wrote a long work to console fathers
      whose sons were thus seduced to the desert.

  214 On this tradition see Champagny, _Les Antonins_, tome i. p. 193.

_  215 Ep._ cxxiii.

  216 Euseb. _Eccl. Hist._ ii. 23.

  217 Gibbon, _Decline and Fall_, ch. xxxvii.; a brief but masterly sketch
      of the progress of the movement.

  218 Palladius, _Hist. Laus._ xxxviii.

  219 Jerome, Preface to the Rule of St. Pachomius, § 7.

  220 Cassian, _De Cœnob. Inst._ iv. 1.

  221 Rufinus, _Hist. Monach._ ch. v. Rufinus visited it himself.

  222 Palladius, _Hist. Laus._ lxxvi.

  223 Rufinus, _Hist. Mon._ vii.

  224 There is a good deal of doubt and controversy about this. See a note
      in Mosheim’s _Eccl. Hist._ (Soame’s edition), vol. i. p. 354.

  225 Most of the passages remaining on the subject of the foundation of
      monachism are given by Thomassin, _Discipline de l’Église_, part i.
      livre iii. ch. xii. This work contains also much general information
      about monachism. A curious collection of statistics of the numbers
      of the monks in different localities, additional to those I have
      given and gleaned from the _Lives of the Saints_, may be found in
      Pitra (_Vie de St. Léger_, Introd. p. lix.); 2,100, or, according to
      another account, 3,000 monks, lived in the monastery of Banchor.

  226 The three principal are the _Historia Monachorum_ of Rufinus, who
      visited Egypt A.D. 373, about seventeen years after the death of St.
      Antony; the _Institutiones_ of Cassian, who, having visited the
      Eastern monks about A.D. 394, founded vast monasteries containing,
      it is said, 5,000 monks, at Marseilles, and died at a great age
      about A.D. 448; and the _Historia Lausiaca_ (so called from Lausus,
      Governor of Cappadocia) of Palladius, who was himself a hermit on
      Mount Nitria, in A.D. 388. The first and last, as well as many minor
      works of the same period, are given in Rosweyde’s invaluable
      collection of the lives of the Fathers, one of the most fascinating
      volumes in the whole range of literature.

      The hospitality of the monks was not without drawbacks. In a church
      on Mount Nitria three whips were hung on a palm-tree—one for
      chastising monks, another for chastising thieves, and a third for
      chastising guests. (Palladius, _Hist. Laus._ vii.)

_  227 Vita Pauli._ St. Jerome adds, that some will not believe this,
      because they have no faith, but that all things are possible for
      those that believe.

_  228 Vita St. Hilarion._

  229 See a long list of these penances in Tillemont, _Mém. pour servir à
      l’Hist. ecclés._ tome viii.

_  230 Vitæ Patrum_ (Pachomius). He used to lean against a wall when
      overcome by drowsiness.

_  231 Vitæ Patrum_, ix. 3.

  232 Sozomen, vi. 29.

  233 E.g. St. Antony, according to his biographer St. Athanasius.

  234 “Il y eut dans le désert de Scété des solitaires d’une éminente
      perfection.... On prétend que pour l’ordinaire ils passoient des
      semaines entières sans manger, mais apparemment cela ne se faisoit
      que dans des occasions particulières.”—Tillemont, _Mém. pour servir
      à l’Hist. eccl._ tome viii. p. 580. Even this, however, was
      admirable!

  235 Palladius, _Hist. Laus._ cap. xx.

  236 “Primum cum accessisset ad eremum tribus continuis annis sub
      cujusdam saxi rupe stans, semper oravit, ita ut nunquam omnino
      resederit neque Jacuerit. Somni autem tantum caperet, quantum stans
      capere potuit; cibum vero nunquam sumpserat nisi die Dominica.
      Presbyter enim tunc veniebat ad eum et offerebat pro eo sacrificium
      idque ei solum sacramentum erat et victus.”—Rufinus, _Hist. Monach._
      cap. xv.

  237 Thus St. Antony used to live in a tomb, where he was beaten by the
      devil. (St. Athanasius, _Life of Antony._)

  238 βοσκοί. See on these monks Sozomen, vi. 33; Evagrius, i. 21. It is
      mentioned of a certain St. Marc of Athens, that, having lived for
      thirty years naked in the desert, his body was covered with hair
      like that of a wild beast. (Bollandists, March 29.) St. Mary of
      Egypt, during part of her period of penance, lived upon grass.
      (_Vitæ Patrum._)

_  239 Life of Antony._

  240 “II ne faisoit pas aussi difficulté dans sa vieillesse de se laver
      quelquefois les piez. Et comme on témoignoit s’en étonner et trouver
      que cela ne répondoit pas à la vie austère des anciens, il se
      justifioit par ces paroles: Nous avons appris à tuer, non pas notre
      corps mais nos passions.”—Tillemont, _Mém. Hist. eccl._ tome xv. p.
      148. This saint was so very virtuous, that he sometimes remained
      without eating for whole weeks.

  241 “Non appropinquavit oleum corpusculo ejus. Facies vel etiam pedes a
      die conversionis suæ nunquam diluti sunt.”—_Vitæ Patrum_, c. xvii.

  242 “In facie ejus puritas animi noscebatur.”—Ibid. c. xviii.

  243 Socrates, iv. 23.

  244 Heraclidis Paradisus (Rosweyde), c. xlii.

  245 “Nulla earum pedes suos abluebat; aliquantæ vero audientes de balneo
      loqui, irridentes, confusionem et magnam abominationem se audire
      judicabant, quæ neque audi tum suum hoc audire patiebantur.”—_Vit.
      S. Euphrax._ c. vi. (Rosweyde.)

  246 See her acts, Bollandists, April 2, and in the _Vitæ Patrum_.

  247 “Patres nostri nunquam facies suas lavabant, nos autem lavacra
      publica balneaque frequentamus.”—Moschus, _Pratum Spirituale_,
      clxviii.

_  248 Pratum Spirituale_, lxxx.

      An Irish saint, named Coemgenus, is said to have shown his devotion
      in a way which was directly opposite to that of the other saints I
      have mentioned—by his special use of cold water—but the principle in
      each case was the same—to mortify nature. St. Coemgenus was
      accustomed to pray for an hour every night in a pool of cold water,
      while the devil sent a horrible beast to swim round him. An angel,
      however, was sent to him for three purposes. “Tribus de causis à
      Domino missus est angelus ibi ad S. Coemgenum. Prima ut a diversis
      suis gravibus laboribus levius viveret paulisper; secunda ut
      horridam bestiam sancto infestam repelleret; tertia _ut frigiditatem
      aquæ calefaceret_.”—Bollandists, June 3. The editors say these acts
      are of doubtful authenticity.

  249 See his Life by his disciple Antony, in the _Vitæ Patrum_, Evagrius,
      i. 13, 14. Theodoret, _Philotheos_, cap. xxvi.

  250 Palladius, _Hist. Laus._ lxxvi.

  251 Rufinus, Hist. _Monach._ xxxiii.

  252 We have a striking illustration of this in St. Arsenius. His
      eyelashes are said to have fallen off through continual weeping, and
      he had always, when at work, to put a cloth on his breast to receive
      his tears. As he felt his death approaching, his terror rose to the
      point of agony. The monks who were about him said, “ ‘Quid fles,
      pater? numquid et tu times?’ Ille respondit, ‘In veritate timeo et
      iste timor qui nunc mecum est, semper in me fuit, ex quo factus sum
      monachus.’ ”—_Verba Seniorum_, Prol. § 163. It was said of St.
      Abraham that no day passed after his conversion without his shedding
      tears. (_Vit. Patrum._) St. John the dwarf once saw a monk laughing
      immoderately at dinner, and was so horrified that he at once began
      to cry. (Tillemont, _Mém. de l’Hist. ecclés._ tome x. p. 430.) St.
      Basil (_Regulæ_, interrog. xvii.) gives a remarkable disquisition on
      the wickedness of laughing, and he observes that this was the one
      bodily affection which Christ does not seem to have known. Mr.
      Buckle has collected a series of passages to precisely the same
      effect from the writings of the Scotch divines. (_Hist. of
      Civilisation_, vol. ii. pp. 385-386.)

  253 “Monachus autem non doctoris habet sed plangentis officium.”—_Contr.
      Vigilant._ xv.

  254 As Tillemont puts it: “Il se trouva très-peu de saints en qui Dieu
      ait joint les talens extérieurs de l’éloquence et de la science avec
      la grâce de la prophétie et des miracles. Ce sont des dons que sa
      Providence a presque toujours séparés.”—_Mém. Hist. ecclés._ tome
      iv. p. 315.

  255 St. Athanasius, _Vit. Anton._

_  256 Ep._ xxii. He says his shoulders were bruised when he awoke.

_  257 Ep._ lxx.; _Adv. Rufinum_, lib. i. ch. xxx. He there speaks of his
      vision as a mere dream, not binding. He elsewhere (_Ep._ cxxv.)
      speaks very sensibly of the advantage of hermits occupying
      themselves, and says he learnt Hebrew to keep away unholy thoughts.

  258 Sozomen, vi. 28; Rufinus, _Hist. Monach._ ch. vi. Socrates tells
      rather a touching story of one of these illiterate saints, named
      Pambos. Being unable to read, he came to some one to be taught a
      psalm. Having learnt the single verse, “I said I will take heed to
      my ways, that I offend not with my tongue,” he went away, saying
      that was enough if it were practically acquired. When asked, six
      months, and again many years, after, why he did not come to learn
      another verse, he answered that he had never been able truly to
      master this. (_H. E._ iv. 23.)

  259 Tillemont, x. p. 61.

  260 Ibid. viii. 490; Socrates, _H. E._ iv. 23.

  261 I have combined in this passage incidents from three distinct lives.
      St. Jerome, in a very famous and very beautiful passage of his
      letter to Eustochium (_Ep._ xxii.) describes the manner in which the
      forms of dancing-girls appeared to surround him as he knelt upon the
      desert sands. St. Mary of Egypt (_Vitæ Patrum_, ch. xix.) was
      especially tortured by the recollection of the songs she had sung
      when young, which continually haunted her mind. St. Hilarion (see
      his _Life_ by St. Jerome) thought he saw a gladiatorial show while
      he was repeating the psalms. The manner in which the different
      visions faded into one another like dissolving views is repeatedly
      described in the biographies.

  262 Rufinus, _Hist. Monach._, ch. xi. This saint was St. Helenus.

  263 Life of St. Pachomius (_Vit. Patrum_), cap. ix.

  264 Rufinus, _Hist. Monach._ cap. i. This story was told to Rufinus by
      St. John the hermit. The same saint described his own visions very
      graphically. “Denique etiam me frequenter dæmones noctibus
      seduxerunt, et neque orare neque requiescere permiserunt, phantasias
      quasdam per noctem totam sensibus meis et cogitationes suggerentes.
      Mane vero velut cum quadam illusione prosternebant se ante me
      dicentes, Indulge nobis, abbas, quia laborem tibi incussimus tota
      nocte.”—Ibid. St. Benedict in the desert is said to have been
      tortured by the recollection of a beautiful girl he had once seen,
      and only regained his composure by rolling in thorns. (St. Greg.
      _Dial._ ii. 2.)

  265 She lived also for some time in a convent at Jerusalem, which she
      had founded. Melania (who was one of St. Jerome’s friends) was a
      lady of rank and fortune, who devoted her property to the monks. See
      her journey in Rosweyde, lib. ii.

  266 See his _Life_ in Tillemont.

  267 Ibid. x. p. 14. A certain Didymus lived entirely alone till his
      death, which took place when he was ninety. (Socrates, _H. E._ iv.
      23.)

  268 Rufinus, _Hist. Monachorum_, cap. i.

_  269 Verba Seniorum_, § 65.

  270 Pelagia was very pretty, and, according to her own account, “her
      sins were heavier than the sand.” The people of Antioch, who were
      very fond of her, called her Margarita, or the pearl. “Il arriva un
      jour que divers évesques, appelez par celui d’Antioche pour quelques
      affaires, estant ensemble à la porte de l’eglise de S.-Julien,
      Pélagie passa devant eux dans tout l’éclat des pompes du diable,
      n’ayant pas seulement une coeffe sur sa teste ni un mouchoir sur ses
      épaules, ce qu’on remarqua comme le comble de son impudence. Tous
      les évesques baissèrent les yeux en gémissant pour ne pas voir ce
      dangereux objet de péché, hors Nonne, très-saint évesque d’Héliople,
      qui la regarda avec une attention qui fit peine aux autres.”
      However, this bishop immediately began crying a great deal, and
      reassured his brethren, and a sermon which he preached led to the
      conversion of the actress. (Tillemont, _Mém. d’Hist. ecclés._ tome
      xii. pp. 378-380. See, too, on women, “under pretence of religion,
      attiring themselves as men,” Sozomen, iii. 14.)

  271 Tillemont, tome x. pp. 376, 377. Apart from family affections, there
      are some curious instances recorded of the anxiety of the saints to
      avoid distractions. One monk used to cover his face when he went
      into his garden, lest the sight of the trees should disturb his
      mind. (_Verb. Seniorum._) St. Arsenius could not bear the rustling
      of the reeds (ibid.); and a saint named Boniface struck dead a man
      who went about with an ape and a cymbal, because he had (apparently
      quite unintentionally) disturbed him at his prayers. (St. Greg.
      _Dial._ i. 9.)

  272 “Quemadmodum se jam divitem non esse sciebat, ita etiam patrem se
      esse nesciret.”—Cassian, _De Cœnobiorum Institutis_, iv. 27.

  273 “Cumque taliter infans sub oculis ejus per dies singulos ageretur,
      pro amore nihilominus Christi et obedientiæ virtute, rigida semper
      atque immobilia patris viscera permanserunt ... parum cogitans de
      lacrymis ejus, sed de propria humilitate ac perfectione
      sollicitus.”—Ibid.

  274 Ibid.

  275 Bollandists, July 6; _Verba Seniorum_, xiv.

_  276 Verba Seniorum_, xiv.

  277 TARTUFFE (_tirant un mouchoir_
      _ de sa poche_).

      “Ah, mon Dieu, je vous prie,
      Avant que de parler, prenez-moi ce mouchoir.

      DORINE.

      Comment!

      TARTUFFE.

      Couvrez ce sein que je ne saurois voir;
      Par de pareils objets des âmes sont blessées,
      Et cela fait venir de coupables pensées.”

      _Tartuffe_, Acte iii. scène 2.

  278 Bollandists, July 6.

_  279 Verba Seniorum_, iv. The poor woman, being startled and perplexed
      at the proceedings of her son, said, “Quid sic operuisti manus tuas,
      fili? Ille autem dixit: Quia corpus mulieris ignis est, et ex eo
      ipso quo te contingebam veniebat mihi commemoratio aliarum feminarum
      in animo.”

  280 Tillemont, _Mém. de l’Hist. ecclés._ tome x. pp. 444, 445.

_  281 Vit. S. Pachomius_, ch. xxxi.; _Verba Seniorum_.

_  282 Verba Senorium_, xiv.

  283 Palladius, _Hist. Laus._ cap. lxxxvii.

  284 Bollandists, June 6. I avail myself again of the version of
      Tillemont. “Lorsque S. Pemen demeuroit en Egypte avec ses frères,
      leur mère, qui avoit un extrême désir de les voir, venoit souvent au
      lieu où ils estoient, sans pouvoir jamais avoir cette satisfaction.
      Une fois enfin elle prit si bien son temps qu’elle les rencontra qui
      alloient à l’église, mais dès qu’ils la virent ils s’en retournèrent
      en haste dans leur cellule et fermèrent la porte sur eux. Elle les
      suivit, et trouvant la porte, elle les appeloit avec des larmes et
      des cris capables de les toucher de compassion.... Pemen s’y leva et
      s’y en alla, et l’entendant pleurer il luy dit, tenant toujours la
      porte fermée, ‘Pourquoi vous lassez-vous inutilement à pleurer et
      crier? N’êtes-vous pas déjà assez abattue par la vieillesse?’ Elle
      reconnut la voix de Pemen, et s’efforçant encore davantage, elle
      s’écria, ‘Hé, mes enfans, c’est que je voudrais bien vous voir: et
      quel mal y a-t-il que je vous voie? Ne suis-je pas votre mère, et ne
      vous ai-je pas nourri du lait de mes mammelles? Je suis déjà toute
      pleine de rides, et lorsque je vous ay entendu, l’extrême envie que
      j’ay de vous voir m’a tellement émue que je suis presque tombée en
      défaillance.’ ”—_Mémoires de l’Hist. ecclès._ tome xv. pp. 157, 158.

  285 The original is much more eloquent than my translation. “Fili, quare
      hoc fecisti? Pro utero quo te portavi, satiasti me luctu, pro
      lactatione qua te lactavi dedisti mihi lacrymas, pro osculo quo te
      osculata sum, dedisti mihi amaras cordis angustias; pro dolore et
      labore quem passa sum, imposuisti mihi sævissimas plagas.”—_Vita
      Simeonis_ (in Rosweyde).

  286 Bingham, _Antiquities_, book vii. ch. iii.

  287 Ibid.

  288 Bingham, _Antiquities_, book vii. chap. 3.

  289 Milman’s _Early Christianity_ (ed. 1867), vol. iii. p. 122.

  290 Ibid. vol. iii. p. 153.

  291 Ibid. vol. iii. p. 120.

_  292 De Virginibus_, i. 11.

  293 See Milman’s _Early Christianity_, vol. iii. p. 121.

_  294 De Virginibus_, i. 11.

_  295 Epist._ xxiv.

  296 St. Jerome describes the scene at her departure with admiring
      eloquence. “Descendit ad portum fratre, cognatis, affinibus et quod
      majus est liberis prosequentibus, et elementissimam matrem pietate
      vincere cupientibus. Jam carbasa tendebantur, et remorum ductu navis
      in altum protrahebatur. Parvus Toxotius supplices manus tendebat in
      littore, Ruffina jam nubilis ut suas expectaret nuptias tacens
      fletibus obsecrabat. Et tamen illa siccos tendebat ad cælum oculos,
      pietatem in filios pietate in Deum superans. Nesciebat se matrem ut
      Christi probaret ancillam.”—_Ep._ cviii. In another place he says of
      her: “Testis est Jesus, ne unum quidem nummum ab ea filiæ derelictum
      sed, ut ante jam dixi, derelictum magnum æs alienum.”—Ibid. And
      again: “Vis, lector, ejus breviter scire virtutes? Omnes suos
      pauperes, pauperior ipsa dimisit.”—Ibid.

  297 See Chastel, _Etudes historiques sur la Charité_, p. 231. The
      parents of St. Gregory Nazianzen had made this request, which was
      faithfully observed.

  298 Chastel, p. 232.

  299 See a characteristic passage from the _Life of St. Fulgentius_,
      quoted by Dean Milman. “Facile potest juvenis tolerare quemcunque
      imposuerit laborem qui poterit maternum jam despicere
      dolorem.”—_Hist. of Latin Christianity_, vol. ii. p. 82.

_  300 Ep._ xiv. (_Ad Heliodorum_).

  301 St. Greg. _Dial._ ii. 24.

  302 Bollandists, May 3 (vol. vii. p. 561).

  303 “Hospitibus omni loco ac tempore liberalissimus fuit.... Solis
      consanguineis durus erat et inhumanus, tamquam ignotos illos
      respiciens.”—Bollandists, May 29.

  304 See Helyot, _Dict. des Ordres religieux_, art. “Camaldules.”

  305 See the charming sketch in the _Life of St. Francis_, by Hase.

  306 The legend of St. Scholastica, the sister of St. Benedict, has been
      often quoted. He had visited her, and was about to leave in the
      evening, when she implored him to stay. He refused, and she then
      prayed to God, who sent so violent a tempest that the saint was
      unable to depart. (St. Greg. _Dial._ ii. 33.) Cassian speaks of a
      monk who thought it his duty never to see his mother, but who
      laboured for a whole year to pay off a debt she had incurred.
      (Cœnob. _Inst._ v. 38.) St. Jerome mentions the strong natural
      affection of Paula, though she considered it a virtue to mortify it.
      (_Ep._ cviii.)

_  307 Life of Antony._ See, too, the sentiments of St. Pachomius, _Vit._
      cap. xxvii.

  308 “Nec ulla res aliena magis quam publica.”—Tertullian, _Apol._ ch.
      xxxviii.

  309 “Quid interest sub cujus imperio vivat homo moriturus, si illi qui
      imperant, ad impia et iniqua non cogant.”—St. Aug. _De Civ. Dei_, v.
      17.

  310 St. Jerome declares that “Monachum in patria sua perfectum esse non
      posse, perfectum autem esse nolle delinquere est.”—_Ep._ xiv. Dean
      Milman well says of a later period: “According to the monastic view
      of Christianity, the total abandonment of the world, with all its
      ties and duties, as well as its treasures, its enjoyments, and
      objects of ambition, advanced rather than diminished the hopes of
      salvation. Why should they fight for a perishing world, from which
      it was better to be estranged?... It is singular, indeed, that while
      we have seen the Eastern monks turned into fierce undisciplined
      soldiers, perilling their own lives and shedding the blood of others
      without remorse, in assertion of some shadowy shade of orthodox
      expression, hardly anywhere do we find them asserting their
      liberties or their religion with intrepid resistance. Hatred of
      heresy was a more stirring motive than the dread or the danger of
      Islamism. After the first defeats the Christian mind was still
      further prostrated by the common notion that the invasion was a just
      and heaven-commissioned visitation; ... resistance a vain, almost an
      impious struggle to avert inevitable punishment.”—Milman’s _Latin
      Christianity_, vol. ii. p. 206. Compare Massillon’s famous _Discours
      au Régiment de Catinat_:—“Ce qu’il y a ici de plus déplorable, c’est
      que dans une vie rude et pénible, dans des emplois dont les devoirs
      passent quelquefois la rigueur des cloîtres les plus austères, vous
      souffrez toujours en vain pour l’autre vie.... Dix ans de services
      ont plus usé votre corps qu’une vie entière de pénitence ... un seul
      jour de ces souffrances, consacré au Seigneur, vous aurait peut-être
      valu un bonheur éternel.”

  311 See a very striking passage in Salvian, _De Gubern. Div._ lib. vi.

  312 Chateaubriand very truly says, “qu’Orose et saint Augustin étoient
      plus occupés du schisme de Pélage que de la désolation de l’Afrique
      et des Gaules.”—_Études histor._ vime discours, 2de partie. The
      remark might certainly be extended much further.

  313 Zosimus, _Hist._ v. 41. This was on the first occasion when Rome was
      menaced by Alaric.

  314 See Merivale’s _Conversion of the Northern Nations_, pp. 207-210.

  315 See Sismondi, _Hist. de la Chute de l’Empire romain_, tome i. p.
      230.

  316 Eunapius. There is no other authority for the story of the
      treachery, which is not believed by Gibbon.

  317 Sismondi, _Hist. de la Chute de l’Empire romain_, tome ii. pp.
      52-54; Milman, _Hist. of Latin Christianity_, vol. ii. p. 213. The
      Monophysites were greatly afflicted because, after the conquest, the
      Mohammedans tolerated the orthodox believers as well as themselves,
      and were unable to appreciate the distinction between them. In Gaul,
      the orthodox clergy favoured the invasions of the Franks, who, alone
      of the barbarian conquerors of Gaul, were Catholics, and St.
      Aprunculus was obliged to fly, the Burgundians desiring to kill him
      on account of his suspected connivance with the invaders. (Greg.
      _Tur._ ii. 23.)

  318 Dean Milman says of the Church, “if treacherous to the interests of
      the Roman Empire, it was true to those of mankind.”—_Hist. of
      Christianity_, vol. iii. p. 48. So Gibbon: “If the decline of the
      Roman Empire was hastened by the conversion of Constantine, the
      victorious religion broke the violence of the fall and mollified the
      ferocious temper of the conquerors.”—Ch. xxxviii.

  319 Observe with what a fine perception St. Augustine notices the
      essentially unchristian character of the moral dispositions to which
      the greatness of Rome was due. He quotes the sentence of Sallust:
      “Civitas, incredibile memoratu est, adeptâ libertate quantum brevi
      creverit, tanta cupido gloriæ incesserat;” and adds: “Ista ergo
      laudis aviditas et cupido gloriæ multa illa miranda fecit,
      laudabilia scilicet atque gloriosa secundum hominum existimationem
      ... causa honoris, laudis et gloriæ consuluerunt patriæ, in qua
      ipsam gloriam requirebant, salutemque ejus saluti suæ præponere non
      dubitaverunt, pro isto uno vitio, id est, amore laudis, pecuniæ
      cupiditatem et multa alia vitia comprimentes.... Quid aliud amarent
      quam gloriam, qua volebant etiam post mortem tanquam vivere in ore
      laudantium?”—_De Civ. Dei_, v. 12-13.

  320 “Præter majorum cineres atque ossa, volucri
      Carpento rapitur pinguis Damasippus et ipse,
      Ipse rotam stringit multo sufflamine consul;
      Nocte quidem; sed luna videt, sed sidera testes
      Intendunt oculos. Finitum tempus honoris
      Quum fuerit, clara Damasippus luce flagellum Sumet.”—Juvenal, _Sat._
      viii. 146.

_  321 Nat. Quæst._ iv. 13. _Ep._ 78.

  322 “Pessimum vitæ scelus fecit, qui id [aurum] primus induit digitis
      ... quisquis primus instituit cunctanter id fecit, lævisque manibus,
      latentibusque induit.”—Plin. _Hist. Nat._ xxxiii. 4.

  323 See a curious passage in his _Apologia_. It should be said that we
      have only his own account of the charges brought against him.

  324 The history of false hair has been written with much learning by M.
      Guerle in his _Éloge des Perruques_.

  325 The fullest view of this age is given in a very learned little work
      by Peter Erasmus Müller (1797), _De Genio Ævi Theodosiani_.
      Montfaucon has also devoted two essays to the moral condition of the
      Eastern world, one of which is given in Jortin’s _Remarks on
      Ecclesiastical History_.

  326 See on these abuses Mosheim, _Eccl. Hist._ (Soame’s ed.), vol. i. p.
      463; Cave’s _Primitive Christianity_, part i. ch. xi.

  327 Cave’s _Primitive Christianity_, part i. ch. vii.

_  328 Ep._ lxi.

  329 Evagrius describes with much admiration how certain monks of
      Palestine, by “a life wholly excellent and divine,” had so overcome
      their passions that they were accustomed to bathe with women; for
      “neither sight nor touch, nor a woman’s embrace, could make them
      relapse into their natural condition. Among men they desired to be
      men, and among women, women.” (_H. E._ i. 21.)

  330 These “mulieres subintroductæ,” as they were called, are continually
      noticed by Cyprian, Jerome, and Chrysostom. See Müller, _De Genio
      Ævi Theodosiani_, and also the _Codex Theod._ xvi. tit. ii. lex 44,
      with the Comments. Dr. Todd, in his learned _Life of St. Patrick_
      (p. 91), quotes (I shall not venture to do so) from the _Lives of
      the Irish Saints_ an extremely curious legend of a kind of contest
      of sanctity between St. Scuthinus and St. Brendan, in which it was
      clearly proved that the former had mastered his passions more
      completely than the latter. An enthusiast named Robert
      d’Arbrisselles is said in the twelfth century to have revived the
      custom. (Jortin’s _Remarks_, A.D. 1106.)

  331 St. Jerome gives (_Ep._ lii.) an extremely curious picture of these
      clerical flatterers, and several examples of the terms of endearment
      they were accustomed to employ. The tone of flattery which St.
      Jerome himself, though doubtless with the purest motives, employs in
      his copious correspondence with his female admirers, is to a modern
      layman peculiarly repulsive, and sometimes verges upon blasphemy. In
      his letter to Eustochium, whose daughter as a nun had become the
      “bride of Christ,” he calls the mother “Socrus Dei,” the
      mother-in-law of God. See, too, the extravagant flatteries of
      Chrysostom in his correspondence with Olympias.

  332 “Pudet dicere sacerdotes idolorum, mimi et aurigæ et scorta
      hæreditates capiunt; solis clericis et monachis hoc lege prohibetur,
      et prohibetur non a persecutoribus, sed a principibus Christianis.
      Nec de lege conqueror sed doleo cur meruerimus hanc legem.” _Ep._
      lii.

  333 See Milman’s _Hist. of Early Christianity_, vol. ii. p. 314.

  334 This was one cause of the disputes between St. Gregory the Great and
      the Emperor Eustace. St. Chrysostom frequently notices the
      opposition of the military and the monastic spirits.

  335 Hieron. _Ep._ cxxviii.

  336 St. Greg. Nyss. _Ad eund. Hieros_. Some Catholic writers have
      attempted to throw doubt upon the genuineness of this epistle, but,
      Dean Milman thinks, with no sufficient reason. Its account of
      Jerusalem is to some extent corroborated by St. Jerome. (_Ad
      Paulinum_, _Ep._ xxix.)

  337 “Præterea non taceo charitati vestræ, quia omnibus servis Dei qui
      hic vel in Scriptura vel in timore Dei probatissimi esse videntur,
      displicet quod bonum et honestas et pudicitia vestræ ecclesiæ
      illuditur; et aliquod levamentum turpitudinis esset, si prohiberet
      synodus et principes vestri mulieribus et velatis feminis illud iter
      et frequentiam, quam ad Romanam civitatem veniendo et redeundo
      faciunt, quia magna ex parte pereunt, paucis remeantibus integris.
      Perpaucæ enim sunt civitates in Longobardia vel in Francia aut in
      Gallia in qua non sit adultera vel meretrix generis Anglorum, quod
      scandalum est et turpitudo totius ecclesiæ vestræ.”—(A.D. 745) _Ep._
      lxiii.

  338 See Milman’s _Latin Christianity_, vol. ii. p. 8.

  339 Tillemont, _Hist. eccl._ tome xi. p. 547.

  340 This was enjoined in the rule of St. Paphnutius. See Tillemont, tome
      x. p. 45.

  341 “Omnimodis monachum fugere debere mulieres et episcopos.”—Cassian,
      _De Cœnob. Inst._ xi. 17.

  342 We also find now and then, though I think very rarely, intellectual
      flashes of some brilliancy. Two of them strike me as especially
      noteworthy. St. Arsenius refused to separate young criminals from
      communion though he had no hesitation about old men; for he had
      observed that young men speedily get accustomed and indifferent to
      the state of excommunication, while old men feel continually, and
      acutely, the separation. (Socrates, iv. 23.) St. Apollonius
      explained the Egyptian idolatry with the most intelligent
      rationalism. The ox, he thought, was in the first instance
      worshipped for its domestic uses; the Nile, because it was the chief
      cause of the fertility of the soil &c. (Rufinus, _Hist. Mon._ cap.
      vii.)

  343 Palladius, _Hist. Laus._ cap. xix.

  344 Rufinus, _Hist. Monach._ cap. xxix.

  345 Tillemont, _Hist. eccl._ tome viii. pp. 583, 584.

  346 Ibid. p. 589.

  347 Theodoret, _Philoth._ cap. iii.

_  348 Verba Seniorum._

  349 Theodoret, _Philoth._ cap. ii.

  350 Tillemont, tome viii. pp. 594-595.

  351 Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ viii. 1. Many anecdotes of elephants are
      collected viii. 1-12. See, too, Dion Cassius, xxxix. 38.

  352 Pliny, viii. 40.

  353 Donne’s _Biathanatos_. p. 22. This habit of bees is mentioned by St.
      Ambrose. The pelican, as is well known, afterwards became an emblem
      of Christ.

  354 Plin. _Hist. Nat._ x. 6.

  355 A long list of legends about dogs is given by Legendre, in the very
      curious chapter on animals, in his _Traité de l’Opinion_, tome i.
      pp. 308-327.

  356 Pliny tells some extremely pretty stories of this kind. (_Hist.
      Nat._ ix. 8-9.) See, too, Aulus Gellius, xvi. 19. The dolphin, on
      account of its love for its young, became a common symbol of Christ
      among the early Christians.

  357 A very full account of the opinions, both of ancient and modern
      philosophers, concerning the souls of animals, is given by Bayle,
      _Dict._ arts. “Pereira E,” “Rorarius K.”

  358 The Jewish law did not confine its care to oxen. The reader will
      remember the touching provision, “Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his
      mother’s milk” (Deut. xiv. 21); and the law forbidding men to take a
      parent bird that was sitting on its young or on its eggs. (Deut.
      xxii. 6, 7.)

  359 “Cujus tanta fuit apud antiquos veneratio, ut tam capital esset
      bovem necuisse quam civem.”—Columella, lib. vi. in proœm. “Hic
      socius hominum in rustico opere et Cereris minister. Ab hoc antiqui
      manus ita abstinere voluerunt ut capite sanxerint si quis
      occidisset.”—Varro, _De Re Rustic._ lib. ii. cap. v.

  360 See Legendre, tome ii. p. 338. The sword with which the priest
      sacrificed the ox was afterwards pronounced accursed. (Ælian, _Hist.
      Var._ lib. viii. cap. iii.)

  361 Diog. Laërt. _Xenocrates_.

  362 There is a story told by Herodotus (i. 157-159) of an ambassador who
      was sent by his fellow-countrymen to consult an oracle at Miletus
      about a suppliant who had taken refuge with the Cymæans and was
      demanded with menace by his enemies. The oracle, being bribed,
      enjoined the surrender. The ambassador on leaving, with seeming
      carelessness disturbed the sparrows under the portico of the temple,
      when the voice from behind the altar denounced his impiety for
      disturbing the guests of the gods. The ambassador replied with an
      obvious and withering retort. Ælian says (_Hist. Var._) that the
      Athenians condemned to death a boy for killing a sparrow that had
      taken refuge in the temple of Æsculapius.

  363 Quintilian, _Inst._ v. 9.

  364 In the same way we find several chapters in the _Zendavesta_ about
      the criminality of injuring dogs; which is explained by the great
      importance of shepherd’s dogs to a pastoral people.

  365 On the origin of Greek cock-fighting, see Ælian, _Hist. Var._ ii.
      28. Many particulars about it are given by Athenæus. Chrysippus
      maintained that cock-fighting was the final cause of cocks, these
      birds being made by Providence in order to inspire us by the example
      of their courage. (Plutarch, _De Repug. Stoic._) The Greeks do not,
      however, appear to have known “cock-throwing,” the favourite English
      game of throwing a stick called a “cock-stick” at cocks. It was a
      very ancient and very popular amusement, and was practised
      especially on Shrove Tuesday, and by school-boys. Sir Thomas More
      had been famous for his skill in it. (Strutt’s _Sports and
      Pastimes_, p. 283.) Three origins of it have been given:—1st, that
      in the Danish wars the Saxons failed to surprise a certain city in
      consequence of the crowing of cocks, and had in consequence a great
      hatred of that bird; 2nd, that the cocks (_galli_) were special
      representatives of Frenchmen, with whom the English were constantly
      at war; and 3rd, that they were connected with the denial of St.
      Peter. As Sir Charles Sedley said:—

      “Mayst thou be punished for St. Peter’s crime,
      And on Shrove Tuesday perish in thy prime.”

      Knight’s _Old England_, vol. ii. p. 126.

_  366 De Natura Rerum_, lib. ii.

_  367 Life of Marc. Cato._

  368 “Quid meruere boves, animal sine fraude dolisque,
      Innocuum, simplex, natum tolerare labores?
      Immemor est demum nec frugum munere dignus.
      Qui potuit curvi dempto modo pondere aratri
      Ruricolam mactare suum.”—

      _Metamorph._ xv. 120-124.

  369 “Cujus
      Turbavit nitidos extinctus passer ocellos.”

      Juvenal, _Sat._ vi. 7-8.

      There is a little poem in Catullus (iii.) to console his mistress
      upon the death of her favourite sparrow; and Martial more than once
      alludes to the pets of the Roman ladies.

      Compare the charming description of the Prioress, in Chaucer:—

      “She was so charitable and so pitous,
      She wolde wepe if that she saw a
      mous Caught in a trappe, if it were ded or bledde.
      Of smale houndes had she that she fedde
      With rosted flesh and milke and wastel brede,
      But sore wept she if one of them were dede,
      Or if men smote it with a yerde smert:
      And all was conscience and tendre herte.”

      _Prologue to the __“__Canterbury Tales.__”_

  370 Philost. _Apol._ i. 38.

  371 See the curious chapter in his Κυνηγετικός, xvi. and compare it with
      No. 116 in the _Spectator_.

  372 In his _De Abstinentia Carnis_. The controversy between Origen and
      Celsus furnishes us with a very curious illustration of the
      extravagances into which some Pagans of the third century fell about
      animals. Celsus objected to the Christian doctrine about the
      position of men in the universe, that many of the animals were at
      least the equals of men both in reason, religious feeling, and
      knowledge. (Orig. _Cont. Cels._ lib. iv.)

  373 These views are chiefly defended in his two tracts on eating flesh.
      Plutarch has also recurred to the subject, incidentally, in several
      other works, especially in a very beautiful passage in his _Life of
      Marcus Cato_.

  374 See, for example, a striking passage in Clem. Alex. _Strom._ lib.
      ii. St. Clement imagines Pythagoras had borrowed his sentiments on
      this subject from Moses.

  375 There is, I believe, no record of any wild beast combats existing
      among the Jews, and the rabbinical writers have been remarkable for
      the great emphasis with which they inculcated the duty of kindness
      to animals. See some passages from them, cited in Wollaston,
      _Religion of Nature_, sec. ii., note. Maimonides believed in a
      future life for animals, to recompense them for their sufferings
      here. (Bayle, _Dict._ art, “Rorarius D.”) There is a curious
      collection of the opinions of different writers on this last point
      in a little book called the _Rights of Animals_, by William Drummond
      (London, 1838), pp. 197-205.

  376 Thus St. Paul (1 Cor. ix. 9) turned aside the precept, “Thou shalt
      not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn,” from its
      natural meaning, with the contemptuous question, “Doth God take care
      for oxen?”

  377 I have taken these illustrations from the collection of hermit
      literature in Rosweyde, from different volumes of the Bollandists,
      from the _Dialogues_ of Sulpicius Severus, and from what is perhaps
      the most interesting of all collections of saintly legends, Colgan’s
      _Acta Sanctorum Hiberniæ_. M. Alfred Maury, in his most valuable
      work, _Légendes pieuses du Moyen Age_, has examined minutely the
      part played by animals in symbolising virtues and vices, and has
      shown the way in which the same incidents were repeated, with slight
      variations, in different legends. M. de Montalembert has devoted
      what is probably the most beautiful chapter of his _Moines
      d’Occident_ (“Les Moines et la Nature”) to the relations of monks to
      the animal world; but the numerous legends he cites are all, with
      one or two exceptions, different from those I have given.

  378 Chateaubriand speaks, however (_Études historiques_, étude vime, 1re
      partie), of an old Gallic law, forbidding to throw a stone at an ox
      attached to the plough, or to make its yoke too tight.

  379 Bollandists, May 31. Leonardo da Vinci is said to have had the same
      fondness for buying and releasing caged birds, and (to go back a
      long way) Pythagoras to have purchased one day, near Metapontus,
      from some fishermen all the fish in their net, that he might have
      the pleasure of releasing them. (Apuleius, _Apologia_.)

  380 See these legends collected by Hase (_St Francis. Assisi_). It is
      said of Cardinal Bellarmine that he used to allow vermin to bite
      him, saying, “We shall have heaven to reward us for our sufferings,
      but these poor creatures have nothing but the enjoyment of this
      present life.” (Bayle, _Dict. philos._ art. “Bellarmine.”)

  381 I have noticed, in my _History of Rationalism_, that, although some
      Popes did undoubtedly try to suppress Spanish bull-fights, this was
      solely on account of the destruction of human life they caused. Full
      details on this subject will be found in Concina, _De Spectaculis_
      (Romæ, 1752). Bayle says, “Il n’y a point de casuiste qui croie
      qu’on pèche en faisant combattre des taureaux contre des dogues,”
      &c. (_Dict. philos._ “Rorarius, C.”)

  382 On the ancient amusements of England the reader may consult
      Seymour’s _Survey of London_ (1734), vol. i. pp. 227-235; Strutt’s
      _Sports and Pastimes of the English People_. Cock-fighting was a
      favourite children’s amusement in England as early as the twelfth
      century. (Hampson’s _Medii Ævi Kalendarii_, vol. i. p. 160.) It was,
      with foot-ball and several other amusements, for a time suppressed
      by Edward III., on the ground that they were diverting the people
      from archery, which was necessary to the military greatness of
      England.

  383 The decline of these amusements in England began with the great
      development of the theatre under Elizabeth. An order of the Privy
      Council in July, 1591, prohibits the exhibition of plays on
      Thursday, because on Thursdays bear-baiting and suchlike pastimes
      had been usually practised, and an injunction to the same effect was
      sent to the Lord Mayor, wherein it was stated that, “in divers
      places the players do use to recite their plays, to the great hurt
      and destruction of the game of bear-baiting and like pastimes, which
      are maintained for Her Majesty’s pleasure.”—Nichols, _Progresses of
      Queen Elizabeth_ (ed. 1823), vol. i. p. 438. The reader will
      remember the picture in _Kenilworth_ of the Earl of Sussex
      petitioning Elizabeth against Shakespeare, on the ground of his
      plays distracting men from bear-baiting. Elizabeth (see Nichols) was
      extremely fond of bear-baiting. James I. especially delighted in
      cock-fighting, and in 1610 was present at a great fight between a
      lion and a bear. (Hone, _Every Day Book_, vol. i. pp. 255-299.) The
      theatres, however, rapidly multiplied, and a writer who lived about
      1629 said, “that no less than seventeen playhouses had been built in
      or about London within threescore years.” (Seymour’s _Survey_, vol.
      i. p. 229.) The Rebellion suppressed all public amusements, and when
      they were re-established after the Restoration, it was found that
      the tastes of the better classes no longer sympathised with the
      bear-garden. Pepys (_Diary_, August 14, 1666) speaks of bull-baiting
      as “a very rude and nasty pleasure,” and says he had not been in the
      bear-garden for many years. Evelyn (_Diary_, June 16, 1670), having
      been present at these shows, describes them as “butcherly sports, or
      rather barbarous cruelties,” and says he had not visited them before
      for twenty years. A paper in the _Spectator_ (No. 141, written in
      1711) talks of those who “seek their diversion at the bear-garden,
      ... where reason and good manners have no right to disturb them.” In
      1751, however, Lord Kames was able to say, “The bear garden, which
      is one of the chief entertainments of the English, is held in
      abhorrence by the French and other polite nations.”—_Essay on
      Morals_ (1st ed.), p. 7; and he warmly defends (p. 30) the English
      taste. During the latter half of the last century there was constant
      controversy on the subject (which may be traced in the pages of the
      _Annual Register_), and several forgotten clergymen published
      sermons upon it, and the frequent riots resulting from the fact that
      the bear-gardens had become the resort of the worst classes assisted
      the movement. The London magistrates took measures to suppress
      cock-throwing in 1769 (Hampson’s _Med. Æv. Kalend._ p. 160); but
      bull-baiting continued far into the present century. Windham and
      Canning strongly defended it; Dr. Parr is said to have been fond of
      it (_Southey’s Commonplace Book_, vol. iv. p. 585); and as late as
      1824, Sir Robert (then Mr) Peel argued strongly against its
      prohibition. (_Parliamentary Debates_, vol. x. pp. 132-133,
      491-495.)

  384 Bacon, in an account of the deficiencies of medicine, recommends
      vivisection in terms that seem to imply that it was not practised in
      his time. “As for the passages and pores, it is true, which was
      anciently noted, that the more subtle of them appear not in
      anatomies, because they are shut and latent in dead bodies, though
      they be open and manifest in live; which being supposed, though the
      inhumanity of _anatomia vivorum_ was by Celsus justly reproved, yet,
      in regard of the great use of this observation, the enquiry needed
      not by him so slightly to have been relinquished altogether, or
      referred to the casual practices of surgery; but might have been
      well diverted upon the dissection of beasts alive, which,
      notwithstanding the dissimilitude of their parts, may sufficiently
      satisfy this enquiry.”—_Advancement of Learning_, x. 4. Harvey
      speaks of vivisections as having contributed to lead him to the
      discovery of the circulation of the blood. (Acland’s _Harveian
      Oration_ (1865), p. 55.) Bayle, describing the treatment of animals
      by men, says, “Nous fouillons dans leurs entrailles pendant leur vie
      afin de satisfaire notre curiosité.”—_Dict. philos._ art. “Rorarius,
      C.” Public opinion in England was very strongly directed to the
      subject in the present century, by the atrocious cruelties
      perpetrated by Majendie at his lectures. See a most frightful
      account of them in a speech by Mr. Martin (an eccentric Irish
      member, who was generally ridiculed during his life, and has been
      almost forgotten since his death, but to whose untiring exertions
      the legislative protection of animals in England is
      due).—_Parliament. Hist._ vol. xii. p. 652. Mandeville, in his day,
      was a very strong advocate of kindness to animals.—_Commentary on
      the Fable of the Bees._

  385 See his _Life_ by Sulpicius Severus.

  386 Milman.

  387 Greg. Turon. ii. 29.

  388 This was the first step towards the conversion of the
      Bulgarians.—Milman’s _Latin Christianity_, vol. iii. p. 249.

  389 A remarkable collection of instances of this kind is given by
      Ozanam, _Civilisation in the Fifth Century_ (Eng. trans.), vol. i.
      pp. 124-127.

  390 St. Gregory, _Dial._ iii. 7. The particular temptation the Jew heard
      discussed was that of the bishop of the diocese, who, under the
      instigation of one of the dæmons, was rapidly falling in love with a
      nun, and had proceeded so far as jocosely to stroke her on the back.
      The Jew, having related the vision to the bishop, the latter
      reformed his manners, the Jew became a Christian, and the temple was
      turned into a church.

  391 William of Malmesbury, ii. 13.

  392 See Milman’s _Hist. of Latin Christianity_, vol. ii. p. 293.

  393 Cassian. _Cœnob. Instit._ v. 4. See, too, some striking instances of
      this in the life of St. Antony.

  394 This spiritual pride is well noticed by Neander, _Ecclesiastical
      History_ (Bohn’s ed.), vol. iii. pp. 321-323. It appears in many
      traits scattered through the lives of these saints. I have already
      cited the visions telling St. Antony and St. Macarius that they were
      not the best of living people; and also the case of the hermit, who
      was deceived by a devil in the form of a woman, because he had been
      exalted by pride. Another hermit, being very holy, received pure
      white bread every day from heaven, but, being extravagantly elated,
      the bread got worse and worse till it became perfectly black.
      (Tillemont, tome x. pp. 27-28.) A certain Isidore affirmed that he
      had not been conscious of sin, even in thought, for forty years.
      (Socrates, iv. 23.) It was a saying of St. Antony, that a solitary
      man in the desert is free from three wars—of sight, speech, and
      hearing: he has to combat only fornication. (_Apothegmata Patrum._)

  395 “Pride, under such training [that of modern rationalistic
      philosophy], instead of running to waste, is turned to account. It
      gets a new name; it is called self-respect.... It is directed into
      the channel of industry, frugality, honesty, and obedience, and it
      becomes the very staple of the religion and morality held in honour
      in a day like our own. It becomes the safeguard of chastity, the
      guarantee of veracity, in high and low; it is the very household god
      of the Protestant, inspiring neatness and decency in the
      servant-girl, propriety of carriage and refined manners in her
      mistress, uprightness, manliness, and generosity in the head of the
      family.... It is the stimulating principle of providence on the one
      hand, and of free expenditure on the other; of an honourable
      ambition and of elegant enjoyment.”—Newman, _On University
      Education_, Discourse ix. In the same lecture (which is, perhaps,
      the most beautiful of the many beautiful productions of its
      illustrious author), Dr. Newman describes, with admirable eloquence,
      the manner in which modesty has supplanted humility in the modern
      type of excellence. It is scarcely necessary to say that the
      lecturer strongly disapproves of the movement he describes.

  396 Thus “indagatio veri” was reckoned among the leading virtues, and
      the high place given to σοφία and “prudentia” in ethical writings
      preserved the notion of the moral duties connected with the
      discipline of the intellect.

  397 St. Augustine reckoned eighty-eight sects as existing in his time.

  398 See a full account of these persecutions in Tillemont, _Mém.
      d’Histoire ecclés._ tome vi.

  399 Socrates, _H. E._, iv. 16. This anecdote is much doubted by modern
      historians.

  400 Milman’s _Hist. of Christianity_ (ed. 1867), vol. ii. p. 422.

  401 St. Athanasius, _Historical Treatises_ (Library of the Fathers), pp.
      192, 284.

  402 Milman, _Hist. of Christianity_, ii. pp. 436-437.

  403 The death of Arius, as is well known, took place suddenly (his
      bowels, it is said, coming out) when he was just about to make his
      triumphal entry into the Cathedral of Constantinople. The death
      (though possibly natural) never seems to have been regarded as such,
      but it was a matter of controversy whether it was a miracle or a
      murder.

  404 Socrates, _H. E._, vii. 13-15.

  405 Milman, _Hist. of Latin Christianity_, vol. i. pp. 214-215.

  406 Milman, _Hist. of Christianity_, vol. iii. p. 145.

  407 Milman, _Hist. of Latin Christianity_, vol. i. pp. 290-291.

  408 Ibid. vol. i. pp. 310-311.

  409 Milman, _Hist. of Latin Christianity_, vol. i. pp. 314-318. Dean
      Milman thus sums up the history: “Monks in Alexandria, monks in
      Antioch, monks in Jerusalem, monks in Constantinople, decide
      peremptorily on orthodoxy and heterodoxy. The bishops themselves
      cower before them. Macedonius in Constantinople, Flavianus in
      Antioch, Elias in Jerusalem, condemn themselves and abdicate, or are
      driven from their sees. Persecution is universal—persecution by
      every means of violence and cruelty; the only question is, in whose
      hands is the power to persecute.... Bloodshed, murder, treachery,
      assassination, even during the public worship of God—these are the
      frightful means by which each party strives to maintain its opinions
      and to defeat its adversary.”

  410 See a striking passage from Julianus of Eclana, cited by Milman,
      _Hist. of Latin Christianity_, vol. i. p. 164.

  411 “Nowhere is Christianity less attractive than in the Councils of the
      Church.... Intrigue, injustice, violence, decisions on authority
      alone, and that the authority of a turbulent majority, ... detract
      from the reverence and impugn the judgments of at least the later
      Councils. The close is almost invariably a terrible anathema, in
      which it is impossible not to discern the tones of human hatred, of
      arrogant triumph, of rejoicing at the damnation imprecated against
      the humiliated adversary.”—Ibid. vol. i. p. 202.

  412 See the account of this scene in Gibbon, _Decline and Fall_, ch.
      xlvii.; Milman, _Hist. of Latin Christianity_, vol. i. p. 263. There
      is a conflict of authorities as to whether the Bishop of Alexandria
      himself kicked his adversary, or, to speak more correctly, the act
      which is charged against him by some contemporary writers is not
      charged against him by others. The violence was certainly done by
      his followers and in his presence.

  413 Ammianus Marcellinus, xxvii. 3.

  414 Cyprian, _Ep._ lxi.

  415 Milman, _Hist. of Christianity_, vol. ii. p. 306.

  416 Ibid. iii. 10.

  417 “By this time the Old Testament language and sentiment with regard
      to idolatry were completely incorporated with the Christian feeling;
      and when Ambrose enforced on a Christian Emperor the sacred duty of
      intolerance against opinions and practices which scarcely a century
      before had been the established religion of the Empire, his zeal was
      supported by almost the unanimous applause of the Christian
      world.”—Milman’s _Hist. of Christianity_, vol. iii. p. 159.

  418 See the Theodosian laws of Paganism.

  419 This appears from the whole history of the controversy; but the
      prevailing feeling is, I think, expressed with peculiar vividness in
      the following passage:—“Eadmer says (following the words of Bede) in
      Colman’s times there was a sharp controversy about the observing of
      Easter, and other rules of life for churchmen; therefore, this
      question deservedly excited the minds and feeling of many people,
      fearing lest, perhaps, after having received the name of Christians,
      they should run, or had run in vain.”—King’s _Hist. of the Church of
      Ireland_, book ii. ch. vi.

  420 Gibbon, chap. lxiii.

  421 An interesting sketch of this very interesting prelate has lately
      been written by M. Druon, _Étude sur la Vie et les Œuvres de
      Synésius_ (Paris, 1859).

  422 Tradition has pronounced Gregory the Great to have been the
      destroyer of the Palatine library, and to have been especially
      zealous in burning the writings of Livy, because they described the
      achievements of the Pagan gods. For these charges, however (which I
      am sorry to find repeated by so eminent a writer as Dr. Draper),
      there is no real evidence, for they are not found in any writer
      earlier than the twelfth century. (See Bayle, _Dict._ art. “Greg.”)
      The extreme contempt of Gregory for Pagan literature is, however,
      sufficiently manifested in his famous and very curious letter to
      Desiderius, Bishop of Vienne, rebuking him for having taught certain
      persons Pagan literature, and thus mingled “the praises of Jupiter
      with the praises of Christ;” doing what would be impious even for a
      religious layman, “polluting the mind with the blasphemous praises
      of the wicked.” Some curious evidence of the feelings of the
      Christians of the fourth, fifth, and sixth centuries, about Pagan
      literature, is given in Guinguené, _Hist. littéraire de l’Italie_,
      tome i. p. 29-31, and some legends of a later period are candidly
      related by one of the most enthusiastic English advocates of the
      Middle Ages. (Maitland, _Dark Ages_.)

  423 Probably the best account of the intellectual history of these times
      is still to be found in the admirable introductory chapters with
      which the Benedictines prefaced each century of their _Hist.
      littéraire de la France_. The Benedictines think (with Hallam) that
      the eighth century was, on the whole, the darkest on the continent,
      though England attained its lowest point somewhat later. Of the
      great protectors of learning Theodoric was unable to write (see
      Guinguené, tome i. p. 31), and Charlemagne (Eginhard) only began to
      learn when advanced in life, and was never quite able to master the
      accomplishment. Alfred, however, was distinguished in literature.

  424 The belief that the world was just about to end was, as is well
      known, very general among the early Christians, and greatly affected
      their lives. It appears in the New Testament, and very clearly in
      the epistle ascribed to Barnabas in the first century. The
      persecutions of the second and third centuries revived it, and both
      Tertullian and Cyprian (_in Demetrianum_) strongly assert it. With
      the triumph of Christianity the apprehension for a time subsided;
      but it reappeared with great force when the dissolution of the
      Empire was manifestly impending, when it was accomplished, and in
      the prolonged anarchy and suffering that ensued. Gregory of Tours,
      writing in the latter part of the sixth century, speaks of it as
      very prevalent (_Prologue to the First Book_); and St. Gregory the
      Great, about the same time, constantly expresses it. The panic that
      filled Europe at the end of the tenth century has been often
      described.

  425 Maitland’s _Dark Ages_, p. 403.

  426 This passion for scraping MSS. became common, according to
      Montfaucon, after the twelfth century. (Maitland, p. 40.) According
      to Hallam, however (_Middle Ages_, ch. ix. part i.), it must have
      begun earlier, being chiefly caused by the cessation or great
      diminution of the supply of Egyptian papyrus, in consequence of the
      capture of Alexandria by the Saracens, early in the seventh century.

  427 Bede, _H. E._ iv. 24.

  428 Mariana, _De Rebus Hispaniæ_, vi. 7. Mariana says the stone was in
      his time preserved as a relic.

  429 Odericus Vitalis, quoted by Maitland (_Dark Ages_, pp. 268-269). The
      monk was restored to life that he might have an opportunity of
      reformation. The escape was a narrow one, for there was only one
      letter against which no sin could be adduced—a remarkable instance
      of the advantages of a diffuse style.

  430 Digby, _Mores Catholici_, book x. p. 246. Matthew of Westminster
      tells of a certain king who was very charitable, and whose right
      hand (which had assuaged many sorrows) remained undecayed after
      death (A.D. 644).

  431 See Hauréau, _Hist. de la Philosophie scolastique_, tome i. pp.
      24-25.

  432 On the progress of Roman civilisation in Britain, see Tacitus,
      _Agricola_, xxi.

  433 See the Benedictine _Hist. littér. de la France_, tome i. part ii.
      p. 9.

  434 A biographer of St. Thomas Aquinas modestly observes:—“L’opinion
      généralement répandue parmi les théologiens c’est que la _Somme de
      Théologie_ de St. Thomas est non-seulement son chef-d’œuvre mais
      aussi celui de l’esprit humain.” (!!)—Carle, _Hist. de St.-Thomas
      d’Aquin_, p. 140.

  435 See Viardot, _Hist. des Arabes en Espagne_, ii. 142-166. Prescott’s
      _Ferdinand and Isabella_, ch. viii. Viardot contends that the
      compass—which appears to have been long known in China—was first
      introduced into Europe by the Mohammedans; but the evidence of this
      appears inconclusive.

  436 Herder.

  437 “Impius ne audeto placare donis iram Deorum.”—Cicero, _De Leg._ ii.
      9. See, too, Philost. _Apoll. Tyan._ i. 11.

  438 There are three or four instances of this related by Porphyry, _De
      Abstin. Carnis_, lib. ii.

  439 Muratori, _Antich. Italiane_, diss. lxvii.

  440 See, on the causes of the wealth of the monasteries, two admirable
      dissertations by Muratori, _Antich. Italiane_, lxvii., lxviii.;
      Hallam’s _Middle Ages_, ch. vii. part i.

  441 “Lors de l’établissement du christianisme la religion avoit
      essentiellement consisté dans l’enseignement moral; elle avoit
      exercé les cœurs et les âmes par la recherche de ce qui étoit
      vraiment beau, vraiment honnête. Au cinquième siècle on l’avoit
      surtout attachée à l’orthodoxie, au septième on l’avoit réduite à la
      bienfaisance envers les couvens.”—Sismondi, _Hist. des Français_,
      tome ii. p. 50.

  442 Mr. Hallam, speaking of the legends of the miracles of saints, says:
      “It must not be supposed that these absurdities were produced as
      well as nourished by ignorance. In most cases they were the work of
      deliberate imposture. Every cathedral or monastery had its tutelar
      saint, and every saint his legend, fabricated in order to enrich the
      churches under his protection, by exaggerating his virtues, his
      miracles, and consequently his power of serving those who paid
      liberally for his patronage.”—_Middle Ages_, ch. ix. part i. I do
      not think this passage makes sufficient allowance for the
      unconscious formation of many saintly myths, but no impartial person
      can doubt its substantial truth.

  443 Sismondi, _Hist. des Français_, tome ii. pp. 54, 62-63.

  444 Milman’s _Hist. of Latin Christianity_, vol. ii. p. 257.

  445 Durandus, a French bishop of the thirteenth century, tells how,
      “when a certain bishop was consecrating a church built out of the
      fruits of usury and pillage, he saw behind the altar the devil in a
      pontifical vestment, standing at the bishop’s throne, who said unto
      the bishop, ‘Cease from consecrating the church; for it pertaineth
      to my jurisdiction, since it is built from the fruits of usuries and
      robberies.’ Then the bishop and the clergy having fled thence in
      fear, immediately the devil destroyed that church with a great
      noise.”—_Rationale Divinorum_, i. 6 (translated for the Camden
      Society).

      A certain St. Launomar is said to have refused a gift for his
      monastery from a rapacious noble, because he was sure it was derived
      from pillage. (Montalembert’s _Moines d’Occident_, tome ii. pp.
      350-351.) When prostitutes were converted in the early Church, it
      was the rule that the money of which they had become possessed
      should never be applied to ecclesiastical purposes, but should be
      distributed among the poor.

_  446 Verba Seniorum_, Prol. § 172.

  447 This vision is not related by St. Gregory himself, and some
      Catholics are perplexed about it, on account of the vision of
      another saint, who afterwards asked whether Trajan was saved, and
      received for answer, “I wish men to rest in ignorance of this
      subject, that the Catholics may become stronger. For this emperor,
      though he had great virtues, was an unbaptised infidel.” The whole
      subject of the vision of St. Gregory is discussed by Champagny, _Les
      Antonins_, tome i. pp. 372-373. This devout writer says, “Cette
      légende fut acceptée par tout le moyen-âge, _indulgent pour les
      païens illustres_ et tout disposé à les supposer chrétiens et
      sauvés.”

  448 See the solemn asseveration of the care which he took in going only
      to the most credible and authorised sources for his materials, in
      the Preface to the First Book of _Dialogues_.

_  449 Dial._ iv. 36.

  450 Ibid. iv. 30.

  451 Ibid. iv. 35.

  452 The fullest collection of these visions with which I am acquainted
      is that made for the Philobiblion Society (vol. ix.), by M.
      Delepierre, called _L’Enfer décrit par ceux qui l’ont vu_, of which
      I have largely availed myself. See, too, Rusca _De Inferno_,
      Wright’s _Purgatory of St. Patrick_, and an interesting collection
      of visions given by Mr. Longfellow, in his translation of Dante. The
      Irish saints were, I am sorry to say, prominent in producing this
      branch of literature. St. Fursey, whose vision is one of the
      earliest, and Tondale, or Tundale, whose vision is one of the most
      detailed, were both Irish. The English historians contain several of
      these visions. Bede relates two or three—William of Malmesbury that
      of Charles the Fat; Matthew Paris three visions of purgatory.

  453 The narrow bridge over hell (in some visions covered with spikes),
      which is a conspicuous feature in the Mohammedan pictures of the
      future world, appears very often in Catholic visions. See Greg. Tur.
      iv. 33; St. Greg. _Dial._ iv. 36; and the vision of Tundale, in
      Delepierre.

  454 Few Englishmen, I imagine, are aware of the infamous publications
      written with this object, that are circulated by the Catholic
      priests among the poor. I have before me a tract “for children and
      young persons,” called _The Sight of Hell_, by the Rev. J. Furniss,
      C.S.S.R., published “permissu superiorum,” by Duffy (Dublin and
      London). It is a detailed description of the dungeons of hell, and a
      few sentences may serve as a sample. “See! on the middle of that
      red-hot floor stands a girl; she looks about sixteen years old. Her
      feet are bare. She has neither shoes nor stockings.... Listen! she
      speaks. She says, I have been standing on this red-hot floor for
      years. Day and night my only standing-place has been this red-hot
      floor.... Look at my burnt and bleeding feet. Let me go off this
      burning floor for one moment, only for one single short moment....
      The fourth dungeon is the boiling kettle ... in the middle of it
      there is a boy.... His eyes are burning like two burning coals. Two
      long flames come out of his ears.... Sometimes he opens his mouth,
      and blazing fire rolls out. But listen! there is a sound like a
      kettle boiling.... The blood is boiling in the scalded veins of that
      boy. The brain is boiling and bubbling in his head. The marrow is
      boiling in his bones.... The fifth dungeon is the red-hot oven....
      The little child is in this red-hot oven. Hear how it screams to
      come out. See how it turns and twists itself about in the fire. It
      beats its head against the roof of the oven. It stamps its little
      feet on the floor.... God was very good to this child. Very likely
      God saw it would get worse and worse, and would never repent, and so
      it would have to be punished much more in hell. So God in His mercy
      called it out of the world in its early childhood.” If the reader
      desires to follow this subject further, he may glance over a
      companion tract by the same reverend gentleman, called _A Terrible
      Judgment on a Little Child_; and also a book on _Hell_, translated
      from the Italian of Pinamonti, and with illustrations depicting the
      various tortures.

  455 St. Greg. _Dial._ iv. 38.

  456 Ibid. iv. 18.

  457 Alger’s _History of the Doctrine of a Future Life_ (New York, 1866),
      p. 414. The ignis fatuus was sometimes supposed to be the soul of an
      unbaptised child. There is, I believe, another Catholic legend about
      the redbreast, of a very different kind—that its breast was stained
      with blood when it was trying to pull out the thorns from the crown
      of Christ.

  458 Wright’s _Purgatory of St. Patrick_, p. 26. M. Delepierre quotes a
      curious theory of Father Hardouin (who is chiefly known for his
      suggestion that the classics were composed by the mediæval monks)
      that the rotation of the earth is caused by the lost souls trying to
      escape from the fire that is at the centre of the globe, climbing,
      in consequence, on the inner crust of the earth, which is the wall
      of hell, and thus making the whole revolve, as the squirrel by
      climbing turns its cage! (_L’Enfer décrit par ceux qui l’ont vu_, p.
      151.)

  459 Delepierre, p. 70.

  460 Thus, in a book which was attributed (it is said erroneously) to
      Jeremy Taylor, we find two singularly unrhetorical and unimpassioned
      chapters, deliberately enumerating the most atrocious acts of
      cruelty in human history, and maintaining that they are surpassed by
      the tortures inflicted by the Deity. A few instances will suffice.
      Certain persons “put rings of iron, stuck full of sharp points of
      needles, about their arms and feet, in such a manner as the
      prisoners could not move without wounding themselves; then they
      compassed them about with fire, to the end that, standing still,
      they might be burnt alive, and if they stirred the sharp points
      pierced their flesh.... What, then, shall be the torment of the
      damned where they shall burn eternally without dying, and without
      possibility of removing?... Alexander, the son of Hyrcanus, caused
      eight hundred to be crucified, and whilst they were yet alive caused
      their wives and children to be murdered before their eyes, that so
      they might not die once, but many deaths. This rigour shall not be
      wanting in hell.... Mezentius tied a living body to a dead until the
      putrefied exhalations of the dead had killed the living.... What is
      this in respect of hell, when each body of the damned is more
      loathsome and unsavoury than a million of dead dogs?... Bonaventure
      says, if one of the damned were brought into this world it were
      sufficient to infect the whole earth.... We are amazed to think of
      the inhumanity of Phalaris, who roasted men alive in his brazen
      bull. That was a joy in respect of that fire of hell.... This
      torment ... comprises as many torments as the body of man has
      joints, sinews, arteries, &c., being caused by that penetrating and
      real fire, of which this temporal fire is but a painted fire....
      What comparison will there be between burning for a hundred years’
      space, and to be burning without interruption as long as God is
      God?”—_Contemplations on the State of Man_, book ii. ch. 6-7, in
      Heber’s Edition of the works of Taylor.

  461 Perrone, _Historiæ Theologiæ cum Philosophia comparata Synopsis_, p.
      29. Peter Lombard’s work was published in A.D. 1160.

  462 “Postremo quæritur, An pœna reproborum visa decoloret gloriam
      beatorum? an eorum beatitudini proficiat? De hoc ita Gregorius ait,
      Apud animum justorum non obfuscat beatitudinem aspecta pœna
      reproborum; quia ubi jam compassio miseriæ non erit, minuere
      beatorum lætitiam non valebit. Et licet justis sua gaudia
      sufficiant, ad majorem gloriam vident pœnas malorum quas per gratiam
      evaserunt.... Egredientur ergo electi, non loco, sed intelligentia
      vel visione manifesta ad videndum impiorum cruciatus; quos videntes
      non dolore afficientur sed lætitia satiabuntur, agentes gratias de
      sua liberatione visa impiorum ineffabili calamitate. Unde Esaias
      impiorum tormenta describens et ex eorum visione lætitiam bonorum
      exprimens, ait, Egredientur electi scilicet et videbunt cadavera
      virorum qui prævaricati sunt in me. Vermis eorum non morietur et
      ignis non extinguetur, et erunt usque ad satietatem visionis omni
      carni, id est electis. Lætabitur justus cum viderit
      vindictam.”—Peter Lombard, _Senten._ lib. iv. finis. These amiable
      views have often been expressed both by Catholic and by Puritan
      divines. See Alger’s _Doctrine of a Future Life_, p. 541.

_  463 Legenda Aurea._ There is a curious fresco representing this
      transaction, on the portal of the church of St. Lorenzo, near Rome.

  464 Aimoni, _De Gestis Francorum Hist._ iv. 34.

  465 Turpin’s _Chronicle_, ch. 32. In the vision of Watlin, however (A.D.
      824), Charlemagne was seen tortured in purgatory on account of his
      excessive love of women. (Delepierre, _L’Enfer décrit par ceux qui
      l’ont vu_, pp. 27-28.)

  466 As the Abbé Mably observes: “On croyoit en quelque sorte dans ces
      siècles grossiers que l’avarice étoit le premier attribut de Dieu,
      et que les saints faisoient un commerce de leur crédit et de leur
      protection. De-là les richesses immenses données aux églises par des
      hommes dont les mœurs déshonoroient la religion.”—_Observations sur
      l’Hist. de France_, i. 4.

  467 Many curious examples of the way in which the Troubadours burlesqued
      the monkish visions of hell are given by Delepierre, p.
      144.—Wright’s _Purgatory of St. Patrick_, pp. 47-52.

  468 Comte, _Philosophie positive_, tome v. p. 269.

  469 “Saint-Bernard, dans son sermon _De obitu Humberti_, affirme que
      tous les tourments de cette vie sont joies si on les compare à une
      seconde des peines du purgatoire. ‘Imaginez-vous donc, délicates
      dames,’ dit le père Valladier (1613) dans son sermon du 3me dimanche
      de l’Avent, ‘d’estre au travers de vos chenets, sur vostre petit feu
      pour une centaine d’ans: ce n’est rien au respect d’un moment de
      purgatoire. Mais si vous vistes jamais tirer quelqu’un à quatre
      chevaux, quelqu’un brusler à petit feu, enrager de faim ou de soif,
      une heure de purgatoire est pire que tout cela.’ ”—Meray, _Les
      Libres Prêcheurs_ (Paris, 1860), pp. 130-131 (an extremely curious
      and suggestive book). I now take up the first contemporary book of
      popular Catholic devotion on this subject which is at hand, and
      read: “Compared with the pains of purgatory, then, all those wounds
      and dark prisons, all those wild beasts, hooks of iron, red-hot
      plates, &c., which the holy martyrs suffered, are nothing.” “They
      (souls in purgatory) are in a real, though miraculous manner,
      tortured by fire, which is of the same kind (says Bellarmine) as our
      element fire.” “The Angelic Doctor affirms ‘that the fire which
      torments the damned is like the fire which purges the elect.’ ”
      “What agony will not those holy souls suffer when tied and bound
      with the most tormenting chains of a living fire like to that of
      hell! and we, while able to make them free and happy, shall we stand
      like uninterested spectators?” “St. Austin is of opinion that the
      pains of a soul in purgatory during the time required to open and
      shut one’s eye is more severe than what St. Lawrence suffered on the
      gridiron;” and much more to the same effect. (_Purgatory opened to
      the Piety of the Faithful._ Richardson, London.)

  470 See Delepierre, Wright, and Alger.

  471 This appears from the vision of Thurcill. (Wright’s _Purgatory of
      St. Patrick_, p. 42.) Brompton (_Chronicon_) tells of an English
      landlord who had refused to pay tithes. St. Augustine, having vainly
      reasoned with him, at last convinced him by a miracle. Before
      celebrating mass he ordered all excommunicated persons to leave the
      church, whereupon a corpse got out of a grave and walked away. The
      corpse, on being questioned, said it was the body of an ancient
      Briton who refused to pay tithes, and had in consequence been
      excommunicated and damned.

  472 Greg. _Dial._ iv. 40.

  473 As Sismondi says: “Pendant quatre-vingts ans, tout au moins, il n’y
      eut pas un Franc qui songeât à transmettre à la postérité la mémoire
      des événements contemporains, et pendant le même espace de temps il
      n’y eut pas un personnage puissant qui ne bâtit des temples pour la
      postérité la plus reculée.”—_Hist. des Français_, tome ii. p. 46.

  474 Gibbon says of the period during which the Merovingian dynasty
      reigned, that “it would be difficult to find anywhere more vice or
      less virtue.” Hallam reproduces this observation, and adds: “The
      facts of these times are of little other importance than as they
      impress on the mind a thorough notion of the extreme wickedness of
      almost every person concerned in them, and consequently of the state
      to which society was reduced.”—_Hist. of the Middle Ages_, ch. i.
      Dean Milman is equally unfavourable and emphatic in his judgment.
      “It is difficult to conceive a more dark and odious state of society
      than that of France under her Merovingian kings, the descendants of
      Clovis, as described by Gregory of Tours. In the conflict of
      barbarism with Roman Christianity, barbarism has introduced into
      Christianity all its ferocity with none of its generosity and
      magnanimity; its energy shows itself in atrocity of cruelty, and
      even of sensuality. Christianity has given to barbarism hardly more
      than its superstition and its hatred of heretics and unbelievers.
      Throughout, assassinations, parricides, and fratricides intermingle
      with adulteries and rapes.”—_History of Latin Christianity_, vol. i.
      p. 365.

  475 Greg. Tur. iv. 12. Gregory mentions (v. 41) another bishop who used
      to become so intoxicated as to be unable to stand; and St. Boniface,
      after describing the extreme sensuality of the clergy of his time,
      adds that there are some bishops “qui licet dicant se fornicarios
      vel adulteros non esse, sed sunt ebriosi et injuriosi,” &c.—_Ep._
      xlix.

  476 Greg. Tur. iv. 12.

  477 Ibid. viii. 29. She gave them knives with hollow grooves, filled
      with poison, in the blades.

  478 Ibid. vii. 20.

  479 Ibid. viii. 31-41.

  480 Ibid. v. 19.

  481 See his very curious correspondence with her.—_Ep._ vi. 5, 50, 59;
      ix. 11, 117; xi. 62-63.

  482 Avitus, _Ep._ v. He adds: “Minuebat regni felicitas numerum regalium
      personarum.”

  483 See the emphatic testimony of St. Boniface in the eighth century.
      “Modo autem maxima ex parte per civitates episcopales sedes traditæ
      sunt laicis cupidis ad possidendum, vel adulteratis clericis,
      scortatoribus et publicanis sæculariter ad perfruendum.”—_Epist._
      xlix. “ad Zachariam.” The whole epistle contains an appalling
      picture of the clerical vices of the times.

  484 More than one Council made decrees about this. See the _Vie de St.
      Léger_, by Dom Pitra, pp. 172-177.

  485 Greg. Tur. iv. 43. St. Boniface, at a much later period (A.D. 742),
      talks of bishops “Qui pugnant in exercitu armati et effundunt
      propria manu sanguinem hominum.”—_Ep._ xlix.

  486 Greg. Tur. iv. 26.

  487 Ibid. iv. 20.

  488 Ibid. iii. 26.

  489 Ibid. ix. 34.

  490 Ibid. viii. 19. Gregory says this story should warn clergymen not to
      meddle with the wives of other people, but “content themselves with
      those that they may possess without crime.” The abbot had previously
      tried to seduce the husband within the precincts of the monastery,
      that he might murder him.

  491 Ibid. v. 3.

  492 Ibid. viii. 39. She was guilty of many other crimes, which the
      historian says “it is better to pass in silence.” The bishop himself
      had been guilty of outrageous and violent tyranny. The marriage of
      ecclesiastics appears at this time to have been common in Gaul,
      though the best men commonly deserted their wives when they were
      ordained. Another bishop’s wife (iv. 36) was notorious for her
      tyranny.

  493 Fredigarius, xlii. The historian describes Clotaire as a perfect
      paragon of Christian graces.

  494 “Au sixième siècle on compte 214 établissements religieux des
      Pyrénées à la Loire et des bouches du Rhône aux Vosges.”—Ozanam,
      _Études germaniques_, tome ii. p. 93. In the two following centuries
      the ecclesiastical wealth was enormously increased.

  495 Matthew of Westminster (A.D. 757) speaks of no less than eight Saxon
      kings having done this.

  496 “Le septième siècle est celui peut-être qui a donné le plus de
      saints au calendrier.”—Sismondi, _Hist. de France_, tome ii. p. 50.
      “Le plus beau titre du septième siècle à une réhabilitation c’est le
      nombre considérable de saints qu’il a produits.... Aucun siècle n’a
      été ainsi glorifié sauf l’âge des martyrs dont Dieu s’est réservé de
      compter le nombre. Chaque année fournit sa moisson, chaque jour a sa
      gerbe.... Si donc il plaît à Dieu et au Christ de répandre à pleines
      mains sur un siècle les splendeurs des saints, qu’importe que
      l’histoire et la gloire humaine en tiennent peu compte?”—Pitra, _Vie
      de St. Léger_, Introd. p. x.-xi. This learned and very credulous
      writer (who is now a cardinal) afterwards says that we have the
      record of more than eight hundred saints of the seventh century.
      (Introd. p. lxxx.)

  497 See, e.g., the very touching passage about the death of his
      children, v. 35.

  498 Lib. ii. Prologue.

  499 Greg. Tur. ii. 27-43.

  500 He observes how impossible it was that he could be guilty of
      shedding the blood of a relation: “Sed in his ego nequaquam conscius
      sum. Nec enim possum sanguinem parentum meorum effundere.”—Greg.
      Tur. ii. 40.

  501 “Prosternebat enim quotidie Deus hostes ejus sub manu ipsius, et
      augebat regnum ejus eo quod ambularet recto corde coram eo, et
      faceret quæ placita erant in oculis ejus.”—Greg. Tur. ii. 40.

  502 Lib. iii. Prologue. St. Avitus enumerates in glowing terms the
      Christian virtues of Clovis (_Ep._ xli.), but, as this was in a
      letter addressed to the king himself, the eulogy may easily be
      explained.

  503 Thus Hallam says: “There are continual proofs of immorality in the
      monkish historians. In the history of Rumsey Abbey, one of our best
      documents for Anglo-Saxon times, we have an anecdote of a bishop who
      made a Danish nobleman drunk, that he might cheat him out of an
      estate, which is told with much approbation. Walter de Hemingford
      records, with excessive delight, the well-known story of the Jews
      who were persuaded by the captain of their vessel to walk on the
      sands at low water till the rising tide drowned them.”—Hallam’s
      _Middle Ages_ (12th ed.), iii. p. 306.

  504 Canciani, _Leges Barbarorum_, vol. iii. p. 64. Canciani notices,
      that among the Poles the teeth of the offending persons were pulled
      out. The following passage, from Bodin, is, I think, very
      remarkable: “Les loix et canons veulent qu’on pardonne aux
      hérétiques repentis (combien que les magistrats en quelques lieux
      par cy-devant, y ont eu tel esgard, que celui qui avoit mangé de la
      chair au Vendredy estoit bruslé tout vif, comme il fut faict en la
      ville d’Angers l’an mil cinq cens trente-neuf, s’il ne s’en
      repentoit: et jaçoit qu’il se repentist si estoit-il pendu par
      compassion).”—_Démonomanie des Sorciers_, p. 216.

  505 A long list of examples of extreme maceration, from lives of the
      saints of the seventh and eighth centuries is given by Pitra, _Vie
      de St. Léger_, Introd. pp. cv.-cvii.

  506 This was related of St. Equitius.—Greg. _Dialog._ i. 4.

  507 Ibid. i. 5. This saint was named Constantius.

  508 A vast number of miracles of this kind are recorded. See, e.g.,
      Greg. Tur. _De Miraculis_, i. 61-66; _Hist._ iv. 49. Perhaps the
      most singular instance of the violation of the sanctity of the
      church was that by the nuns of a convent founded by St. Radegunda.
      They, having broken into rebellion, four bishops, with their
      attendant clergy, went to compose the dispute, and having failed,
      excommunicated the rebels, whereupon the nuns almost beat them to
      death in the church.—Greg. Tur. ix. 41.

  509 See Canciani, _Leges Barbarorum_, vol. iii. pp. 19, 151.

  510 Much information about these measures is given by Dr. Hessey, in his
      _Bampton Lectures on Sunday_. See especially, lect. 3. See, too,
      Moehler, _Le Christianisme et l’Esclavage_, pp. 186-187.

  511 Gregory of Tours enumerates some instances of this in his
      extravagant book _De Miraculis_, ii. 11; iv. 57; v. 7. One of these
      cases, however, was for having worked on the day of St. John the
      Baptist. Some other miracles of the same nature, taken, I believe,
      from English sources, are given in Hessey’s _Sunday_ (3rd edition),
      p. 321.

  512 Compare Pitra, _Vie de St.-Léger_, p. 137. Sismondi, _Hist. des
      Français_, tome ii. pp. 62-63.

  513 See a remarkable passage from his life, cited by Guizot, _Hist. de
      la Civilisation en France_, xviime leçon. The English historians
      contain several instances of the activity of charity in the darkest
      period. Alfred and Edward the Confessor were conspicuous for it.
      Ethelwolf is said to have provided, “for the good of his soul,”
      that, till the day of judgment, one poor man in ten should be
      provided with meat, drink, and clothing. (Asser’s _Life of Alfred_.)
      There was a popular legend that a poor man having in vain asked alms
      of some sailors, all the bread in their vessel was turned into
      stone. (Roger of Wendover, A.D. 606.) See, too, another legend of
      charity in Matthew of Westminster, A.D. 611.

  514 Greg. Tur. _Hist._ v. 8.

  515 M. Guizot has given several specimens of this (_Hist. de la
      Civilis._ xviime leçon).

  516 This portion of mediæval history has lately been well traced by Mr.
      Maclear, in his _History of Christian Missions in the Middle Ages_
      (1863). See, too, Montalembert’s _Moines d’Occident_; Ozanam’s
      _Études germaniques_. The original materials are to be found in
      Bede, and in the _Lives of the Saints_—especially that of St.
      Columba, by Adamnan. On the French missionaries, see the Benedictine
      _Hist. lit. de la France_, tome iv. p. 5; and on the English
      missionaries, Sharon Turner’s _Hist. of England_, book x. ch. ii.

  517 Dion Chrysostom, _Or._ ii. (_De Regno_).

  518 Gibbon, ch. xvi.

  519 Origen, _Cels._ lib. viii.

  520 “Navigamus et nos vobiscum et militamus.”—Tert. _Apol._ xlii. See,
      too, Grotius _De Jure_, i. cap. ii.

  521 See an admirable dissertation on the opinions of the early
      Christians about military service, in Le Blant, _Inscriptions
      chrétiennes de la Gaule_, tome i. pp. 81-87. The subject is
      frequently referred to by Barbeyrac, _Morale des Pères_, and
      Grotius, _De Jure_, lib. i. cap. ii.

  522 Philostorgius, ii. 5.

  523 See some excellent remarks on this change, in Milman’s _History of
      Christianity_, vol. ii. pp. 287-288.

  524 Mably, _Observations sur l’Histoire de France_, i. 6; Hallam’s
      _Middle Ages_, ch. ii. part ii.

  525 Wakeman’s _Archæologia Hibernica_, p. 21. However, Giraldus
      Cambrensis observes that the Irish saints were peculiarly
      vindictive, and St. Columba and St. Comgall are said to have been
      leaders in a sanguinary conflict about a church near Coleraine. See
      Reeve’s edition of Adamnan’s _Life of St. Columba_, pp. lxxvii. 253.

  526 Campion’s _Historie of Ireland_ (1571), book i. ch. vi.

  527 It seems curious to find in so calm and unfanatical a writer as
      Justus Lipsius the following passage: “Jam et invasio quædam
      legitima videtur etiam sine injuria, ut in barbaros et moribus aut
      _religione_ prorsum a nobis abhorrentes.”—_Politicorum sive Civilis
      Doctrinæ libri_ (Paris, 1594), lib. iv. ch. ii. cap. iv.

  528 “Con l’occasione di queste cose Plutarco nel _Teseo_ dice che gli
      eroi si recavano a grande onore e si reputavano in pregio d’armi con
      l’esser chiamati ladroni; siccome a’ tempi barbari ritornati quello
      di Corsale era titolo riputato di signoria; d’intorno a’ quali tempi
      venuto Solone, si dice aver permesso nelle sue leggi le società per
      cagion di prede; tanto Solone ben intese questa nostra compiuta
      Umanità, nella quale costoro non godono del diritto natural delle
      genti! Ma quel che fa più maraviglia è che Platone ed Aristotile
      posero il ladroneccio fralle spezie della caccia e con tali e tanti
      filosofi d’una gente umanissima convengono con la loro barbarie i
      Germani antichi; appo i quali al referire di Cesare ì ladronecci non
      solo non eran infami, ma si tenevano tra gli esercizi della virtù
      siccome tra quelli che per costume non applicando ad arte alcuna
      così fuggivano l’ozio.”—Vico, _Scienza Nuova_, ii. 6. See, too,
      Whewell’s _Elements of Morality_, book vi. ch. ii.

  529 The ancient right of war is fully discussed by Grotius, _De Jure_,
      lib. iii. See, especially, the horrible catalogue of tragedies in
      cap. 4. The military feeling that regards capture as disgraceful,
      had probably some, though only a very subordinate, influence in
      producing cruelty to the prisoners.

  530 “Le jour où Athènes décréta que tous les Mityléniens, sans
      distinction de sexe ni d’âge, seraient exterminés, elle ne croyait
      pas dépasser son droit; quand le lendemain elle revint sur son
      décret et se contenta de mettre à mort mille citoyens et de
      confisquer toutes les terres, elle se crut humaine et indulgente.
      Après la prise de Platée les hommes furent égorgés, les femmes
      vendues, et personne n’accusa les vainqueurs d’avoir violé le
      droit.... C’est en vertu de ce droit de la guerre que Rome a étendu
      la solitude autour d’elle; du territoire où les Volsques avaient
      vingt-trois cités elle a fait les marais pontins; les
      cinquante-trois villes du Latium ont disparu; dans le Samnium on put
      longtemps reconnaître les lieux où les armées romaines avaient
      passé, moins aux vestiges de leurs camps qu’à la solitude qui
      règnait aux environs.”—Fustel de Coulanges, _La Cité antique_, pp.
      263-264.

  531 Plato, _Republic_, lib. v.; Bodin, _République_, liv. i. cap. 5.

  532 Grote, _Hist. of Greece_, vol. viii. p. 224. Agesilaus was also very
      humane to captives.—Ibid. pp. 365-6.

  533 This appears continually in Livy, but most of all, I think, in the
      Gaulish historian, Florus.

  534 Scipio and Trajan.

  535 See some very remarkable passages in Grotius, _De Jure Bell_. lib.
      iii. cap. 4, § 19.

  536 These mitigations are fully enumerated by Ayala, _De Jure et
      Officiis Bellicis_ (Antwerp, 1597), Grotius, _De Jure_. It is
      remarkable that both Ayala and Grotius base their attempts to
      mitigate the severity of war chiefly upon the writings and examples
      of the Pagans. The limits of the right of conquerors and the just
      causes of war are discussed by Cicero, _De Offic._ lib. i.

  537 In England the change seems to have immediately followed conversion.
      “The evangelical precepts of peace and love,” says a very learned
      historian, “did not put an end to war, they did not put an end to
      aggressive conquests, but they distinctly humanised the way in which
      war was carried on. From this time forth the never-ending wars with
      the Welsh cease to be wars of extermination. The heathen English had
      been satisfied with nothing short of the destruction and expulsion
      of their enemies; the Christian English thought it enough to reduce
      them to political subjection.... The Christian Welsh could now sit
      down as subjects of the Christian Saxon. The Welshman was
      acknowledged as a man and a citizen, and was put under the
      protection of the law.”—Freeman’s _Hist. of the Norman Conquest_,
      vol. i. pp. 33-34. Christians who assisted infidels in wars were
      _ipso facto_ excommunicated, and might therefore be enslaved, but
      all others were free from slavery. “Et quidem inter Christianos
      laudabili et antiqua consuetudine introductum est, ut capti hinc
      inde, utcunque justo bello, non fierent servi, sed liberi
      servarentur donec solvant precium redemptionis.”—Ayala, lib. i. cap.
      5. “This rule, at least,” says Grotius, “(though but a small matter)
      the reverence for the Christian law has enforced, which Socrates
      vainly sought to have established among the Greeks.” The Mohammedans
      also made it a rule not to enslave their co-religionists.—Grotius,
      _De Jure_, iii. 7, § 9. Pagan and barbarian prisoners were, however,
      sold as slaves (especially by the Spaniards) till very recently.

  538 The character of Constantine, and the estimate of it in Eusebius,
      are well treated by Dean Stanley, _Lectures on the Eastern Church_
      (Lect. vi.).

  539 Theodoret, iii. 28.

  540 They are collected by Chateaubriand, _Études hist._ 2me disc. 2me
      partie.

  541 See St. Gregory’s oration on _Cesarius_.

  542 Sozomen, vi. 2.

_  543 Ep._ xiii. 31-39. In the second of these letters (which is
      addressed to Leontia), he says: “Rogare forsitan debui ut ecclesiam
      beati Petri apostoli quæ nunc usque gravibus insidiis laboravit,
      haberet Vestra Tranquillitas specialiter commendatam. Sed qui scio
      quia omnipotentem Deum diligitis, non debeo petere quod sponte ex
      benignitate vestræ pietatis exhibetis.”

  544 See the graphic description in Gibbon, ch. liii.

  545 Baronius.

  546 Mably, ii. 1; Gibbon, ch. xlix.

  547 There are some good remarks upon the way in which, among the free
      Franks, the bishops taught the duty of passive obedience, in Mably,
      _Obs. sur l’Histoire de France_, livre i. ch. iii. Gregory of Tours,
      in his address to Chilperic, had said: “If any of us, O king,
      transgress the boundaries of justice, thou art at hand to correct
      us; but if thou shouldest exceed them, who is to condemn thee? We
      address thee, and if it please thee thou listenest to us; but if it
      please thee not, who is to condemn thee save He who has proclaimed
      Himself Justice.”—Greg. Tur. v. 19. On the other hand, Hincmar,
      Archbishop of Rheims, strongly asserted the obligation of kings to
      observe the law, and denounced as diabolical the doctrine that they
      are subject to none but God. (Allen, _On the Royal Prerogative_
      (1849), pp. 171-172.)

  548 The exact degree of the authority of the barbarian kings, and the
      different stages by which their power was increased, are matters of
      great controversy. The reader may consult Thierry’s _Lettres sur
      l’Hist. de France_ (let. 9); Guizot’s _Hist. de la Civilisation_;
      Mably, _Observ. sur l’Hist. de France_; Freeman’s _Hist. of the
      Norman Conquest_, vol. i.

  549 Fauriel, _Hist. de la Poésie provençale_, tome ii. p. 252.

  550 Ibid, p. 258.

  551 Le Grand D’Aussy, _Fabliaux_, préf. p. xxiv. These romances were
      accounts of his expeditions to Spain, to Languedoc, and to
      Palestine.

  552 The ἕδνα of the Greeks.

  553 Legouvé, _Histoire morale des Femmes_, pp. 95-96.

  554 Gen. xxix., xxxiv. 12; Deut. xxii. 29; 1 Sam. xviii. 25.

  555 The history of dowries is briefly noticed by Grote, _Hist. of
      Greece_, vol. ii. pp. 112-113; and more fully by Lord Kames, in the
      admirable chapter “On the Progress of the Female Sex,” in his
      _Sketches of the History of Man_, a book less read than it deserves
      to be. M. Legouvé has also devoted a chapter to it in his _Hist.
      morale des Femmes_. See, too, Legendre, _Traité de l’Opinion_, tome
      ii. pp. 329-330. We find traces of the dowry, as well as of the
      ἕδνα, in Homer. Penelope had received a dowry from Icarus, her
      father. M. Michelet, in one of those fanciful books which he has
      recently published, maintains a view of the object of the ἕδνα which
      I do not remember to have seen elsewhere, and which I do not
      believe. He says: “Ce prix n’est point un achat de la femme, mais
      une indemnité qui dédommage la famille du père pour les enfants
      futurs, qui ne profiteront pas à cette famille mais à celle où la
      femme va entrer.”—_La Femme_, p. 166.

  556 In Rome, when the separation was due to the misconduct of the wife,
      the dowry belonged to her husband.

  557 “Dotem non uxor marito sed uxori maritus offert.”—Tac. _Germ._
      xviii. On the Morgengab, see Canciani, _Leges Barbarorum_ (Venetiis,
      1781), vol. i. pp. 102-104; ii. pp. 230-231. Muratori, _Antich.
      Ital._ diss. xx. Luitprand enacted that no Longobard should give
      more than one-fourth of his substance as a Morgengab. In Gregory of
      Tours (ix. 20) we have an example of the gift of some cities as a
      Morgengab.

  558 See, on this point, Aul. Gellius, _Noct. Att._ xv. 20. Euripides is
      said to have had two wives.

  559 Aristotle said that Homer never gives a concubine to Menelaus, in
      order to intimate his respect for Helen—though false. (_Athenæus_,
      xiii. 3.)

  560 Æschylus has put this curious notion into the mouth of Apollo, in a
      speech in the _Eumenides_. It has, however, been very widely
      diffused, and may be found in Indian, Greek, Roman, and even
      Christian writers. M. Legouvé, who has devoted a very curious
      chapter to the subject, quotes a passage from St. Thomas Aquinas,
      accepting it, and arguing from it, that a father should be more
      loved than a mother. M. Legouvé says that when the male of one
      animal and the female of another are crossed, the type of the female
      usually predominates in the offspring. See Legouvé, _Hist. morale
      des Femmes_, pp. 216-228; Fustel de Coulanges, _La Cité antique_,
      pp. 39-40; and also a curious note by Boswell, in Croker’s edition
      of Boswell’s _Life of Johnson_ (1847), p. 472.

  561 Dr. Vintras, in a remarkable pamphlet (London, 1867) _On the
      Repression of Prostitution_, shows from the police statistics that
      the number of prostitutes _known to the police_ in England and
      Wales, in 1864, was 49,370; and this is certainly much below the
      entire number. These, it will be observed, comprise only the
      habitual, professional prostitutes.

  562 Some measures have recently been taken in a few garrison towns. The
      moral sentiment of the community, it appears, would be shocked if
      Liverpool were treated on the same principles as Portsmouth. This
      very painful and revolting, but most important, subject has been
      treated with great knowledge, impartiality, and ability, by
      Parent-Duchâtelet, in his famous work, _La Prostitution dans la
      ville de Paris_. The third edition contains very copious
      supplementary accounts, furnished by different doctors in different
      countries.

  563 Parent-Duchâtelet has given many statistics, showing the very large
      extent to which the French system of supervision deters those who
      were about to enter into prostitution, and reclaims those who had
      entered into it. He and Dr. Vintras concur in representing English
      prostitution as about the most degraded, and at the same time the
      most irrevocable.

  564 Miss Mulock, in her amiable but rather feeble book, called _A
      Woman’s Thoughts about Women_, has some good remarks on this point
      (pp. 291-293), which are all the more valuable, as the authoress has
      not the faintest sympathy with any opinions concerning the character
      and position of women which are not strictly conventional. She
      notices the experience of Sunday school mistresses, that, of their
      pupils who are seduced, an extremely large proportion are “of the
      very best, refined, intelligent, truthful, and affectionate.”

  565 See the very singular and painful chapter in Parent-Duchâtelet,
      called “Mœurs et Habitudes des Prostituées.” He observes that they
      are remarkable for their kindness to one another in sickness or in
      distress; that they are not unfrequently charitable to poor people
      who do not belong to their class; that when one of them has a child,
      it becomes the object of very general interest and affection; that
      most of them have lovers, to whom they are sincerely attached; that
      they rarely fail to show in the hospitals a very real sense of
      shame; and that many of them entered into their mode of life for the
      purpose of supporting aged parents. One anecdote is worth giving in
      the words of the author: “Un médecin n’entrant jamais dans leurs
      salles sans ôter légèrement son chapeau, par cette seule politesse
      il sut tellement conquérir leur confiance qu’il leur faisait faire
      tout ce qu’il voulait.” This writer, I may observe, is not a romance
      writer or a theorist of any description. He is simply a physician
      who describes the results of a very large official experience.

  566 “Parent-Duchâtelet atteste que sur trois mille créatures perdues
      trente cinq seulement avaient un état qui pouvait les nourrir, et
      que quatorze cents avaient été précipitées dans cette horrible vie
      par la misère. Une d’elles, quand elle s’y résolut, n’avait pas
      mangé depuis trois jours.”—Legouvé, _Hist. morale des Femmes_, pp.
      322-323.

  567 Concerning the position and character of Greek women, the reader may
      obtain ample information by consulting Becker’s _Charicles_
      (translated by Metcalfe, 1845); Rainneville, _La Femme dans
      l’Antiquité_ (Paris, 1865); and an article “On Female Society in
      Greece,” in the twenty-second volume of the _Quarterly Review_.

  568 Plutarch, _Conj. Præc._

  569 Xenophon, _Econ._ ii.

  570 Plut. _Conj. Præc._ There is also an extremely beautiful picture of
      the character of a good wife in Aristotle. (_Economics_, book i.
      cap. vii.)

  571 See Alexander’s _History of Women_ (London, 1783), vol. i. p. 201.

  572 Plutarch, _Phocion_.

  573 Our information concerning the Greek courtesans is chiefly derived
      from the thirteenth book of the _Deipnosophists_ of Athenæus, from
      the _Letters_ of Alciphron, from the _Dialogues_ of Lucian on
      courtesans, and from the oration of Demosthenes against Neæra. See,
      too, Xenophon, _Memorabilia_, iii. 11; and among modern books,
      Becker’s _Charicles_. Athenæus was an Egyptian, whose exact date is
      unknown but who appears to have survived Ulpian, who died in A.D.
      228. He had access to, and gave extracts from, many works on this
      subject, which have now perished. Alciphron is believed to have
      lived near the time of Lucian.

  574 According to some writers the word “venerari” comes from “Venerem
      exercere,” on account of the devotions in the temple of Venus. See
      Vossius, _Etymologicon Linguæ Latinæ_, “veneror;” also La Mothe le
      Vayer, _Lettre_ xc.

  575 On the connection of the courtesans with the artistic enthusiasm,
      see Raoul Rochette, _Cours d’Archéologie_, pp. 278-279. See, too,
      Athenæus, xiii. 59; Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ xxxv. 40.

  576 See the very curious little work of Ménage, _Historia Mulierum
      Philosopharum_ (Lugduni, MDXC.); also Rainneville, _La Femme dans
      l’Antiquite_, p. 244. At a much later date Lucian described the
      beauty, accomplishments, generosity, and even modesty, of Panthea of
      Smyrna, the favourite mistress of Lucius Verus.

  577 The ζῶμα, which was at first in use, was discarded by the
      Lacedæmonians, and afterwards by the other Greeks. There are three
      curious memoirs tracing the history of the change, by M. Burette, in
      the _Hist. de l’Académie royale des Inscriptions_, tome i.

  578 On the causes of paiderastia in Greece, see the remarks of Mr. Grote
      in the review of the _Symposium_, in his great work on Plato. The
      whole subject is very ably treated by M. Maury, _Hist. des Religions
      de la Gréce antique_, tome iii. pp. 35-39. Many facts connected with
      it are collected by Döllinger, in his _Jew and Gentile_, and by
      Chateaubriand, in his _Études historiques_. The chief original
      authority is the thirteenth book of Athenæus, a book of very painful
      interest in the history of morals.

  579 Plutarch, in his _Life of Agesilaus_, dwells on the intense
      self-control manifested by that great man, in refraining from
      gratifying a passion he had conceived for a boy named Megabetes, and
      Maximus Tyrius says it deserved greater praise than the heroism of
      Leonidas. (_Diss._ xxv.) Diogenes Laërtius, in his _Life of Zeno_,
      the founder of Stoicism, the most austere of all ancient sects,
      praises that philosopher for being but little addicted to this vice.
      Sophocles is said to have been much addicted to it.

  580 Some examples of the ascription of this vice to the divinities are
      given by Clem. Alex. _Admonitio ad Gentes_. Socrates is said to have
      maintained that Jupiter loved Ganymede for his wisdom, as his name
      is derived from γάνυμαι and μῆδος, to be delighted with prudence.
      (Xenophon, _Banquet_.) The disaster of Cannæ was ascribed to the
      jealousy of Juno because a beautiful boy was introduced into the
      temple of Jupiter. (Lactantius, _Inst. Div._ ii. 17.)

  581 Athenæus, xiii. 78. See, too, the very revolting book on different
      kinds of love, ascribed (it is said falsely) to Lucian.

  582 Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ xxxiv. 9.

  583 There is ample evidence of this in Athenæus, and in the Dialogues of
      Lucian on the courtesans. See, too, Terence, _The Eunuch_, act v.
      scene 4, which is copied from the Greek. The majority of the class
      were not called hetæræ, but πόρναι.

  584 Plutarch, _De Garrulitate_; Plin. _Hist. Nat._ xxxiv. 19. The feat
      of biting out their tongues rather than reveal secrets, or yield to
      passion, is ascribed to a suspiciously large number of persons.
      Ménage cites five besides Leæna. (_Hist. Mulier. Philos._ pp.
      104-108.)

  585 See, upon Bacchis, several of the letters of Alciphron, especially
      the very touching letter (x.) on her death, describing her kindness
      and disinterestedness. Athenæus (xiii. 66) relates a curious
      anecdote illustrating these aspects of her character.

  586 Xenophon, _Memorab._ iii. 11.

  587 On the Flamens, see Aulus Gell. _Noct._ x. 15.

  588 Capitolinus, _Maximinus Junior_.

  589 Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ vii. 36. There is (as is well known) a similar
      legend of a daughter thus feeding her father. Val. Max. Lib. v. cap.
      4.

  590 This appears from the first act of the _Stichus_ of Plautus. The
      power appears to have become quite obsolete during the Empire but
      the first legal act (which was rather of the nature of an
      exhortation than of a command) against it was issued by Antoninus
      Pius, and it was only definitely abolished under Diocletian.
      (Laboulaye, _Recherches sur la condition civile et politique des
      femmes_, pp. 16-17.)

  591 Aul. Gell. _Noct._ x. 23.

  592 Val. Maximus, ii. 1, § 4; Aul. Gellius, _Noct._ iv. 3.

  593 Ammianus Marcellinus, xxviii. 4.

  594 Tacitus, _De Oratoribus_, xxviii.

  595 See Aulus Gellius, Noct. ii. 24.

  596 “More inter veteres recepto, qui satis pœnarum adversum impudicas in
      ipsa professione flagitii credebant.”—Tacitus, _Annal._ ii. 85.

  597 Aul. Gell. iv. 3. Juno was the goddess of marriage.

  598 Ibid. iv. 14.

  599 The well-known superstition about the lion, &c., becoming docile
      before a virgin is, I believe, as old as Roman times. St. Isidore
      mentions that rhinoceroses were said to be captured by young girls
      being put in their way to fascinate them. (Legendre, _Traité de
      l’Opinion_, tome ii. p. 35.)

  600 Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ xxviii. 23.

  601 Ibid. vii. 18.

  602 “Quem enim Romanorum pudet uxorem ducere in convivium? aut cujus
      materfamilias non primum locum tenet ædium, atque in celebritate
      versatur? quod multo fit aliter in Græcia. Nam neque in convivium
      adhibetur, nisi propinquorum, neque sedet nisi in interiore parte
      ædium quæ _gynæcontis_ appellatur, quo nemo accedit, nisi propinqua
      cognatione conjunctus.”—Corn. Nepos. præfat.

  603 Val. Max. ii. 1, § 6.

  604 Liv. viii. 18.

  605 See Val. Max. ii. 1.

  606 “Nuptiæ sunt conjunctio maris et feminæ, et consortium omnis vitæ,
      divini et humani juris communicatio.”—Modestinus.

  607 Livy, xxxiv. 5. There is a fine collection of legends or histories
      of heroic women (but chiefly Greek) in Clem. Alexand. _Strom._ iv.
      19.

  608 Tacitus, _Annal._ ii. 85. This decree was on account of a patrician
      lady named Vistilia having so enrolled herself.

  609 Dion Cassius, liv. 16, lvi. 10.

  610 “Si sine uxore possemus, Quirites, esse, omnes ea molestia
      careremus; sed quoniam ita natura tradidit, ut nec cum illis satis
      commode nec sine illis ullo modo vivi possit, saluti perpetuæ potius
      quam brevi voluptati consulendum.”—Aulus Gellius, _Noct._ i. 6. Some
      of the audience, we are told, thought that, in exhorting to
      matrimony, the speaker should have concealed its undoubted evils. It
      was decided, however, that it was more honourable to tell the whole
      truth. Stobæus (_Sententiæ_) has preserved a number of harsh and
      often heartless sayings about wives, that were popular among the
      Greeks. It was a saying of a Greek poet, that “marriage brings only
      two happy days—the day when the husband first clasps his wife to his
      breast, and the day when he lays her in the tomb;” and in Rome it
      became a proverbial saying, that a wife was only good “in thalamo
      vel in tumulo.”

  611 Friedländer, _Hist. des Mœurs romaines_, tome i. pp. 360-364. On the
      great influence exercised by Roman ladies on political affairs some
      remarkable passages are collected in Denis, _Hist. des Idées
      Morales_, tome ii. pp. 98-99. This author is particularly valuable
      in all that relates to the history of domestic morals. The
      _Asinaria_ of Plautus, and some of the epigrams of Martial, throw
      much light upon this subject.

  612 See the very remarkable discussion about this repeal in Livy, lib.
      xxxiv. cap. 1-8.

  613 Legouvé, _Hist. Morale des Femmes_, pp. 23-26. St. Augustine
      denounced this law as the most unjust that could be mentioned or
      even conceived. “Qua lege quid iniquius dici aut cogitari possit,
      ignoro.”—St. Aug. _De Civ. Dei_, iii. 21—a curious illustration of
      the difference between the habits of thought of his time and those
      of the middle ages, when daughters were habitually sacrificed,
      without a protest, by the feudal laws.

  614 Plutarch, _Cicero_.

  615 Tacit. _Ann._ i. 10.

  616 Plutarch, _Cato_; Lucan, _Pharsal_. ii.

  617 Senec. _Ep._ cxiv.

  618 Val. Max. vi. 3.

  619 Plutarch, _Paul. Æmil._ It is not quite clear whether this remark
      was made by Paulus himself.

  620 Sen. _De Benef._ iii. 16. See, too, _Ep._ xcv. _Ad Helv._ xvi.

_  621 Apol._ 6.

_  622 Epig._ vi. 7.

  623 Juv. _Sat._ vi. 230.

_  624 Ep._ 2.

  625 Sueton. _Aug._ Charlemagne, in like manner, made his daughters work
      in wool. (Eginhardus, _Vit. Car. Mag._ xix.)

  626 Friedländer, _Mœurs romaines du règne d’Auguste à la fin des
      Antonins_ (trad. franç.), tome i. p. 414.

  627 Much evidence of this is collected by Friedländer, tome i. pp.
      387-395.

  628 Plutarch, _Pompeius_.

  629 Martial, xi. 16. Pliny, _Ep._ i. 14.

  630 Suet. _Tiberius_, xlv.

  631 Plutarch, _Brutus_.

  632 Tacit. _Annal._ xv. 63, 64.

  633 “Pæte, non dolet.”—Plin. _Ep._ iii. 16; Martial, _Ep._ i. 14.

  634 Tacit. _Annal._ xvi. 10-11; _Hist._ i. 3. See, too, Friedländer,
      tome i. p. 406.

  635 Tacit. _Ann._ xvi. 34.

  636 Pliny mentions her return after the death of the tyrant (_Ep._ iii.
      11).

  637 “Quod paucis datum est, non minus amabilis quam veneranda.”—Plin.
      _Ep._ vii. 19.

  638 See Plin. _Ep._ vii. 19. Dion Cassius and Tacitus relate the exiles
      of Helvidius, who appears to have been rather intemperate and
      unreasonable.

  639 Friedländer gives many and most touching examples, tome i. pp.
      410-414.

  640 Suet. _Dom._ viii.

  641 Capitolinus, _Macrinus_.

  642 Lampridius, _A. Severus_.

  643 In the oration against Neæra, which is ascribed to Demosthenes, but
      is of doubtful genuineness, the licence accorded to husbands is
      spoken of as a matter of course: “We keep mistresses for our
      pleasures, concubines for constant attendance, and wives to bear us
      legitimate children, and to be our faithful housekeepers.”

  644 There is a remarkable passage on the feelings of wives, in different
      nations, upon this point, in Athenæus, xiii. 3. See, too, Plutarch,
      _Conj. Præc._

  645 Euripid. _Andromache_.

  646 Valer. Max. vi. 7, § 1. Some very scandalous instances of cynicism
      on the part of Roman husbands are recorded. Thus, Augustus had many
      mistresses, “Quæ [virgines] sibi undique etiam _ab uxore_
      conquirerentur.”—Sueton. _Aug._ lxxi. When the wife of Verus, the
      colleague of Marcus Aurelius, complained of the tastes of her
      husband, he answered, “Uxor enim dignitatis nomen est, non
      voluptatis.”—Spartian. _Verus_.

  647 Aristotle, _Econom._ i. 4-8-9.

  648 Plutarch enforces the duty at length, in his very beautiful work on
      marriage. In case husbands are guilty of infidelity, he recommends
      their wives to preserve a prudent blindness, reflecting that it is
      out of respect for them that they choose another woman as the
      companion of their intemperance. Seneca touches briefly, but
      unequivocally, on the subject: “Scis improbum esse qui ab uxore
      pudicitiam exigit, ipse alienarum corruptor uxorum. Scis ut illi nil
      cum adultero, sic nihil tibi esse debere cum pellice.”—_Ep._ xciv.
      “Sciet in uxorem gravissimum esse genus injuriæ, habere
      pellicem.”—_Ep._ xcv.

  649 “Periniquum enim videtur esse, ut pudicitiam vir ab uxore exigat,
      quam ipse non exhibeat.”—_Cod. Just. Dig._ xlviii. 5-13.

  650 Quoted by St. Augustine, _De Conj. Adult._ ii. 19. Plautus, long
      before, had made one of his characters complain of the injustice of
      the laws which punished unchaste wives but not unchaste husbands,
      and ask why, since every honest woman is contented with one husband,
      every honest man should not be contented with one wife? (_Mercator_,
      Act iv. scene 5.)

  651 Horace, _Sat._ i. 2.

  652 “Verum si quis est qui etiam meretriciis amoribus interdictum
      juventuti putet, est ille quidem valde severus; negare non possum;
      sed abhorret non modo ab hujus sæculi licentia, verum etiam a
      majorum consuetudine atque concessis. Quando enim hoc factum non
      est? Quando reprehensum? Quando non permissum? Quando denique fuit
      ut quod licet non liceret?”—Cicero, _Pro Cælio_, cap. xx. The whole
      speech is well worthy of the attention of those who would understand
      Roman feelings on these matters; but it should be remembered that it
      is the speech of a lawyer defending a dissolute client.

  653 Περί ἀφροδίσια, εἰς δύναμιν πρὸ γάμου καθαρευτέον. ἁπτομένῳ δέ, ὢν
      νομιμόν ἐστι, μεταληπτέον, μὴ μέν τοι ἐπαχθὴς γίνου τοῖς χρωμένοις,
      μηδὲ ἐλεγκτικός, μηδὲ πολλαχοῦ τό, Ὅτι αὐτὸς οὐ χρῇ,
      παράφερε.—_Enchir._ xxxiii.

  654 “Et si uxores non haberent, singulas concubinas, quod sine his esse
      non possent.”—Lampridius, _A. Severus_. We have an amusing picture
      of the common tone of people of the world on this matter, in the
      speech Apuleius puts into the mouth of the gods, remonstrating with
      Venus for being angry because her son formed a connection with
      Psyche. (_Metam._ lib. v.)

  655 Preserved by Stobæus. See Denis, _Hist. des Idées morales dans
      l’Antiquité_, tome ii. pp. 134-136, 149-150.

  656 Philos. _Apol._ i. 13. When a saying of Pythagoras, “that a man
      should only have commerce with his own wife,” was quoted, he said
      that this concerned others.

  657 Trebellius Pollio, _Zenobia_.

  658 This is asserted by an anonymous writer quoted by Suidas. See
      Ménage, _Hist. Mulierum Philosopharum_, p. 58.

  659 See, e.g., Plotinus, 1st Eun. vi. 6.

  660 Capitolinus, _M. Aurelius_.

  661 Amm. Marcell. xxv. 4.

_  662 Cod. Theod._ lib. ix. tit. 24.

_  663 Cod. Theod._ lib. xv. tit. 7.

  664 “Fidicinam nulli liceat vel emere vel docere vel vendere, vel
      conviviis aut spectaculis adhibere. Nec cuiquam aut delectationis
      desiderio erudita feminea aut musicæ artis studio liceat habere
      mancipia.”—_Cod. Theod._ xv. 7, 10. This curious law was issued in
      A.D. 385. St. Jerome said these musicians were the chorus of the
      devil, and quite as dangerous as the sirens. See the comments on the
      law.

  665 Ruinart, _Act. S. Perpetuæ_. These acts, are, I believe, generally
      regarded as authentic. There is nothing more instructive in history
      than to trace the same moral feelings through different ages and
      religions; and I am able in this case to present the reader with an
      illustration of their permanence, which I think somewhat remarkable.
      The younger Pliny gives in one of his letters a pathetic account of
      the execution of Cornelia, a vestal virgin, by the order of
      Domitian. She was buried alive for incest; but her innocence appears
      to have been generally believed; and she had been condemned unheard,
      and in her absence. As she was being lowered into the subterranean
      cell her dress was caught and deranged in the descent. She turned
      round and drew it to her, and when the executioner stretched out his
      hand to assist her, she started back lest he should touch her, for
      this, according to the received opinion, was a pollution; and even
      in the supreme moment of her agony her vestal purity shrank from the
      unholy contact. (Plin. _Ep._ iv. 11.) If we now pass back several
      centuries, we find Euripides attributing to Polyxena a trait
      precisely similar to that which was attributed to Perpetua. As she
      fell beneath the sword of the executioner, it was observed that her
      last care was that she might fall with decency.

      ἡ δὲ και θνήσκουσ᾽ ὅμως πολλὴν πρόνοιαν εἶχεν εὐσχήμως πεσεῖν,
      κρύπτουσ᾽ ἂ κρύπτειν ὄμματ᾽ ἀρσένων χρεών.

      Euripides, _Hec._ 566-68.

_  666 Vita Pauli._

  667 St. Ambrose relates an instance of this, which he says occurred at
      Antioch (_De Virginibus_, lib. ii. cap. iv.). When the Christian
      youth was being led to execution, the girl whom he had saved
      reappeared and died with him. Eusebius tells a very similar story,
      but places the scene at Alexandria.

  668 See Ceillier, _Hist. des Auteurs ecclés._ tome iii. p. 523.

  669 Ibid. tome viii. pp. 204-207.

  670 Among the Irish saints St. Colman is said to have had a girdle which
      would only meet around the chaste, and which was long preserved in
      Ireland as a relic (Colgan, _Acta Sanctorum Hiberniæ_, Louvain,
      1645, vol. i. p. 246); and St. Fursæus a girdle that extinguished
      lust. (Ibid. p. 292.) The girdle of St. Thomas Aquinas seems to have
      had some miraculous properties of this kind. (See his _Life_ in the
      Bollandists, Sept. 29.) Among both the Greeks and Romans it was
      customary for the bride to be girt with a girdle which the
      bridegroom unloosed in the nuptial bed, and hence “zonam solvere”
      became a proverbial expression for “pudicitiam mulieris imminuere.”
      (Nieupoort, _De Ritibus Romanorum_, p. 479; Alexander’s _History of
      Women_, vol. ii. p. 300.)

_  671 Vit. St. Pachom._ (Rosweyde).

  672 See his _Life_, by Gregory of Nyssa.

  673 A little book has been written on these legends by M. Charles de
      Bussy, called _Les Courtisanes saintes_. There is said to be some
      doubt about St. Afra, for, while her acts represent her as a
      reformed courtesan, St. Fortunatus, in two lines he has devoted to
      her, calls her a virgin. (Ozanam, _Études german._ tome ii. p. 8.)

  674 See the _Vit. Sancti Joannis Eleemosynarii_ (Rosweyde).

  675 Tillemont, tome x. pp. 61-62. There is also a very picturesque
      legend of the manner in which St. Paphnutius converted the courtesan
      Thais.

  676 See especially, Tertullian, _Ad Uxorem_. It was beautifully said, at
      a later period, that woman was not taken from the head of man, for
      she was not intended to be his ruler, nor from his feet, for she was
      not intended to be his slave, but from his side, for she was to be
      his companion and his comfort. (Peter Lombard, _Senten._ lib. ii.
      dis. 18.)

  677 The reader may find many passages on this subject in Barbeyrac,
      _Morale des Pères_, ii. § 7; iii. § 8; iv. § 31-35; vi. § 31; xiii.
      § 2-8.

  678 “It is remarkable how rarely, if ever (I cannot call to mind an
      instance), in the discussions of the comparative merits of marriage
      and celibacy, the social advantages appear to have occurred to the
      mind.... It is always argued with relation to the interests and the
      perfection of the individual soul; and, even with regard to that,
      the writers seem almost unconscious of the softening and humanising
      effect of the natural affections, the beauty of parental tenderness
      and filial love.”—Milman’s _Hist. of Christianity_, vol. iii. p.
      196.

  679 “Tempus breve est, et jam securis ad radices arborum posita est, quæ
      silvam legis et nuptiarum evangelica castitate succidat.”—_Ep._
      cxxiii.

  680 “Laudo nuptias, laudo conjugium, sed quia mihi virgines
      generant.”—_Ep._ xxii.

  681 See Ceillier, _Auteurs ecclés._ xiii. p. 147.

  682 Socrates, iv. 23.

  683 Palladius, _Hist. Laus._ cxix.

_  684 Vit. S. Abr._ (Rosweyde), cap. i.

  685 I do not know when this legend first appeared. M. Littré mentions
      having found it in a French MS. of the eleventh century (Littré,
      _Les Barbares_, pp. 123-124); and it also forms the subject of a
      very curious fresco, I imagine of a somewhat earlier date, which was
      discovered, within the last few years, in the subterranean church of
      St. Clement at Rome. An account of it is given by Father Mullooly,
      in his interesting little book about that Church.

_  686 De Virgin._ cap. iii.

  687 Greg. Tur. i. 42.

  688 The regulations on this point are given at length in Bingham.

  689 Muratori, _Antich. Ital._ diss. xx.

  690 St. Greg. _Dial._ i. 10.

  691 Delepierre, _L’Enfer décrit par ceux qui l’ont vu_, pp. 44-56.

  692 Val. Max. ii. 1. § 3.

  693 “Ille meos, primus qui me sibi junxit, amores
      Abstulit; ille habeat secum, servetque sepulchro.”

      _Æn._ iv. 28.

  694 E.g., the wives of Lucan, Drusus, and Pompey.

  695 Tacit. _German._ xix.

  696 Friedländer, tome i. p. 411.

  697 Hieron. _Ep._ liv.

  698 “Uxorem vivam amare voluptas;
      Defunctam religio.”

      Statius. _Sylv._ v. in proœmio.

  699 By one of the laws of Charondas it was ordained that those who cared
      so little for the happiness of their children as to place a
      stepmother over them, should be excluded from the councils of the
      State. (Diod. Sic. xii. 12.)

  700 Tertullian expounded the Montanist view in his treatise, _De
      Monogamia_.

  701 A full collection of the statements of the Fathers on this subject
      is given by Perrone, _De Matrimonio_, lib. iii. Sect. I.; and by
      Natalis Alexander, _Hist. Eccles._ Sæc. II. dissert. 18.

  702 Thus, to give but a single instance, St. Jerome, who was one of
      their strongest opponents, says: “Quid igitur? damnamus secunda
      matrimonia? Minime, sed prima laudamus. Abjicimus de ecclesia
      digamos? absit; sed monogamos ad continentiam provocamus. In arca
      Noe non solum munda sed et immunda fuerunt animalia.”—_Ep._ cxxiii.

_  703 In Legat._

_  704 Strom._ lib. iii.

_  705 Contra Jovin._ i.

  706 Ibid. See, too, _Ep._ cxxiii.

  707 Hom. xvii. in Luc.

_  708 Orat._ xxxi.

  709 Perrone, _De Matr._ iii. § 1, art. 1; Natalis Alexander, _Hist.
      Eccles._ II. dissert. 18. The penances are said not to imply that
      the second marriage was a sin, but that the moral condition that
      made it necessary was a bad one.

  710 See Stephen’s _Hist. of English Criminal Law_, i. p. 461.

  711 Conc. Illib. can. xxxviii. Bingham thinks the feeling of the Council
      to have been, that if baptism was not administered by a priest, it
      should at all events be administered by one who might have been a
      priest.

  712 Perrone, _De Matrimonio_, tome iii. p. 102.

  713 This subject has recently been treated with very great learning and
      with admirable impartiality by an American author, Mr. Henry C. Lea,
      in his _History of Sacerdotal Celibacy_ (Philadelphia, 1867), which
      is certainly one of the most valuable works that America has
      produced. Since the great history of Dean Milman, I know no work in
      English which has thrown more light on the moral condition of the
      middle ages, and none which is more fitted to dispel the gross
      illusions concerning that period which High Church writers, and
      writers of the positive school, have conspired to sustain.

  714 See Lea, p. 36. The command of St. Paul, that a bishop or deacon
      should be the husband of _one_ wife (1 Tim. iii. 2-12) was believed
      by all ancient and by many modern commentators to be prohibitory of
      second marriages; and this view is somewhat confirmed by the widows
      who were to be honoured and supported by the Church, being only
      those who had been but once married (1 Tim. v. 9). See Pressensé,
      _Hist. des trois premiers Siècles_ (1re série), tome ii. p. 233.
      Among the Jews it was ordained that the high priest should not marry
      a widow. (Levit. xxi. 13-14.)

  715 Socrates, _H. E._ i. 11. The Council of Illiberis (can. xxxiii.) had
      ordained this, but both the precepts and the practice of divines
      varied greatly. A brilliant summary of the chief facts is given in
      Milman’s _History of Early Christianity_, vol. iii. pp. 277-282.

  716 See, on the state of things in the tenth and eleventh centuries,
      Lea, pp. 162-192.

  717 Ratherius, quoted by Lea, p. 151.

  718 See some curious evidence of the extent to which the practice of the
      hereditary transmission of ecclesiastical offices was carried, in
      Lea, pp. 149, 150, 266, 299, 339.

  719 Lea, pp. 271, 292, 422.

  720 Ibid. pp. 186-187.

  721 Lea, p. 358.

  722 Ibid. p. 296.

  723 Ibid. p. 322.

  724 Ibid. p. 349.

  725 The reader may find the most ample evidence of these positions in
      Lea. See especially pp. 138, 141, 153, 155, 260, 344.

  726 Synesius, _Ep._ cv.

  727 Lea, p. 122. St. Augustine had named _his_ illegitimate son
      Adeodatus, or the Gift of God, and had made him a principal
      interlocutor in one of his religious dialogues.

_  728 Dialog._ iv. 11.

  729 This is mentioned by Henry of Huntingdon, who was a contemporary.
      (Lea, p. 293.)

  730 The first notice of this very remarkable precaution is in a canon of
      the Council of Palencia (in Spain) held in 1322, which anathematises
      laymen who compel their pastors to take concubines. (Lea, p. 324.)
      Sleidan mentions that it was customary in some of the Swiss cantons
      for the parishioners to oblige the priest to select a concubine as a
      necessary precaution for the protection of his female parishioners.
      (Ibid. p. 355.) Sarpi, in his _Hist. of the Council of Trent_,
      mentions (on the authority of Zuinglius) this Swiss custom. Nicolas
      of Clemangis, a leading member of the Council of Constance, declared
      that this custom had become very common, that the laity were firmly
      persuaded that priests _never_ lived a life of real celibacy, and
      that, where no proofs of concubinage were found, they always assumed
      the existence of more serious vice. The passage (which is quoted by
      Bayle) is too remarkable to be omitted. “Taceo de fornicationibus et
      adulteriis a quibus qui alieni sunt probro cæteris ac ludibrio esse
      solent, spadonesque aut sodomitæ appellantur; denique laici usque
      adeo persuasum habent nullos cælibes esse, ut in plerisque parochiis
      non aliter velint presbyterum tolerare nisi concubinam habeat, quo
      vel sic suis sit consultum uxoribus, quæ nec sic quidem usquequaque
      sunt extra periculum.” Nic. de Clem. _De Præsul. Simoniac._ (Lea, p.
      386.)

  731 This was energetically noticed by Luther, in his famous sermon “De
      Matrimonio,” and some of the Catholic preachers of an earlier period
      had made the same complaint. See a curious passage from a
      contemporary of Boccaccio, quoted by Meray, _Les Libres prêcheurs_,
      p. 155. “Vast numbers of laymen separated from their wives under the
      influence of the ascetic enthusiasm which Hildebrand created.”—Lea,
      p. 254.

  732 “Quando enim servata fide thori causa prolis conjuges conveniunt sic
      excusatur coitus ut culpam non habeat. Quando vero deficiente bono
      prolis fide tamen servata conveniunt causa incontinentiæ non sic
      excusatur ut non habeat culpam, sed venialem.... Item hoc quod
      conjugati victi concupiscentia utuntur invicem, ultra necessitatem
      liberos procreandi, ponam in his pro quibus quotidie dicimus Dimitte
      nobis debita nostra.... Unde in sententiolis Sexti Pythagorici
      legitur ‘omnis ardentior amator propriæ uxoris adulter est.’ ”—Peter
      Lombard, _Sentent._ lib. iv. dist. 31.

  733 Many wives, however, were forbidden. (Deut. xvii. 17.) Polygamy is
      said to have ceased among the Jews after the return from the
      Babylonish captivity.—Whewell’s _Elements of Morality_, book iv. ch.
      v.

  734 Levit. xii. 1-5.

  735 Ecclesiasticus, xiii. 14. I believe, however, the passage has been
      translated “Better the badness of a man than the blandishments of a
      woman.”

  736 This curious fact is noticed by Le Blant, _Inscriptions chrétiennes
      de la Gaule_, pp. xcvii.-xcviii.

  737 See the decree of a Council of Auxerre (A.D. 578), can. 36.

  738 See the last two chapters of Troplong, _Influences du Christianisme
      sur le Droit_ (a work, however, which is written much more in the
      spirit of an apologist than in that of an historian), and Legouvé,
      pp. 27-29.

  739 Even in matters not relating to property, the position of women in
      feudalism was a low one. “Tout mari,” says Beaumanoir, “peut battre
      sa femme quand elle ne veut pas obéir à son commandement, ou quand
      elle le maudit, ou quand elle le dément, pourvu que ce soit
      modérément et sans que mort s’ensuive,” quoted by Legouvé, p. 148.
      Contrast with this the saying of the elder Cato: “A man who beats
      his wife or his children lays impious hands on that which is most
      holy and most sacred in the world.”—Plutarch, _Marcus Cato_.

  740 See Legouvé, pp. 29-38; Maine’s _Ancient Law_, pp. 154-159.

  741 “No society which preserves any tincture of Christian institutions
      is likely to restore to married women the personal liberty conferred
      on them by the middle Roman law: but the proprietary disabilities of
      married females stand on quite a different basis from their personal
      incapacities, and it is by keeping alive and consolidating the
      former that the expositors of the canon law have deeply injured
      civilisation. There are many vestiges of a struggle between the
      secular and ecclesiastical principles; but the canon law nearly
      everywhere prevailed.”—Maine’s _Ancient Law_, p. 158. I may observe
      that the Russian law was early very favourable to the proprietary
      rights of married women. See a remarkable letter in the _Memoirs of
      the Princess Daschkaw_ (edited by Mrs. Bradford: London, 1840), vol.
      ii. p. 404.

_  742 Germania_, cap. ix. xviii.-xx.

_  743 De Gubernatione Dei._

  744 See, for these legends, Mallet’s _Northern Antiquities_.

  745 Tacitus, _Germ._ 9; _Hist._ iv. 18; Xiphilin. lxxi. 3; Amm.
      Marcellinus, xv. 12; Vopiscus, _Aurelianus_; Floras, iii. 3.

  746 Valer. Max. vi. 1; Hieron. _Ep._ cxxiii.

  747 Plutarch, _De Mulier. Virt._

  748 Plutarch, _Amatorius_; Xiphilin. lxvi. 16; Tacit. _Hist._ iv. 67.
      The name of this heroic wife is given in three different forms.

  749 On the polygamy of the first, see Greg. Tur. iv. 26; on the polygamy
      of Chilperic, Greg. Tur. iv. 28; v. 14.

  750 Greg. Tur. iv. 3.

  751 Ibid. iii. 25-27, 36.

  752 Fredegarius, xxxvi.

  753 Ibid. lx.

  754 Eginhardus, _Vit. Kar. Mag._ xviii. Charlemagne had, according to
      Eginhard, four wives, but, as far as I can understand, only two at
      the same time.

  755 Smyth’s _Lectures on Modern History_, vol. i. pp. 61-62.

  756 Milman’s _Hist. of Latin Christianity_, vol. i. p. 363; Legouvé,
      _Hist. Morale des Femmes_, p. 57.

  757 See, on these laws, Lord Kames _On Women_; Legouvé, p. 57.

  758 Favorinus had strongly urged it. (Aul. Gell. _Noct._ xii. 1.)

  759 These are the reasons given by Malthus, _On Population_, book iii.
      ch. ii.

  760 St. Augustine (_De Conj. Adult._ ii. 19) maintains that adultery is
      even more criminal in the man than in the woman. St. Jerome has an
      impressive passage on the subject: “Aliæ sunt leges Cæsarum, aliæ
      Christi; aliud Papianus, aliud Paulus nostri præcepit. Apud illos
      viris impudicitiæ fræna laxantur et solo stupro atque adulterio
      condemnato passim per lupanaria et ancillulas libido permittitur,
      quasi culpam dignitas faciat non voluntas. Apud nos quod non licet
      feminis æque non licet viris; et eadem servitus pari conditione
      censetur.”—_Ep._ lxxvii. St. Chrysostom writes in a similar strain.

  761 See Troplong, _Influence du Christianisme sur le Droit_, pp.
      239-251.

  762 We find, however, traces of a toleration of the Roman type of
      concubine in Christianity for some time. Thus, a Council of Toledo
      decreed: “Si quis habens uxorem fidelis concubinam habeat non
      communicet. Cæterum is qui non habet uxorem et pro uxore concubinam
      habet a communione non repellatur, tantum ut unius mulieris, aut
      uxoris aut concubinæ ut ei placuerit, sit conjunctione contentus.”—1
      _Can._ 17. St. Isidore said: “Christiano non dicam plurimas sed nec
      duas simul habere licitum est, nisi unam tantum aut uxorem, aut
      certo loco uxoris, si conjux deest, concubinam.”—_Apud Gratianum_,
      diss. 4. Quoted by Natalis Alexander, _Hist. Eccles._ Sæc. I. diss.
      29. Mr. Lea (_Hist. of Sacerdotal Celibacy_, pp. 203-205) has
      devoted an extremely interesting note to tracing the history of the
      word concubine through the middle ages. He shows that even up to the
      thirteenth century a concubine was not necessarily an abandoned
      woman. The term was applied to marriages that were real, but not
      officially recognised. Coleridge notices a remarkable instance of
      the revival of this custom in German history.—_Notes on English
      Divines_ (ed. 1853), vol. i. p. 221.

  763 Legouvé, p. 199.

  764 See some curious passages in Troplong, pp. 222-223. The Fathers seem
      to have thought dissolution of marriage was not lawful on account of
      the adultery of the husband, but that it was not absolutely
      unlawful, though not commendable, for a husband whose wife had
      committed adultery to re-marry.

  765 Some of the great charities of Fabiola were performed as penances,
      on account of her crime in availing herself of the legislative
      permission of divorce.

  766 Laboulaye, _Recherches sur la Condition civile et politique des
      Femmes_, pp. 152-158.

  767 “A discourse concerning the obligation to marry within the true
      communion, following from their style (_sic_) of being called a holy
      seed.” This rare discourse is appended to a sermon against mixed
      marriages by Leslie. (London, 1702.) The reader may find something
      about Dodwell in Macaulay’s _Hist. of England_, ch. xiv.; but
      Macaulay, who does not appear to have known Dodwell’s
      masterpiece—his dissertation _De Paucitate Marturum_, which is one
      of the finest specimens of criticism of his time—and who only knew
      the discourse on marriages by extracts, has, I think, done him
      considerable injustice.

  768 Dodwell relies mainly upon this fact, and especially upon Ezra’s
      having treated these marriages as essentially null.

  769 “Jungere cum infidelibus vinculum matrimonii, prostituere gentilibus
      membra Christi.”—Cyprian, _De Lapsis_.

  770 “Hæc cum ita sint, fideles Gentilium matrimonia subeuntes stupri
      reos esse constat, et arcendos ab omni communicatione
      fraternitatis.”—Tert. _Ad Uxor._ ii. 3.

  771 See on this law, and on the many councils which condemned the
      marriage of orthodox with heretics, Bingham, _Antiq._ xxii. 2, §§
      1-2.

  772 Many curious statistics illustrating this fact are given by M.
      Bonneville de Marsangy—a Portuguese writer who was counsellor of the
      Imperial Court at Paris—in his _Étude sur la Moralité comparée de la
      Femme et de l’Homme_. (Paris, 1862.) The writer would have done
      better if he had not maintained, in lawyer fashion, that the
      statistics of crime are absolutely decisive on the question of the
      comparative morality of the sexes, and also, if he had not thought
      it due to his official position to talk in a rather grotesque strain
      about the regeneration and glorification of the sex in the person of
      the Empress Eugénie.

  773 See Pliny, _Hist. Nat._ xxxiv. 19.

  774 “Tantum inter Stoicos, Serene, et ceteros sapientiam professos
      interesse, quantum inter fœminas et mares non immerito dixerim.”—_De
      Const. Sapientis_, cap. i.

  775 This is well illustrated, on the one side, by the most repulsive
      representations of Christ, by Michael Angelo, in the great fresco in
      the Sistine Chapel (so inferior to the Christ of Orgagna, at Pisa,
      from which it was partly imitated), and in marble in the Minerva
      Church at Rome; and, on the other side, by the frescoes of Perugino,
      at Perugia, representing the great sages of Paganism. The figure of
      Cato, in the latter, almost approaches, as well as I remember, the
      type of St. John.

  776 In that fine description of a virtuous woman which is ascribed to
      the mother of King Lemuel, we read: “She stretcheth out her hand to
      the poor; yea, she reacheth forth her hands to the needy.” (Proverbs
      xxxi. 20.) I have already quoted from Xenophon the beautiful
      description of the Greek wife tending her sick slaves. So, too,
      Euripides represents the slaves of Alcestis gathering with tears
      around the bed of their dying mistress, who, even then, found some
      kind word for each, and, when she died, lamenting her as their
      second mother. (Eurip. _Alcest._) In the servile war which desolated
      Sicily at the time of the Punic wars, we find a touching trait of
      the same kind. The revolt was provoked by the cruelties of a rich
      man, named Damophilus, and his wife, who were massacred with
      circumstances of great atrocity; but the slaves preserved their
      daughter entirely unharmed, for she had always made it her business
      to console them in their sorrow, and she had won the love of all.
      (Diodor. Sic. _Frag._ xxxiv.) So, too, Marcia, the wife of Cato,
      used to suckle her young slaves from her breast. (Plut. _Marc.
      Cato_.) I may add the well-known sentiment which Virgil puts in the
      mouth of Dido: “Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere disco.” There
      are, doubtless, many other touches of the same kind in ancient
      literature, some of which may occur to my readers.

  777 Theodoret, v. 19.

  778 See the beautiful description of the functions of a Christian woman
      in the second book of Tertullian, _Ad Uxorem_.

  779 See, upon the deaconesses, Bingham’s _Christian Antiquities_, book
      ii. ch. 22, and Ludlow’s _Woman’s Work in the Church_. The latter
      author argues elaborately that the “widows” were not the same as the
      deaconesses.

  780 Phœbe (Rom. xvi. 1) is described as a διάκονος.

  781 A very able writer, who takes on the whole an unfavourable view of
      the influence of Christianity on legislation, says: “The provision
      for the widow was attributable to the exertions of the Church, which
      never relaxed its solicitude for the interests of wives surviving
      their husbands, winning, perhaps, one of the most arduous of its
      triumphs when, after exacting for two or three centuries an express
      promise from the husband at marriage to endow his wife, it at last
      succeeded in engrafting the principle of dower on the customary law
      of all Western Europe.”—Maine’s _Ancient Law_, p. 224.

  782 See Troplong, _Influence du Christianisme sur le Droit_, pp.
      308-310.

  783 The results of this change have been treated by Miss Parkes in her
      truly admirable little book called _Essays on Woman’s Work_, better
      than by any other writer with whom I am acquainted.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY OF EUROPEAN MORALS FROM AUGUSTUS TO CHARLEMAGNE (VOL. 2 OF 2)***



CREDITS


April 15, 2012

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by Delphine Lettau, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>.



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 39535‐0.txt or 39535‐0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/9/5/3/39535/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***

