Chapter 9

These doubts fretted and harassed him, growing weaker or stronger from
time to time, but never leaving him. He read and thought, and the more
he read and the more he thought, the further he felt from the aim he
was pursuing.

Of late in Moscow and in the country, since he had become convinced
that he would find no solution in the materialists, he had read and
re-read thoroughly Plato, Spinoza, Kant, Schelling, Hegel, and
Schopenhauer, the philosophers who gave a non-materialistic explanation
of life.

Their ideas seemed to him fruitful when he was reading or was himself
seeking arguments to refute other theories, especially those of the
materialists; but as soon as he began to read or sought for himself a
solution of problems, the same thing always happened. As long as he
followed the fixed definition of obscure words such as _spirit, will,
freedom, essence,_ purposely letting himself go into the snare of words
the philosophers set for him, he seemed to comprehend something. But he
had only to forget the artificial train of reasoning, and to turn from
life itself to what had satisfied him while thinking in accordance with
the fixed definitions, and all this artificial edifice fell to pieces
at once like a house of cards, and it became clear that the edifice had
been built up out of those transposed words, apart from anything in
life more important than reason.

At one time, reading Schopenhauer, he put in place of his _will_ the
word _love_, and for a couple of days this new philosophy charmed him,
till he removed a little away from it. But then, when he turned from
life itself to glance at it again, it fell away too, and proved to be
the same muslin garment with no warmth in it.

His brother Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to read the theological works
of Homiakov. Levin read the second volume of Homiakov’s works, and in
spite of the elegant, epigrammatic, argumentative style which at first
repelled him, he was impressed by the doctrine of the church he found
in them. He was struck at first by the idea that the apprehension of
divine truths had not been vouchsafed to man, but to a corporation of
men bound together by love—to the church. What delighted him was the
thought how much easier it was to believe in a still existing living
church, embracing all the beliefs of men, and having God at its head,
and therefore holy and infallible, and from it to accept the faith in
God, in the creation, the fall, the redemption, than to begin with God,
a mysterious, far-away God, the creation, etc. But afterwards, on
reading a Catholic writer’s history of the church, and then a Greek
orthodox writer’s history of the church, and seeing that the two
churches, in their very conception infallible, each deny the authority
of the other, Homiakov’s doctrine of the church lost all its charm for
him, and this edifice crumbled into dust like the philosophers’
edifices.

All that spring he was not himself, and went through fearful moments of
horror.

“Without knowing what I am and why I am here, life’s impossible; and
that I can’t know, and so I can’t live,” Levin said to himself.

“In infinite time, in infinite matter, in infinite space, is formed a
bubble-organism, and that bubble lasts a while and bursts, and that
bubble is Me.”

It was an agonizing error, but it was the sole logical result of ages
of human thought in that direction.

This was the ultimate belief on which all the systems elaborated by
human thought in almost all their ramifications rested. It was the
prevalent conviction, and of all other explanations Levin had
unconsciously, not knowing when or how, chosen it, as anyway the
clearest, and made it his own.

But it was not merely a falsehood, it was the cruel jeer of some wicked
power, some evil, hateful power, to whom one could not submit.

He must escape from this power. And the means of escape every man had
in his own hands. He had but to cut short this dependence on evil. And
there was one means—death.

And Levin, a happy father and husband, in perfect health, was several
times so near suicide that he hid the cord that he might not be tempted
to hang himself, and was afraid to go out with his gun for fear of
shooting himself.

But Levin did not shoot himself, and did not hang himself; he went on
living.


Chapter 10

When Levin thought what he was and what he was living for, he could
find no answer to the questions and was reduced to despair, but he left
off questioning himself about it. It seemed as though he knew both what
he was and for what he was living, for he acted and lived resolutely
and without hesitation. Indeed, in these latter days he was far more
decided and unhesitating in life than he had ever been.

When he went back to the country at the beginning of June, he went back
also to his usual pursuits. The management of the estate, his relations
with the peasants and the neighbors, the care of his household, the
management of his sister’s and brother’s property, of which he had the
direction, his relations with his wife and kindred, the care of his
child, and the new bee-keeping hobby he had taken up that spring,
filled all his time.

These things occupied him now, not because he justified them to himself
by any sort of general principles, as he had done in former days; on
the contrary, disappointed by the failure of his former efforts for the
general welfare, and too much occupied with his own thought and the
mass of business with which he was burdened from all sides, he had
completely given up thinking of the general good, and he busied himself
with all this work simply because it seemed to him that he must do what
he was doing—that he could not do otherwise. In former days—almost from
childhood, and increasingly up to full manhood—when he had tried to do
anything that would be good for all, for humanity, for Russia, for the
whole village, he had noticed that the idea of it had been pleasant,
but the work itself had always been incoherent, that then he had never
had a full conviction of its absolute necessity, and that the work that
had begun by seeming so great, had grown less and less, till it
vanished into nothing. But now, since his marriage, when he had begun
to confine himself more and more to living for himself, though he
experienced no delight at all at the thought of the work he was doing,
he felt a complete conviction of its necessity, saw that it succeeded
far better than in old days, and that it kept on growing more and more.

Now, involuntarily it seemed, he cut more and more deeply into the soil
like a plough, so that he could not be drawn out without turning aside
the furrow.

To live the same family life as his father and forefathers—that is, in
the same condition of culture—and to bring up his children in the same,
was incontestably necessary. It was as necessary as dining when one was
hungry. And to do this, just as it was necessary to cook dinner, it was
necessary to keep the mechanism of agriculture at Pokrovskoe going so
as to yield an income. Just as incontestably as it was necessary to
repay a debt was it necessary to keep the property in such a condition
that his son, when he received it as a heritage, would say “thank you”
to his father as Levin had said “thank you” to his grandfather for all
he built and planted. And to do this it was necessary to look after the
land himself, not to let it, and to breed cattle, manure the fields,
and plant timber.

It was impossible not to look after the affairs of Sergey Ivanovitch,
of his sister, of the peasants who came to him for advice and were
accustomed to do so—as impossible as to fling down a child one is
carrying in one’s arms. It was necessary to look after the comfort of
his sister-in-law and her children, and of his wife and baby, and it
was impossible not to spend with them at least a short time each day.

And all this, together with shooting and his new bee-keeping, filled up
the whole of Levin’s life, which had no meaning at all for him, when he
began to think.

But besides knowing thoroughly what he had to do, Levin knew in just
the same way _how_ he had to do it all, and what was more important
than the rest.

He knew he must hire laborers as cheaply as possible; but to hire men
under bond, paying them in advance at less than the current rate of
wages, was what he must not do, even though it was very profitable.
Selling straw to the peasants in times of scarcity of provender was
what he might do, even though he felt sorry for them; but the tavern
and the pothouse must be put down, though they were a source of income.
Felling timber must be punished as severely as possible, but he could
not exact forfeits for cattle being driven onto his fields; and though
it annoyed the keeper and made the peasants not afraid to graze their
cattle on his land, he could not keep their cattle as a punishment.

To Pyotr, who was paying a money-lender ten per cent. a month, he must
lend a sum of money to set him free. But he could not let off peasants
who did not pay their rent, nor let them fall into arrears. It was
impossible to overlook the bailiff’s not having mown the meadows and
letting the hay spoil; and it was equally impossible to mow those acres
where a young copse had been planted. It was impossible to excuse a
laborer who had gone home in the busy season because his father was
dying, however sorry he might feel for him, and he must subtract from
his pay those costly months of idleness. But it was impossible not to
allow monthly rations to the old servants who were of no use for
anything.

Levin knew that when he got home he must first of all go to his wife,
who was unwell, and that the peasants who had been waiting for three
hours to see him could wait a little longer. He knew too that,
regardless of all the pleasure he felt in taking a swarm, he must
forego that pleasure, and leave the old man to see to the bees alone,
while he talked to the peasants who had come after him to the
bee-house.

Whether he were acting rightly or wrongly he did not know, and far from
trying to prove that he was, nowadays he avoided all thought or talk
about it.

Reasoning had brought him to doubt, and prevented him from seeing what
he ought to do and what he ought not. When he did not think, but simply
lived, he was continually aware of the presence of an infallible judge
in his soul, determining which of two possible courses of action was
the better and which was the worse, and as soon as he did not act
rightly, he was at once aware of it.

So he lived, not knowing and not seeing any chance of knowing what he
was and what he was living for, and harassed at this lack of knowledge
to such a point that he was afraid of suicide, and yet firmly laying
down his own individual definite path in life.


