Chapter 20

Alexey Alexandrovitch took leave of Betsy in the drawing-room, and went
to his wife. She was lying down, but hearing his steps she sat up
hastily in her former attitude, and looked in a scared way at him. He
saw she had been crying.

“I am very grateful for your confidence in me.” He repeated gently in
Russian the phrase he had said in Betsy’s presence in French, and sat
down beside her. When he spoke to her in Russian, using the Russian
“thou” of intimacy and affection, it was insufferably irritating to
Anna. “And I am very grateful for your decision. I, too, imagine that
since he is going away, there is no sort of necessity for Count Vronsky
to come here. However, if....”

“But I’ve said so already, so why repeat it?” Anna suddenly interrupted
him with an irritation she could not succeed in repressing. “No sort of
necessity,” she thought, “for a man to come and say good-bye to the
woman he loves, for whom he was ready to ruin himself, and has ruined
himself, and who cannot live without him. No sort of necessity!” she
compressed her lips, and dropped her burning eyes to his hands with
their swollen veins. They were rubbing each other.

“Let us never speak of it,” she added more calmly.

“I have left this question to you to decide, and I am very glad to
see....” Alexey Alexandrovitch was beginning.

“That my wish coincides with your own,” she finished quickly,
exasperated at his talking so slowly while she knew beforehand all he
would say.

“Yes,” he assented; “and Princess Tverskaya’s interference in the most
difficult private affairs is utterly uncalled for. She especially....”

“I don’t believe a word of what’s said about her,” said Anna quickly.
“I know she really cares for me.”

Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed and said nothing. She played nervously
with the tassel of her dressing-gown, glancing at him with that
torturing sensation of physical repulsion for which she blamed herself,
though she could not control it. Her only desire now was to be rid of
his oppressive presence.

“I have just sent for the doctor,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.

“I am very well; what do I want the doctor for?”

“No, the little one cries, and they say the nurse hasn’t enough milk.”

“Why didn’t you let me nurse her, when I begged to? Anyway” (Alexey
Alexandrovitch knew what was meant by that “anyway”), “she’s a baby,
and they’re killing her.” She rang the bell and ordered the baby to be
brought her. “I begged to nurse her, I wasn’t allowed to, and now I’m
blamed for it.”

“I don’t blame....”

“Yes, you do blame me! My God! why didn’t I die!” And she broke into
sobs. “Forgive me, I’m nervous, I’m unjust,” she said, controlling
herself, “but do go away....”

“No, it can’t go on like this,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself
decidedly as he left his wife’s room.

Never had the impossibility of his position in the world’s eyes, and
his wife’s hatred of him, and altogether the might of that mysterious
brutal force that guided his life against his spiritual inclinations,
and exacted conformity with its decrees and change in his attitude to
his wife, been presented to him with such distinctness as that day. He
saw clearly that all the world and his wife expected of him something,
but what exactly, he could not make out. He felt that this was rousing
in his soul a feeling of anger destructive of his peace of mind and of
all the good of his achievement. He believed that for Anna herself it
would be better to break off all relations with Vronsky; but if they
all thought this out of the question, he was even ready to allow these
relations to be renewed, so long as the children were not disgraced,
and he was not deprived of them nor forced to change his position. Bad
as this might be, it was anyway better than a rupture, which would put
her in a hopeless and shameful position, and deprive him of everything
he cared for. But he felt helpless; he knew beforehand that everyone
was against him, and that he would not be allowed to do what seemed to
him now so natural and right, but would be forced to do what was wrong,
though it seemed the proper thing to them.


Chapter 21

Before Betsy had time to walk out of the drawing-room, she was met in
the doorway by Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just come from Yeliseev’s,
where a consignment of fresh oysters had been received.

“Ah! princess! what a delightful meeting!” he began. “I’ve been to see
you.”

“A meeting for one minute, for I’m going,” said Betsy, smiling and
putting on her glove.

“Don’t put on your glove yet, princess; let me kiss your hand. There’s
nothing I’m so thankful to the revival of the old fashions for as the
kissing the hand.” He kissed Betsy’s hand. “When shall we see each
other?”

“You don’t deserve it,” answered Betsy, smiling.

“Oh, yes, I deserve a great deal, for I’ve become a most serious
person. I don’t only manage my own affairs, but other people’s too,” he
said, with a significant expression.

“Oh, I’m so glad!” answered Betsy, at once understanding that he was
speaking of Anna. And going back into the drawing-room, they stood in a
corner. “He’s killing her,” said Betsy in a whisper full of meaning.
“It’s impossible, impossible....”

“I’m so glad you think so,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, shaking his head
with a serious and sympathetically distressed expression, “that’s what
I’ve come to Petersburg for.”

“The whole town’s talking of it,” she said. “It’s an impossible
position. She pines and pines away. He doesn’t understand that she’s
one of those women who can’t trifle with their feelings. One of two
things: either let him take her away, act with energy, or give her a
divorce. This is stifling her.”

“Yes, yes ... just so....” Oblonsky said, sighing. “That’s what I’ve
come for. At least not solely for that ... I’ve been made a
_Kammerherr_; of course, one has to say thank you. But the chief thing
was having to settle this.”

“Well, God help you!” said Betsy.

After accompanying Betsy to the outside hall, once more kissing her
hand above the glove, at the point where the pulse beats, and murmuring
to her such unseemly nonsense that she did not know whether to laugh or
be angry, Stepan Arkadyevitch went to his sister. He found her in
tears.

Although he happened to be bubbling over with good spirits, Stepan
Arkadyevitch immediately and quite naturally fell into the sympathetic,
poetically emotional tone which harmonized with her mood. He asked her
how she was, and how she had spent the morning.

“Very, very miserably. Today and this morning and all past days and
days to come,” she said.

“I think you’re giving way to pessimism. You must rouse yourself, you
must look life in the face. I know it’s hard, but....”

“I have heard it said that women love men even for their vices,” Anna
began suddenly, “but I hate him for his virtues. I can’t live with him.
Do you understand? the sight of him has a physical effect on me, it
makes me beside myself. I can’t, I can’t live with him. What am I to
do? I have been unhappy, and used to think one couldn’t be more
unhappy, but the awful state of things I am going through now, I could
never have conceived. Would you believe it, that knowing he’s a good
man, a splendid man, that I’m not worth his little finger, still I hate
him. I hate him for his generosity. And there’s nothing left for me
but....”

She would have said death, but Stepan Arkadyevitch would not let her
finish.

“You are ill and overwrought,” he said; “believe me, you’re
exaggerating dreadfully. There’s nothing so terrible in it.”

And Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. No one else in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s
place, having to do with such despair, would have ventured to smile
(the smile would have seemed brutal); but in his smile there was so
much of sweetness and almost feminine tenderness that his smile did not
wound, but softened and soothed. His gentle, soothing words and smiles
were as soothing and softening as almond oil. And Anna soon felt this.

“No, Stiva,” she said, “I’m lost, lost! worse than lost! I can’t say
yet that all is over; on the contrary, I feel that it’s not over. I’m
an overstrained string that must snap. But it’s not ended yet ... and
it will have a fearful end.”

“No matter, we must let the string be loosened, little by little.
There’s no position from which there is no way of escape.”

“I have thought, and thought. Only one....”

Again he knew from her terrified eyes that this one way of escape in
her thought was death, and he would not let her say it.

“Not at all,” he said. “Listen to me. You can’t see your own position
as I can. Let me tell you candidly my opinion.” Again he smiled
discreetly his almond-oil smile. “I’ll begin from the beginning. You
married a man twenty years older than yourself. You married him without
love and not knowing what love was. It was a mistake, let’s admit.”

“A fearful mistake!” said Anna.

“But I repeat, it’s an accomplished fact. Then you had, let us say, the
misfortune to love a man not your husband. That was a misfortune; but
that, too, is an accomplished fact. And your husband knew it and
forgave it.” He stopped at each sentence, waiting for her to object,
but she made no answer. “That’s so. Now the question is: can you go on
living with your husband? Do you wish it? Does he wish it?”

“I know nothing, nothing.”

“But you said yourself that you can’t endure him.”

“No, I didn’t say so. I deny it. I can’t tell, I don’t know anything
about it.”

“Yes, but let....”

“You can’t understand. I feel I’m lying head downwards in a sort of
pit, but I ought not to save myself. And I can’t....”

“Never mind, we’ll slip something under and pull you out. I understand
you: I understand that you can’t take it on yourself to express your
wishes, your feelings.”

“There’s nothing, nothing I wish ... except for it to be all over.”

“But he sees this and knows it. And do you suppose it weighs on him any
less than on you? You’re wretched, he’s wretched, and what good can
come of it? while divorce would solve the difficulty completely.” With
some effort Stepan Arkadyevitch brought out his central idea, and
looked significantly at her.

She said nothing, and shook her cropped head in dissent. But from the
look in her face, that suddenly brightened into its old beauty, he saw
that if she did not desire this, it was simply because it seemed to her
unattainable happiness.

“I’m awfully sorry for you! And how happy I should be if I could
arrange things!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling more boldly. “Don’t
speak, don’t say a word! God grant only that I may speak as I feel. I’m
going to him.”

Anna looked at him with dreamy, shining eyes, and said nothing.


