The Project Gutenberg EBook of Temporal Power, by Marie Corelli

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Temporal Power

Author: Marie Corelli


Release Date: November, 2004  [EBook #6921]
This file was first posted on February 11, 2003
Last Updated: November 3, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEMPORAL POWER ***




Produced by Charles Adarondo and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team







TEMPORAL POWER

A STUDY IN SUPREMACY

By Marie Corelli




CONTENTS

I. THE KING’S PLEASAUNCE

II. MAJESTY CONSIDERS AND RESOLVES

III. A NATION OR A CHURCH?

IV. SEALED ORDERS

V. “IF I LOVED YOU!”

VI. SERGIUS THORD

VII. THE IDEALISTS

VIII. THE KING’S DOUBLE

IX. THE PREMIER’S SIGNET

X. THE ISLANDS

XI. “GLORIA--IN EXCELSIS!”

XII. A SEA PRINCESS

XIII. SECRET SERVICE

XIV. THE KING’S VETO

XV. “MORGANATIC” OR--?

XVI. THE PROFESSOR ADVISES

XVII. AN “HONOURABLE” STATESMAN

XVIII. ROYAL LOVERS

XIX. OF THE CORRUPTION OF THE STATE

XX. THE SCORN OF KINGS

XXI. AN INVITATION TO COURT

XXII. A FAIR DEBUTANTE

XXIII. THE KING’S DEFENDER

XXIV. A WOMAN’S REASON

XXV. “I SAY--‘ROME’!”

XXVI. “ONE WAY--ONE WOMAN!”

XXVII. THE SONG OF FREEDOM

XXVIII. “FATE GIVES--THE KING!”

XXIX. THE COMRADE OF HIS FOES

XXX. KING AND SOCIALIST

XXXI. A VOTE FOR LOVE

XXXII. BETWEEN TWO PASSIONS

XXXIII. SAILING TO THE INFINITE

XXXIV. ABDICATION




CHAPTER I

THE KING’S PLEASAUNCE


“In the beginning,” so we are told, “God made the heavens and the
earth.”

The statement is simple and terse; it is evidently intended to be wholly
comprehensive. Its decisive, almost abrupt tone would seem to forbid
either question or argument. The old-world narrator of the sublime event
thus briefly chronicled was a poet of no mean quality, though moved by
the natural conceit of man to give undue importance to the earth as his
own particular habitation. The perfect confidence with which he explains
‘God’ as making ‘two great lights, the greater light to rule the day,
the lesser light to rule the night,’ is touching to the verge of pathos;
and the additional remark which he throws in, as it were casually,--‘He
made the stars also,’ cannot but move us to admiration. How childlike
the simplicity of the soul which could so venture to deal with the
inexplicable and tremendous problem of the Universe! How self-centred
and sure the faith which could so arrange the work of Infinite and
Eternal forces to suit its own limited intelligence! It is easy and
natural to believe that ‘God,’ or an everlasting Power of Goodness and
Beauty called by that name, ‘created the heavens and the earth,’ but one
is often tempted to think that an altogether different and rival element
must have been concerned in the making of Man. For the heavens and the
earth are harmonious; man is a discord. And not only is he a discord in
himself, but he takes pleasure in producing and multiplying discords.
Often, with the least possible amount of education, and on the slightest
provocation, he mentally sets Himself, and his trivial personal opinion
on religion, morals, and government, in direct opposition to the
immutable laws of the Universe, and the attitude he assumes towards the
mysterious Cause and Original Source of Life is nearly always one of
three things; contradiction, negation, or defiance. From the first to
the last he torments himself with inventions to outwit or subdue Nature,
and in the end dies, utterly defeated. His civilizations, his dynasties,
his laws, his manners, his customs, are all doomed to destruction and
oblivion as completely as an ant-hill which exists one night and is
trodden down the next. Forever and forever he works and plans in vain;
forever and forever Nature, the visible and active Spirit of God, rises
up and crushes her puny rebel.

There must be good reason for this ceaseless waste of human life,--this
constant and steady obliteration of man’s attempts, since there can be
no Effect without Cause. It is, as if like children at a school, we were
set a certain sum to do, and because we blunder foolishly over it
and add it up to a wrong total, it is again and again wiped off
the blackboard, and again and again rewritten for our more careful
consideration. Possibly the secret of our failure to conquer Nature lies
in ourselves, and our own obstinate tendency to work in only one groove
of what we term ‘advancement,’--namely our material self-interest.
Possibly we might be victors if we would, even to the very vanquishment
of Death!

So many of us think,--and so thought one man of sovereign influence
in this world’s affairs as, seated on the terrace of a Royal palace
fronting seaward, he pondered his own life’s problem for perhaps the
thousandth time.

“What is the use of thinking?” asked a wit at the court of Louis
XVI. “It only intensifies the bad opinion you have of others,--or of
yourself!”

He found this saying true. Thinking is a pernicious habit in which very
great personages are not supposed to indulge; and in his younger days he
had avoided it. He had allowed the time to take him as it found him, and
had gone with it unresistingly wherever it had led. It was the best way;
the wisest way; the way Solomon found most congenial, despite its end
in ‘vanity and vexation of spirit.’ But with the passing of the years a
veil had been dropped over that path of roses, hiding it altogether from
his sight; and another veil rose inch by inch before him, disclosing
a new and less joyous prospect on which he was not too-well-pleased to
look.

The sea, stretching out in a broad shining expanse opposite to him,
sparkled dancingly in the warm sunshine, and the snowy sails of many
yachts and pleasure-boats dipped now and again into the glittering waves
like white birds skimming over the tiny flashing foam-crests. Dazzling
and well-nigh blinding to his eyes were the burning glow and exquisite
radiance of colour which seemed melted like gold and sapphire into
that bright half-circle of water and sky,--beautiful, and full of a
dream-like evanescent quality, such as marks all the loveliest scenes
and impressions of our life on earth. There was a subtle scent of
violets in the air,--and a gardener, cutting sheafs of narcissi from the
edges of the velvety green banks which rolled away in smooth undulations
upward from the terrace to the wider extent of the palace pleasaunce
beyond, scattered such perfume with his snipping shears as might have
lured another Proserpine from Hell. Cluster after cluster of white
blooms, carefully selected for the adornment of the Royal apartments,
he laid beside him on the grass, not presuming to look in the direction
where that other Workman in the ways of life sat silent and absorbed in
thought. That other, in his own long-practised manner, feigned not to
be aware of his dependant’s proximity,--and in this fashion they
twain--human beings made of the same clay and relegated, to the same
dust--gave sport to the Fates by playing at Sham with Heaven and
themselves. Custom, law, and all the paraphernalia of civilization, had
set the division and marked the boundary between them,--had forbidden
the lesser in world’s rank to speak to the greater, unless the greater
began conversation,--had equally forbidden the greater to speak to the
lesser lest such condescension should inflate the lesser’s vanity so
much as to make him obnoxious to his fellows. Thus,--of two men, who,
if left to nature would have been merely--men, and sincere enough at
that,--man himself had made two pretenders,--the one as gardener, the
other as--King! The white narcissi lying on the grass, and preparing to
die sweetly, like sacrificed maiden-victims of the flower-world,
could turn true faces to the God who made them,--but the men at
that particular moment of time had no real features ready for God’s
inspection,--only masks.

“C’est mon metier d’être Roi!” So said one of the many dead and gone
martyrs on the rack of sovereignty. Alas, poor soul, thou would’st
have been happier in any other ‘métier’ I warrant! For kingship is a
profession which cannot be abandoned for a change of humour, or cast
aside in light indifference and independence because a man is bored by
it and would have something new. It is a routine and drudgery to which
some few are born, for which they are prepared, to which they must
devote their span of life, and in which they must die. “How shall we
pass the day?” asked a weary Roman emperor, “I am even tired of killing
my enemies!”

‘Even’ that! And the strangest part of it is, that there are people who
would give all their freedom and peace of mind to occupy for a few
years an uneasy throne, and who actually live under the delusion that a
monarch is happy!

The gardener soon finished his task of cutting the narcissi, and though
he might not, without audacity, look at his Sovereign-master, his
Sovereign-master looked at him, furtively, from under half-closed
eyelids, watching him as he bound the blossoms together carefully, with
the view of giving as little trouble as possible to those whose duty
it would be to arrange them for the Royal pleasure. His work done, he
walked quickly, yet with a certain humble stealthiness,--thus admitting
his consciousness of that greater presence than his own,--down a broad
garden walk beyond the terrace towards a private entrance to the palace,
and there disappeared.

The King was left alone,--or apparently so, for to speak truly, he was
never alone. An equerry, a page-in-waiting,--or what was still more
commonplace as well as ominous, a detective,--lurked about him, ever
near, ever ready to spring on any unknown intruder, or to answer his
slightest call.

But to the limited extent of the solitude allowed to kings, this man
was alone,--alone for a brief space to consider, as he had informed
his secretary, certain documents awaiting his particular and private
perusal.

The marble pavilion in which he sat had been built by his father, the
late King, for his own pleasure, when pleasure was more possible than it
is now. Its slender Ionic columns, its sculptured friezes, its painted
ceilings, all expressed a gaiety, grace and beauty gone from the world,
perchance for ever. Open on three sides to the living picture of the
ocean, crimson and white roses clambered about it, and tall plume-like
mimosa shook fragrance from its golden blossoms down every breath of
wind. The costly table on which this particular Majesty of a nation
occasionally wrote his letters, would, if sold, have kept a little town
in food for a year,--the rich furs at his feet would have bought bread
for hundreds of starving families,--and every delicious rose that nodded
its dainty head towards him with the breeze would have given an hour’s
joy to a sick child. Socialists say this kind of thing with wildly
eloquent fervour, and blame all kings in passionate rhodomontade for the
tables, the furs and the roses,--but they forget--it is not the sad
and weary kings who care for these or any luxuries,--they would be far
happier without them. It is the People who insist on having kings that
should be blamed,--not the monarchs themselves. A king is merely the
people’s Prisoner of State,--they chain him to a throne,--they make
him clothe himself in sundry fantastic forms of attire and exhibit his
person thus decked out, for their pleasure,--they calculate, often with
greed and grudging, how much it will cost to feed him and keep him in
proper state on the national premises, that they may use him at their
will,--but they seldom or never seem to remember the fact that there is
a Man behind the King!

It is not easy to govern nowadays, since there is no real autocracy,
and no strong soul likely to create one. But the original idea of
sovereignty was grand and wise;--the strongest man and bravest, raised
aloft on shields and bucklers with warrior cries of approval from the
people who voluntarily chose him as their leader in battle,--their
utmost Head of affairs. Progress has demolished this ideal, with many
others equally fine and inspiring; and now all kings are so, by right of
descent merely. Whether they be infirm or palsied, weak or wise, sane or
crazed, still are they as of old elected; only no more as the Strongest,
but simply as the Sign-posts of a traditional bygone authority. This
King however, here written of, was not deficient in either mental or
physical attributes. His outward look and bearing betokened him as far
more fit to be lifted in triumph on the shoulders of his battle-heroes,
a real and visible Man, than to play a more or less cautiously inactive
part in the modern dumb-show of Royalty. Well-built and muscular, with
a compact head regally poised on broad shoulders, and finely formed
features which indicated in their firm modelling strong characteristics
of pride, indomitable resolution and courage, he had an air of rare and
reposeful dignity which made him much more impressive as a personality
than many of his fellow-sovereigns. His expression was neither foolish
nor sensual,--his clear dark grey eyes were sane and steady in their
regard and had no tricks of shiftiness. As an ordinary man of the
people his appearance would have been distinctive,--as a King, it was
remarkable.

He had of course been called handsome in his childhood,--what heir to a
Throne ever lived that was not beautiful, to his nurse at least?--and in
his early youth he had been grossly flattered for his cleverness as well
as his good looks. Every small attempt at witticism,--every poor joke he
could invent, adapt or repeat, was laughed at approvingly in a chorus of
admiration by smirking human creatures, male and female, who bowed
and bobbed up and down before the lad like strange dolphins disporting
themselves on dry land. Whereat he grew to despise the dolphins, and
no wonder. When he was about seventeen or eighteen he began to ask odd
questions of one of his preceptors, a learned and ceremonious personage
who, considering the extent of his certificated wisdom, was yet so
singularly servile of habit and disposition that he might have won a
success on the stage as Chief Toady in a burlesque of Court life. He was
a pale, thin old man, with a wizened face set well back amid wisps of
white hair, and a scraggy throat which asserted its working muscles
visibly whenever he spoke, laughed or took food. His way of shaking
hands expressed his moral flabbiness in the general dampness, looseness
and limpness of the act,--not that he often shook hands with his pupil,
for though that pupil was only a boy made of ordinary flesh and blood
like other boys, he was nevertheless heir to a Throne, and in strict
etiquette even friendly liberties were not to be too frequently taken
with such an Exalted little bit of humanity. The lad himself, however,
had a certain mischievous delight in making him perform this courtesy,
and being young and vigorous, would often squeeze the old gentleman’s
hesitating fingers in his strong clasp so energetically as to cause him
the severest pain. Student of many philosophies as he was, the worthy
pedagogue would have cried out, or sworn profane oaths in his agony, had
it been any other than the ‘Heir-Apparent’ who thus made him wince with
torture,--but as matters stood, he merely smiled--and bore it. The young
rascal of a prince smiled too,--taking note of his obsequious hypocrisy,
which served an inquiring mind with quite as good a field for
logical speculation as any problem in Euclid. And he went on with his
questions,--questions, which if not puzzling, were at least irritating
enough to have secured him a rap on the knuckles from his tutor’s cane,
had he been a grocer’s lad instead of the eldest son of a Royal house.

“Professor,” he said on one occasion, “What is man?”

“Man,” replied the professor sedately, “is an intelligent and reasoning
being, evolved by natural processes of creation into his present
condition of supremacy.”

“What is Supremacy?”

“The state of being above, or superior to, the rest of the animal
creation.”

“And is he so superior?”

“He is generally so admitted.”

“Is my father a man?”

“Assuredly! The question is superfluous.”

“What makes him a King?”

“Royal birth and the hereditary right to his great position.”

“Then if man is in a condition of supremacy over the rest of creation, a
king is more than a man if he is allowed to rule men?”

“Sir, pardon me!--a king is not more than a man, but men choose him as
their ruler because he is worthy.”

“In what way is he worthy? Simply because he is born as I am, heir to a
throne?”

“Precisely.”

“He might be an idiot or a cripple, a fool or a coward,--he would still
be King?”

“Most indubitably.”

“So that if he were a madman, he would continue to hold supremacy over a
nation, though his groom might be sane?”

“Your Royal Highness pursues the question with an unwise
flippancy;”--remonstrated the professor with a pained, forced smile.
“If an idiot or a madman were unfortunately born to a throne, a regency
would be appointed to control state affairs, but the heir would, in
spite of natural incapability, remain the lawful king.”

“A strange sovereignty!” said the young prince carelessly. “And a still
stranger patience in the people who would tolerate it! Yet over all
men,--kings, madmen, and idiots alike,--there is another ruling force,
called God?”

“There is a force,” admitted the professor dubiously--“But in the
present forward state of things it would not be safe to attempt to
explain the nature of that force, and for the benefit of the illiterate
masses we call it God. A national worship of something superior to
themselves has always been proved politic and necessary for the people.
I have not at any time resolved myself as to why it should be so; but so
it is.”

“Then man, despite his ‘supremacy’ must have something more supreme than
himself to keep him in order, if it be only a fetish wherewith to tickle
his imagination?” suggested the prince with a touch of satire,--“Even
kings must bow, or pretend to bow, to the King of kings?”

“Sir, you have expressed the fact with felicity;” replied the professor
gravely--“His Majesty, your august father, attends public worship with
punctilious regularity, and you are accustomed to accompany him. It is a
rule which you will find necessary to keep in practice, as an example to
your subjects when you are called upon to reign.”

The young man raised his eyebrows deprecatingly, with a slight ironical
smile, and dropped the subject. But the learned professor as in duty
bound, reported the conversation to his pupil’s father; with the
additional observation that he feared, he very humbly and respectfully
feared, that the developing mind of the prince appeared undesirably
disposed towards discursive philosophies, which were wholly unnecessary
for the position he was destined to occupy. Whereupon the King took his
son to task on the subject with a mingling of kindness and humour.

“Do not turn philosopher!” he said--“For philosophy will not so much
content you with life, as with death! Philosophy will chill your best
impulses and most generous enthusiasms,--it will make you over-cautious
and doubtful of your friends,--it will cause you to be indifferent to
women in the plural, but it will hand you over, a weak and helpless
victim to the _one_ woman,--when she comes,--as she is bound to come.
There is no one so hopelessly insane as a philosopher in love! Love
women, but not _a_ woman!”

“In so doing I should follow the wisest of examples,--yours, Sir!”
 replied the prince with a familiarity more tender than audacious, for
his father was a man of fine presence and fascinating manner, and
knew well the extent of his power to charm and subjugate the fairer
sex,--“But I have a fancy that love,--if it exists anywhere outside the
dreams of the poets,--is unknown to kings.”

The monarch bent his brows frowningly, and his eyes were full of a deep
and bitter melancholy.

“You mistake!” he said slowly--“Love,--and by that name I mean a wholly
different thing from Passion,--comes to kings as to commoners,--but
whereas the commoner may win it if he can, the king must reject it. But
it comes,--and leaves a blank in the proudest life when it goes!”

He turned away abruptly, and the conversation was not again resumed. But
when he died, those who prepared his body for burial, found a gold chain
round his neck, holding the small medallion portrait of a woman, and a
curl of soft fair hair. Needless to say the portrait was not that of the
late Queen-Consort, who had died some years before her Royal spouse, nor
was the hair hers,--but when they brought the relic to the new King, he
laid it back with his own hands on his father’s lifeless breast, and let
it go into the grave with him. For, being no longer the crowned Servant
of the State, he had the right as a mere dead man, to the possession of
his love-secret.

So at least thought his son and successor, who at times was given to
wondering whether if, like his father, he had such a secret he would
be able to keep it as closely and as well. He thought not. It would be
scarcely worth while. It can only be the greatest love that is always
silent,--and in the greatest,--that is, the ideal and self-renouncing
love,--he did not believe; though in his own life’s experience he had
been given a proof that such love is possible to women, if not to men.
When he was about twenty, he had loved, or had imagined he loved, a
girl,--a pretty creature, who did not know him as a prince at all,
but simply as a college student. He used to walk with her hand in hand
through the fields by the river, and gather wild flowers for her to
wear in her little white bodice. She had shy soft eyes, and a timid, yet
trusting look, full of tenderness and pathos. Moved by a romantic sense
of honour and chivalry, he promised to marry her, and thereupon wrote an
impulsive letter to his father informing him of his intention. Of course
he was summoned home from college at once,--he was reminded of his high
destiny--of the Throne that would be his if he lived to occupy it,--of
the great and serious responsibilities awaiting him,--and of how
impossible it was that the Heir-Apparent to the Crown should marry a
commoner.

“Why not?” he cried passionately--“If she be good and true she is as fit
to be a queen as any woman royally born! She is a queen already in her
own right!”

But while he was being argued with and controlled by all the authorities
concerned in king’s business, his little sweetheart herself put an end
to the matter. Her parents told her all unpreparedly, and with no doubt
unnecessary harshness, the real position of the college lad with whom
she had wandered in the fields so confidingly; and in the bewilderment
of her poor little broken heart and puzzled brain, she gave herself
to the river by whose flowering banks she had sworn her maiden
vows,--though she knew it not,--to her future King; and so, drowning her
life and love together, made a piteous exit from all difficulty. Before
she went forth to die, she wrote a farewell to her Royal lover, posting
the letter herself on her way to the river, and, by the merest chance he
received it without a spy’s intervention. It was but one line, scrawled
in a round youthful hand, and blotted with many tears.

“Sir--my love!--forgive me!”

It would be unwise to say what that little scrap of ill-formed writing
cost the heir to a throne when he heard how she had died,--or how he
raged and swore and wept. It was the first Wrong forced on him as Right,
by the laws of the realm; and he was young and generous and honest, and
not hardened to those laws then. Their iniquity and godlessness appeared
to him in plain ugly colours undisguised. Since that time he had
perforce fallen into the habit and routine of his predecessors, though
he was not altogether so ‘constitutional’ a sovereign as his father had
been. He had something of the spirit of one who had occupied his throne
five hundred years before him; when strength and valour and wit and
boldness, gave more kings to the world than came by heritage. He did
unconventional things now and then; to the grief of flunkeys, and the
alarm of Court parasites. But his kingdom was of the South, where hot
blood is recognized and excused, and fiery temper more admired than
censured, and where,--so far as social matters went,--his word, whether
kind, cold, or capricious, was sufficient to lead in any direction that
large flock of the silly sheep of fashion who only exist to eat, and
to be eaten. Sometimes he longed to throw himself back into bygone
centuries and stand as his earliest ancestor stood, sword in hand, on
a height overlooking the battle-field, watching the swaying rush of
combat,--the glitter of spears and axes--the sharp flight of arrows--the
tossing banners, the grinding chariots, the flying dust and carnage
of men! There was something to fight for in those days,--there was
no careful binding up of wounds,--no provision for the sick or the
mutilated,--nothing, nothing, but ‘Victory or Death!’ How much grander,
how much finer the old fierce ways of war than now, when any soldier
wounded, may write the details of his bayonet-scratch or bullet-hole
to the cheap press, and the surgeon prys about with Rontgen-ray
paraphernalia and scalpel, to discover how much or how little escape
from dissolution a man’s soul has had in the shock of contest with his
foe! Of a truth these are paltry days!--and paltry days breed paltry
men. Afraid of sickness, afraid of death, afraid of poverty, afraid of
offences, afraid to think, afraid to speak, Man in the present era
of his boasted ‘progress’ resembles nothing so much as a whipped
child,--cowering under the outstretched arm of Heaven and waiting in
whimpering terror for the next fall of the scourge. And it is on this
point especially, that the monarch who takes part in this unhesitating
chronicle of certain thoughts and movements hidden out of sight,--yet
deeply felt in the under-silences of the time,--may claim to be
unconventional;--he was afraid of nothing,--not even of himself as King!




