CHAPTER II.

THE CHRISTIAN BIBLE.


The title Bible, from Ta Biblia, meaning The Book, or more properly
The Books, was given to the sacred book of Christians, it is claimed,
by Chrysostom in the fifth century.

For a period of one hundred and fifty years the sacred books of the
Jews alone constituted the Christian Bible. They consisted of the
following three collections of books which form the


    Old Testament.

    The Law.

    Genesis,
    Exodus,
    Leviticus,
    Numbers,
    Deuteronomy.


    The Prophets.

    Joshua,
    Judges,
    1 Samuel,
    2 Samuel,
    1 Kings,
    2 Kings,
    Isaiah,
    Jeremiah,
    Ezekiel,
    Hosea,
    Joel,
    Amos,
    Obadiah,
    Jonah,
    Micah,
    Nahum,
    Habakkuk,
    Zephaniah,
    Haggai,
    Zechariah,
    Malachi.


    Hagiographa.

    Psalms,
    Proverbs,
    Job,
    Song of Solomon,
    Ruth,
    Lamentations,
    Ecclesiastes,
    Esther,
    Daniel,
    Ezra,
    Nehemiah,
    1 Chronicles,
    2 Chronicles.


To the above thirty-nine books of the Old Testament were subsequently
added the following twenty-seven books of the


    New Testament.

    Matthew,
    Mark,
    Luke,
    John,
    Acts,
    Romans,
    1 Corinthians,
    2 Corinthians,
    Galatians,
    Ephesians,
    Philippians,
    Colossians,
    1 Thessalonians,
    2 Thessalonians,
    1 Timothy,
    2 Timothy,
    Titus,
    Philemon,
    Hebrews,
    James,
    1 Peter,
    2 Peter,
    1 John,
    2 John,
    3 John,
    Jude,
    Revelation.


The books of the Old Testament were called The Scripture, or
Scriptures, by early Christians. After the books of the New Testament
were recognized as canonical and inspired, the terms Old and New
Testaments were employed to distinguish the two divisions. Tertullian,
at the beginning of the third century, was the first to use the term
New Testament.

The proper arrangement of the books of the Old Testament is in
the order named in the foregoing list. Both Jews and Christians,
however, have varied the order. The books of the Hagiographa, with the
exceptions of Ruth which follows Judges, Lamentations which follows
Jeremiah, and Daniel which appears among the Prophets, have been placed
between the Earlier and Later Prophets. In later Jewish versions
the Song of Solomon, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, and Esther,
called the five rolls, come immediately after the Pentateuch. In the
Christian Bibles of the Eastern churches, including the two most noted
ancient manuscripts, the Vatican and Alexandrian, the seven Catholic
Epistles, James, 1 Peter, 2 Peter, 1 John, 2 John, 3 John, and Jude,
follow Acts and precede the Pauline Epistles.

In the accepted Hebrew the thirty-nine books of the Old Testament
formed but twenty-two, corresponding to the twenty-two letters of the
Hebrew alphabet. Judges and Ruth formed one book, First and Second
Samuel one, First and Second Kings one, First and Second Chronicles
one, Ezra and Nehemiah one, Jeremiah and Lamentations one, and the
twelve Minor Prophets one.

The books of the Pentateuch (Pente, five; teuchos, volume) now bear
the Greek names given them by the Septuagint translators, with the
exception of the fourth, Arithmoi, which is called by the English name,
Numbers. The Hebrew names for these, as well as many other books of the
Old Testament, are the initial words of the books. The name of Genesis,
as translated, is "In the Beginning;" Exodus, "These Are the Words;"
Leviticus, "And He Called;" Numbers, "And He Spake;" Deuteronomy,
"These Are the Words." Joshua originally belonged to this collection,
and to the six books modern scholars have given the name Hexateuch.

About one-half of the books of the Bible, Joshua, Isaiah, Matthew,
etc., are named after their alleged authors. A few, like Ruth and
Esther, take their names from the leading characters of the books. The
Pauline Epistles bear the names of the churches, people, or persons
to whom they are addressed. The titles of Judges, Kings, Chronicles,
Psalms, Proverbs, and a few others, indicate the subjects of the books.

The division of the books of the Bible into chapters was made in
the thirteenth century; the division into verses, in the sixteenth
century. These divisions are to a great extent mechanical rather
than logical. Paragraphs are frequently divided in the formation of
chapters, and sentences in the formation of verses.



Canonical and Apocryphal Books of the Old and New Testaments.

In addition to the canonical books of the Bible, there are many Jewish
and Christian books known as the Apocryphal books of the Old and New
Testaments. A critical review of the Bible demands a consideration of
the apocryphal as well as the canonical books, and the subject will
be made more intelligible to the reader by giving a list of both. In
making a classification of them they will be divided into ten groups,
as follows:



1.

Books accepted as canonical and divine by all Jews and Christians.

Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy.



2.

Books accepted as canonical and divine by a part of the Jews and by
all Christians.

Joshua, Judges, 1 Samuel, 2 Samuel, 1 Kings, 2 Kings, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Ezekiel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk,
Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi.



3.

Books accepted by a part of the Jews as canonical, but not divine;
by most Christians as canonical and divine.

Ruth, 1 Chronicles, 2 Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, Psalms,
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, Lamentations, Daniel.



4.

Books accepted as canonical by some Jews, and for most part by the
Greek and Roman Catholic churches, but rejected by the Protestants.

Baruch, Tobit, Judith, Book of Wisdom, Song of the Three Children,
History of Susanna, Bel and the Dragon, Prayer of Manasseh,
Ecclesiasticus, 1 Esdras, 2 Esdras, 1 Maccabees, 2 Maccabees, 3
Maccabees, 4 Maccabees, 5 Maccabees.



5.

Lost books cited by writers of the Bible.

Book of the Wars of the Lord, Book of Jasher, Book of the Covenant,
Book of Nathan, Book of Gad, Book of Samuel, Prophecy of Ahijah,
Visions of Iddo, Acts of Uzziah, Acts of Solomon, Three Thousand
Proverbs of Solomon, A Thousand and Five Songs of Solomon, Chronicles
of the Kings of Judah, Chronicles of the Kings of Israel, Book of Jehu,
Book of Enoch.



6.

Books which formed the original canon of the New Testament and which
have always been accepted by Christians.

Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Acts, Romans, 1 Corinthians, 2 Corinthians,
Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, 1 Thessalonians,
2 Thessalonians, 1 Timothy, 2 Timothy, Titus, Philemon, 1 John.



7.

Books which are now generally accepted by Christians, but which were
for a time rejected.

Hebrews, James, 1 Peter, 2 Peter, 2 John, 3 John, Jude, Revelation.



8.

Books now excluded from the canon, but which are found in some of
the older manuscripts of the New Testament.

Shepherd of Hermas, Epistle of Barnabas, 1 Clement, 2 Clement, Paul's
Epistle to Laodiceans, Apostolic Constitutions.



9.

Other Apocryphal books of the New Testament which are extant.

Gospel of the Infancy, Protevangelion of James, Acts of Pilate,
Nativity of Mary, Fifteen Epistles of Ignatius, Epistle of Polycarp,
Gospel of Marcion (in part), Clementine Recognitions, Clementine
Homilies.



10.

Apocryphal books of the New Testament which are lost.

Oracles of Christ, Gospel According to the Hebrews, Gospel According
to the Egyptians, Gospel of Peter, Gospel of Paul, Gospel of Philip,
Gospel of Matthias, Gospel of Andrew, Gospel of Perfection, Gospel of
Tatian, Gospel of Basilides, Gospel of Apelles, Gospel of Cerinthus,
Gospel of Bartholomew, Acts of Paul, Acts of Peter, Revelation of Paul,
Revelation of Peter, Preaching of Peter, Memoirs of the Apostles.

Here is a list of one hundred and fifty books. In the apocryphal
groups have been included only the most important of this class. To
these might be added at least one hundred other apocryphal books of
the Old and New Testaments. Of these two hundred and fifty Jewish and
Christian writings, sixty-six--about one-fourth--have been declared
canonical and divine by Protestants.

In the mind of the devout Protestant there is as great a difference
between the canonical and apocryphal books of the Old and New
Testaments as there is between light and darkness. The former he
regards as the work of a wise and good God, the latter, with a
few exceptions, as the work of ignorant and wicked men. And yet
there is no such difference. The two classes are of much the same
character. The worst canonical books are, perhaps, better than the
worst apocryphal books; while, on the other hand, the best apocryphal
books, if not equal to the best canonical books, are far superior to
a majority of them. Circumstances rather than merit determined the
fate of these books. Books of real merit and of high authority in some
of the early churches were cast aside because these churches either
ceased to exist or changed their creeds; while books of little merit
survived as authorities because their teachings supported the doctrines
which survived. The religion of the primitive churches underwent many
radical changes. The Christianity of the second century was not the
Christianity of the first. Books teaching the new theology superseded
those which taught the old; and thus the earlier writings became
obsolete. Of all the Christian books written prior to the middle of the
second century only a few epistles have been retained as authorities.







