PART III.

MORALITY.


CHAPTER XXV.

THE BIBLE NOT A MORAL GUIDE.


We are asked to accept the Bible as the revealed will of an
all-powerful, all-wise and all-just God. We are asked to revere it
beyond all other books, to make a fetich of it. Above all, we are asked
to accept it as a divine and infallible moral guide. Christians profess
to accept it as such; and many who are not Christians--many who reject
the authenticity of the most of it, and who doubt the credibility
of much of it--parrot-like, repeat the claims of supernaturalists,
dwell upon its "beautiful moral teachings," and abet the efforts of
the clergy to place it in our public schools, seemingly oblivious to
the fact that it is not in any sense a moral guide.



What is Morality?

What is morality? Paley, by many considered the chief of modern
Christian authorities, basing his conception of morality on the Bible,
defines it as "the doing good to mankind, in obedience to the will
of God [as revealed in the Bible], and for the sake of everlasting
happiness [and to escape everlasting misery]." Supernaturalism and
selfishness are thus its sole principles; supernaturalism being its
source and selfishness being the motive for its observance. Here virtue
does not bring its own reward, the will of God is not omnipotent,
and mankind, like a spoiled child, must be bribed or frightened to
obey its precepts.

This is the Christian conception of morality. But it is a false
conception. Morality is not supernatural and divine, but natural and
human. It is purely utilitarian. Utility, regardless of the will
of God, is its all-pervading principle. Whatever is beneficial to
man is right, is moral; and whatever is injurious to him is wrong,
is immoral. The end and aim of moral conduct, according to Hobbes,
is self-preservation and happiness; not everlasting happiness in
another world, as taught by Paley, but life-lasting happiness in
this. Dr. Priestley's phrase, "The greatest happiness of the greatest
number," is pronounced by Jeremy Bentham, one of the most eminent
of ethical writers, "a true standard for whatever is right or wrong,
useful, useless, or mischievous in human conduct."

More and more, as men become civilized and enlightened, the egoistic
principles of religionists give way to the altruistic principle
of Rationalists. "Live for others" is the sublime teaching of the
Positivist Comte. In obeying this noble precept we are not sacrificing,
but augmenting our own happiness. "To do good is my religion,"
said Thomas Paine. The rewards and punishments of this religion,
which is here but another name for morality, are happily expressed
by Abraham Lincoln: "When I do good I feel good, and when I do bad I
feel bad." The husband and wife who labor for each other's happiness,
regardless of their own; the father and mother who deprive themselves
to make their children happy; men, like Sir Moses Montefiore and
Baron Hirsch, and women, like Florence Nightingale and Clara Barton,
who devote their time and wealth to aid in removing the poverty and
alleviating the sufferings of humanity--these, by increasing the
happiness of others, increase their own.

When the true principles of morality are universally understood and
accepted, divine revelations will be cast aside and supernatural
religions will die; the zealot's visions of a celestial paradise
will vanish, and the philanthropist's dream of a heaven on earth will
be realized.



Bible Codes.

The Ten Commandments in the Old Testament and the Sermon on the Mount,
including the Golden Rule, in the New, are supposed to comprise
the best moral teachings of the Bible. They are declared to be so
far superior to all other moral codes as to preclude the idea of
human origin.

The Decalogue is a very imperfect moral code; not at all superior to
the religious and legislative codes of other ancient peoples. The last
six of these commandments, while not above criticism, are in the main
just, and were recognized alike by Jew and Gentile. They are a crude
attempt to formulate the crystallized experiences of mankind. The
first four (first three according to Catholic and Lutheran versions)
possess no moral value whatever. They are simply religious emanations
from the corrupt and disordered brain of priestcraft. They only serve
to obscure the principles of true morality and produce an artificial
system which bears the same relation to natural morality that a
measure of chaff and grain does to a measure of winnowed grain.

As a literary composition and as a partial exposition of the peculiar
tenets of a heretical Jewish sect, the Sermon on the Mount is
interesting; but as a moral code it is of little value. Along with
some admirable precepts, it contains others, like the following,
which are false and pernicious: "Blessed are the poor in spirit;"
"Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth;" "If thy
right eye offend thee pluck it out;" "If thy right hand offend thee
cut it off;" "Whosoever shall marry her that is divorced committeth
adultery;" "Resist not evil;" "Whosoever shall smite thee on the
right cheek, turn to him the other also;" "If any man will sue thee
at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also;"
"Love your enemies;" "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth;"
"Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall
drink, nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on;" "Take therefore
no thought for the morrow."

Christians claim that unbelievers have no moral standard, that they
alone have such a standard--an infallible standard--the Bible. If we
ask them to name the best precept in this standard they cite the Golden
Rule. And yet the Golden Rule is in its very nature purely a human rule
of conduct. "Whatsoever ye [men, not God] would that men should do to
you, do ye even so to them." This rule enjoins what Christians profess
to condemn, that every person shall form his own moral standard. In
this rule the so-called divine laws are totally ignored.

The Golden Rule, so far as the Bible is concerned, is a borrowed
gem. Chinese, Greek, and Roman sages had preached and practiced it
centuries before the Sermon on the Mount was delivered. This rule, one
of the best formulated by the ancients, is not, however, a perfect rule
of human conduct. It does not demand that our desires shall always be
just. But it does recognize and enjoin the principle of reciprocity,
and is immeasurably superior to the rule usually practised by the
professed followers of Jesus: Whatsoever we would that you should do
unto us, do it; and whatsoever we wish to do unto you, that will we do.

The three Christian virtues, faith, hope, and charity, fairly represent
this whole system of so-called Bible morals--two false or useless
precepts to one good precept. Charity is a true virtue, but "faith
and hope," to quote Volney, "may be called the virtues of dupes for
the benefit of knaves." And if the knaves have admitted charity to be
the greatest of these virtues, it is because they are the recipients
and not the dispensers of it.



Bible Models.

The noblest types of manhood, like Bruno, Spinoza, Paine, and
Ingersoll, have been slandered, anathematized, and slain by Christians,
while the gods, the heroes, the patriarchs, the prophets, and the
priests of the Bible have been presented as the highest models of
moral excellence. Of these, Jehovah, Abraham, Jacob, Moses, David,
Paul, and Christ are represented as the greatest and the best.

Who was Jehovah? "A being of terrific character--cruel, vindictive,
capricious, and unjust."--Jefferson.

Who was Abraham? An insane barbarian patriarch who married his sister,
denied his wife, and seduced her handmaid; who drove one child into
the desert to starve, and made preparations to butcher the other.

Who was Jacob? Another patriarch, who won God's love by deceiving
his father, cheating his uncle, robbing his brother, practicing
bigamy with two of his cousins, and committing fornication with two
of his housemaids.

Who was Moses? A model of meekness; a man who boasted of his own
humility; a man who murdered an Egyptian and hid his body in the
sand; a man who exterminated whole nations to secure the spoils of
war, a man who butchered in cold blood thousands of captive widows,
a man who tore dimpled babes from the breasts of dying mothers and put
them to a cruel death; a man who made orphans of thirty-two thousand
innocent girls, and turned sixteen thousand of them over to the brutal
lusts of a savage soldiery.

Who was David? "A man after God's own heart." A vulgar braggadocio,
using language to a woman the mere quoting of which would send me
to prison; a traitor, desiring to lead an enemy's troops against
his own countrymen; a thief and robber, plundering and devastating
the country on every side; a liar, uttering wholesale falsehoods
to screen himself from justice; a red-handed butcher, torturing and
slaughtering thousands of men, women, and children, making them pass
through burning brick-kilns, carving them up with saws and axes,
and tearing them in pieces under harrows of iron; a polygamist,
with a harem of wives and concubines; a drunken debauchee, dancing
half-naked before the maids of his household; a lecherous old
libertine, abducting and ravishing the wife of a faithful soldier; a
murderer, having this faithful soldier put to death after desolating
his home; a hoary-headed fiend, foaming with vengeance on his dying
bed, demanding with his latest breath the deaths of two aged men,
one of whom had most contributed to make his kingdom what it was,
the other a man to whom he had promised protection.

Who was Paul? A religious fanatic; a Jew and a Christian. As a Jew,
in the name of Jehovah, he persecuted Christians; as a Christian,
in the name of Christ, he persecuted Jews; and both as a Jew and a
Christian, and in the name of both Jehovah and Christ, he practiced
dissimulation and hallowed falsehood.

Who was Christ? He is called the "divine teacher." Yes,


                                        "He led
    The crowd, he taught them justice, truth, and peace,
    In semblance; but he lit within their souls
    The quenchless flames of zeal, and blessed the sword
    He brought on earth to satiate with the blood
    Of truth and freedom his malignant soul."

                                                   --Shelley.



Immoral Teachings of the Bible.

In the modern and stricter sense of the term, morality is scarcely
taught in the Bible. Neither moral, morals, and morality, nor
their equivalents, ethical and ethics, are to be found in the
book. T. B. Wakeman, president of the Liberal University of Oregon,
a life-long student of sociology and ethics, says:

"The word 'moral' does not occur in the Bible, nor even the
idea. Hunting for morals in the Bible is like trying to find
human remains in the oldest geologic strata--in the eozoon, for
instance. Morals had not then been born."

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it sanctions
nearly every vice and crime. Here is the long list of wrongs which
it authorizes and defends:


 1.  Lying and Deception.
 2.  Cheating.
 3.  Theft and Robbery.
 4.  Murder.
 5.  Wars of Conquest.
 6.  Human Sacrifices.
 7.  Cannibalism.
 8.  Witchcraft.
 9.  Slavery.
10.  Polygamy.
11.  Adultery and Prostitution.
12.  Obscenity.
13.  Intemperance.
14.  Vagrancy.
15.  Ignorance.
16.  Injustice to Woman.
17.  Unkindness to Children.
18.  Cruelty to Animals.
19.  Tyranny.
20.  Intolerance and Persecution.


The Bible is, for the most part, the crude literature of a people
who lived 2,000 years, and more, ago. Certain principles of right
and wrong they recognized, but the finer principles of morality were
unknown to them. They were an ignorant people. An ignorant people is
generally a religious people, and a religious people nearly always an
immoral people. They believed that they were God's chosen people--God's
peculiar favorites--and that because of this they had the right to
rob and cheat, to murder and enslave the rest of mankind. From these
two causes, chiefly, ignorance and religion, i. e., superstition,
emanated the immoral deeds and opinions which found expression in
the writings of their priests and prophets.

The passages in the Bible which deal with vice and crime may be
divided into three classes:

1. There are passages which condemn vice and crime. These I indorse.

2. There are many passages in which the crimes and vices of the people
are narrated merely as historical facts without either sanctioning
or condemning them. The book merits no censure because of these.

3. There are numerous passages which sanction vice and crime. These,
and these alone, in the chapters which follow, I shall adduce to
prove the charges that I make against the Bible as a moral guide.







