
                               THE BIBLE

                      I. AUTHENTICITY
                            II. CREDIBILITY
                                   III. MORALITY


                                   By
                            JOHN E. REMSBURG


         "Somebody ought to tell the truth about the Bible."
                                                    --Ingersoll.


                                New York
                        THE TRUTH SEEKER COMPANY
                            62 Vesey Street
                                  1907








                              In memory of
                                   my
                                mother,
                            Sarah A. Bruner.







PREFACE.


In January, 1901, the following announcement appeared in The Truth
Seeker, of New York:


    To the Readers of The Truth Seeker: Two years ago that able
    and sagacious Liberal leader, L. K. Washburn, wrote: "The next
    great moral revolution of the world will be a crusade against
    the Christian Bible." The church expects this and is preparing
    for it. In an address before the Methodist ministers of Chicago,
    the Rev. Dr. Curry, a distinguished Methodist divine, said: "We are
    standing on the eve of the most stupendous revolution in reference
    to the doctrines of the Bible that the church has ever known." In
    this long war with bibliolaters the younger readers of The Truth
    Seeker will take a prominent part. To call their attention to the
    impending struggle, and to aid in a small way in fitting them for
    it, the editor of The Truth Seeker has invited me to open a sort
    of Bible school in his paper. For nearly a quarter of a century I
    have been writing and lecturing and debating against the divinity
    of the Bible. My opposition from the trained defenders of the
    book has been at times both keen and bitter. I was compelled to
    become and remain a diligent student of the Bible and of Biblical
    criticism. As far as possible I collected all of the damaging facts
    obtainable. I digested and classified them and filed them away
    in the labeled pigeon-holes of my brain for use when needed. I am
    growing old. My hair which was black when I began my work will soon
    be white. I have at the most but a few more years to labor. This
    arsenal of facts which I have gathered and the arguments that
    I have formulated from them I wish to place within the reach of
    others. Whether the thought be a Spiritualistic assurance or an
    Irish bull, it will be a pleasure to me when I am dead to know
    that I am still of some service to the cause.

    In the next issue of The Truth Seeker I shall begin a series
    of some thirty lessons or chapters on "The Bible." The chief
    purpose of the work will be to combat the dogmas of the divine
    origin and infallibility of the Christian Bible. The points of
    attack will be three: 1. Its Authenticity; 2. Its Credibility;
    3. Its Morality. I shall endeavor to disprove in a large degree
    the authenticity of its books, the credibility of its statements,
    and the morality of its teachings.


        John E. Remsburg.


These chapters were published in weekly installments in The Truth
Seeker, their publication extending through a period of twenty
months. The matter was electrotyped as published and the work will now
be given to the public in book form. To those interested in Biblical
criticism, and especially to the Freethought propagandist and to the
Christian investigator, it is hoped that its contents may be useful.

The facts presented in this volume, while known to many Christian
scholars, are, as far as possible, kept from the lower orders of the
clergy and from the laity. Divines enjoying high honors and large
salaries may be cognizant of them without endangering their faith;
but the humbler ministers who receive small pay, and the laity who
support the church, are liable to have their faith impaired by a
knowledge of them.

In Part II., devoted to the Credibility of the Bible, less space is
given to the errors of the New Testament than to those of the Old
Testament. This is not because the New contains less errors than
the Old, but because the author has prepared another volume on this
subject. In "The Christ," a sequel to "The Bible," a more exhaustive
exposition of the errors of the New Testament, particularly of the
Four Gospels, is given.

While denying the infallibility of the writers of the Bible the author
is not unconscious of his own fallibility.







CONTENTS.


PART I.

AUTHENTICITY.


Chapter I.

Sacred Books of the World,     5


