CHAPTER X.

ACTS, CATHOLIC EPISTLES, REVELATION.


In this chapter will be reviewed the so-called historical book of
Acts, the Catholic Epistles, and Revelation. In some versions of the
New Testament the Catholic Epistles come immediately after Acts.



Acts of the Apostles.

The Acts of the Apostles is one of many books bearing this name which
appeared during the early centuries of the church. Concerning the
origin of our canonical Acts, Dr. Hitchcock says: "It was written
by Luke, in considerable part from his own observations of the facts
narrated, and about A.D. 63, and at Rome, during Paul's stay there."

The Gospel of Luke is addressed to Theophilus; the book of Acts is
addressed to the same person, and as the author states that he has
addressed a former work to him, it is inferred that both works were
written by the same person. It has been shown that Theophilus lived
in the latter part of the second century, and that the Gospel of Luke
was written at this time. If Luke and Acts, then, were written by
the same person, and Acts was written after Luke, it also must have
been written late in the second century, and consequently could not
have been written by Luke, the companion of Paul.

It is asserted that Luke was the associate of Paul, and that he was
in Rome with Paul when his book was written. This implies Paul's
sanction of the book. But if the Epistles of Paul are genuine, and
it is generally agreed that those bearing upon this question are,
this can not be true; for the Paul of these epistles and the Paul of
Acts are two entirely different characters.

The book is entitled the Acts of the Apostles; and yet the acts of
Peter and Paul are almost the only apostolic acts recorded. Besides
the narrative of the author, the book consists largely of discourses
attributed to Peter and Paul. But the style of the "unlearned and
ignorant" (iv, 13) Peter is so similar to that of Paul with his "much
learning" (xxvi, 24), and both so closely resemble the style of the
author, that one not strongly imbued with faith must conclude that
the whole is the product of one mind.

The author cites a speech made by Gamaliel before the Jewish council,
in which he uses the following language: "For before these days rose
up Theudas, boasting himself to be somebody; to whom a number of men,
almost four hundred, joined themselves, who were slain," etc. (v, 36).

Josephus, who gives an account of this event (Antiq. Bk. xx,
ch. v, sec. 1), says that it happened "while Fadus was Procurator
of Judea." This was 45 or 46 A.D. Gamaliel's speech was delivered,
according to the accepted chronology, 29 A.D. Thus the author of Acts
makes Gamaliel refer to an event as long past which in reality did
not happen until sixteen years after that time.

Continuing his speech, Gamaliel refers to another event, as follows:
"After this man [Theudas] rose up Judas of Galilee in the days of the
taxing, and drew away much people after him; he also perished" (37).

Here the author makes Gamaliel state that the sedition of Judas of
Galilee occurred after that of Theudas, when in fact it occurred in
6 A.D.--forty years before. Such grave discrepancies could have been
made only by one writing long after the date claimed.

Holtzmann, a German critic, has shown that the author of Acts
borrowed from the Antiquities of Josephus. The Antiquities appeared
93 A.D.--just thirty years after the date assigned to Acts.

This book will not be given up by orthodox Christians without a
struggle. The authenticity of primitive Christianity depends largely
upon the authenticity of this book. Renan who was a Rationalist, and,
at the same time something of an apologist for Christianity, affirms
that the last pages of Acts, which are devoted almost entirely to
Paul's missionary labors constitute the only historical record of
the early church. At the same time, he admits that it is the most
faulty book in the New Testament. The Rev. Dr. Hooykaas concedes the
same. He says:

"Of the earliest fortunes of the community of Jesus, the primitive
history of the Christian church and the whole of the apostolic age,
we should know as good as nothing if we had not the book of Acts. If
only we could trust the writer fully! But we soon see that the utmost
caution is necessary. For we have another account of some of the
things about which this writer tells us--an account written by the
very man to whom they refer, the best possible authority, therefore,
as to what really took place. This man is Paul himself. In the first
two chapters of the epistle to the Galatians he gives us several
details of his own past life; and no sooner do we place his story
side by side with that of the Acts than we clearly perceive that this
book contains an incorrect account, and that its inaccuracy is not
the result of accident or ignorance, but of a deliberate design, an
attempt--conceived no doubt with the best intentions--to hide in some
degree the actual course of events" (Bible for Learners, Vol. III.,
p. 25).

The dissensions which arose in the first century between the Jewish
Christians and the Gentile Christians had only increased with time,
and these were among the chief obstacles in the way of uniting
Christians and establishing the Catholic church. The composition
of Acts was one of the many attempts made toward the close of the
second century to heal these dissensions. The author was a man who
cared little for either Petrine or Pauline Christianity--little for
the so-called truths of Christianity in any form--but a man who cared
much for church unity and church power.

The book of Acts was little known at first. St. Chrysostom, writing
in the fifth century, says: "This book is not so much as known to
many. They know neither the book nor by whom it was written."



James and Jude.

The seven Catholic Epistles, James, First and Second Peter, First,
Second, and Third John, and Jude, have been declared spurious or
doubtful by eminent Christian scholars in every age of the church. The
Fathers were loath to admit them into the Bible, and their right to
a place there has always been disputed.

James and Jude, the first and the last of these epistles, orthodox
Christians believe, were written by James and Jude, the brothers of
Jesus, in 62 and 64 A.D.

Three leading orthodox authorities, representing the three great
divisions of the Christian church, Cajetan of the Roman Catholic
church; Lucar of the Greek Catholic church, and Erasmus of the
Protestant church, have denied the authenticity of James. Luther
himself refused to accept it. He says: "The Epistle of James I account
the writing of no apostle."

The composition of Jude and Second Peter are both placed
in A.D. 64. There is no proof that either was in existence in
A.D. 164. It is only necessary to read Jude and the second chapter
of Second Peter to see that one borrowed from the other. While most
believe that the author of Second Peter used Jude in the construction
of his epistle, Luther contends that Jude is the plagiarist. He says:
"The epistle of Jude is an abstract or copy of St. Peter's Second"
(Preface to Luther's Version).

Jude cites as authentic the apocryphal book of Enoch, and the
apocryphal story of Michael the archangel contending with Satan
for the body of Moses. Origen, Jerome, and others in ancient,
and Calvin, Grotius and others in modern times, have doubted its
authenticity. Mayerhoff says it was written in the second century to
combat the heresies of the Carpocratians.



Epistles of Peter.

Most Christians contend that the First Epistle of Peter is
genuine. Some of the early Christian Fathers, however, rejected
it. Irenæus did not place it in his canon. Not until the third century
was it accepted as the writing of Peter.

The celebrated Tubingen school of critics rejects the authenticity
of the book. Baur and Zeller believe it to be a Pauline
document. Schwegler believes that it was written to reconcile the
Pauline and Petrine doctrines. The Dutch critics say that it was
borrowed largely from Paul and James, and that it was probably written
early in the second century. Regarding its authorship, Jules Soury,
of the University of France, says:

"Nobody, however, knows better than he [Renan] that the so-called
First Epistle of Peter, full of allusions to Paul's writings, as well
as the epistle to the Hebrews and the epistle of James, dates in all
probability from the year 130 A.D., at the earliest, thus placing
two generations between the time of its composition and the latter
years of the reign of Nero, when Peter is fabled to have been in Rome"
(Jesus and the Gospels, p. 32).

All critics pronounce Second Peter a forgery. Chambers's Encyclopedia
says: "So far as external authority is concerned, it has hardly
any. The most critical and competent of the Fathers were suspicious of
its authenticity; it was rarely if ever quoted, and was not formally
admitted into the canon till the Council of Hippo, 393 A.D. The
internal evidence is just as unsatisfactory."

Smith's "Bible Dictionary" contains the following relative to its
authenticity: "We have few references to it in the writings of the
early Fathers; the style differs materially from that of the First
Epistle, and the resemblance amounting to a studied imitation between
this epistle and that of Jude, seems scarcely reconcilable with the
position of Peter.... Many reject the epistle altogether as spurious."

It is believed by some that the original title of Second Peter was
the Epistle of Simeon. Grotius argues that it is a compilation from
two older epistles. The third chapter begins as follows: "This second
epistle, beloved, I now write unto you." These words clearly denote the
beginning of a document. Those who affirm its genuineness consider the
second chapter an interpolation. Westcott says there is no evidence of
the existence of this epistle prior to 170 A.D. Scaliger declares it to
be a "fiction of some ancient Christian misemploying his leisure time."



Epistles of John.

The so-called Epistles of John, so far as the books themselves are
concerned, are anonymous. They do not purport to have been written
by the Apostle John, nor by anyone bearing the name of John.

Of First John, "Chambers's Encyclopedia" says: "Of the epistles
it is almost certain that the First proceeded from the same writer
who composed the [Fourth] Gospel. In style, language, and doctrine,
it is identical with it." If John did not write the Fourth Gospel,
and it is conceded by most writers that he did not, then he did not
write this epistle.

Referring to the Gospel of John, whose authenticity he denies and
whose composition he assigns to the second century, Dr. Hooykaas
says: "The First Epistle of John soon issued from the same school in
imitation of the Gospel" (Bible for Learners, Vol. III, p. 692).

Of two passages in the First Epistle, ii, 23, and v, 7, which teach
the doctrine of the Trinity, the "Bible Dictionary" says: "It would
appear without doubt that they are not genuine." The Revisers of the
King James version pronounced them spurious.

The second and third epistles were not written by the writer of
the first. The early Fathers rejected them. Eusebius in the fourth
century classed them with the doubtful books. It has been claimed that
the second epistle was written for the purpose of counteracting the
heretical teachings of Basilides and his followers. Basilides was a
famous writer of the second century.

These epistles have the following superscriptions: "The elder
[presbyter] unto the elect lady" to the first, and "The elder unto
the well-beloved Gaius" to the second. The declaration that they are
from an elder or presbyter proves that they are not from an apostle,
and consequently not from the Apostle John. If they were written by a
writer named John, it was probably John the Presbyter, who lived in
the second century. Jerome states that they were generally credited
to him. In his account of John the Presbyter, Judge Waite says:
"He is also, not without reason, believed to have been the author of
the Epistles of John" (History of the Christian Religion, p. 228).



Revelation.

Revelation is the last book of the Bible, and the one least
understood. Christians themselves are not agreed as to its
meaning. Some believe it to be a series of prophecies which have had
their fulfilment in the struggles between Christianity and Paganism;
others believe that its prophecies are yet to be fulfilled; still
others pronounce it a symbolical poem, representing the conflict
between truth and error, while not a few consider it the recorded
fancies of a diseased imagination.

The book purports to be from "John to the seven churches of Asia" (i,
4). This John is declared to be the Apostle John and its authority is
based upon this claim. Smith's "Bible Dictionary" says: "The question
as to the canonical authority of the Revelation resolves itself into
a question of authorship. Was St. John the Apostle and Evangelist
the writer of the Revelation?" If John the Apostle and the author
of the Fourth Gospel were one, as assumed by the "Bible Dictionary,"
then the question of its authenticity and canonical authority must be
abandoned, for the author of the Fourth Gospel did not write it. There
is nothing in common between them. The German theologian, Lucke, says:
"If all critical experience and rules in such literary questions
do not deceive, it is certain that the Evangelist and Apocalyptist
are two different persons." De Wette says: "The Apostle John, if he
be the author of the Fourth Gospel and of the Johannine epistles,
did not write the Apocalypse." Regarding this conclusion, Ewald says:
"All men capable of forming a judgment are of the same opinion." Among
the eminent critics and commentators who take this position are Luther,
Erasmus, Michaelis, Schleiermacher, Credner, Zeller, Evanson, Baur,
Renan, and Davidson.

The Apostle John wrote neither the Fourth Gospel, the so-called
Epistles of John, nor Revelation. That he did not write Revelation
is shown by the following:

1. The author does not claim to be an apostle.

2. He refers to the Twelve Apostles (xxi, 14) in a way that forbids
the supposition that he was one of them.

3. The Apostle John is declared to have been illiterate and incapable
of writing a book.

4. It is addressed to the seven churches of Asia, and yet the seven
churches of Asia, to which it is addressed, rejected it.

The Alogi maintained that it was a forgery which came from
Corinth. Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, writing in the third century,
says: "Divers of our predecessors have wholly refused and rejected
this book, and by discussing the several parts thereof have found it
obscure and void of reason and the title forged."

Concerning its rejection by modern churchmen, the Edinburgh Review
(No. 131) says: "The most learned and intelligent of Protestant
divines here almost all doubted or denied the canonicity of the book
of Revelation. Calvin and Beza pronounced the book unintelligible,
and prohibited the pastors of Geneva from all attempts at
interpretation." Dr. South described it as "a book that either found
a man mad or left him so."

Luther, in the Preface to his New Testament (Ed. of 1522) writes:
"In the Revelation of John much is wanting to let me deem it either
prophetic or apostolical."







