CHAPTER XXVIII.

HUMAN SACRIFICES--CANNIBALISM--WITCHCRAFT.


Human Sacrifices.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it sanctions
human sacrifices.

"No devoted thing, that a man shall devote unto the Lord of all that
he hath, both of man and beast, and of the field of his possession,
shall be sold or redeemed; every devoted thing is most holy unto the
Lord. None devoted, which shall be devoted of men, shall be redeemed;
but shall surely be put to death" (Lev. xxvii, 28, 29).

God commands Abraham to sacrifice his son:

"Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get
thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering"
(Gen. xxii, 2).

The order was countermanded, but the perusal of this text has driven
thousands to insanity and murder.

That a famine may cease, David sacrifices the sons of Saul:

"Wherefore David said unto the Gibeonites, What shall I do for you? and
wherewith shall I make the atonement, that ye may bless the inheritance
of the Lord?... And they answered the king, The man that consumed us
and devised against us.... Let seven men of his sons be delivered unto
us, and we will hang them up unto the Lord.... And the king said, I
will give them. And he delivered them unto the hands of the Gibeonites,
and they hanged them in the hill before the Lord; and they fell all
seven together, and were put to death in the days of the harvest"
(2 Sam. xxi).

The sacrifice, we are told, was accepted, and the famine ceased.

Five of these innocent victims, if the Bible be true, were the sons
of Michal, David's own wife. Two were the sons of Rizpah. Throughout
that long summer--from April till October--in the heat and glare of the
day and the chill and darkness of the night, Rizpah, broken-hearted,
tenderly watches and protects the decaying bodies of her dead sons
and relatives.

"And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it for
her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water dropped
upon them out of heaven, and suffered neither the birds of the air
to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night."

When I dwell on this dark tragedy, and contrast the love and devotion
of this agonized and despairing Hebrew mother with the malignant
hatred and heartless cruelty of this Bible God and his despicable
agent, humanity rises to the highest heaven and divinity sinks to
the lowest hell.

The pathetic story of Jephthah's daughter is familiar to all. Jephthah
is a warrior, and makes a vow that if he is permitted to conquer
the children of Ammon, upon his return the first that meets him at
the door will be offered up for a burnt offering unto the Lord. He is
successful; the Lord permits him to defeat the children of Ammon. Upon
his return the first to meet him is his daughter, an only child. He
tells her of his vow. She prays for two brief months to live. Her
prayer is granted, and at the expiration of this time, the Bible tells
us that Jephthah "did with her according to the vow which he had vowed"
(Jud. xi, 26-40).

Describing the fulfilment of this terrible vow, Dr. Oort says:

"This victim, crowned with flowers, was led round the altar with
music and song in honor of Yahweh. She met her cruel fate without
shrinking. But who shall say how sick at heart her father was when
he struck that fatal blow with his own hand and saw the blood of his
darling child poured out upon the sacred stone, while her body was
burned upon the altar?" (Bible for Learners, Vol. I., p. 408.)

"In that frightful sacrifice that he performed--breaking the holiest
domestic ties--we do but see the disastrous results of a mistaken
faith" (Ibid., p. 411).

The celebrated Jewish commentator, Dr. Kalisch, while endeavoring
to palliate as far as possible the crimes of his people, admits that
human sacrifices were not uncommon among them:

"The fact stands indisputable that human sacrifices offered to Jehovah
were possible among the Hebrews long after the time of Moses, without
meeting a check or censure from the teachers and leaders of the nation"
(Leviticus, Part I., p. 385).

"One instance like that of Jephthah not only justifies, but
necessitates, the influence of a general custom. Pious men slaughtered
human victims, not to Moloch, nor to any other foreign deity, but to
the national God, Jehovah" (Ibid., p. 390).

Jules Soury says: "Nothing is better established than the existence
of human sacrifices among the Hebrews in honor of Iahveh, and that
down to the time of Josiah, perhaps even until the return from the
Babylonish captivity" (Religion of Israel, p. 46).

The Church, having received the benefits of a sacrificed God,
deems human sacrifices no longer necessary. But what can be said
of the Church as a whole cannot be said of all its individual
members. Scarcely a year passes without the sacrifice of human beings
by those who believe the Bible to be inspired, and who believe that
what was right three thousand years ago is right to-day.

The sacrifice of little Ben Smith at Los Angeles, in 1882, is still
remembered by some. His father was converted at a Methodist revival. He
became very religious. The press dispatches stated that "for several
months he devoted his time to the study of the Bible until he not
only convinced himself that he ought to make a human sacrifice, but
brought his wife and their only child, a boy of thirteen, to acquiesce,
in his views." I quote from the mother's testimony:

"When he talked to me and persuaded me that a good wife ought to
think as her husband did, I got so as to take whatever he said as the
truth. He made us fast, and when Ben asked him if God had ordered us
to starve he said yes. When he announced that the boy must be killed
we both remonstrated, but finally thought it was all right. On the
day appointed for the ceremony he called Ben out of the house and
told him he had to die for our savior. The little fellow knelt down
and I got on my knees by his side; John raised the knife, looked hard
into the boy's face, and then drove the knife into his breast."

Here the mother was overcome with grief. Regaining her composure,
she continued: "I am always thinking of Ben; I am always hearing him
in the night asking to be brought in and laid on his bed, and begging
for a little water before he died."

Let me recall another half-forgotten scene. In a quiet village of New
England live a pair whom nature meant for good, kind citizens. But
they have become infatuated with the Bible. They believe it to be
infallible. Day after day they pore over its pages. They dwell with
especial interest upon the story of Abraham and Isaac, until at last
they become impressed with the belief that they, too, are called
upon to offer up their child. The fatal hour arrives. Nerved for the
cruel deed, they approach the bedside of their child, a sweet-faced,
curly-haired girl of four. How placidly she rests! Folded upon her
breast are dimpled hands, white as the winter snow; curtained in
slumber are eyes as mild as the summer sky. How beautiful! How pure! We
would risk our lives to save that pretty thing from harm. How dear,
then, must she be to that father and that mother! She is their
idol. But that idol is about to be sacrificed upon the altar of
superstition. There they stand--the mother with a lamp in her hand,
the father with a knife. They gaze for a moment upon their sleeping
victim. Then the father lifts his arm and plunges the knife into
the heart of his child! A quiver--the blue eyes open, and cast
a reproachful look upon the parent. The little lips exclaim, "O
papa!" and the sacrifice is made!

You may say these people were insane. Aye, but what made them
insane? And what, more than almost any other cause, is filling our
asylums with these unfortunate people? The vain attempt to reconcile
with reason the irreconcilable teachings of the Bible.



Cannibalism.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it teaches the
horrible custom of cannibalism.

"The fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee, and the sons
shall eat their fathers" (Ezek. v, 10).

"And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your
daughters shall ye eat" (Lev. xxvi, 29).

"And I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of
their daughters, and they shall eat every one the flesh of his friend"
(Jer. xix, 9).

"And thou shalt eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy
sons and of thy daughters.... So that the man that is tender among
you, and very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother,
and toward the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his
children which he shall leave; so that he will not give to any of
them the flesh of his children whom he shall eat.... The tender and
delicate woman among you, which would not adventure to set the sole
of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye
shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and
toward her daughter, ... for she shall eat them" (Deut. xxviii, 53-57).

"The hands of the pitiful women have sodden [boiled] their own
children" (Lam. iv, 10).

"And the king said unto her, What aileth thee? And she answered,
This woman said unto me, Give thy son that we may eat him to-day,
and we will eat my son to-morrow. So we boiled my son, and did eat
him. And I said unto her on the next day, Give thy son that we may
eat him; and she hath hid her son" (2 Kings vi, 28, 29).

You will say that these were punishments inflicted upon these people
for their sins. And you will have us believe that these punishments
were just. Strange justice! a merciful God compelling a starving
mother to kill and devour her own child!

"Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood,
ye have no life in you" (John vi, 53).

The church perpetuates the idea, if not the practice, of
cannibalism. The Christian takes a piece of bread, and tries to make
himself and the world believe that he is eating the body of Christ;
he takes a sup of wine, and says, "This is Christ's blood." Your
sacramental feast points to the time when savage priests gathered
around the festal board and supped on human flesh and blood.

Primitive Christians, many of them, were guilty of cannibalism. In
their Agapæ they were accustomed to kill and eat an infant. Dr. Cave
in his "Primitive Christianity" (Part III., ch. i) says:

"Epiphanius reports that the Gnostics (a sect of primitive Christians)
at their meetings were wont to take an infant begotten in their
promiscuous mixtures, and, beating it in a mortar, to season it
with honey and pepper and some other spices and perfumes to make
it palatable, and then like swine or dogs to devour it, and then to
conclude all with prayer."

Meredith, in "The Prophet of Nazareth," says:

"So well known were those horrid vices to be carried on by Christians
in their nocturnal and secret assemblies, and so certain it was thought
that every one who was a Christian participated in them, that for a
person to be known to be a Christian was thought a strong presumptive
proof that he was guilty of these offenses.... It would appear,
however, that, owing to the extreme measures taken against them by
the Romans, both in Italy and in all the provinces, the Christians, by
degrees, were forced to abandon entirely in their Agapæ infant murders,
together with every species of obscenity, retaining, nevertheless,
some of them, such as the kiss of charity, and the bread and wine,
which they contended was transubstantiated into real flesh and blood."

In the remote districts of Christian Russia, where the rays of
our civilization have not yet penetrated the darkness of theology,
where Bible morals are still supreme, we are told that even at the
present time a more terribly real form attaches to this eucharistic
ceremony. From Harper's Weekly I quote the following:

"We hear of horrid sects at present in Russia, practicing cannibal and
human sacrifices with rites almost more devilish than any recorded in
history. 'The communism of the flesh of the Lamb' and 'the communism
of the blood of the Lamb' really seem to have been invented by the
lowest demons of the bottomless pit. The subject is too revolting to
be pursued in detail; it is enough to say that an infant seven days
old is bandaged over the eyes, stretched over a dish, and a silver
spoon thrust into the side so as to pierce the heart. The elect suck
the child's blood--that is 'the blood of the Lamb!' The body is left
to dry up in another dish full of sage, then crushed into powder and
eaten--that is 'the flesh of the Lamb!'"



Witchcraft.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it recognizes
as a verity the delusion of witchcraft and punishes with death its
victims.

The God that inspired the account of Saul's interview with the
witch of Endor was as thorough a believer in witchcraft as the most
superstitious crone of the Middle Ages.

Manasseh "used enchantments, and used witchcraft, and dealt with a
familiar spirit, and with wizards" (2 Chron. xxxiii, 6).

Isaiah speaks of "wizards that peep and mutter" (Isa. viii, 19).

Samuel (1 Sam, xv, 23) and Micah (v, 12) and Nahum (iii, 4) and Paul
(Gal. v, 20) all admit the reality of witchcraft.

The decline in the belief of wizards and witches denotes a decline of
faith in the Bible. Until a very recent period, those who professed
to believe in the divinity of the Bible also professed to believe in
the reality of witchcraft. "Giving up witchcraft," says John Wesley,
"is, in effect, giving up the Bible" (Journal, 1768).

Sir William Blackstone says: "To deny the possibility--nay, actual
existence--of witchcraft and sorcery is at once flatly to contradict
the revealed word of God in various passages both of the Old and
New Testaments."

Sir Matthew Hale says: "The Bible leaves no doubt as to the reality
of witchcraft and the duty of putting its subjects to death."

"I should have no compassion on these witches." said Luther; "I would
burn them all" (Table Talk).

"Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live" (Ex. xxii, 18).

"A man also or a woman that hath a familial spirit, or that is a
wizard, shall surely be put to death" (Lev. xx, 27).

Oh, that I could bring to view the suffering and death these texts
have caused! Millions have died because of them. One thousand were
burned at Como in one year; 800 were burned at Würzburg in one year;
500 perished at Geneva in three months; 80 were burned in a single
village of Savoy; nine women were burned in a single fire at Leith;
sixty were hanged at Suffolk; 3,000 were legally executed during
one session of Parliament, while thousands more were put to death by
mobs; Remy, a Christian judge, executed 800; 600 were burned by one
bishop at Bamburg; Boguet burned 600 at St. Cloud; thousands were
put to death by the Lutherans of Norway and Sweden; Catholic Spain
butchered thousands; Presbyterians were responsible for the death of
4,000 in Scotland; 50,000 were sentenced to death during the reign
of Francis I.; 7,000 died at Treves; the number killed in Paris in a
few months is declared to have been "almost infinite." Dr. Sprenger
places the total number of executions for witchcraft in Europe at nine
millions. For centuries witch fires burned in nearly every town of
Europe, and this Bible text, "Thou shall not suffer a witch to live,"
was the torch that kindled them.

Four hundred were burned at Toulouse in one day. Think of it! Four
hundred women--guilty of no crime, save that which exists in the
diseased imaginations of their accusers--four hundred mothers, wives,
and daughters, taken out upon the public square, chained to posts,
the fagots piled around them, and burned to death! See them writhing
in the flames--listen to their piteous shrieks--four hundred voices
raised in one wild chorus of agony! And all because the Bible says,
"Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live."

Only a few years ago, in the province of Novgorod, Russia, a woman was
burnt for witchcraft. Agrafena was a soldier's widow, and possessed
of more than ordinary gifts of mind. But ignorance and superstition
prevailed around her. Every strange occurrence, every disease that
could not be accounted for, was the result of witchcraft. One day a
farmer's daughter was seized with some violent disease, and in her
paroxysms of pain she chanced to breathe the name of Agrafena. That
was enough; Agrafena was a witch. A mob was raised and led to the
widow's dwelling. They called her to the door, parleyed with her a
moment, then thrust her back into the house, fastened its doors, and
set it on fire. And while it was burning, this mob, led by Christian
priests, stood around it, singing praises to God--their strains blended
with the shrieks of this dying woman--dying because the Bible says,
"Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live."

And in our own America the blighting influence of this delusion and
this brutal statute has been felt. With the soil of our Republic is
mingled the dust of murdered women--murdered because the Bible says,
"Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live."







