Chapter XXI.

The Bible and Science,           271


Chapter XXII.

Prophecies,                      293


Chapter XXIII.

Miracles,                         306


Chapter XXIV.

The Bible God,                    317



PART III.

MORALITY.


Chapter XXV.

The Bible Not a Moral Guide,       329


Chapter XXVI.

Lying--Cheating--Stealing,         339


Chapter XXVII.

Murder--War,                       351


Chapter XXVIII.

Human Sacrifices--Cannibalism--Witchcraft       361


Chapter XXIX.

Slavery--Polygamy,         374


Chapter XXX.

Adultery--Obscenity         388


Chapter XXXI.

Intemperance--Vagrancy--Ignorance,        394


Chapter XXXII.

Injustice to Women--Unkindness to Children--Cruelty to Animals,
404


Chapter XXXIII.

Tyranny--Intolerance,                   415


Chapter XXXIV.

Conclusion,                           423


APPENDIX.

Arguments Against the Divine Origin and in Support of the Human Origin
of the Bible,                      433


Index,               463







THE BIBLE.

PART I.--AUTHENTICITY.


CHAPTER I.

SACRED BOOKS OF THE WORLD.


Asia has been the fruitful source of religions and Bibles. The seven
great religions of the world, Brahmanism, Buddhism, Confucianism,
Zoroastrianism, Mohammedanism, Judaism, and Christianity--all had
their birth in Asia; and the so-called sacred books which are used to
uphold and propagate these faiths were nearly all written by Asiatic
priests and prophets. A brief description of the most important of
these books will be presented in this chapter.



Sacred Books of India.

Vedas.--The Vedas are the oldest Bibles in the world. There are
four of them, the Rigveda, the Yajurveda, the Samaveda, and the
Atharvaveda. Devout Hindoos believe that these books have always
existed--that they are co-eternal with God. Scholars agree that they
are very old, that the Rigveda, the oldest of the four, and one of
the oldest books extant, was composed between 3,000 and 4,000 years
ago. Each Veda is complete in itself, and consists of religious
teachings, prayers, and hymns.

Puranas.--The Vedas and Puranas are the most important of the
sacred books of the Hindoos. The Puranas, more than any other works,
have contributed to mould the doctrines of the popular Brahmanical
religion of India. They are eighteen in number, of which the Bhagavata,
containing a history of Chrisna, is the one best known.

Tripitaka.--This is the Buddhist Bible. It was compiled 300 years
before the Christian era. Self conquest and universal charity are
its fundamental teachings.

Upanishads.--These are sacred books which treat of the Creation, of
the Supreme Being or Spirit, Brahma, and of the nature of the human
soul and its relation to Brahma.

Tantras.--The Tantras are sacred books relating chiefly to the
God Siva.

Ramayana.--The Ramayana is one of the great epic poems of the world. It
gives the history of Rama, one of the incarnations of the God Vishnu.

Mahabharata.--This is another epic poem, a larger one, containing
more than 100,000 verses. Like the Ramayana, it is believed to be of
divine origin. It has been described as "the great manual of all that
is moral, useful, and agreeable."

Institutes of Menu.--Menu is regarded as the law-giver of the Hindoos,
as Moses is of the Jews. The Institutes of Menu are in many respects
similar to the so-called laws of Moses.



Sacred Books of China.

Yih King.--This book contains a cosmological treatise and a compendium
on morals. It was written 1143 B.C.

Shu King.--This contains the teachings and maxims of certain ancient
Chinese kings. There are documents in it over 4,000 years old.

Shi King.--This is the Chinese hymn book. It contains three hundred
sacred songs and poems, some of which are very old.

Le King.--The Le King is a text book on manners, customs, and
ceremonies. It has been one of the chief agents in moulding the social
and religious life of China.

Chun Tsien.--The Chun Tsien is a historical work compiled by
Confucius. It gives a record of his own times and those immediately
preceding him.

The above books, called the Five Kings, are the canonical books of
Confucianism, the religion of the educated classes of China. With
the exceptions noted, they were mostly written or compiled about
500 B.C. They are considered sacred by the Chinese, but not, like
other sacred books, a revelation from God. Confucius recognized no
God. His religion is preeminently the religion of this world, and
is thus summed up by him: "The observance of the three fundamental
laws of relation between sovereign and subject, father and child,
husband and wife, and the five capital virtues--universal charity,
impartial justice, conformity to ceremonies and established usages,
rectitude of heart and mind, and pure sincerity."



Sacred Books of Persia.

Zend Avesta.--This is one of the most important of all the Bibles of
the world, although the religion which it teaches numbers but a few
adherents. It was written by Zoroaster and his disciples about 3,000
years ago. It was an enormous work in size, covering, it is said,
12,000 parchments. The Zend Avesta proper consisted of twenty-one
books. All of these, save one and some fragments of the others,
have perished. They dealt chiefly with religion, but touched upon
almost every subject of interest to mankind. They were believed to
be a faithful record of the words spoken to the great prophet by God
himself. Both Jews and Christians borrowed much from the Zend Avesta.

Sadder.--The Sadder is the Bible of the modern Parsees, and contains,
in an abridged form, the religious teachings of Zoroaster.



Sacred Books of Islam.

Koran.--The Mohammedans believe that divine revelations were given
to Adam, Seth, Enoch, Abraham, Moses, David, Jesus, and Mohammed,
and that each successive revelation in a measure superseded the
preceding one. The books given to Adam, Seth, Enoch, and Abraham
have been lost. The Pentateuch, the Psalms, and the Four Gospels
are accepted by them, but the interpolations and corruptions of Jews
and Christians, they claim, have greatly impaired their value. The
Koran is with them the book of books--God's last and best revelation
to man. It was written in rays of light on a tablet before the throne
of God. A copy bound in white silk and bedecked with gems was carried
by Gabriel to the lowest heaven, where from time to time, during a
period of twenty years, portions of it were transmitted to Mohammed
until the whole was given to the world. The book is divided into
114 chapters. It is elegant in style, and, like most other Bibles,
contains, along with a great deal that is fabulous and puerile,
some admirable moral teachings.

Sunna.--The Sunna is a large work containing many thousand legends
of Mohammed. It is a sacred book, but of less authority than the Koran.



Sacred Books of the Jews.

Torah.--The Book of the Law, now commonly called the Pentateuch,
is the most sacred of all Jewish books. Jews as well as Christians
believe that it was written by Moses and dictated by God. It was not
divided into five books as we have it. In the oldest Hebrew manuscripts
the entire work forms but one book. It was subsequently divided into
parshiyoth, or chapters, and these into sedarim, or sections.

Nebiim.--The Law and the Prophets were the chief authorities of the
Jews. The books of the Prophets, called Nebiim, were believed by
the orthodox Jews to be divinely inspired, but were esteemed of less
importance than the Torah.

Cethubim.--This collection of writings comprised the hymns, poems,
and other books now known as the Hagiographa.

Talmud.--The Talmud, while not regarded as a divine revelation, like
the Law and the Prophets, is in some respects the most important of
Jewish works. It is almost a library in itself, and constitutes a vast
storehouse of information pertaining to Jewish history and theology.



Sacred Book of Christians.

Holy Bible.--The Christian Bible consists of two collections of small
books, one called the Old Testament, the other the New Testament. The
Old Testament comprises the Torah, Nebiim, and Cethubim of the Jews. It
is divided into 39 books (including the Apocryphal books accepted by
the Greek and Roman Catholic churches, about 50). The New Testament
is a collection of 27 early Christian writings, which originally
appeared in the various churches of Asia, Africa and Europe.

The Bible is but one of many books for which divinity is
claimed. Christians deny the divinity of the other books, however,
and affirm that they are of human origin--that their book is God's
only revelation to mankind. The orthodox claim respecting its divinity
is expressed in the following words:

"Behind the human authors stood the divine Spirit, controlling,
guiding, and suggesting every part of their different messages"
(Birks).







