CHAPTER VII.

THE PROPHETS.


Next to the Pentateuch, the most important books of the Old Testament
are the Prophets. They are divided into two divisions, Earlier and
Later. The Earlier prophets comprise Joshua, Judges, First Samuel,
Second Samuel, First Kings, and Second Kings. The Later Prophets are
divided into Greater and Minor. The Greater Prophets are Isaiah,
Jeremiah, and Ezekiel; the Minor Prophets, Hosea, Joel, Amos,
Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah,
and Malachi.



Joshua.

The book of Joshua, it is claimed, was written by Joshua just before
his death, which occurred, according to the accepted chronology, in
1426 B.C. This book for a time formed a part of the Pentateuch (or
Hexateuch). In later times, to increase its authority, the Pentateuch
was ascribed to Moses. A recognition of the fact that Moses could not
have written a history of the events that happened after his death
caused that portion now known as Joshua to be detached and credited
to Joshua.

Many of the arguments adduced against the Mosaic authorship of the
preceding books apply with equal force against the claim that Joshua
wrote the book which bears his name. The book contains no internal
evidence of his authorship; he does not claim to be its author; the
other writers of the Old Testament do not ascribe its authorship to
him; he is spoken of in the third person; it is clearly the work of
more than one writer; the language in which it was written was not in
existence when he lived; much of it relates to events that occurred
after his death.

"And it came to pass after these things, that Joshua, the son
of Nun, the servant of the Lord, died, being a hundred and ten
years old. And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
Timnath-serah.... And Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua,
and all the days of the elders that overlived Joshua" (Josh. xxiv,
29-31).

As the Pentateuch gives an account of the death and burial of Moses, so
the book of Joshua gives an account of the death and burial of Joshua.

"And Eleazer the son of Aaron died" (xxiv, 33).

The death of Eleazer occurred six years after the death of Joshua.

"But the Jebusites dwell with the children of Judah at Jerusalem unto
this day" (xv, 63).

The children of Judah did not dwell in Jerusalem until nearly 400
years after Joshua. The phrase "unto this day" is frequently used in
the book, and this shows that it was written long after the events
it describes.

In his account of the miracle of Joshua causing the sun to stand still,
the writer appeals to the book of Jasher in support of his statement:

"Is not this written in the book of Jasher?" (x, 13.)

This could not have been written until after the book of Jasher
was written or compiled. When was Jasher written? We do not know,
but in his history of David the author of Samuel thus refers to it:
"He [David] bade them teach the children of Judah the use of the bow;
behold, it is written in the book of Jasher" (2 Sam. i, 18). This
proves that the book of Jasher was not written before the time of
David. If the book of Joshua was not written until after the book
of Jasher was written, then it could not have been written until the
time of David or later.

The book of Joshua consists of two parts. The first, which originally
formed a part of, or sequel to, Deuteronomy, was probably written
before the Captivity; the latter part was written after the
captivity--900 years after the time of Joshua.



Judges.

The authorship of this book has been ascribed to Samuel. In disproof
of this I quote the following:

"Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem and taken it"
(i, 8).

Jerusalem was taken by Judah 1048 B.C.; Samuel died 1060 B.C., twelve
years before it was taken.

"In those days there was no king in Israel" (xviii, 1; xix, 1;
xxi, 25).

This passage, which is repeated several times, was written after
Israel had become a kingdom, and evidently long subsequent to the
time of Saul and Samuel.

"And they forsook the Lord, and served Baal and Ashtaroth" (ii, 13).

This was probably written as late as the reign of Hoshea, 730 B.C.

The chapters relating to Samson indicate a date as late as Manasseh,
698 to 643 B.C. During the reign of this king the Hebrews became
sun-worshipers. Samson was a sun-god--the name signifies "sun-god." All
the stories related of him in Judges are solar myths.

"He and his sons were priests to the tribe of Dan until the day of
the captivity of the land" (xviii, 30).

The above passage denotes a date as late as the Captivity.

Smith's "Bible Dictionary" says: "It is probable that the books
of Judges, Ruth, Samuel, and Kings originally formed one work"
(art. Ruth). If these books originally formed one work, Samuel was
not the author of any of them, for Kings, it is admitted, was written
as late as the time of Jeremiah, and possibly as late as the time of
Ezra, from 450 to 600 years after Samuel.

Judges, like the Pentateuch and Joshua, is the work of several
writers. It can scarcely be called even a compilation. It is a mere
collection of historical and mythological fragments, thrown together
without any regard to logical arrangement or chronological order.



First and Second Samuel.

It is popularly supposed, and many Christian teachers affirm, that
Samuel wrote the books which bear his name. And yet the writer says,
"Samuel died," and seven chapters of the first book follow this
announcement. The second book in no way pertains to him; his name
is not once mentioned; the events narrated occurred from four to
forty-four years after his death.

Others claim that the books were written by Samuel, Nathan, and Gad,
basing their claim on a passage in Chronicles, which says that the
acts of David "are written in the book of Samuel the seer, and in
the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of Gad the seer"
(1 Chron. xxix, 29).

As Samuel died while David was yet a young man--four years before
he became king--he did not record the acts of David. Nathan and
Gad are referred to in the books, but in a manner that forbids the
supposition of their authorship. These books were not written by
Samuel; neither were they written by Samuel, Nathan, and Gad. Their
authorship is unknown.

Concerning the books of Samuel, Dr. Oort writes: "There is no book in
the Bible which shows so clearly that its contents are not all derived
from the same source.... Two conflicting traditions relating to the
same subject are constantly placed side by side in perfect simplicity,
and apparently with no idea that the one contradicts the other"
(Bible for Learners, vol. i, pp. 433, 434).



First and Second Kings.

In the Catholic version, and in the subtitles of our versions of
the Bible, First and Second Samuel and First and Second Kings are
called the First, Second, Third, and Fourth books of Kings. They are
properly one book. The division of the work into four books is not only
artificial, but illogical. Regarding the authorship of the last two,
Smith's "Bible Dictionary" says: "As regards the authorship of the
books, but little difficulty presents itself. The Jewish tradition,
which ascribes them to Jeremiah, is borne out by the strongest internal
evidence" (Kings).

Is this true? The date assigned for Jeremiah's composition of the books
is 600 B.C. And yet a considerable portion of the work is devoted to
a presentation of the forty years of Jewish history subsequent to this
date. It records the death of Jehoiakim, the first siege and taking of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, the elevation of Zedekiah to the throne,
his eleven years' reign, the second siege and capture of Jerusalem,
and a long list of events that followed. It records the reign of
the Babylonian king, Evil-Merodach. This, according to the popular
chronology, and according to the "Bible Dictionary," was from 561
to 559 B.C.--forty years after the date assigned, and long after the
time of Jeremiah.

These books are a mixture of history and fiction. They profess to be a
history of the Hebrew kings; and yet a dozen chapters are devoted to
a fabulous account of the sayings and doings of two Hebrew prophets,
Elijah and Elisha. First and Second Chronicles, which give a history
of the same kings, refer to Elijah but once, and make no mention
of Elisha.

The confused character of their contents, especially their chronology,
has often been referred to. They are simply a compilation of ancient
documents, written at various times, and by various authors.

The Encyclopedia Britannica expresses the almost unanimous verdict of
critics respecting the authorship of the four principal historical
books of the Old Testament: "We cannot speak of the author of Kings
or Samuel, but only of an editor or successive editors whose main
work was to arrange in a continuous form extracts or abstracts from
earlier books."



Isaiah.

Isaiah, the chief of the prophetic books, and, next to the Pentateuch
and the Four Gospels, the most important book of the Bible, purports to
be a series of prophecies uttered during the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham,
Ahaz, and Hezekiah. Uzziah's reign began B.C. 810, and ended B.C. 758;
Hezekiah's reign began B.C. 726 and ended B.C. 698. Isaiah's ministry
is supposed to have extended from about 760 to 700 B.C., and toward
the close of this period, the book of Isaiah, as it now appears,
is said to have been written.

In support of Isaiah's authorship of the entire work the following
arguments have been advanced:


    1. Its various prophecies exhibit a unity of design.
    2. The style is the same throughout the work.
    3. Messianic prophecies abound in both its parts.
    4. No other writer claimed its authorship.
    5. The ancient Jews all ascribe it to him.


The above arguments for the authenticity of the work are partly
true and partly untrue. So far as they conflict with the following
arguments against its authenticity as a whole they are untrue:


    1. The work is fragmentary in character.
    2. The style of its several parts is quite unlike.
    3. Many of its events occurred after Isaiah's death.
    4. Much of it relates to the Babylonian captivity.
    5. It records both the name and the deeds of Cyrus.


Isaiah might very properly be divided into two books, the first
comprising the first thirty-nine chapters; the second, the concluding
twenty-seven chapters. Impartial critics agree that while Isaiah may
have written a portion of the first part he could not have written
all of it nor any of the second. This is the conclusion of Cheyne,
Davidson, De Wette, Eichorn, Ewald, Gesenius, and others.

That he wrote neither the first nor the second part of the book,
as it now exists, is proven by the following passages taken from both:

"Babylon is fallen, is fallen" (xxi, 9).

"Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the defensed cities
of Judah, and took them" (xxxvi, 1).

"So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned and
dwelt in Nineveh.

"And it came to pass, as he was worshiping in the house of Nishrock
his god, that Addrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the
sword; and they escaped into the land of Armenia; and Esarhaddon his
son reigned in his stead" (xxxvii, 37, 38).

Sennacherib ascended the throne 702 B.C. and died 680 B.C. Isaiah
lived in the preceding century.

"That saith of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my
pleasure; even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be built, and to the
temple, Thy foundation shall be laid" (xliv, 28).

"Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus" (xlv, 1). "He shall
build my city, and he shall let go my captives" (xlv, 13).

Cyrus conquered Babylon B.C. 538, and released the Jews from captivity
and permitted them to return and rebuild Jerusalem and the temple
B.C. 536, nearly two centuries after the time of Isaiah.

Regarding these passages, Dr. Lyman Abbott, in a sermon on "The
Scientific Conception of Revelation," says: "If you take up a history
and it refers to Abraham Lincoln, you are perfectly sure that it
was not written in the time of George Washington. Now, if you take
up the book of Isaiah and read in it about Cyrus the Great, you are
satisfied that the book was not written by Isaiah one hundred years
before Cyrus was born."

Prof. T. K. Cheyne of Oxford University, the leading modern authority
on Isaiah, says: "That portion of the Old Testament which is known as
the book of Isaiah was, in fact, written by at least three writers--and
possibly many more--who lived at different times and in different
places." Nearly all of the ninth chapter, which, on account of its
supposed Messianic prophecies, is, with Christians, one of the most
valued chapters of the Bible, Professor Cheyne declares to be an
interpolation.

That four of the middle chapters, the thirty-sixth, thirty-seventh,
thirty-eighth, and thirty-ninth, originally formed a separate document
is evident. Concerning these four chapters, Paine truthfully observes:
"This fragment of history begins and ends abruptly; it has not the
least connection with the chapter that precedes it, nor with that which
follows it, nor with any other in the book" (Age of Reason, p. 129).

If Isaiah wrote this book, and Jeremiah wrote the books of Kings,
as claimed; then either Isaiah or Jeremiah was a plagiarist; for the
language of the four chapters just mentioned is, with a few slight
alterations, identical with that of a portion of the second book
of Kings.

The integrity of this book cannot be maintained. It is not the product
of one writer, but of many. How many, critics may never be able to
determine; certainly not less than five, probably more than ten.



Jeremiah.

The prophecies of Jeremiah, it is affirmed, were delivered at various
times between 625 and 585 B.C., and a final redaction of them was made
by him about the latter date. The book, as it now appears, is in such
a disordered condition that Christian scholars have to separate it
into numerous parts and rearrange them in order to make a consecutive
and intelligible narrative. Dr. Hitchcock, in his "Analysis of the
Bible" (p 1,144), says: "So many changes have taken place, or else
so many irregularities were originally admitted in the arrangement
of the book, that Dr. Blayney, whose exposition we chiefly follow,
was obliged to make fourteen different portions of the whole before
he could throw it into consecutive order."

The following is Dr. Blayney's arrangement of the book: Chapters i-xii;
xiii-xx; xxii, xxiii; xxv, xxvi; xxxv, xxxvi; xlv-xlviii; xlix (1-33);
xxi; xxiv; xxvii-xxxiv; xxxvii-xxxix; xlix (34-39); l, li; xl-xliv.

This disordered condition of Jeremiah indicates one of two things:
a plurality of authors, or a negligence, if nothing worse, on the part
of the Bible's custodians that Christians will be loath to acknowledge.

The book, as a whole, was not written by Jeremiah. He did not write
the following:

"And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity
of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the five and
twentieth day of the month, that Evil-Merodach king of Babylon, in
the first year of his reign, lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king
of Judah, and brought him forth out of prison" (lii, 31).

The release of Jehoiachin by Evil-Merodach occurred 562 or 561
B.C. Jeremiah had then been dead twenty years.

This book is not the work of one author. The thirty-seventh and
thirty-eighth chapters were not written by the same person. Much of
the thirty-eighth is a mere repetition of the thirty-seventh; and
yet the two are so filled with discrepancies that it is impossible
to accept both as the writings of the same author.

Jeremiah, it is declared, wrote both Kings and Jeremiah. He could
not have written the concluding portion of either. The last chapter
of 2 Kings and the last chapter of Jeremiah are the same, and were
written after the time of Jeremiah.



Ezekiel.

The period assigned for Ezekiel's prophecies is that beginning
B.C. 595 and ending B.C. 573. Christians assert that the first
twenty-four chapters of the work were written before the destruction
of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar. The whole work was undoubtedly written
after this event.

The Talmud credits its authorship to the Great Synagogue. If this be
correct, Ezekiel had nothing to do with its composition; for he was
not a member of the Great Synagogue. Ewald, while claiming for him
the utterance of its several prophecies, believes that the book in
its present form is not his work, but that of a later author.

Referring to Ezekiel, Dr. Oort says: "In his case, far more than in
Jeremiah's even, we must be on our guard against accepting the written
account of his prophecies as a simple record of what he actually said"
(Bible for Learners, vol. ii, p. 407).

Zunz, a German critic, not only contends that the book is not
authentic, but declares that no such prophet as Ezekiel ever existed.

While it must be admitted that the internal evidence against the
integrity and authenticity of Ezekiel is weaker than that of the
other books thus far examined, it can be confidently asserted that
Bible apologists have been unable to establish either. One damaging
fact they concede: no other writer of the Bible ever mentions the
book or its alleged author.



Minor Prophets.

The twelve Minor Prophets, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah,
Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi,
require but a passing notice. Compared with the other Prophets, or
even with the principal books of the Hagiographa, they are of little
importance. A part of them may be genuine--the writings of those to
whom their authorship has been ascribed--but there is no external
evidence, either in the Bible or elsewhere, to support the claim,
while the internal evidence of the books themselves is not convincing.

The date assigned for the composition of Jonah, the oldest of the
Later Prophets, is 856--according to some, 862 B.C. He is said to
have prophesied during the reign of one Pul, "king of Assyria." But
unfortunately Pul's reign is placed in 770 B.C., ninety years after
the date assigned for the book. Jonah is named in the Four Gospels,
named by Christ himself. This is adduced as proof of its authenticity
and in support of a literal instead of an allegorical interpretation of
its language. But Christ's language, even if his divinity be admitted,
proves neither the authenticity nor the historical character of the
book. He taught in parables, and certainly would have no hesitancy
in using an allegorical figure as a symbol. No scholar now contends
for its authenticity, and no sane person believes its stories to be
historical. Luther rejected the book.

Four other books, Hosea, Micah, Zechariah, and Malachi, are quoted or
supposed to be quoted, by the Evangelists, and two, Joel and Amos,
are mentioned in Acts. This proves no more than that these books
were in existence when the New Testament was written--a fact which
none disputes.

Matthew (ii, 6) cites Micah (v, ii) as a Messianic prophecy. Micah
lived during the reign of Hezekiah and wrote, not of an event 700
years in the future, but of one near at hand, the expected invasions
of the Assyrians. The passage quoted by Matthew (ii, 15) from Hosea
(xi, 1) refers to the exodus of the Israelites which took place 700
years before the time of Hosea.

Zechariah is the work of at least three writers. Davidson says: "To
Zechariah's authentic oracles were attached chapters ix-xiv, themselves
made up of two parts (ix-xi, xii-xiv) belonging to different times
and authors" (Canon, p. 33). The passage quoted by Matthew (xxi, 5)
is not from the authentic portion of Zechariah, but from one of the
spurious chapters, ix, 9.

Mark (1, 2, 3) quotes a prophecy which he applies to John the
Baptist. The passage quoted contains two sentences, one of which
is found in Malachi (iii, 1), the other in Isaiah (xl, 3). Whiston
declares that both sentences originally belonged to Isaiah. If Whiston
is correct the Evangelist has not quoted Malachi. This, the last book
of the Old Testament, is an anonymous work, Malachi being the name
of the book and not of the author.

The period assigned for the prophecies of Amos is from 808 to 785
B.C. The book contains the following: "In that day will I raise up the
tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof;
and I will raise up his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of
old" (ix, 11).

"And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel, and
they shall build the waste cities and inhabit them" (14).

Amos was not written until after the captivity. This commenced 588
B.C. and continued fifty years.

Joel, it is asserted, was written 800 B.C. That this writer also
lived after the captivity is shown by the following:

"I shall bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem" (iii, 1).

This passage, it is claimed, was a prediction made centuries before
the event occurred. Joel's ability to predict future events, however,
is negatived by his next effort: "But Judah shall dwell forever,
and Jerusalem from generation to generation" (20).

"Nineveh is laid waste: who shall bemoan her?" (Nahum iii, 7).

The composition of Nahum is placed between 720 and 698 B.C. Nineveh
was destroyed 606 B.C., a century later.

The first verse of Zephaniah declares that the book was written
"in the days of Josiah," in the seventh century B.C.; the last verse
shows that it was written in the days of Cyrus, in the sixth century
B.C. Every chapter of Habakkuk and Obadiah's single chapter show that
these books were written after the dates assigned.

The book of Haggai is ascribed to Haggai, the last person in the world
to whom it can reasonably be ascribed. It is not a book of Haggai,
but about Haggai. Excepting a few brief exhortations, of which it
gives an account, it does not purport to contain a word from his
tongue or pen. This argument applies with still greater force to Jonah.

The greater portion of the Minor Prophets are probably forgeries. The
names of their alleged authors are attached to them, but in most
cases in the form of a superscription only. Each book opens with a
brief introduction announcing the author. These introductions were not
written by the authors themselves, but by others. The only authority
for pronouncing the books authentic, then, is the assurance of some
unknown Jewish scribe or editor.

A damaging argument against the authority, if not against the
authenticity, of the Prophets is the fact that while the historical
records of the Old Testament cover the time during which all of them
are said to have flourished, only a few of them are deemed worthy
of mention.







