CHAPTER XXVII.

MURDER--WAR.


Murder.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it sanctions
murder.

It is true the Sixth Commandment says, "Thou shalt not kill;" but
this law is practically annulled by innumerable commands from the
same source, like the following, to kill:

"Thus saith the Lord God of Israel, Put every man his sword by his
side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp, and
slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every
man his neighbor" (Ex. xxxii, 27).

"Spare them not, but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling"
(1 Sam. xv, 3).

"Slay utterly old and young, both maids and little children"
(Ezek. ix, 6)

"Cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from blood" (Jer. xlviii,
10).

For the leader and legislator of his chosen people, God selects a
murderer. The first recorded act of Moses was premeditated murder. "He
looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man,
he slew the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand" (Ex. ii 12).

For committing a murder, Phinehas is rewarded by Jehovah with "the
covenant of an everlasting priesthood" (Num. xxv, 6-13).

Samuel "hewed Agag," a captive king, "in pieces before the Lord"
(1 Sam. xv, 32, 33).

Jehu murders all the house of Ahab, and God rewards him for it:

"And Joram turned his hands and fled, and said to Ahaziah, There is
treachery, O Ahaziah. And Jehu drew a bow with his full strength,
and smote Jehoram between his arms, and the arrow went out at his
heart and he sunk down in his chariot.

"But when Ahaziah, the king of Judah, saw this, he fled by the way
of the garden house. And Jehu followed after him, and said, Smite
him also in the chariot. And they did so.

"And when Jehu was come to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it, and she
painted her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a window. And
as Jehu entered in at the gate she said, Had Zimri peace who slew his
master? And he lifted up his face to the window, and said, Who is on
my side? Who? And there looked out to him two or three eunuchs. And he
said, Throw her down. So they threw her down, and some of her blood
was sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses; and he trode her under
foot. And when he was come in, he did eat and drink, and said, Go, see
now this cursed woman, and bury her; for she is a king's daughter. And
they went to bury her, but they found no more of her than the skull,
and the feet, and the palms of her hands."

The dogs had devoured her.

"And Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. And Jehu wrote letters and
sent to Samaria.... And it came to pass when the letter came to them,
that they took the king's sons, and slew seventy persons, and put
their heads in baskets, and sent him them to Jezreel."

"So Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel,
and all his great men, and his kinsfolks, and his priests, until he
left him none remaining."

"And the Lord said unto Jehu, Because thou hast done well in executing
that which is right in mine eyes, and hast done unto the house of
Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of the
fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel" (2 Kings ix,
23, 24, 27, 30-35; x, 1, 7, 11, 30).

The assassination of Eglon by Ehud was characterized by the basest
treachery and brutality. Eglon was king of Moab. Ehud carried a present
to him, and after he had delivered the present he told the king that he
had a private message for him. Eglon ordered his attendants to retire,
and when alone Ehud drew a large dagger from beneath his cloak and
thrust it through the body of the king. And the Bible tells us that
God raised up Ehud expressly for this work (Jud. iii, 15-23).

The warmest eulogy in the Bible is bestowed upon a murderess. Sisera
is a fugitive from battle. He reaches in safety the tent of Heber, his
friend. Heber is absent, but Jael, his wife, receives the fugitive, and
bids him welcome. She gives him food, spreads a soft couch for him, and
covers him with her mantle. Wearied with his retreat, and unconscious
of impending danger, Sisera soon sinks into a profound slumber. With a
tent nail in one hand and a hammer in the other, Jael approaches the
bedside of her sleeping guest. She bends over him, listens to assure
herself that he is asleep, then places the nail against his temple,
and with a blow drives it through his head. A struggle, and Sisera
is dead, a victim of one of the most damnable deeds ever committed.

In honor of this assassination, God's favorite prophetess, Deborah,
sings:

"Blessed above women shall Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite, be;
blessed shall she be above women in the tent. He asked water, and she
gave him milk; she brought forth butter in a lordly dish. She put
her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workman's hammer;
and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head, when
she had pierced and stricken through his temples. At her feet he
bowed, he fell, he lay down; at her feet he bowed, he fell: where he
bowed, there he fell down dead. The mother of Sisera looked out at
a window, and cried through the lattice, Why is his chariot so long
in coming? Why tarry the wheels of his chariot?" (Jud. v, 24-28.)

We wish to place before our children, for their emulation, good
and noble characters. We have been taught that in the Bible such
characters may be found. You desire a model woman to place before your
daughter. What one will you select? Here is a woman whom the Bible
pronounces "blessed above women." This must be a suitable model,
then. Blessed for what? For committing one of the most infamous
of murders.

We had a Kansas girl who followed in the footsteps of this
"blessed woman." Years ago, across the prairies of southern Kansas
stretched a lonely road. By its side, far from other habitations,
stood an unpretentious dwelling, inhabited by four persons--father,
mother, son, and daughter. But the daughter was the ruling spirit
there. Their only volume, we are told, was a Bible, and this the
daughter read. The house contains two rooms besides the cellar. The
rooms are separated simply by a curtain. In the front room is kept a
small stock of groceries. Here, too, with its back against the curtain,
and fastened to the floor, stands a chair. Above the door is a sign
with this inviting word, "Provisions." A traveler enters and makes some
purchases, displaying a well-filled purse. He is treated hospitably,
and invited to remain awhile and rest. Wearied, he drops into the
chair, his head pressing against the curtain. Armed with a hammer,
this follower of Jael now approaches from the rear. One well-directed
blow, and the tired traveler sinks into eternal rest. His pockets are
rifled, and his body thrown into the cellar, to be taken out at night
and buried in the little garden behind the dwelling. Time rolls on;
the traveler does not return. Day after day his wife at home, with
anxious heart, peers through the window and sighs, "Why don't he
come?" At length suspicion rests upon this den of infamy. A search
is instituted, and the garden is found to be a cemetery, filled with
the bodies of murdered travelers--one a little child. In the mean
time this female monster with her kin has fled. Detectives are still
searching for her. They'll never find her. Where is she? In heaven
with Jael. Now let some modern Deborah sing, "Blessed above maidens
shall Kate Bender be!"



War.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it sanctions
wars of conquest and extermination.

"Blessed be the Lord, my strength, which teacheth my hands to war
and my fingers to fight" (Ps. cxliv, 1).

The Old Testament is largely a record of wars and massacres. God
is represented as "a man of war." At his command whole nations are
exterminated.

"Ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from before you,
... and ye shall dispossess the inhabitants of the land, and dwell
therein" (Num. xxxiii, 52, 53).

"And thou shalt consume all the people which the Lord thy God shall
deliver thee; thine eye shall have no pity upon them" (Deut. vii, 16).

"Of the cities of these people, which the Lord thy God doth give thee
for an inheritance, thou shalt save alive nothing that breatheth:
but thou shalt utterly destroy them" (Deut. xx, 16, 17).

"And they warred against the Midianites, as the Lord commanded Moses;
and they slew all the males.... And the children of Israel took
all the women of Midian captives, and their little ones, and took
the spoil of all their cattle, and all their flocks, and all their
goods. And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, and all
their goodly castles with fire" (Num. xxxi, 7-10).

Moses is angry because the women and children have been saved, and
from this fiendish conqueror comes the mandate: "Kill every male
among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known man."

The mourning remnants of twenty thousand families are thus to be
destroyed. The fathers, far away, lie still in death beside the
smouldering ruins of their once fair homes; and now their wives and
little ones are doomed to die. The signal is sounded, and the massacre
begins. The mothers, on bended knees, with tearful eyes and pleading
lips, are ruthlessly cut down. Their prattling babes, in unsuspecting
innocence, smile on the uplifted sword as if it were a glittering toy,
and the next moment feel it speeding through their little frames. The
daughters only are spared--spared to be the wretched slaves of those
whose hands are red with the life-blood of their dear ones.

And this is but a prelude to the sanguinary scenes that are to follow.

"Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass over the river Arnon; behold
I have given into thine hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and
his land: begin to possess it, and contend with him in battle. This
day will I begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of thee upon
the nations that are under the whole heaven, who shall hear report
of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee."

"And we took all his cities at that time, and utterly destroyed the
men, and the women, and the little ones of every city, we left none
to remain" (Deut. ii, 24, 25, 34).

"The Lord our God delivered into our hands Og also, the king of
Bashan, and all his people, and we smote him until none was left to
him remaining. And we took all his cities at that time, there was not a
city which we took not from them, threescore cities.... And we utterly
destroyed them as we did unto Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying
the men, women, and children of every city" (Deut. iii, 3-6).

Moses dies, and Joshua next leads Jehovah's troops.

"And the Lord said unto Joshua, See, I have given into thine hand
Jericho.... And they utterly destroyed all that was in that city,
both man and woman, young and old" (Josh. vi, 2, 21).

"And the Lord said unto Joshua, Stretch out the spear that is in
thy hand toward Ai; for I will give it into thine hand.... And so
it was, that all that fell that day, both of men and women, were
twelve thousand.... And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it a heap forever"
(Josh. viii, 18, 25, 28).

"And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto Lachish,
and encamped against it, and fought against it. And the Lord delivered
Lachish into the hands of Israel, which took it on the second day,
and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were
therein" (Josh. x, 31, 32).

"And from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon, and all Israel with him;
and they encamped against it, and fought against it. And they took it
on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls
that were therein he utterly destroyed that day" (Josh. x, 34, 35).

Thus city after city falls, and nation after nation is vanquished,
until thirty-one kingdoms have been destroyed. And still there
"remaineth much land to be possessed," and many millions more of
unoffending people to be slain to please this God of War.

Christ came, heralded as the "Prince of Peace." But he "came not to
send peace but a sword"--a sword his own arm was too weak to wield,
but which his followers have used with dire effect. Expunge from the
history of Christendom the record of its thousand wars and little will
remain. From the time that Constantine inscribed the emblem of the
cross upon his banner to the present hour, the church of Christ has
been upheld by the sword. Five million troops maintain its political
supremacy in Europe to-day. To "express our national acknowledgment
of Almighty God as the source of all authority in civil government;
of the Lord Jesus Christ as the ruler of nations, and of his revealed
will as of supreme authority;" in short, to make this a "Christian
nation," as Bible moralists demand, means a standing army in this
country of five hundred thousand men.

The Bible has inspired more wars in Christendom than all else
combined. It is a fountain of blood, and the crimson rivers that have
flowed from it would float the navies of the world.







