CHAPTER III.

FORMATION OF THE CANON.


Second in interest and importance only to the origin of the individual
books composing the Bible are the facts relating to the manner in
which these books were collected into one great volume and declared
canonical or authoritative. The formation of the canon required
centuries of time to complete.



The Jewish Canon.

The Jewish canon, it is claimed, was chiefly the work of Ezra,
completed by Nehemiah. "All antiquity," says Dr. Adam Clarke, "is
nearly unanimous in giving Ezra the honor of collecting the different
writings of Moses and the prophets and reducing them into the form
in which they are now found in the Bible."

This opinion, shared alike by Jews and Christians, is simply a
tradition. There is no conclusive evidence that Ezra founded the canon
of the Old Testament. Nehemiah could not have completed it, because
a part of the books were written after his time. There is no proof
that all the books of the Old Testament existed in a collected form
before the beginning of the Christian era. There is no proof that even
the Law and the Prophets existed in such a form before the Maccabean
period. The Rev. Frederick Myers, an able authority on the Bible,
makes this candid admission: "By whom the books of the Old Testament
were collected into one volume, and by what authority made canonical,
we do not know" ("Catholic Thoughts on the Bible," p. 56).

Another prevalent belief is that all of the Jewish scriptures were
lost during the captivity, and that Ezra was divinely inspired to
rewrite them. Irenæus says: "God ... inspired Esdras, the priest of
the tribe of Levi, to compose anew all the discourses of the ancient
prophets, and to restore to the people the laws given them by Moses"
("Ecclesiastical History," Book V., chap. viii).

This is a myth. The books of the Old Testament which were written
before the captivity were not lost. Many books, it is true, were
written after the captivity, but these books were not reproductions
of lost writings. They were original compositions, or compilations
of documents which had not been lost.

If Ezra was inspired, as claimed, to rewrite the Hebrew scriptures,
he did not complete his task, for the books that were really lost have
never been restored, and the Old Testament is but a part of the Hebrew
scriptures that once existed. St. Chrysostom says: "The Jews having
been at some time careless, and at others profane, they suffered some
of the sacred books to be lost through their carelessness, and have
burnt and destroyed others." The list of books given in the preceding
chapter, under the head of "Lost Books cited by writers of the Bible,"
would nearly all be deemed canonical were they extant. Referring to
these books, the Rev. Dr. Campbell, in his "Introduction to Matthew,"
says: "The Book of the Wars of the Lord, the Book of Jasher, the
Book of Nathan the Prophet, the Book of Gad the Seer, and several
others, are referred to in the Old Testament, manifestly as of
equal authority with the book which refers to them, and as fuller in
point of information. Yet these are to all appearances irrecoverably
lost." God's revelation in its entirety, then, no longer exists.

The ten Hebrew tribes which formed the kingdom of Israel, and whose
remnants were afterwards called Samaritans, accepted only the first
six books of the Old Testament. The other Jews generally accepted the
Pentateuch and the Prophets, and, in a less degree, the Hagiographa
as canonical. Some of them also attached more or less importance to
the Apocryphal books.



The Christian Canon.

Respecting the formation of the New Testament canon, the
Rev. Dr. Roswell D. Hitchcock says:

"The new book of records was, like the old, set down by eye-witnesses
of and actors in its scenes, closely after their occurrence;
its successive portions were cautiously scrutinized and clearly
distinguished as entitled to reception; when the record, properly
so-called, was completed, the new canon was closed" ("Analysis of
the Bible," p. 1149).

"This process was rapid and decisive; it had in all probability
become substantially complete before the death of John, the last of
the apostles" (Ibid, p. 1158).

That these statements, popularly supposed to be true, are wholly untrue
will be demonstrated by the facts presented in this and succeeding
chapters. The Christian canon was not completed before the death of
the last apostle. The New Testament did not exist in the time of the
apostles. It did not exist in the time of the Apostolic Fathers. It
was not in existence in the middle of the second century.

There was no New Testament in the time of Papias. Dr. Samuel Davidson,
the highest Christian authority on the canon, says: "Papias (150
A.D.) knew nothing, so far as we can learn, of a New Testament canon"
("Canon of the Bible," p. 123).

Justin Martyr knew nothing of a New Testament canon. I quote again
from Dr. Davidson: "Justin Martyr's canon (150 A.D.), so far as
divine authority and inspiration are concerned, was the Old Testament"
(Ibid, p. 129).

For nearly two centuries after the beginning of the Christian era,
the Old Testament--the Old Testament alone--constituted the Christian
canon. No other books were called scripture; no other books were
considered inspired; no other books were deemed canonical.



Founding of the Canon.

To Irenæus, more than to any other man, belongs the credit of founding
the Roman Catholic church; and to him also belongs the credit of
founding the New Testament canon, which is a Roman Catholic work. No
collection of books corresponding to our New Testament existed before
the time of Irenæus. He was the first to make such a collection,
and he was the first to claim inspiration and divine authority for
its books. Dr. Davidson says:

"The conception of canonicity and inspiration attaching to New
Testament books did not exist till the time of Irenæus" ("Canon,"
p. 163).

At the close of the second century the Christian world was divided
into a hundred different sects. Irenæus and others conceived the plan
of uniting these sects, or the more orthodox of them, into one great
Catholic church, with Rome at the head; for Rome was at this time the
largest and most influential of all the Christian churches. "It is a
matter of necessity," says Irenæus, "that every church should agree
with this church on account of its preeminent authority" ("Heresies,"
Book 3).

In connection with this work Irenæus made a collection of books for
use in the church. His collection comprised the following: Matthew,
Mark, Luke, John, Acts, Romans, First Corinthians, Second Corinthians,
Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, First Thessalonians,
Second Thessalonians, First Timothy, Second Timothy, Titus, Philemon,
First John, and Revelation--twenty books in all.

In the work of establishing the Roman Catholic church and the New
Testament canon Irenæus was succeeded, early in the third century, by
Tertullian and Clement of Alexandria. They adopted the list of books
made by him. The books adopted by these Fathers were selected from a
large number of Christian writings then extant--forty or more gospels,
nearly as many Acts of Apostles, a score of Revelations, and a hundred
epistles. Each church had one or more books which were used in that
church. No divine authority, however, was ascribed to any of them.

Why did the Fathers choose these particular books? Above all,
why did they choose four gospels instead of one? We never see four
biographies of Washington, of Cromwell, or of Napoleon, bound in
one volume; yet here we have four different biographies of Jesus in
one book. Irenæus says it is because "there are four quarters of
the earth in which we live, and four universal winds." Instead of
this artificial reason he could have given a natural, a rational,
and a truthful reason. While primitive Christians, as we have seen,
were divided into many sects, the principal sects may be grouped into
three divisions: 1. The Petrine churches, comprising the church of
Rome and other churches which recognized Peter as the chief of the
apostles and the visible head of the church on earth; 2. The Pauline
sects, which accepted Paul as the true exponent of Christianity;
3. The Johannine or Eastern churches, which regarded John as their
founder. A collection of books to be acceptable to all of these
churches must contain the favorite books of each. The First Gospel,
written about the time this church union movement was inaugurated,
was adopted by the Petrine churches. The Second Gospel was also
highly valued by the church of Rome. The Third Gospel, a revised and
enlarged edition of the Pauline Gospel of Marcion, had become the
standard authority of Pauline Christians. The Fourth Gospel, which
had superseded other and older gospels, was generally read in the
Johannine churches. The Acts of the Apostles, written for the purpose
of healing the dissensions that had arisen between the followers of
Peter and Paul, was acceptable to both Petrines and Paulines. The
Epistles of Paul were of course received by the Pauline churches,
while the First Epistle of John was generally received by the Eastern
churches. The collection would not be complete without a Revelation,
and the Revelation of John was selected.

The work instituted by Irenæus was successful. The three divisions of
Christendom were united, and the Catholic church was established. But
this cementing, although it held for centuries, did not last, as was
hoped, for all time. The seams gave way, the divisions separated,
and to-day stand out as distinctly as they did in the second century;
the Roman Catholic church representing the Petrine, the Greek church
the Johannine, and the Protestant churches to a great extent the
Pauline Christians of that early age. But while the church separated,
each retained all of the sixty-six canonical books, save Revelation,
which for a time was rejected by the Greek church.

The New Testament originally contained but twenty books. To First
Peter, Second John, and the Shepherd of Hermas Irenæus attached some
importance, but did not place them in his canon. Hebrews, James,
Second Peter, Third John, and Jude he ignored. Tertullian placed in an
appendix Hebrews, First Peter, Second John, Jude, and the Shepherd of
Hermas. Clement of Alexandria classed as having inferior authority,
Hebrews, Second John, Jude, First and Second Epistles of Clement
(of Rome), Epistle of Barnabas, Shepherd of Hermas, and Revelation
of Peter.

Regarding the competency of the founders of the New Testament canon,
Davidson says:

"Of the three fathers who contributed most to its early growth, Irenæus
was credulous and blundering, Tertullian passionate and one-sided,
and Clement of Alexandria, imbued with the treasures of Greek wisdom,
was mainly occupied with ecclesiastical ethics" (Canon, p. 155).

"The three Fathers of whom we are speaking had neither the ability nor
the inclination to examine the genesis of documents surrounded with
an apostolic halo. No analysis of their authenticity was seriously
contemplated" (Ibid, p. 156).



Completion of the Canon.

The Christian canon, including the New Testament canon, assumed
something like its present form under the labors of Augustine and
Jerome toward the close of the fourth century. St. Augustine's canon
contained all of the books now contained in the Old and New Testaments,
excepting Lamentations, which was excluded. It contained, in addition
to these, the apocryphal pieces belonging to Daniel, and the books of
Tobit, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and First and Second Maccabees.

St. Jerome's canon contained Lamentations, which Augustine's canon
excluded, and omitted Tobit, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, and First
and Second Maccabees, which Augustine's included. Roman Catholics
accept the canon of Augustine, including Lamentations; Protestants,
generally, accept the canon of Jerome.

While Jerome included in his canon all the books of the New Testament,
he admitted that Philemon, Hebrews, Second Peter, Second and Third
John, Jude, and Revelation were of doubtful authority.

Referring to the work of Augustine and Jerome, Davidson, says:
"Both were unfitted for the critical examination of such a topic"
(Canon, p. 200).



Christian Councils.

Many believe that the Council of Nice, held in 325 A.D., determined
what books should constitute the Bible. This council did not determine
the canon. So far as is known, the first church council which acted
upon this question was the Synod of Laodicea which met in 365. This
council rejected the Apocryphal books contained in Augustine's
list, but admitted Baruch and the Epistle of Jeremiah. It excluded
Revelation.

Various councils, following this, adopted canonical lists. One council
would admit certain books and the next council would reject them. The
third council of Carthage in 397 adopted the list of Augustine which
admitted the Apocryphal books and Revelation and rejected Lamentations.

The actions of none of these councils were unanimous or decisive. The
list of books adopted was adopted simply by a majority vote. A
large minority of every council refused to accept the list of the
majority. Some advocated the admission of books that were rejected;
others opposed the admission of books that were accepted. As late as
the seventh century (629), at the sixth Council of Constantinople,
many different canonical lists were presented for ratification.

The damaging facts that I have adduced concerning the formation of
the Christian canon are admitted in a large degree by one of the
most orthodox of authorities, McClintock and Strong's "Cyclopedia of
Biblical and Ecclesiastical Literature." Dr. McClintock says:

"The New Testament canon presents a remarkable analogy to the canon of
the Old Testament. The beginnings of both are obscure.... The history
of the canon may be divided into three periods. The first, extending
to 170, includes the era of circulation and gradual collection of
the apostolic writings. The second is closed in 303, separating the
sacred from other ecclesiastical writings. The third may be defined
by the third Council of Carthage, 397 A.D., in which a catalogue
of the books of the Scriptures was formally ratified by conciliar
authority. The first is characteristically a period of tradition, the
second of speculation, and the third of authority, and we may trace the
features of the successive ages in the course of the history of the
canon. But however all this may have been, the complete canon of the
New Testament, as we now have it, was ratified by the third Council
of Carthage, 397 A.D., from which time it was generally accepted by
the Latin church, some of the books remaining in doubt and disputed."

Concerning the work of these councils, William Penn writes as follows:

"I say how do they know that these men discerned true from
spurious? Now, sure it is, that some of the Scriptures taken in by
one council were rejected by another for apocryphal, and that which
was left out by the former for apocryphal was taken in by the latter
for canonical" (Penn's Works, Vol. I., p. 302).

In regard to the character of these councils, Dean Milman writes:

"It might have been supposed that nowhere would Christianity appear
in such commanding majesty as in a council.... History shows the
melancholy reverse. Nowhere is Christianity less attractive, and
if we look to the ordinary tone and character of the proceedings,
less authoritative, than in the councils of the church. It is in
general a fierce collision of two rival factions, neither of which
will yield, each of which is solemnly pledged against conviction"
(History of Latin Christianity, Vol. I., p. 226).

The Roman Catholic, Greek Catholic, and Protestant canons, no two of
which are alike, were fixed by modern councils. The Council of Trent
(1545-1563) determined the Roman Catholic canon. While a majority
were in favor of the canon of Augustine they were not agreed in
regard to the character and classification of the books. There were
four parties. The first advocated two divisions of the books, one to
comprise the acknowledged books, the other the disputed books. The
second party proposed three divisions--the acknowledged books, the
disputed books of the New Testament, and the Apocryphal books of the
Old Testament. The third party desired the list of books to be named
without determining their authority. The fourth party demanded that
all the books, acknowledged, disputed, and apocryphal, be declared
canonical. This party triumphed.

At a council of the Greek church held in Jerusalem in 1672, this
church, which had always refused to accept Revelation, finally placed
it in the canon. The Greek canon contains several apocryphal books
not contained in the Roman Catholic canon.

Both divisions of the Protestant church, German and English, declared
against the authority of the Apocryphal books. The Westminster Assembly
(1647) formally adopted the list of books contained in our Authorized
Version of the Bible.



Ancient Christian Scholars.

Most Christians believe that all of the books of the Bible, and
only the books of the Bible, have been accepted as canonical by all
Christians. And yet, how far from this is the truth! In every age of
the church there have been Christians, eminent for their piety and
learning, who either rejected some of these books, or who accepted
as canonical books not contained in the Bible.

Not one of the five men who contributed most to form the canon,
Irenæus, Tertullian, Clement, Jerome, and Augustine, accepted all of
these books.

Late in the second century Melito, Bishop of Sardis, a contemporary
of Irenæus, was deputed to make a list of the books belonging to the
Old Testament. His list omitted Esther and Lamentations.

The Muratori canon, which is supposed to belong to the third century,
omitted Hebrews, James, First and Second Peter, and Third John. The
Apostolic canon omitted Revelation, and included First and Second
Clement and the Apostolic Constitutions.

Of Origen, the great Christian Father of the third century, "Chambers'
Encyclopedia" says: "Origen doubted the authority of the Epistle
to the Hebrews, of the Epistle of James, of Jude, of the Second of
Peter, and the Second and Third of John; while, at the same time, he
was disposed to recognize as canonical certain apocryphal scriptures,
such as those of Hermas and Barnabas." In addition to the apocryphal
books named, Origen also accepted as authoritative the Gospel of the
Hebrews, Gospel of the Egyptians, Acts of Paul, and Preaching of Peter.

The Rev. Jeremiah Jones, a leading authority on the canon, says:
"Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, and the rest of
the primitive writers were wont to approve and cite books which now
all men know to be apocryphal" (Canon, p. 4).

Theodoret says that as late as the fifth century many churches used the
Gospel of Tatian instead of the canonical Gospels. Gregory the Great,
at the beginning of the seventh, and Alfric, at the close of the
tenth century, accepted as canonical Paul's Epistle to the Laodiceans.

Early in the fourth century the celebrated church historian,
Eusebius, gave a list of the acknowledged and disputed books of the
New Testament. The disputed books--books which some accepted and
others rejected--were Hebrews, James, Second and Third John, Jude,
Revelation, Shepherd of Hermas, Epistle of Barnabas, Acts of Paul,
and Revelation of Peter.

Athanasius rejected Esther, and Epiphanius accepted the Epistle
of Jeremiah. Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem, and Gregory, Bishop of
Constantinople, both rejected Revelation.

Chrysostom, one of the greatest of church divines, and, who gave to
the sacred book of Christians its name, omitted ten books from his
canon--First and Second Chronicles, Esther, Job, and Lamentations,
five books in the Old Testament; and Second Peter, Second and Third
John, Jude, and Revelation, five books in the New Testament.



Protestant Scholars.

Many Protestant scholars have questioned or denied the correctness
of the Protestant canon. Calvin doubted Second and Third John
and Revelation. Erasmus doubted Hebrews, Second and Third John,
and Revelation. Zwingle and Beza rejected Revelation. Dr. Lardner
questioned the authority of Hebrews, James, Second Peter, Second
and Third John, Jude and Revelation. Evanson rejected Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and nearly half of the Epistles. Schleiermacher rejected First
Timothy. Scaliger rejected Second Peter. Davidson thinks that Esther
should be excluded from the canon. Eichorn rejected Daniel and Jonah
in the Old Testament, and Second Timothy and Titus in the New.

Dr. Whiston excluded the Song of Solomon, and accepted as canonical
more than twenty books not found in the Bible. He says: "Can anyone be
so weak as to imagine Mark, and Luke, and James, and Jude, who were
none of them more than companions of the Apostles, to be our sacred
and unerring guides, while Barnabas, Thaddeus, Clement, Timothy,
Hermas, Ignatius, and Polycarp, who were equally companions of the
same Apostles, to be of no authority at all?" (Exact Time, p. 28).

The Rev. James Martineau, of England, says: "If we could recover
the Gospel of the Hebrews, and that of the Egyptians, it would be
difficult to give a reason why they should not form a part of the
New Testament; and an epistle by Clement, the fellow laborer of Paul,
which has as good a claim to stand there as the Epistle to the Hebrews,
or the Gospel of Luke" (Rationale of Religious Enquiry).

Archbishop Wake pronounces the writings of the Apostolic Fathers
"inspired," and says that they contain "an authoritative declaration
of the Gospel of Christ" (Apostolic Fathers).

The church of Latter Day Saints, numbering one half million adherents,
and including some able Bible scholars, believe that the modern Book
of Mormon is a part of God's Word, equal in authority and importance
to the Pentateuch or the Four Gospels.



Martin Luther.

The greatest name in the records of the Protestant church is Martin
Luther. He is generally recognized as its founder; he is considered
one of the highest authorities on the Bible; he devoted a large
portion of his life to its study; he made a translation of it for
his people, a work which is accepted as one of the classics of German
literature. With Luther the Bible superseded the church as a divine
authority. And yet this greatest of Protestants rejected no less than
six of the sixty-six books composing the Protestant Bible.

Luther rejected the book of Esther. He says: "I am such an enemy to
the book of Esther that I wish it did not exist." In his "Bondage of
the Will," he severely criticises the book.

He rejected the book of Jonah. He says: "The history of Jonah is
so monstrous as to be absolutely incredible" (Colloquia, Chap. LX.,
Sec. 10).

He rejected Hebrews: "The Epistle to the Hebrews is not by St. Paul;
nor, indeed, by any apostle" (Standing Preface to Luther's New
Testament).

He rejected the Epistle of James: "St. James' Epistle is truly an
epistle of straw" (Preface to Edition of 1524).

He rejected Jude. "The Epistle of Jude," he says, "allegeth stories
and sayings which have no place in Scripture" (Standing Preface).

He rejected Revelation. He says: "I can discover no trace that it is
established by the Holy Spirit" (Preface to Edition of 1522).







