CHAPTER XXXI.

INTEMPERANCE--VAGRANCY--IGNORANCE.


Intemperance.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it fosters the
evil of intemperance.

While the sacred books of Buddhists and Mohammedans, by forbidding
the use of intoxicating drinks, have contributed to make drunkenness
among these people disreputable and rare, the Bible, by encouraging
their use, has made intemperance in Christian countries frightfully
prevalent and almost respectable.

"Thou shalt bestow that money for whatsoever thy soul lusteth after,
for oxen or for sheep, or for wine, or for strong drink" (Deut. xiv,
26).

"Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto
those that be of heavy hearts. Let him drink and forget his poverty,
and remember his misery no more" (Prov. xxxi, 6,7).

"Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomach's sake"
(1 Tim. v, 23).

"Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry
heart, for God now accepteth thy works" (Eccles. ix, 7).

"Corn shall make the young men cheerful, and new wine the maids"
(Zech. ix, 17).

"They shall plant vineyards and drink the wine thereof" (Amos ix, 14).

"Wine that maketh glad the heart of man" (Ps. civ, 15).

"Wine which cheereth God and man" (Jud. ix, 13).

"In the holy place shalt thou cause the strong wine to be poured unto
the Lord for a drink offering" (Num. xxviii, 7).

Will that wing of the Prohibition army which accepts the Bible as
its guide inscribe these texts upon its banner?

As a reward for the Jews keeping the judgments of the Lord he was to
bless their wine (Deut. vii, 13).

Liberal giving to the Lord was to be rewarded with an abundance
of wine.

"Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all
thine increase: so shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy
presses shall burst out with new wine" (Prov. iii, 9, 10).

One of the most direful calamities was a wine famine.

"Awake, ye drunkards, and weep; and howl, all ye drinkers of wine,
because of the new wine; for it is cut off from your mouth.... The
drink offering is cut off from the house of the Lord; the priests,
the Lord's ministers, mourn.... Gird yourselves and lament, ye priests
howl, ye ministers of the altar; come, lie all night in sackcloth,
ye ministers of my God; for ... the drink offering is withholden from
the house of your God" (Joel i, 5, 9, 13).

God's especial favorites had a weakness for wine. When he drowned
the world's inhabitants he saved Noah, knowing that as soon as the
waters subsided he would plant a vineyard, make wine, and become
intoxicated. When Sodom was destroyed the only righteous man he
found was that foul drunkard, Lot. When David made his celebrated
feast in honor of the Lord he gave to every man and woman a flagon
of wine. He kept some for himself and so merry did his heart become
that he "danced before the Lord with all his might."

Thus joyously sings Solomon: "I have drunk my wine with my milk [milk
punch]; eat, O friends! drink, yea, drink abundantly." In the morning
he sings another song: "Open to me ... my love ... for my head is
filled with dew." How many a wayward fellow like Solomon has risen
from the gutter, sorrowfully wended his way home, and serenaded his
sleeping spouse with that same melody!

When Solomon erected his temple to God he gave to his laborers "twenty
thousand baths [nearly 175,000 gallons] of wine" (2 Chron. ii, 10).

The Nazarite, it is claimed, was commanded to abstain from wine. Yes,
but only during the period of his separation. "After that the Nazarite
may drink wine" (Num. vi, 20).

God commanded Jeremiah to tempt with wine those who abstained from
its use:

"Go unto the house of the Rechabites and speak with them, and bring
them into the house of the Lord, into one of the chambers, and give
them wine to drink" (Jer. xxxv, 2).

Christ spoke as follows:

"John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine.... The
Son of Man is come eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold a gluttonous
man and a winebibber" (Luke, vii, 33, 34).

This censure was evidently not unmerited. The first act in Christ's
ministerial career was to manufacture three barrels of wine for
a wedding feast; his last recorded act was a benediction upon the
wine cup.

Theology being no longer in demand, the Protestant clergy, contrary
to the teachings of the Bible, and the traditions of the church, now
find it popular and profitable to espouse the cause of temperance. But
in championing one rational virtue they employ two Christian vices,
hypocrisy and intolerance. The most inconsistent, the most uncharitable
opponents of the liquor traffic to-day are these fresh converts who
profess to be doing their master's will and who claim that his Word
is the advocate of total abstinence and prohibitory laws. With fierce
invective they declaim against the old God Bacchus, yet every anathema
they hurl at him will apply with equal justice to their God and Christ.

One of the most unscrupulous arguments ever adduced in support
of any cause is that now advanced by some Christian temperance
advocates to the effect that the wine sanctioned in the Bible was
not intoxicating. With the same ease that they declare that in the
Bible "black" means "white," that "hate" means "love," and "day"
means "age," they declare that Bible wine does not mean wine, but
unfermented grape juice.

The Rev. Dr. W. M. Thompson, Rev. William Wright, Rev. S. H. Calhoun,
Rev. C. V. A. Van Dyke, and other able Hebrew and Sanscrit scholars
of Western Asia, who have made the history and customs of its people
both ancient and modern a life study, affirm that such a thing as
non-intoxicating wine was unknown, that the unfermented juice of the
grape was never recognized as wine. Dr. Philip Schaff, the foremost
Bible scholar of this country, affirms the same:

"The wine of the Bible was no doubt pure and unadulterated.... It was
genuine and real wine, and, like all wine in use in grape-growing
countries, exhilarating. To lay down the principle that the use of
intoxicating drink as a beverage is a sin--per se--is to condemn the
greater part of Christendom, to contradict the Bible, and to impeach
Christ himself, who drank wine and made wine by miracle to supply
the marriage guests."

At the General Assembly of the Presbyterian church held at Belfast,
Ireland, in 1870, an exhaustive examination and discussion was given
this subject. The result was the adoption by an almost unanimous
vote of the following resolution offered by the Rev. Robert Wales,
Professor of Dialectic Theology, Belfast:

"As the wine used in the oblations of the Old Testament time at the
Passover and by our Lord Jesus Christ himself in the institution of the
supper was the ordinary wine of the country, that is, the fermented
juice of the grape, we cannot sanction the use of the unfermented
juice of the grape as a symbol in the ordinance."

That the sacramental wine used by the early Christians was
intoxicating, and that they were addicted to using it to excess at
the Lord's Supper, is admitted by Paul (1 Cor. xi, 20-34).

Referring to this subject, the Christian Register says: "We deplore
intemperance, and welcome every truthful argument against it, but the
argument founded on the non-intoxicating character of Bible wine is
a weak and diluted fallacy."



Vagrancy.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it encourages
poverty and vagrancy.

Jesus Christ was the panegyrist of poverty and the promoter of
vagrancy:

"Blessed be ye poor" (Luke vi, 20).

"But woe unto you that are rich" (Luke vi, 24).

"A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven" (Matt. xix,
23).

"It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for
a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God" (Mark x, 25).

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth" (Matt. vi, 19).

When the judicious use of wealth is promotive of human happiness,
and when poverty is the source of so much misery and crime, such
teachings are not only false, but pernicious.

"Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall
drink; nor yet for your body what ye shall put on.... Behold the
fowls of the air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather
into barns.... And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the
lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they
spin.... Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or,
What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?... The
morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto
the day is the evil thereof" (Matt. vi, 25-34).

To-day our land is infested with an army of tramps. Their skirmishers
are deployed along every highway; their points of attack are the
kitchen and the haymow; their text-book on military science is the
Sermon on the Mount. "They sow not, neither do they reap;" "They toil
not, neither do they spin." They beg and steal. These are Christ's
followers--the truest followers he has on earth to-day.

In the streets of our cities we see men clad in rags, idle, and
drunken, and penniless. We see them arrested for vagrancy, thrust into
prison, or made to labor for their bread. These are Christ's martyrs.

Poor tramp and vagrant! How you are "persecuted for righteousness'
sake!" Men despise you; the farmer drives you from his door; the social
economist racks his brain to devise a plan for your suppression;
state governments legislate against you; everywhere you are treated
as an outcast--and all because, taking the Bible for your guide,
you endeavor faithfully to conform to its teachings.



Ignorance.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it condemns
the use of reason and the acquisition of knowledge.

"Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat
of it" (Gen. ii, 17).

"She took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her
husband with her; and he did eat. And the eyes of them both were
opened" (iii, 6, 7).

"Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden" (23).

"He that believeth not shall be damned" (Mark xvi, 16).

For partaking of the fruit of the tree of knowledge, our parents
were banished from Paradise; for obeying the dictates of reason,
we are consigned to hell.

Education, physical, moral, and intellectual, is discouraged.

Bodily exercise profiteth little.--Paul.

Be not righteous overmuch.--Solomon.

Neither make thyself over wise.--Solomon.

Choice mottoes, the above, to hang up on the walls of the school-room!

"Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy" (Col. ii, 8).

"Knowledge puffeth up" (1 Cor. viii, 1).

"Thy wisdom and thy knowledge it hath perverted thee" (Isa. xlvii, 10).

"I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly; I
perceived that this also is vexation of spirit. For in much wisdom
is much grief; and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow"
(Ecles. i, 17, 18).

"If any man be ignorant let him be ignorant" (1 Cor. xiv, 38).

"The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God" (1 Cor. iii, 19).

"The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge" (Prov. i, 7).

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of ignorance. This fear has
kept the world in intellectual bondage. It is a flaming sword that
priestcraft has placed in every highway of learning to frighten back
the timid searchers after truth.

"The clergy, with a few honorable exceptions," says Buckle, "have
in all modern countries been the avowed enemies of the diffusion of
knowledge, the danger of which to their own profession they, by a
certain instinct, seem always to have perceived."

The Bible, and the religion emanating from it, are the fruitful
parents of ignorance and idiocy. They demand a sacrifice of the very
attribute which exalts the man of sense above the idiot; they bid him
pluck out the eyes of Reason, and in their place insert the sightless
balls of Faith.

"Reason should be destroyed in all Christians," says Luther
(L. Ungedr. Pred. Bru., p. 106).

"One destitute of reason," is a phrase employed by Webster to define
the word "fool."

"We are fools for Christ's sake," exclaims Paul (1 Cor. iv, 10).







