CHAPTER XVI.

WHEN DID JEHOSHAPHAT DIE?


At the end of Solomon's reign the Jewish nation was divided into two
kingdoms. Two tribes acknowledged the authority of Solomon's successor,
Rehoboam. This was called the kingdom of Judah, of which Jerusalem was
the capital. Ten tribes revolted and made Jeroboam king. This formed
the kingdom of Israel, of which Samaria was the capital. The following
is a brief summary of the reigns of the kings of the two kingdoms from
the partition of the empire to the conquest of Israel by the Assyrians:



Kingdom of Judah.

"And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah ... and he reigned
seventeen years" (1 Kings xiv, 21).

"And Rehoboam slept with his fathers ... and Abijam his son reigned
in his stead" (1 Kings xiv, 31). "Three years reigned he" (xv, 2).

"And Abijam slept with his fathers ... and Asa his son reigned in
his stead" (1 Kings xv, 8). "Forty and one years reigned he" (10).

"And Asa slept with his fathers ... and Jehoshaphat his son reigned
in his stead" (1 Kings xv, 24). "And he reigned twenty and five years
in Jerusalem" (xxii, 42).

"And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers ... and Jehoram his son
reigned in his stead" (1 Kings xxii, 50). "And he reigned eight years"
(2 Kings viii, 17).

"And Joram [Jehoram] slept with his fathers ... and Ahaziah reigned
in his stead" (2 Kings viii, 24). "And he reigned one year" (26).

"And he [Ahaziah] fled to Megiddo and died there" (2 Kings xi,
17). "And when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was
dead she arose and destroyed all the seed royal. But Jehosheba took
Joash the son of Ahaziah ... and he was with her [his nurse] hid in
the house of the Lord six years. And Athaliah did reign over the land"
(xi, 1-3).

"They slew Athaliah" (2 Kings xi, 20). "And they brought down the king
[Joash] from the house of the Lord.... And he sat on the throne of
the kings" (19). "Forty years reigned he in Jerusalem" (xii, 1).

"His servants smote him [Joash] and he died, ... and Amaziah his son
reigned in his stead" (2 Kings xii, 21)--"and reigned twenty and nine
years" (xiv, 2).

"They made a conspiracy against him [Amaziah] ... and slew him"
(2 Kings xiv, 19). "And all the people of Judah took Azariah ... and
made him king instead of his father, Amaziah" (21). "And he reigned
two and fifty years" (xv, 2).

"So Azariah slept with his fathers ... and Jotham his son reigned in
his stead" (2 Kings xv, 7). "And he reigned sixteen years" (33).

"And Jotham slept with his fathers ... and Ahaz his son reigned in
his stead" (2 Kings xv, 38)--"and reigned sixteen years" (xvi, 2).

"And Ahaz slept with his fathers ... and Hezekiah his son reigned in
his stead" (2 Kings xvi, 10) "In the sixth year of Hezekiah ... Samaria
was taken" (xviii, 10).

From the division of the empire, then, to the conquest of Israel by
the Assyrians, the reigns of Judah's kings were as follows:


                  Rehoboam,      seventeen     years,
                  Abijam,        three         years,
                  Asa,           forty-one     years,
                  Jehoshaphat,   twenty-five   years,
                  Joram,         eight         years,
                  Ahaziah,       one           years,
                  Athaliah,      six           years,
                  Joash,         forty         years,
                  Amaziah,       twenty-nine   years,
                  Azariah,       fifty-two     years,
                  Jotham,        sixteen       years,
                  Ahaz,          sixteen       years,
                  Hezekiah,      six           years.



Kingdom of Israel.

"They ... made him [Jeroboam] king over all Israel" (1 Kings xii,
20). "And the days which Jeroboam reigned were two and twenty years"
(xiv, 20).

"And he [Jeroboam] slept with his fathers and Nadab his son reigned
in his stead" (1 Kings xiv, 20)--"and reigned over Israel two years"
(xv, 25).

"And Baasha smote him [Nadab] ... and reigned in his stead" (1 Kings
xv, 27, 28)--"twenty and four years" (33).

"So Baasha slept with his fathers ... and Elah his son reigned in
his stead" (1 Kings xvi, 6)--"two years" (8).

"Zimri went in and smote him, and killed him [Elah] ... and reigned
in his stead" (1 Kings xvi, 10)--"seven days" (15).

"Wherefore all Israel made Omri ... king over Israel" (1 Kings xvi,
16)--"to reign over Israel twelve years" (23).

"So Omri slept with his fathers ... and Ahab his son reigned in his
stead" (1 Kings xvi, 28)--"twenty and two years" (29).

"So Ahab slept with his fathers and Ahaziah his son reigned in his
stead" (1 Kings xxii, 40)--"and reigned two years over Israel" (51).

"So he [Ahaziah] died ... and Jehoram [his brother] reigned in his
stead" (2 Kings i, 17)--"and reigned twelve years" (iii, 1).

"I have anointed thee [Jehu] king ... over Israel" (2 Kings ix,
6). "And Jehu ... smote Jehoram" (24). "And the time that Jehu reigned
over Israel in Samaria was twenty and eight years" (x, 36).

"And Jehu slept with his fathers ... and Jehoahaz his son reigned in
his stead" (2 Kings x, 35)--"and reigned seventeen years" (xiii, 1).

"And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers ... and Joash his son reigned
in his stead" (2 Kings xiii, 9)--"and reigned sixteen years" (10).

"And Joash slept with his fathers and Jeroboam sat upon his throne"
(2 Kings xiii, 13)--"and reigned forty and one years" (xiv, 23).

"And Jeroboam slept with his fathers ... and Zachariah his son reigned
in his stead" (2 Kings xiv, 29)--"six months" (xv, 8).

"And Shallum ... slew him [Zachariah] and reigned in his stead"
(2 Kings xv, 10)--"a full month" (13).

"Menahem ... slew him [Shallum] and reigned in his stead" (2 Kings xv,
14)--"and reigned ten years" (27).

"And Menahem slept with his fathers and Pekahiah his son reigned in
his stead" (2 Kings xv, 22)--"and reigned two years" (23).

"Pekah ... killed him [Pekahiah] and reigned in his room" (2 Kings xv,
25)--"and reigned twenty years" (7).

"And Hoshea ... slew him [Pekah] and reigned in his stead" (2 Kings
xv, 30)--"nine years" (xvii, 1). "In the ninth year of Hoshea the king
of Assyria took Samaria, and carried Israel away into Assyria" (6).

From the division of the empire to the conquest of Israel the reigns
of Israel's kings, omitting Zimri's brief reign of seven days and
calling the combined reigns of Zachariah and Shallum one year, as
computed by chronologists, were as follows:


             Jeroboam,                twenty-two     years,
             Nadab,                   two            years,
             Baasha,                  twenty-four    years,
             Elah,                    two            years,
             Omri,                    twelve         years,
             Ahab,                    twenty-two     years,
             Ahaziah,                 two            years,
             Jehoram,                 twelve         years,
             Jehu,                    twenty-eight   years,
             Jehoahaz,                seventeen      years,
             Joash,                   sixteen        years,
             Jeroboam II.,            forty-one      years,
             Zachariah and Shallum,   one            years,
             Menahem,                 ten            years,
             Pekahiah,                two            years,
             Pekah,                   twenty         years,
             Hoshea,                  nine           years.


The foregoing epitome of Jewish history, gleaned from 1 and 2 Kings,
is presented in order that the reader may the more readily understand
the following solutions (based upon statements that appear in these
books) to the question that forms the topic of this chapter--When
did Jehoshaphat die?

Jehoshaphat is represented as one of Judah's best and greatest
kings. He did "that which was right in the eyes of the Lord." "The
Lord was with Jehoshaphat." "And Jehoshaphat waxed great." "And he
had riches and honor in abundance." He died at the age of sixty,
after a reign of twenty-five years. Ahaziah, king of Israel, is
represented as a very wicked king. "He did evil in the sight of
the Lord." "For he served Baal, and worshiped him, and provoked to
anger the Lord." Elijah prophesied his early death, which came after
a brief reign of two years. The last chapter of the first book of
Kings chronicles the reign and death of Judah's king, Jehoshaphat;
the first chapter of the second book of Kings records the reign and
death of Israel's king, Ahaziah. Now when did Jehoshaphat die? Did
he die before or after Ahaziah died?



1.

"And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel reigned Asa
over Judah" (1 Kings xv, 9).

As Jeroboam reigned twenty-two years, he reigned two years after Asa
became king. From the commencement of Asa's reign, then, to the death
of Ahaziah, the reigns of Israel's kings were as follows: Jeroboam 2
years, Nadab 2 years, Baasha 24 years, Elah 2 years, Omri 12 years,
Ahab 22 years, and Ahaziah 2 years. 2 years + 2 years + 24 years +
2 years + 12 years + 22 years + 2 years = 66 years.

As Asa reigned forty-one years and Jehoshaphat reigned twenty-five
years, from the commencement of Asa's reign to the death of Jehoshaphat
was 41 years + 25 years = 66 years.

If from the commencement of Asa's reign to the death of Ahaziah was
sixty-six years, and from the commencement of Asa's reign to the
death of Jehoshaphat was sixty-six years, Jehoshaphat therefore died
in the same year that Ahaziah died.



2.

"Now in the eighteenth year of King Jeroboam the son of Nebat reigned
Abijam over Judah" (1 Kings xv, 1).

As Jeroboam reigned 22 years, he reigned four years after the beginning
of Abijam's reign. From the beginning of Abijam's reign, then, to the
death of Ahaziah, the reigns of Israel's kings were: Jeroboam 4 years,
Nadab 2 years, Baasha 24 years, Elah 2 years, Omri 12 years Ahab 22
years, and Ahaziah 2 years. 4 years + 2 years + 24 years + 2 years +
12 years + 22 years + 2 years = 68 years.

From the beginning of Abijam's reign to the death of Jehoshaphat
the reigns of Judah's kings were: Abijam 3 years, Asa 41 years,
Jehoshaphat 25 years. 3 years + 41 years + 25 years = 69 years.

If from the beginning of Abijam's reign to the death of Ahaziah was
sixty-eight years, and from the beginning of Abijam's reign to the
death of Jehoshaphat was sixty-nine years, Jehoshaphat therefore died
one year after Ahaziah died.



3.

"In the thirty and first year of Asa king of Judah began Omri to
reign over Israel" (1 Kings xvi, 23).

From the accession of Omri to the death of Ahaziah the reigns of
Israel's kings were: Omri 12 years, Ahab 22 years, and Ahaziah 2
years. 12 years + 22 years + 2 years = 36 years.

As Omri became king in the thirty-first year of Asa's reign,
Asa reigned ten years after Omri became king, and this added to
Jehoshaphat's reign of twenty-five years makes thirty-five years from
Omri to the death of Jehoshaphat.

If from the accession of Omri to the death of Ahaziah was thirty-six
years, and from the accession of Omri to the death of Jehoshaphat
was thirty-five years, Jehoshaphat therefore died one year before
Ahaziah died.



4.

"In the three and twentieth year of Joash the son of Ahaziah king
of Judah, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel"
(2 Kings xiii, 1).

From the death of Ahaziah king of Israel to the accession of Jehoahaz,
Jehoram reigned 12 years, and Jehu 28 years, a total of 40 years.

From the death of Jehoshaphat to the accession of Jehoahaz, Judah's
sovereigns reigned--Joram 8 years, Ahaziah 1 year, Athaliah 6 years,
Joash 23 years. 8 years + 1 year + 6 years + 23 years = 38 years.

If from the death of Ahaziah to the accession of Jehoahaz was forty
years, and from the death of Jehoshaphat to the accession of Jehoahaz
was thirty-eight years, Jehoshaphat therefore died two years after
Ahaziah died.



5.

"And Jehoram [of Israel] reigned in his [Ahaziah's] stead, in the
second year of Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat" (2 Kings i, 17).

If Ahaziah died and Jehoram of Israel became king in the second year
of Jehoram of Judah, Jehoshaphat therefore died two years before
Ahaziah died.



6.

"And Joram [Jehoram] king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah went out,
each in his chariot ... against Jehu" (2 Kings ix, 21), "And Jehu drew
a bow with his full strength, and smote Jehoram between his arms, and
the arrow went out at his heart" (24). "But when Ahaziah the king of
Judah saw this he fled by way of the garden house. And Jehu followed
after him, and said, Smite him also in the chariot. And they did so"
(27).

Jehoram, king of Israel, and Ahaziah, king of Judah, were thus slain
at the same time. Jehu succeeded Jehoram; Athaliah succeeded Ahaziah,
reigned six years, and was in turn succeeded by Joash. Jehu had thus
reigned six years over Israel when Joash became king of Judah. As
Jehoram reigned twelve years, from the death of Ahaziah [of Israel]
to the accession of Joash then, was eighteen years.

From the death of Jehoshaphat to the accession of Joash, Judah's
sovereigns reigned as follows: Joram 8 years, Ahaziah 1 year, Athaliah
6 years--a total of fifteen years.

If from the death of Ahaziah to the reign of Joash was eighteen years,
and from the death of Jehoshaphat to the reign of Joash was fifteen
years, Jehoshaphat therefore died three years after Ahaziah died.



7.

"In the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel reigned
Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah" (2 Kings xiv, 1).

From the death of Ahaziah to the accession of Amaziah the reigns
of Israel's kings were: Jehoram 12 years, Jehu 28 years, Jehoahaz
17 years, Joash 2 years. 12 years + 28 years + 17 years + 2 years =
59 years.

From the death of Jehoshaphat to the accession of Amaziah, Judah's
kings reigned--Joram 8 years, Ahaziah 1 year, Athaliah 6 years,
Joash 40 years. 8 years + 1 year + 6 years + 40 years = 55 years.

If from the death of Ahaziah to the accession of Amaziah was fifty-nine
years, and from the death of Jehoshaphat to the accession of Amaziah
was fifty-five years, Jehoshaphat therefore died four years after
Ahaziah died.



8.

"And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the
fourth year of Ahab king of Israel" (1 Kings xxii, 41).

If Ahab reigned twenty-two years and Jehoshaphat began to reign in the
fourth year of Ahab's reign, Jehoshaphat had reigned eighteen years
when Ahab died, and twenty years when Ahaziah died. As Jehoshaphat
reigned twenty-five years, he therefore died five years after
Ahaziah died.



9.

"Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the
seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned two years
over Israel" (1 Kings, xxii, 51).

If Ahaziah began to reign in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat and
reigned two years before he died, he died in the nineteenth year
of Jehoshaphat's reign. As Jehoshaphat reigned twenty-five years,
he therefore died six years after Ahaziah died.



10.

"Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria
in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah" (2 Kings iii, 1).

If Ahaziah died and Jehoram became king in the eighteenth year of
Jehoshaphat's reign, Jehoshaphat therefore died seven years after
Ahaziah died.



11.

"In the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel
began Jotham the son of Uzziah [Azariah] king of Judah to reign"
(2 Kings xv, 32).

From the death of Ahaziah to the beginning of Jotham's reign the
following were the reigns of Israel's kings: Jehoram 12 years, Jehu
28 years, Jehoahaz 17 years, Joash 16 years, Jeroboam 41 years,
Zachariah and Shallum 1 year, Menahem 10 years, Pekahiah 2 years,
Pekah 2 years. 12 years + 28 years + 17 years + 16 years + 41 years +
1 year + 10 years + 2 years + 2 years = 129 years.

From the death of Jehoshaphat to the beginning of Jotham's reign the
following were the reigns of Judah's kings: Joram 8 years, Ahaziah 1
year, Athaliah 6 years, Joash 40 years, Amaziah 29 years, Azariah 52
years. 8 years + 1 year + 6 years + 40 years + 29 years + 52 years =
136 years.

If from the death of Ahaziah to the beginning of Jotham's reign was
one hundred and twenty-nine years, and from the death of Jehoshaphat to
the beginning of Jotham's reign was one hundred and thirty-six years,
Jehoshaphat therefore died seven years before Ahaziah died.



12.

"In the thirty and eighth year of Azariah king of Judah did Zachariah
the son of Jeroboam reign over Israel" (2 Kings xv, 8).

From the death of Ahaziah to the accession of Zachariah the reigns
of Israel's kings were: Jehoram 12 years, Jehu 28 years, Jehoahaz
17 years, Joash 16 years, Jeroboam 41 years. 12 years + 28 years +
17 years + 16 years + 41 years = 114 years.

From the death of Jehoshaphat to the accession of Zachariah the reigns
of Judah's kings were: Joram 8 years, Ahaziah 1 year, Athaliah 6 years,
Joash 40 years, Amaziah 29 years, Azariah 38 years. 8 years + 1 year +
6 years + 40 years + 29 years + 38 years = 122 years.

If from the death of Ahaziah to the accession of Zachariah was one
hundred and fourteen years, and from the death of Jehoshaphat to
the accession of Zachariah was one hundred and twenty-two years,
Jehoshaphat therefore died eight years before Ahaziah died.



13.

"In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekahiah the son of
Menahem began to reign over Israel" (2 Kings xv, 23).

From the death of Ahaziah to the accession of Pekahiah, Israel's
kings reigned as follows: Jehoram 12 years, Jehu 28 years, Jehoahaz
17 years, Joash 16 years, Jeroboam 41 years, Zachariah and Shallum 1
year, Menahem 10 years. 12 years + 28 years + 17 years + 16 years +
41 years + 1 year + 10 years = 125 years.

From the death of Jehoshaphat to the accession of Pekahiah, Judah's
kings reigned as follows: Joram 8 years, Ahaziah 1 year, Athaliah 6
years, Joash 40 years, Amaziah 29 years, Azariah 50 years. 8 years +
1 year + 6 years + 40 years + 29 years + 50 years = 134 years.

If from the death of Ahaziah to the accession of Pekahiah was one
hundred and twenty-five years, and from the death of Jehoshaphat
to the accession of Pekahiah was one hundred and thirty-four years,
Jehoshaphat therefore died nine years before Ahaziah died.



14.

"In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah began Hoshea the son of
Elah to reign in Samaria over Israel" (2 Kings xvii, 1).

From the death of Ahaziah to the accession of Hoshea the reigns of
Israel's kings were: Jehoram 12 years, Jehu 28 years, Jehoahaz 17
years, Joash 16 years, Jeroboam 41 years, Zachariah and Shallum 1
year, Menahem 10 years, Pekahiah 2 years, Pekah 20 years. 12 years
+ 28 years + 17 years + 16 years + 41 years + 1 year + 10 years +
2 years + 20 years = 147 years.

From the death of Jehoshaphat to the accession of Hoshea the reigns of
Judah's kings were: Joram 8 years, Ahaziah 1 year, Athaliah 6 years,
Joash 40 years, Amaziah 29 years, Azariah 52 years, Jotham 16 years,
Ahaz 12 years. 8 years + 1 year + 6 years + 40 years + 29 years +
52 years + 16 years + 12 years = 164 years.

If from the death of Ahaziah to the accession of Hoshea was one
hundred and forty-seven years, and from the death of Jehoshaphat
to the accession of Hoshea was one hundred and sixty-four years,
Jehoshaphat therefore died seventeen years before Ahaziah died.



15.

"And it came to pass in the fourth year of King Hezekiah, which
was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that
Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria and besieged it"
(2 Kings xviii, 9).

From the death of Ahaziah to the commencement of the siege of Samaria
the reigns of Israel's kings were: Jehoram 12 years, Jehu 28 years,
Jehoahaz 17 years, Joash 16 years, Jeroboam 41 years, Zachariah and
Shallum 1 year, Menahem 10 years, Pekahiah 2 years, Pekah 20 years,
Hoshea 7 years. 12 years + 28 years + 17 years + 16 years + 41 years +
1 year + 10 years + 2 years + 20 years + 7 years = 154 years.

From the death of Jehoshaphat to the siege of Samaria the reigns of
Judah's kings were: Joram 8 years, Ahaziah 1 year, Athaliah 6 years,
Joash 40 years, Amaziah 29 years, Azariah 52 years, Jotham 16 years,
Ahaz 16 years, Hezekiah 4 years. 8 years + 1 year + 6 years + 40 years
+ 29 years + 52 years + 16 years + 16 years + 4 years = 172 years.

If from the death of Ahaziah to the siege of Samaria was one hundred
and fifty-four years, and from the death of Jehoshaphat to the siege
of Samaria was one hundred and seventy-two years, Jehoshaphat therefore
died eighteen years before Ahaziah died.



16.

"In the twenty and seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel began
Azariah son of Amaziah king of Judah to reign" (2 Kings xv, 1).

From the death of Ahaziah to the accession of Azariah the reigns
of Israel's kings were: Jehoram 12 years, Jehu 28 years, Jehoahaz
17 years, Joash 16 years, Jeroboam 27 years. 12 years + 28 years +
17 years + 16 years + 27 years = 100 years.

From the death of Jehoshaphat to the accession of Azariah the reigns of
Judah's kings were: Joram 8 years, Ahaziah 1 year, Athaliah 6 years,
Joash 40 years, Amaziah 29 years. 8 years + 1 year + 6 years + 40
years + 29 years = 84 years.

If from the death of Ahaziah to the accession of Azariah was one
hundred years, and from the death of Jehoshaphat to the accession
of Azariah was eighty-four years, Jehoshaphat therefore died sixteen
years after Ahaziah died.



Recapitulation.

When did Jehoshaphat's death occur? Did it occur before or after
Ahaziah's death occurred? The following is a recapitulation of the
various answers to this question which the preceding solutions have
disclosed:


 1.  The same year.
 2.  One year after.
 3.  One year before.
 4.  Two years after.
 5.  Two years before.
 6.  Three years after.
 7.  Four years after.
 8.  Five years after.
 9.  Six years after.
10.  Seven years after.
11.  Seven years before.
12.  Eight years before.
13.  Nine years before.
14.  Seventeen years before.
15.  Eighteen years before.
16.  Sixteen years after.


Here are sixteen different answers to a simple historical question. But
one of them can possibly be correct; fifteen of them must necessarily
be incorrect. And yet I challenge the theologian to demonstrate the
incorrectness of one of them without at the same time demonstrating the
fallibility of the Bible and its unreliability as a historical record.



Notes and Explanations.

The history of Judah's and of Israel's sovereigns is recorded in Kings
and repeated in Chronicles. Had I used both Kings and Chronicles
in the preparation of this chapter, the number of various answers
would have been increased. Some Christian scholars, however, admit
that Chronicles is not entirely free from errors, while Kings, on
the other hand, is denominated a "marvel of accuracy." To avoid any
objections that might be raised were Chronicles used--to assail only
that which is deemed unassailable--I have confined myself to Kings.

To prevent confusion in regard to names, the reader should remember
that Israel had two kings named Jeroboam, and that Israel and Judah
each had kings named Ahaziah, Jehoram, and Jehoash. In Israel Jehoram
succeeded Ahaziah; in Judah, Ahaziah succeeded Jehoram. The contracted
form of Jehoram is Joram, and of Jehoash, Joash. Both forms are
used. Azariah is also called Uzziah.

In computing time, ordinal numbers are reckoned the same as cardinal
numbers. It may be urged that the phrase, "in the eighteenth year,"
does not denote the full period of eighteen completed years. In
justification of the method pursued, I may say that it is not only
the method generally followed by chronologists, but it is the method
authorized by the Bible. See 2 Kings xvii, 1; 2 Kings xvii, 6. Also
1 Kings xv, 9, 10; 2 Chron. xvi, 13. Its adoption simplifies the form
without increasing the number of solutions.

To reconcile other discrepancies, some Bible chronologists have assumed
an interregnum of eleven years between the reigns of Jeroboam II. and
Zachariah, and another of nine years between Pekah and Hosea. The
language of the Bible utterly precludes these assumptions.

"And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, even with the kings of Israel,
and Zachariah his son reigned in his stead" (2 Kings xiv, 29).

"And Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the son
of Remaliah, and smote him, and slew him, and reigned in his stead"
(2 Kings xv, 30).

That these interregnums did not occur, nor indeed any interregnums
between the reigns of Israel's kings, is attested by Josephus, who by
Christians is esteemed an authority second only to the writers of the
Scriptures. The ninth book of his "Antiquities" bears the following
title: "Containing the interval of one hundred and fifty-seven years
from the death of Ahab to the captivity of the ten tribes." This
forbids the idea of any interregnum.

But if it could be shown that these or other interregnums really did
occur, the fact would increase rather than diminish the difficulties
connected with the solution of this question.

We search the writings of Bible commentators in vain for an explanation
or attempted reconciliation of many of the conflicting statements to
be found in the passages that I have quoted. These exegetes have either
been ignorant of their existence, or have purposely ignored them. Some
of the more noticeable ones they have attempted to reconcile; but the
explanations offered are of such a character as to make it seemingly
impossible for an honest scholar to advance them, or an intelligent
reader to accept them.

These pretended reconciliations have been abridged, and, in the
shape of marginal notes, transferred to the popular editions of the
Bible. Where different and conflicting dates are assigned for the
commencement of a king's reign, opposite the first will be found
such explanatory notes as "prorex," "viceroy," "in consort," or "in
partnership with his father;" and opposite the last, "began to reign
alone;" and all this without a word or hint, either in the Bible or
elsewhere, to authorize it.

The demonstration of a single error in the Bible destroys the dogmas of
its divinity and infallibility. Yet notwithstanding this single error,
or even twenty errors, it might still be valuable as a historical
record. But when it can be demonstrated that it abounds with glaring
contradictions, that its every chapter teems with flagrant errors,
it is utterly unworthy of credit, and must be rejected even as a
human record of events.







