CHAPTER XI.

PAULINE EPISTLES.


Fourteen books--Romans, First and Second Corinthians, Galatians,
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, First and Second Thessalonians,
First and Second Timothy, Titus, Philemon, and Hebrews--are ascribed,
some correctly, some doubtfully, and others falsely, to Paul. They
were all written, it is claimed, between 52 and 65 A.D.



Genuine Epistles.

The genuine Epistles of Paul, those whose authenticity is conceded
by nearly all critics, are Romans, First and Second Corinthians, and
Galatians. The term "genuine" is applied to the books as originally
written, and not to the text as it now exists. It is probable that they
have undergone various changes since they left Paul's hand. The last
two chapters of Romans are believed to be interpolations. The fifteenth
consists chiefly of irrelevant matter which detracts from the symmetry
of the work. The sixteenth is mostly filled with salutations. In these
several women are given a prominence in church affairs that is wholly
at variance with Paul's attitude toward woman. The subscription to
the First Epistle to the Corinthians states that it "was written from
Philippi." The 19th verse of the last chapter shows that Paul was in
Asia instead of Europe, while the 8th verse expressly declares that
he was at Ephesus. The Second Epistle to Corinthians, it is declared,
"was written from Philippi" also. That this is doubtful is admitted
even by the most orthodox authorities. The subscription to Galatians
reads as follows: "Unto the Galatians, written from Rome." This book
was written between 52 and 55 A.D.; Paul did not go to Rome until 61
A.D. This epistle was written from Ephesus.

While critics are nearly unanimous in acknowledging the genuineness
of these books, a few, including Professor Thudichum of Germany,
Prof. Edwin Johnson of England, and W. H. Burr of this country,
pronounce them forgeries, and contend that the Paul of the New
Testament is a myth.



Doubtful Epistles.

The doubtful Epistles, those whose authenticity is accepted by some
critics and rejected by others, are Philippians, First Thessalonians,
and Philemon. Sixty years ago to this list of doubtful books critics
would have added three others--Ephesians, Colossians, and Second
Thessalonians; but the critical labors of the Tubingen school and
others have relegated these to the already burdened shelf of spurious
Bible books.

In regard to Philippians, Ferdinand Baur, for thirty years head of
the Tubingen school and unquestionably the greatest of Bible critics,
says: "The Epistles to the Colossians and to the Philippians ... are
spurious, and were written by the Catholic school near the end of
the second century, to heal the strife between the Jew and Gentile
factions" (Paul the Apostle of Jesus Christ).

Baur also rejects First Thessalonians. He contends that this, as well
as the Second Epistle, contains teachings quite at variance with the
teachings of Paul. The German critic Schrader is confident that Paul
did not write First Thessalonians.

Respecting Philemon, Dr. Hitchcock says: "This brief Epistle was
written at the same time with those to the Colossians and Ephesians,
and was sent along with them by Tychicus and Onesimus." As Colossians
and Ephesians have both been declared spurious by the ablest Christian
scholars, Philemon, to say the least, is placed in bad company. This
Epistle was written in behalf of one Onesimus, a zealous Christian,
who is also mentioned in Colossians. There was an Onesimus, a zealous
church worker, living in 175 A.D.

Holland's critics, Dr. Kuenen, Dr. Oort, and Dr. Hooykaas, are disposed
to accept Philippians, First Thessalonians, and Philemon, but admit
that there are grave doubts concerning the authenticity of each.



Spurious Epistles.

The spurious Epistles, those whose authenticity is generally denied
by the critics, are Ephesians, Colossians, Second Thessalonians,
First and Second Timothy, Titus, and Hebrews.

Ewald and De Wette both admit that Ephesians was not written by
St. Paul. De Wette thinks it was compiled from Colossians. Davidson and
Mayerhoff believe that neither Ephesians nor Colossians is genuine. I
have quoted Baur's rejection of Colossians. The Encyclopedia Britannica
says: "It is undeniable that the Epistle to the Colossians and the
so-called Epistle to the Ephesians differ considerably in language
and thought from other Pauline Epistles and that their relation to
one another demands explanation."

First and Second Thessalonians are pronounced the oldest of Paul's
writings, both belonging, it is claimed, to 52 A.D. The author of the
Second Epistle is very desirous of having his writing accepted as
a genuine Epistle of Paul. Several times he declares himself to be
Paul. He warns them not to be deceived "by letter as from us" (ii,
2), and concludes with "the salutation of Paul with mine own hand,
which is the token in every Epistle." This Epistle affirms the first
to be a forgery. The first was probably written at an early date, and,
whether genuine or spurious, was accepted as a Pauline Epistle. In it
the early advent of Christ--during Paul's lifetime--is predicted. "We,
which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not
prevent them which are asleep" (iv, 15). "Then we which are alive
and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds"
(17). Generations passed, Christ did not come, and the church
was losing faith in Paul and Christianity. To restore confidence,
another letter from Paul to the Thessalonians was "found," and this
repudiates the first. He exhorts them not to be troubled, "neither
by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of
Christ is at hand" (ii, 2). It teaches the second coming of Christ,
but carefully leaves the time indefinite. Whatever may be said of
the First Epistle, the Second is clearly a forgery.

With respect to these Epistles, the Britannica says: "The predominant
opinion of modern criticism at present is that the genuineness of the
First Epistle is certain, while that of the Second must be given up."

First and Second Timothy and Titus, known as the Pastoral Epistles, and
Hebrews were not written by Paul. The Pastoral Epistles are forgeries,
while Hebrews is an anonymous work. The contents of these books betray
a later date. Their teachings are not the teachings of Paul. Their
language is utterly unlike that of the genuine Epistles. They contain
two hundred words never used by Paul. Marcion, the most noted Pauline
Christian of the second century, who made a collection of Paul's
Epistles, excluded them. Tatian and Basilides also rejected them.

Against the authenticity of the Pastoral Epistles may be cited
nearly every modern critic, including the four great names of Baur,
Eichorn, De Wette, and Davidson. Baur says they were written in the
second century.

While thirteen of the so-called Pauline Epistles claim to have
been written by Paul, Hebrews alone is silent regarding its
authorship. Tertullian classed it with the apocryphal books, but
thought it might have been written by Barnabas. In the Clermont codex
it is called the Epistle of Barnabas. According to Origen, some ascribe
it to Luke, others to Clement of Rome. Origen himself says: "Who it was
that really wrote the Epistle, God only knows." Dr. Westcott admits
that there is no evidence that Paul wrote it. Grotius attributes it
to Luke, Luther to Apollos. Luther says: "That the Epistle to the
Hebrews is not by St. Paul, nor, indeed, by any apostle, is shown by
chapter ii, 3" (Preface to Luther's N. T.).

Concerning the seven books that we have been considering, Dr. Hooykaas
says:

"Fourteen Epistles are said to be Paul's; but we must at once strike
off one, namely, that to the Hebrews, which does not bear his name
at all.... The two letters to Timothy and the letter to Titus were
certainly composed long after the death of Paul.... It is more than
probable that the letters to the Ephesians and Colossians are also
unauthentic, and the same suspicion rests, perhaps, on the first,
but certainly on the second of the Epistles to the Thessalonians"
(Bible for Learners, Vol. III., p. 23).

The Rev. John W. Chadwick, in his "Bible of To-day," says that the
first four Epistles "are his [Paul's] with absolute certainty." Four
others, Philippians, Colossians, First Thessalonians, and Philemon,
he is disposed to accept, but admits that their authenticity is
doubtful. The remaining books he pronounces spurious.

Persons in this age have little conception of the prevalence
of literary forgeries in the early centuries of the church. Now,
when books are printed in editions of 1,000 or more, such forgeries
are nearly impossible and consequently rare. When books existed in
manuscript only, they were neither difficult nor uncommon. Books
and letters purporting to have been written by Paul, Peter, John,
and other Apostles were readily "discovered" when wanted. Of these
Apostolic forgeries Prof. John Tyndall says: "When arguments or proofs
were needed, whether on the side of the Jewish Christians or of the
Gentile Christians, a document was discovered which met the case, and
on which the name of an Apostle or of some authoritative contemporary
of the Apostles was boldly inscribed. The end being held to justify
the means, there was no lack of manufactured testimony."



Conclusion.

Of these fourteen Epistles ascribed to Paul, four, then, Romans,
First and Second Corinthians, and Galatians, are pronounced genuine;
three, Philippians, First Thessalonians, and Philemon, are of doubtful
authenticity; while seven, Ephesians, Colossians, Second Thessalonians,
First and Second Timothy, Titus, and Hebrews, are spurious.

The genuine writings of Paul are probably the oldest Christian writings
extant. Admitting the authenticity of these four books, of course,
is not admitting the authenticity of Christianity. Paul was not a
witness of the alleged events upon which historical Christianity
rests. He was not a convert to Christianity until many years after
Christ's death. He did not see Christ (save in a vision); he did not
listen to his teachings; he did not learn from his disciples. "The
gospel which was preached of me is not after man, for I neither
received it of man, neither was I taught it" (Gal. i, 11, 12). Paul
accepted only to a small extent the religion of Christ's disciples. He
professed to derive his knowledge from supernatural sources--from
trances and visions. Regarding the value of such testimony, the
author of "Supernatural Religion" says: "No one can deny, and medical
and psychological annals prove, that many men have been subject to
visions and hallucinations which have never been seriously attributed
to supernatural causes. There is not one single valid reason removing
the ecstatic visions and trances of the Apostle Paul from this class."



We have now reviewed the books of the Bible and presented some of the
historical and internal evidences bearing upon the question of their
authenticity. The authenticity of the books of the New Testament,
we have seen, is but little better attested than that of the Old. The
authors of twenty books--Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Acts, Ephesians,
Colossians, Second Thessalonians, First and Second Timothy, Titus,
Hebrews, James, First and Second Peter, First, Second, and Third John,
Jude, and Revelation--are unknown. Three books--Philippians, First
Thessalonians, and Philemon--are of questionable authenticity. Four
books only--Romans, First and Second Corinthians, and Galatians--are
generally admitted to be authentic.

Of the sixty-six books of the Bible at least fifty are anonymous
works or forgeries. To teach that these books are divine, and to
accept them as such, denotes a degree of depravity on the one hand,
and an amount of credulity on the other, that are not creditable to
a moral and enlightened people.







