CHAPTER XXX.

ADULTERY--OBSCENITY.


Adultery.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it sanctions
adultery and prostitution.

Adultery is made prominent by the recital of the numerous adulteries
of Abraham, Lot, Jacob, Judah, Samson, David, and other Bible saints,
and sanctified by the approved adulteries of Abraham and Jacob.

Both Abraham and Isaac were willing to sell the virtue of their wives
to save themselves from harm.

Two instances are recorded of fathers having offered their own
daughters to gratify the lust of a sensual mob, and these abominable
acts are represented as especially meritorious. Read the nineteenth
chapter of Genesis and the nineteenth chapter of Judges; dwell upon
the eighth verse of the former and the twenty-fourth verse of the
latter; and then, if you can indorse the spirit of these narratives,
you are unfit to be the parent of a daughter.

The Mosaic law authorizes a father to sell his daughter for a concubine
or mistress (euphemistically translated "maid servant"). God's
instructions respecting the thirty-two thousand captive Midianite
maidens impliedly sanction concubinage and prostitution.

These Bible teachings have been the cause of countless outrages
against the chastity of woman. John Wesley says:

"Almost all the soldiers in the Christian world ... have claimed,
more especially in time of war, another kind of liberty: that of
borrowing the wives and daughters of the men that fell into their
hands" (Wesley's Miscellaneous Works, Vol. III., p. 117).

Luther, drawing his morality from the Bible, gave concubinage his
indorsement:

"There is nothing unusual in princes keeping concubines; and although
the lower orders may not perceive the excuses of the thing, the more
intelligent know how to make allowance" (Consilium).

Luther might with equal truthfulness have said, "There is nothing
unusual in priests and preachers keeping concubines," and he might have
helped to confirm it by a few leaves from his own private history. In a
letter to his confidential friend, Spalatin, he confessed to numerous
adulteries.

God instructs his prophet Hosea to marry a prostitute. He subsequently
commands him to love and hire an adulteress (Hosea i, 2, 3; iii, 1, 2).

Christ forgave the woman taken in adultery, while his favorite female
companion was a reformed (?) prostitute. Referring to his female
ancestors, Dr. Alexander Walker, a Christian, says:

"It is remarkable that in the genealogy of Christ only four women
have been named: Tamar, who seduced the father of her late husband;
Rachab, a common prostitute; Ruth, who, instead of marrying one of her
cousins, went to bed with another of them, and Bathsheba, an adultress,
who espoused David, the murderer of her husband" (Woman, p. 330).

The early Christians were notorious for their adulteries. Dr. Cave, in
his "Primitive Christianity" (Part II., ch. v), says it was commonly
charged "that the Christians knew one another by certain privy marks
and signs, and were wont to be in love almost before they knew one
another; that they exercised lust and filthiness under a pretense
of religion, promiscuously calling themselves brothers and sisters,
that by the help of so sacred a name their common adulteries might
become incestuous."

Of the Carpocratians, who Dr. Lardner says "are not accused of
rejecting any part of the New Testament," Dr. Cave says: "Both men
and women used to meet at supper (which was called their love-feast),
when after they had loaded themselves with a plentiful meal, to prevent
all shame, if they had any remaining, they put out the lights, and
then promiscuously mixed in filthiness with one another" (Ibid).

In his Epistle to the Corinthians, Paul says: "It is reported commonly
that there is fornication among you, and such fornication as is not
so much as named among the gentiles" (1 Cor. v, 1).

It is an indisputable fact that the most notorious adulterers are
those whose profession makes them most familiar with the teachings
of the Bible, and compels them to accept its teachings as divine.



Obscenity.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide, and protest against
its being placed in the hands of the young, because its pages are
defiled with obscenity.

Aside from thousands of coarse and vulgar expressions contained in it,
there are at least a hundred passages so obscene that their appearance
in any other book would exclude that book from the mails and send
its publisher to prison. The United States courts have declared
parts of the Bible to be obscene. There are entire chapters, such as
the thirty-eighth chapter of Genesis, that reek with obscenity from
beginning to end.

In proof of the charge of obscenity, I refer you to the following:
Isaiah xxxvi, 12; Ezek. iv, 12-15; Gen. xix, 30-36; xxx, 1-16; xxxviii;
2 Kings xviii, 27; Lev. xv, 16-33; Job xl, 16, 17; 1 Kings xiv, 10;
Isaiah iii, 17.

That portions of the Bible are obscene and unfit to be read, is
admitted even by Christians. Noah Webster, a Protestant, edited an
expurgated edition of the Bible. In vindication of his work, he says:

"Many passages are expressed in language which decency forbids to be
repeated in families and in the pulpit."

The Rev. Dr. Embree, Methodist, of Kansas, in a speech before the
Topeka School Board advocating the reading of Bible selections in
the public schools of that city, recently said:

"I would not want the Bible read indiscriminately. I think some of
it unfit to be read by any one."

The Rev. Father Maguire, Catholic, in his debate with the
Rev. Mr. Greg, at Dublin, gave utterance to the following:

"I beg of you not to continue such a practice; it is disreputable. I
will ask Mr. Greg a question (and I beg of you, my brethren of the
Protestant church, to bear this in mind), I will ask him if he dare
to take up the Bible and read from the book of Genesis the fact of
Onan--I ask him will he read that? Will he read the fact relative to
Lot and his two daughters? Will he read these and many other passages
which I could point out to him in the Holy Bible, which I would not
take one thousand guineas, nay, all the money in the world, and read
them here to-day?"

Richard Lalor Shiel, M. P., and Privy Counselor to the Queen,
thus wrote:

"Part of the Holy Writings consist of history, and the narration of
facts of a kind that cannot be mentioned in the presence of a virtuous
woman without exciting horror. Shall a woman be permitted to read in
her chamber what she would tremble to hear at her domestic board? Shall
she con over and revolve what she would rather die than utter?"

And if unfit for the perusal of a matured woman, shall innocent
childhood be polluted by these vile, indecent tales?







