CHAPTER XXXIII.

TYRANNY--INTOLERANCE.


Tyranny.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it enjoins
submission to tyrants.

"Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man, ... whether it be to
the king as supreme; or unto governors" (1 Pet. ii, 13).

"Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no
power but of God. Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth
the ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to themselves
damnation" (Rom. xiii, 1, 2).

And these sentiments were uttered when a Nero sat upon the throne--when
Palestine was being crushed beneath the iron heel of despotism--when
brave and patriotic men were struggling for freedom.

The Bible has ever been the bulwark of tyranny. When the oppressed
millions of France were endeavoring to throw off their yoke--when
the Washingtons, the Franklins, the Paines, and the Jeffersons were
contending for American liberty--craven priests stood up in the pulpit,
opened this book, and gravely read: "The powers that be are ordained
of God; they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation."

In the American Revolution every Tory was a Christian, and nearly
every orthodox Christian was a Tory. Writing in 1777, John Wesley says:

"I have just received two letters from New York.... They inform me
that all the Methodists there were firm for the government, and on
that account persecuted by the rebels" (Wesley's Miscellaneous Works,
Vol. III., page 410).

Referring to our Revolutionary fathers, Robert Dale Owen says:

"I know not what the private opinions of those sturdy patriots were,
who, in the old Philadelphia State House, appended their signatures
to the immortal document. But this I do know, that when they did so,
it was in defiance of the Bible; it was in direct violation of the
law of the New Testament.

"If a Being who cannot lie penned the Bible, then George Washington
and every soldier who drew sword in the Republic's armies for liberty
expiate, at this moment, in hell-fire, the punishment of their ungodly
strife! There, too, John Hancock and every patriot whose name stands
to America's Title Deed, have taken their places with the devil and
his angels! All resisted the power; all, unless God lie, have received
to themselves damnation" (Bacheler-Owen Debate, Vol. II., page 230).

From the first century to the twentieth--from Paul to Leo--these Bible
teachings have dominated the Christian world. Of the early Christian
Fathers, Lecky writes:

"The teaching of the early Fathers on the subject is perfectly
unanimous and unequivocal. Without a single exception, all who touched
upon the subject pronounced active resistance to the established
authorities to be under all circumstances sinful" (Rationalism in
Europe, Vol. II., page 136).

Jeremy Taylor, one of the greatest of modern divines, speaking not
for himself alone, but for all Christians, says:

"The matter of Scripture being so plain that it needs no
interpretation, the practice and doctrine of the church, which is
usually the best commentary, is now but of little use in a case so
plain; yet this also is as plain in itself, and without any variety,
dissent, or interruption universally agreed upon, universally practiced
and taught, that, let the powers set over us be what they will,
we must suffer it and never right ourselves" (Ductor Dubitantium,
Book III., chapter iii).

This has been the chief cause of Christian triumph and Christian
supremacy. It has secured for the church the adherence and support
of every tyrant in Christendom. Thomas Jefferson truly says:

"In every country and in every age the priest has been hostile to
liberty; he is always in alliance with the despot, abetting his abuses
in return for protection to his own."

Writing of his country and his country's church, Macaulay says:

"The Church of England continued to be for more than 150 years the
servile handmaid of monarchy, the steady enemy of public liberty. The
divine right of kings and the duty of passively obeying all their
commands were her favorite tenets. She held these tenets firmly through
times of oppression, persecution, and licentiousness, while law was
trampled down, while judgment was perverted, while the people were
eaten as though they were bread" (Essays, Vol. I., page 60).



Intolerance.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because its teachings
have filled the world with intolerance and persecution.

"If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter,
or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, which is as thine own soul,
entice thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which
thou hast not known, thou nor thy fathers: namely, of the gods of the
people which are round about you [that is, accept another religion]
... thou shalt not consent unto him; neither shall thine eye pity him;
neither shalt thou spare, neither shalt thou conceal him; but thou
shalt surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him to put him
to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people" (Deut. xiii, 6-9).

Kill your friend, kill your brother, kill your wife, kill your child,
for accepting another religious belief!

Did a merciful God inspire this prayer?

"Let his days be few; and let another take his office. Let his
children be fatherless, and his wife a widow. Let his children be
continually vagabonds, and beg; let them seek their bread also out of
their desolate places. Let the extortioner catch all that he hath; and
let the strangers spoil his labor. Let there be none to extend mercy
unto him; neither let there be any to favor his fatherless children"
(Ps. cix, 8-12).

"In the literature of the world there is nothing more heartless,
more infamous, than the 109th Psalm."--Ingersoll.

Let me quote from the New Testament:

"He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believeth not shall be damned" (Mark xvi, 16).

"Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire" (Matt. xxv, 41).

"These shall go away into everlasting punishment" (Matt. xxv, 46).

"Cast into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched" (Mark
ix, 45).

These passages ought to consign to everlasting abhorrence the being
who uttered them, the book containing them, and the church indorsing
them. This dogma of endless punishment is the dogma of fiends,
the most infamous dogma that human lips have ever breathed! What
needless terror it has inspired! What misery it has caused! Think
of the millions of innocent children whose young lives it has filled
with gloom! This horrible nightmare of hell has strewn the pathway of
childhood with thorns where flowers should have been made to bloom;
it has filled the minds of children with fear and made them wretched
when their hearts should have been filled with joy; it has robbed
home of wife and mother, it has driven thousands of pure and loving
women to madness and despair. I had rather trace my descent to the
tiger or hyena than to the creation of a God who dooms his creatures
to eternal pain; and the time will come when the remembrance of the
theologians who have taught this hideous lie will provoke more shame
and pity than the ancestral apes do now.

"If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive
him not into your house" (2 John i, 10).

Amid the storms of a winter night, a traveler, perishing with cold
and hunger, knocks at your door and begs for food and shelter. You
interrogate him as to his religious belief, and finding that he is
not a member of your church you forbid him to enter. In the morning
when you discover his lifeless body by the roadside, how impressed
you will be with the transcendent beauty of Bible morals!

Paul preached a sermon on charity, and then wrote to the Galatians
as follows:

"If any man preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have
received, let him be accursed" (Gal. i, 9).

From the same pen, too, came this sneaking, infamous hint:

"I would they were even cut off which trouble you" (Gal. v, 12).

What ghastly fruits these teachings have produced! We see earth
covered with the yellow bones of murdered heretics and scholars; we
see the persecutions and butcheries of Constantine, of Theodosius,
of Clovis, of Justinian, and of Charlemagne; we see the Crusades,
in which nearly twenty millions perish; we see the followers
of Godfrey in Jerusalem--see the indiscriminate massacre of men,
women, and children--see the mosques piled seven deep with murdered
Saracens--the Jews burnt in their synagogues; we see Coeur de Lion
slaughter in cold blood thousands of captive Saracens; we see the
Franks in Constantinople, plundering, ravishing, murdering; we see
the Moors expelled from Spain; we see the murder of the Huguenots
and Waldenses--the slaughter of German peasants--the desolation
of Ireland--Holland covered with blood; we witness Smithfield and
Bartholomew; we see the Inquisition with its countless instruments
of fiendish cruelty; we see the Auto-da-fé, where heretics, clad in
mockery, are led to torture and to death; we see men stretched upon
the rack, disjointed, and torn limb from limb; we see them flayed
alive--their bleeding bodies seared with red-hot irons; we see them
covered with pitch and oil and set on fire; we see them hurled headlong
from towers to the stony streets below; we see them buried alive; we
see them hanged and quartered; we see their eyes bored out with heated
augers--their tongues torn out--their bones broken with hammers--their
bodies pierced with a thousand needles; we see aged women tied to the
heels of fiery steeds--see their mangled and bleeding bodies dragged
with lightning speed over the frozen earth; we see new-born babes
flung into the flames to perish with their mothers, or with their
mothers sewed in sacks and sunk into the sea; in short, on every hand,
as a result of this book's teachings, we see hate, torture, death!

But, thanks to the brave Infidels who have gone before, you, Bible
moralists, can use these instruments of cruelty to silence heretics
to Christianity no more.


   "Where are the hands which once for this foul creed,
    'Mid flame and torture, made an Atheist bleed?
    Gone--like the powers your fathers used so well
    To send souls heavenward through the flames of hell.
    And you, poor palsied creatures! you, ere long,
    With them thrice cursed shall swell Gehenna's throng.
    Your God is dead; your heaven a hope bewrayed;
    Your hell a by-word, and your creed a trade;
    Your vengeance--what? A mere polluting touch--
    cripple striking with a broken crutch!"







