CHAPTER VIII.

THE HAGIOGRAPHA.


The Hagiographa comprises the remaining thirteen books of the
Old Testament. It was divided into three divisions: 1. Psalms,
Proverbs, Job. 2. Song of Solomon, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes,
Esther. 3. Daniel, Ezra and Nehemiah, First and Second Chronicles. The
Jews considered these books of less value than those of the Law and
the Prophets. The books belonging to the third division possess little
merit; but the first two divisions, omitting Esther, together with
a few poems in the Pentateuch and the Prophets, contain the cream of
Hebrew literature.



Psalms.

The collection of hymns and prayers used in public worship by Jews
and Christians, and called the Psalms, stands first in importance as a
religious book in the Hagiographa. Christians accept it not only as a
book of praise, but as a prophetic revelation and doctrinal authority.

It is popularly supposed that David wrote all, or nearly all, of
the Psalms. Many commentators attribute to him the authorship of one
hundred or more. He wrote, at the most, but a few of them.

The Jews divided them into five books: 1. Chapters i-xli; 2. xlii-lxii;
3. lxiii-lxxxix; 4. xc-cvi; 5. cvii-cl. Smith's "Bible Dictionary,"
a standard orthodox authority, claims for David the authorship of the
first book only. The second book, while including a few of his psalms,
was not compiled, it says, until the time of Hezekiah, three hundred
years after his reign. The psalms of the third book, it states, were
composed during Hezekiah's reign; those of the fourth book following
these, and prior to the Captivity; and those of the fifth book after
the return from Babylon, four hundred years after David's time.

There are psalms in the third, fourth, and fifth books ascribed
to David, but they are clearly of much later origin. The "Bible
Dictionary" admits that they were not composed by him, and attempts
to account for the Davidic superscription by assuming that they were
written by Hezekiah, Josiah, and others who were lineal descendants
and belonged to the house of David. But there is nothing to warrant
the assumption that they were written by these Jewish kings. They
were anonymous pieces to which the name of David was affixed to add
to their authority.

The second book concludes with these words: "The prayers of David,
the son of Jesse, are ended." This is accepted to mean that none of
the psalms following this book belong to David. The Korahite psalms,
assigned to David's reign, belong to a later age. Twelve psalms are
ascribed to Asaph, who lived in David's reign. This passage from one
of them was written at least 430 years after David's death:

"O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance; thy holy temple
have they defiled: they have laid Jerusalem on heaps" (lxxix, 1).

In the second and third books the word God occurs 206 times, while
Jehovah, translated "Lord God," occurs but 44 times; in the remaining
three books, God occurs but 23 times, while Jehovah occurs 640 times.

Psalms xlii and xliii are merely parts of the same psalm. Psalm xix
consists of two distinct psalms, the first eleven verses constituting
one, the last three another. Psalms xiv and liii are the same; lx and
cviii, omitting the first four or five verses, are also the same. The
Septuagint version and the Alexandrian manuscript contain 151 psalms,
the last one being omitted from other versions.

Some of the more conservative German critics credit David with
as many as thirty psalms. Dr. Lyman Abbott contends that he did
not write more than fifteen. The Dutch scholars, Kuenen and Oort,
believe that he wrote none. And this is probably the truth. While
collections of these psalms doubtless existed at an earlier period,
the book, in its present form, was compiled during the Maccabean age,
about one hundred and fifty years before the Christian era.

Many of these psalms are fine poetical compositions; but the greater
portion of them are crude in construction, and some of them fiendish
in sentiment.



Proverbs.

The authorship of Proverbs has been ascribed to Solomon. He could have
written but few of these proverbs, and probably wrote none. It is a
compilation of maxims made many centuries after his time. Tradition
represented Solomon as the wisest of men, and every wise saying whose
origin was unknown was credited to him.

Dr. Oort says: "The history of Solomon's wisdom resembles that
of David's music. In either case the imagination of posterity has
given a thoroughly religious character to what was in reality purely
secular; and just as David was made the author of a number of psalms,
so various works of the so-called sages, or proverb-makers, were
ascribed to Solomon" (Bible for Learners, vol. ii, p. 75).

The book consists of seven different collections of proverbs, as
follows: 1. i, 7-ix; 2. x-xxii, 16; 3. xxii, 17-xxiv; 4. xxv-xxix;
5. xxx; 6. xxxi, 1-9; 7. xxxi, 10-31. The first six verses are
a preface.

The first collection, it is admitted, was not the work of
Solomon. These proverbs were composed as late as 600 B.C. The second
collection is presented as "The Proverbs of Solomon." If any of
Solomon's proverbs exist they are contained in this collection. The
third collection is anonymous. The fourth begins as follows: "These
are also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah, king of Judah,
copied out" (700 B.C.). The fifth contains "The words of Agur the son
of Jakeh." The sixth, comprising the first nine verses of the last
chapter, are "The words of King Lemuel." The seventh, comprising the
remainder of the chapter, is a poem, written after the Captivity.



Job.

It is remarkable that the book which, from a literary point of view,
occupies the first place among the books of the Bible, should be the
only one in the collection that was not written by a believer in the
religion of the Bible. It is almost universally conceded that the
book of Job was not written by a Jew, but by a Gentile.

Most Christians ascribe its authorship to Job himself; but there
is no more authority for ascribing it to Job than there is for
ascribing the Pentateuch to Moses. Job is the name of the leading
character of the book, not the name of its author. Its authorship is
unknown. The Talmud asserts, and probably correctly, that Job was
not a real personage--that the book is an allegory. Luther says,
"It is merely the argument of a fable."

Regarding its antiquity, Dr. Hitchcock says: "The first written of
all the books in the Bible, and the oldest literary production in the
world, is the book of Job." The date assigned for its composition is
1520 B.C.

Had Job been written a thousand years before the time claimed, it
would not be the oldest literary production in the world. But it was
probably written a thousand years after the time claimed. Luther places
its composition 500 years after this time; Renan says that it was
written 800 years later, Ewald and Davidson 900 years later. Grotius
and De Wette believe that it was written 1000 years after the date
assigned, while Hartmann and others contend that it was written still
later. While its exact date cannot be determined, there is internal
evidence pointing to a much later age than that named.

"Which maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of the
south" (ix, 9).

The use of these Greek astronomical names proves a later origin. So,
too, does the following passage:

"The Chaldeans made out three bands" (i, 17).

Of this people Chambers' Encyclopedia says: "The Chaldeans are first
heard of in the ninth century before Christ as a small Accadian tribe
on the Persian Gulf." This was seven centuries after the date assigned
for Job, while the same authority states that Chaldea did not exist
until a still later period.

The poem of Job, as originally composed, comprised the following:
Chapters i-xxvii, 10; xxviii-xxxi; xxviii-xli, 12; xlii, 1-6. All
the rest of the book, about eight chapters--nearly one fifth of
it--consists of clumsy forgeries. The poet is a radical thinker
who boldly questions the wisdom and justice of God. To counteract
the influence of his work these interpolations which controvert its
teachings were inserted.

Nor is this all. Our translators have still further mutilated the
work. Its most damaging lines they have mistranslated or glossed
over. Thus Job (xiii, 15) says: "He [God] will slay me; I have no
hope." Yet they make him say the very reverse of this: "Though he
slay me, yet will I trust in him."



The Five Rolls.

The second division of the Hagiographa, known as the Five Rolls,
or Megilloth, contains five small books--The Song of Solomon,
Ecclesiastes, Lamentations, Ruth, and Esther.

The Song of Solomon, Song of Songs, or Canticles, as it is variously
called, and Ecclesiastes, or The Preacher, are said to be the works
of Solomon--the former a product of his youth, the latter of his old
age. It is quite certain that the same author did not write both,
and equally certain that Solomon wrote neither.

The Song of Solomon, Ewald affirms, is an anonymous poem, written
about the middle of the tenth century B.C..--after Solomon's time. It
is doubtless of much later origin. It belongs to Northern, and
not to Southern Palestine. This alone proves that Solomon did not
write it. The Talmud says, "Hezekiah and his company wrote Isaiah,
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs." Hengstenberg, one of the
most orthodox of commentators, says that Ecclesiastes was written
centuries after the time of Solomon. Davidson believes that it was
written as late as 350 B.C.; while Hartmann and Hitzig, German critics,
contend that it was written still later.

Solomon's Song is an amorous poem, beautiful in its way. But when
we turn to it in the Christian Bible and find the running titles
of every page and the table of contents of every chapter filled
with sanctimonious drivel about Christ and his bride, the Church,
we are reminded of a lecherous parson masquerading under the cloak of
piety among his female parishioners. The Preacher of Ecclesiastes is
something of a Freethought preacher. He is a skeptic and a philosopher.

Lamentations, it is claimed, was composed by Jeremiah. There is little
evidence either for or against this claim. Oort affirms that its
ascription to Jeremiah is a "mistaken tradition," that its five poems
were written by five different authors and at different times. The
habit of ascribing anonymous writings to eminent men was prevalent
among the Jews. Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, Solomon, Daniel, and
probably Jeremiah, have been declared the authors of books of which
they never heard.

Ruth is the only book of the Bible whose authorship is generally
conceded by Christians to be unknown. Dr. Hitchcock says: "There is
nothing whatever by which the authorship of it can be determined."

Many orthodox scholars admit that Esther's authorship, like that
of Ruth, is unknown. Some credit it to Mordecai. It was written
as late as 300 B.C., 150 years after Mordecai's time. The Vulgate
and modern Catholic versions include six chapters not found in our
authorized version. There are many books in the Bible devoid of truth,
but probably none so self-evidently false as Esther. It has been
described as "a tissue of glaring impossibilities from beginning to
end." Luther pronounces it a "heathenish extravagance."



Daniel.

Christians class Daniel with the Greater Prophets, and assign its
authorship to the sixth century B.C. It belongs to the Hagiographa
and was one of the last books of the Old Testament to be written.

A considerable portion of the book relates to Belshazzar. Twenty
times in one chapter is he referred to as the king of Babylon, and
five times is he called the son of Nebuchadnezzar. Yet Belshazzar was
not the son of Nebuchadnezzar, neither was he king of Babylon. Again
the author devotes several chapters to Darius "the Median," who,
he says, defeated the Chaldeans and conquered Babylon. Now, nearly
everybody, excepting this writer, supposed that it was Cyrus the
Persian who conquered Babylon. Darius "the Median" was never king of
Babylon. This book was written by one ignorant of Babylonian history,
and not by Daniel, who lived in Babylon, and who is said to have been
next to the king in authority.

Prof. A. H. Sayce, Professor of Assyriology in Oxford University,
considered by many the greatest of archæologists, a believer in
the divinity of the Bible and an opponent of Higher Criticism, is
compelled to reject Daniel. In a recent article, he says: "The old
view of the old Book is correct excepting the book of Daniel, which
is composed of legends.... The historical facts as we know them from
the contemporaneous records are irreconcilable with the statements
found in the historical portions of Daniel."

This statement, aside from its rejection of Daniel, is
significant. Here is a man whose life-long study and researches make
him preeminently qualified to judge of one book's authenticity and
credibility. This book he rejects. The books he accepts are those
concerning which he is not specially qualified to judge.

Dr. Arnold says: "I have long thought that the greater part of the
book of Daniel is most certainly a very late work, of the time of
the Maccabees" (Life and Correspondence, Vol. II., p. 188). This
conclusion of Dr. Arnold's, made seventy years ago, is confirmed by
the later critics who place its composition in the reign of Antiochus
Epiphanes, about 165 B.C.

A part, if not all of the book, was written in Aramaic. In the Greek
version the three small Apocryphal books, History of Susannah, Song
of the Three Holy Children, and Bel and the Dragon, are included in
it. The fact that the Jews placed Daniel in the Hagiographa, instead of
the Prophets, is fatal to the claims regarding its authorship and date.



Ezra and Nehemiah.

Ezra and Nehemiah for a time constituted one book, Ezra. This was
afterwards divided into two books and called The First and Second
books of Ezra. Both were ascribed to Ezra. Subsequently the names
were changed to those by which they are now known, and the authorship
assigned respectively to Ezra and Nehemiah. That both were not composed
by the same author is shown by the fact that each contains a copy of
the register of the Jews that returned from Babylon.

Critics agree that Ezra did not write all of the book which now bears
his name--that it is the work of various authors and was written,
for the most part, long after Ezra's time. A portion of it was written
in Hebrew and the remainder in Aramaic.

Nehemiah wrote, at the most, but a part of the book ascribed to
him. He did not write the following:

"The Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua,
were recorded chief of the fathers; also the priests to the reign of
Darius the Persian" (xii, 22).

Darius the Persian began to reign 336 B.C.; Nehemiah wrote 433 B.C.

"There were in the days of ... Nehemiah the governor" (xii, 26). "In
the days of Nehemiah" (47).

These passages show that the book, as a whole, was not only not written
by Nehemiah, but not until long after the time of Nehemiah. Spinoza
says that both Ezra and Nehemiah were written two or three hundred
years after the time claimed. The later critics are generally agreed
that neither Ezra nor Nehemiah had anything to do with the composition
of these books.



First and Second Chronicles.

The concluding books of the Hagiographa, and of the Old
Testament, if arranged in their proper order, are First and Second
Chronicles. Theologians tell us that they were written or compiled
by Ezra 456 B.C.

By carefully comparing the genealogy given in the third chapter of 1
Chronicles with that given in the first chapter of Matthew, it will
be seen that the records of Chronicles are brought down to within a
few generations of Jesus. These books are a compilation of documents
made centuries after the time that Ezra and Nehemiah are supposed to
have completed the canon of the Old Testament, and a hundred years
after the date assigned for the Septuagint translation.

The fragmentary character of many of the books of the Bible, and
particularly of Chronicles, is shown in the conclusion of the second
book. It closes with an unfinished sentence, as follows: "The Lord
his God is with him and let him go up--." The concluding words may
be found in another book of the Bible--Ezra (i, 3): "To Jerusalem,
which is in Judah, and build the house of the Lord God of Israel,"
etc. The first verses of Ezra are identical with the last verses of
Chronicles. The compiler of Chronicles had seemingly begun to copy
the document which now forms a part of the book of Ezra, and in the
middle of a sentence was suddenly called away from his work, never
to resume and complete it.

We have now reviewed the books of the Old Testament. We have seen
that the claims made in support of their authenticity are, for the
most part, either untrue or incapable of proof. When and by whom
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges,
Ruth, First and Second Samuel, First and Second Kings, First and
Second Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, Lamentations, Daniel, Jonah, Haggai,
and Malachi were written is unknown. Isaiah, Jeremiah, Amos, and
Zechariah wrote, at the most, but portions of the books ascribed to
them. The few remaining books may have been written by those whose
names they bear, though even these are veiled in doubt. There is not
one book in the Old Testament whose authenticity, like that of many
ancient Greek and Roman books, is fully established.







