CHAPTER VI.

THE PENTATEUCH.


The first five books of the Bible, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers, and Deuteronomy--collectively called the Pentateuch--are the
most important books of the Old Testament. The three great Semitic
religions, Judaism, Christianity, and Mohammedanism, are all, to a
great extent, based upon them.

These books, orthodox Christians affirm, were written by Moses at least
1,450 years before the Christian era. "This sacred code," says Dr. Adam
Clarke, "Moses delivered complete to the Hebrews sometime before his
death." In modern versions of the Bible, Genesis is styled the First
Book of Moses; Exodus, the Second Book of Moses; Leviticus, the Third
Book of Moses; Numbers, the Fourth Book of Moses, and Deuteronomy,
the Fifth Book of Moses. Their very high authority rests upon the
supposed fact of their Mosaic authorship and great antiquity. To
disprove these--to show that the Pentateuch was not written by Moses,
nor at this early age, but centuries later by unknown writers--is to
largely impair, if not entirely destroy, its authority as a religious
oracle. And this is what modern criticism has done.



Arguments for Mosaic Authorship.

The following passage is the chief argument relied upon to prove the
Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch:

"And it came to pass, that when Moses had made an end of writing the
words of this law in a book, until they were finished, that Moses
commanded the Levites, which bore the ark of the covenant of the
Lord, saying, Take this book of the law, and put it in the side of
the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, that it may be there
for a witness against thee" (Deut. xxxi, 24-26).

This was written for a purpose. Its sequel appears in 2 Kings. During
the reign of Josiah, Hilkiah the high priest discovered a "book of
the law" in the temple. "And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan
the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of the Lord"
(2 Kings xxii, 8).

This book was the book of Deuteronomy, written, not in the time
of Moses, but in the time of Josiah, more than eight centuries
later. Hilkiah needed the book and he "found" it. It was written by
him or for him. Holland's great critic, Dr. Kuenen, says: "There is
no room to doubt that the book was written with a view to the use
that Hilkiah made of it" (Kuenen's Hexateuch, p. 215).

Dr. Oort, another able Dutch scholar, professor of Oriental languages
at Amsterdam, says: "The book was certainly written about the time
of its discovery. It is true that it introduces Moses as uttering
the precepts and exhortations of which it consists, just before the
people enter Canaan. But this is no more than a literary fiction. The
position of affairs assumed throughout the book is that of Judah in
the time of Josiah" (Bible for Learners, vol. ii, p. 331).

In support of this unanimous conclusion of the critics, Dr. Briggs
presents the following long array of irrefutable arguments:

"The reasons for the composition of Deuteronomy in the time of Josiah
according to the later hypothesis are: (1) Expressions which indicate
a period subsequent to the Conquest (ii, 12; xix, 14); (2) the law
of the king, which implies the reign of Solomon (xvii, 14-20); (3)
the one supreme judicatory of the time of Jehoshaphat (xvii, 8); (4)
the one central altar of the times of Hezekiah (xii, 5 seq.); (5) the
return to Egypt in ships not conceivable before the time of Manasseh
(xxviii, 68); (6) the forms of idolatry of the middle period of the
monarchy (iv, 19; xvii, 3); (7) no trace of Deuteronomy in writings
prior to Jeremiah; (8) the point of view indicates an advanced style
of theological reflection; (9) the prohibition of Mazzebah (xvi,
22) regarded as lawful in Isaiah (xix, 19); (10) the style implies
a long development of the art of Hebrew oratory, and the language
is free from archaism, and suits the times preceding Jeremiah; (11)
the doctrine of the love of God and his faithfulness with the term
'Yahweh thy God' presuppose the experience of the prophet Hosea;
(12) the humanitarianism of Deuteronomy shows an ethical advance
beyond Amos and Isaiah and prepares the way for Jeremiah and Ezekiel;
(13) ancient laws embedded in the code account for the penalties
for their infraction in 2 Kings xxii; (14) ancient laws of war are
associated with laws which imply the wars of the monarchy, and have
been influenced by Amos" (The Hexateuch, p. 261).

No book had been deposited in the ark as the writer stated. At the
dedication of Solomon's temple the ark was opened, but it contained
no book. "There was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone,
which Moses put there at Horeb" (1 Kings viii, 5-9).

In the Pentateuch it is also stated that Moses, at the command of God,
wrote certain covenants (Ex. xxxiv, 27), recorded the curse of Amalek
(Ex. xvii, 14), and made a list of the stations between the Red Sea and
the Jordan (Num. xxxiii); likewise that he wrote a song (Deut. xxxi,
22). The absurdity of adducing these to prove that Moses wrote the
Pentateuch is thus exposed by Briggs:

"When the author of the Pentateuch says that Moses wrote one
or more codes of law, that he wrote a song, that he recorded a
certain memorandum, it would appear that having specified such of
his materials as were written by Moses, he would have us infer that
the other materials came from other sources of information. But it
has been urged the other way; namely, that, because it is said that
Moses wrote the codes of the covenant and the Deuteronomic code,
he also wrote all the laws of the Pentateuch; that because he wrote
the song Deut. xxxii, he wrote all the other pieces of poetry in the
Pentateuch, that because he recorded the list of stations and the
memorial against Amalek, he recorded all the other historical events
of the Pentateuch. It is probable that no one would so argue did he
not suppose it was necessary to maintain the Mosaic authorship of
the Pentateuch at every cost" (Hexateuch, pp. 10, 11).

Again, it has been argued that Christ and some of the writers of the
New Testament recognize Moses as the author of the Pentateuch. Such
expressions as "the law of Moses," "the book of Moses," "Moses said,"
etc., occur a few times. These expressions are explained and this
argument answered by the following: 1. It is not denied by critics
that Moses was the legislator of the Jews and promulgated certain
laws. 2. An anonymous book is usually called after the leading
character of the book. 3. At this time the traditional theory of the
Mosaic authorship was generally accepted. Of Christ's mention of Moses,
Dr. Davidson says: "The venerable authority of Christ himself has no
proper bearing on the question."



Arguments Against Mosaic Authorship.

That the Pentateuch was not written by Moses, that it is an anonymous
work belonging to a later age, is clearly proven by the following:

1. There is no proof that Moses ever claimed to be the author of the
Pentateuch. There is nothing in the work, neither is there anything
outside of it, to indicate that he was its author.

2. The ancient Hebrews did not believe that he wrote it. Renan says:
"The opinion which attributes the composition of the Pentateuch to
Moses seems quite modern; it is very certain that the ancient Hebrews
never dreamed of regarding their legislator as their historian. The
ancient documents appeared to them absolutely impersonal, and they
attached to them no author's name" (History of Semitic Languages,
Book II., chapter i).

3. The Pentateuch was written in the Hebrew language. The Hebrew of
the Bible did not exist in the time of Moses. Language is a growth. It
takes centuries to develop it. It took a thousand years to develop the
English language. The Hebrew of the Bible was not brought from Egypt,
but grew in Palestine. Referring to this language, De Wette says:
"Without doubt it originated in the land [Canaan] or was still further
developed therein after the Hebrew and other Canaanitish people had
migrated thither from the Northern country" (Old Testament, Part
II.). Gesenius says that the Hebrew language scarcely antedates the
time of David.

4. Not only is it true that the Hebrew language did not exist, but
it is urged by critics that no written language, as we understand it,
existed in Western Asia in the time of Moses. Prof. Andrew Norton says:
"For a long time after the supposed date of the Pentateuch we find
no proof of the existence of a book or even an inscription in proper
alphabetical characters among the nations by whom the Hebrews were
surrounded" (The Pentateuch, p. 44). Hieroglyphics were then in use,
and it is not to be supposed that a work as large as the Pentateuch
was written or engraved in hieroglyphics and carried about by this
wandering tribe of ignorant Israelites.

5. Much of the Pentateuch is devoted to the history of Moses; but
excepting a few brief compositions attributed to him and quoted by the
author he is always referred to in the third person. The Pentateuch
contains a biography, not an autobiography of Moses.

6. It contains an account of the death and burial of Moses which he
could not have written:

"So Moses, the servant of the Lord, died there in the land of
Moab.... And he buried him in a valley of the land of Moab"
(Deut. xxxiv, 5, 6).

"And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab
thirty days" (8).

Orthodox commentators attempt to remove this difficulty by supposing
that the last chapter of Deuteronomy belongs to the book of Joshua,
and that Joshua recorded the death of Moses. The same writer,
referring to the appointment of Joshua as the successor of Moses,
says: "And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom"
(Deut. xxxiv, 9). If Joshua wrote this, however full of the spirit
of wisdom he may have been, he certainly was not full of the spirit
of modesty. Joshua did not write this chapter.

7. "No man knoweth of his [Moses'] sepulchre unto this day"
(Deut. xxxiv, 6).

That the authorship of this chapter should ever have been attributed
to either Moses or Joshua is incomprehensible. The language plainly
shows that not merely one but many generations had elapsed between
the time of Moses and the time that it was written.

8. While the advocates of the Mosaic authorship have, without proof,
asserted that Joshua wrote the book of Joshua and the conclusion
of Deuteronomy, the Higher Critics have demonstrated the common
authorship of Deuteronomy and a large portion of Joshua. As all the
events recorded in Joshua occurred after the death of Moses, he could
not have been the author of Deuteronomy.

9. "They [the Israelites] did eat manna until they came unto the
borders of Canaan" (Ex. xvi, 35).

This passage was written after the Israelites settled in Canaan and
ceased to subsist on manna. And this was not until after the death
of Moses.

10. "The Horims also dwelt in Seir beforetime; but the children of Esau
succeeded them, when they had destroyed them from before them, and
dwelt in their stead; as Israel did unto the land of his possession,
which the Lord gave unto them" (Deut. ii, 12).

This refers to the conquest of Canaan and was written after that event.

11. "And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness they
found a man that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath day" (Num. xv, 32).

When this was written the children of Israel were no longer in the
wilderness. Their sojourn there is referred to as a past event. As
Moses died while they were still in the wilderness--that is, before
they had entered the promised land--it could not have been written
by him.

12. "Thou shalt eat it within thy gates" (Deut. xv, 22).

The phrase, "within thy gates," occurs in the Pentateuch about
twenty-five times. It refers to the gates of the cities of the
Israelites, which they did not inhabit until after the death of Moses.

13. "Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments, ... that
the land spew not you out also, when ye defile it, as it spewed out
the nations that were before you" (Lev. xviii, 26, 28).

When Moses died the nations alluded to still occupied the land and
had not been expelled.

14. "And Abraham called the name of the place Jehovah-jireh: as
it is said to this day, In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen"
(Gen. xxii, 14).

This is one of the passages adduced by the critics of the seventeenth
century against the Mosaic authorship of these books. It implies the
conquest and a long occupancy of the land by the Israelites.

15. "And Sarah died in Kirjath-arba; the same is Hebron in the land of
Canaan" (Gen. xxiii, 2). "And Jacob came ... unto the city of Arbah,
which is Hebron" (xxxv, 27).

Moses' uncle was named Hebron, and from him the Hebronites were
descended. After the Conquest this family settled in Kirjath-arba
and changed the name of the city to Hebron.

16. "And Rachel died and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is
Bethlehem" (Gen. xxxv, 19).

The Hebrew name of Bethlehem was not given to this city until after
the Israelites had conquered and occupied it.

17. "For only Og, king of Bashan, remained of the remnant of giants;
behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron; is it not in Rabbath of
the children of Ammon?" (Deut. iii, 11.)

This is another passage relied upon by the early critics to disprove
the Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch. The writer's reference to
the bedstead of Og, which was still preserved as a relic at Rabbath,
indicates a time long subsequent to the conquest of Bashan.

18. "Thou shalt not remove thy neighbor's landmark, which they of
old time have set in thine inheritance" (Deut. xix, 14).

This refers to the ancient landmarks set by the Israelites when
they obtained possession of Canaan, and was written centuries after
that time.

19. "And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the small towns
thereof, and called them Havoth-jair" (Num. xxxii, 41).

The above is evidently a misstatement of an event recorded in Judges:

"And after him [Tola] arose Jair, a Gileadite, and judged Israel twenty
and two years. And he had thirty sons, ... and they had thirty cities,
which are called Havoth-jair unto this day" (Jud. x, 3, 4).

Jair was judge of Israel from 1210 to 1188 b.c., or from 241 to 263
years after the date assigned for the writing of the Pentateuch.

20. "And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the villages thereof, and
called it Nobah, after his own name" (Num. xxxii, 42).

Referring to this and the preceding passage, Dr. Oort says: "It is
certain that Jair, the Gileadite, the conqueror of Bashan, after
whom thirty places were called Jair's villages, lived in the time of
the Judges, and that a part of Bashan was conquered at a still later
period by a certain Nobah" (Bible for Learners, vol. i, p. 329).

21. "Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob unto the
coasts of Geshuri and Maachathi; and called them after his own name,
Bashan-havoth-jair, unto this day" (Deut. iii, 14).

Even if Jair had lived in the time of Moses, the phrase "unto this day"
shows that it was written long after the event described.

22. "And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he
armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and
eighteen, and pursued them unto Dan" (Gen. xiv, 14).

This passage could not have been written before Dan existed. In Judges
(xviii, 26-29) the following account of the origin of this place is
given: "And the children of Dan went their way; ... and came unto
Laish, unto a people that were at quiet and secure; and they smote
them with the edge of the sword, and burnt the city with fire.... And
they built a city, and dwelt therein. And they called the name of the
city Dan." This is placed after the death of Samson, and Samson died,
according to Bible chronology, 1120 B.C.--331 years after Moses died.

23. "And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom before
there reigned any king over the children of Israel" (Gen. xxxvi, 31).

This could not have been written before the kingdom of Israel was
established; for the writer is familiar with the fact that kings have
reigned in Israel. Saul, the first king of Israel, began to reign
356 years after Moses.

24. "And his [Israel's] king shall be higher than Agag" (Num. xxiv, 7).

This refers to Saul's defeat of Agag. "And he [Saul] took Agag the
king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed all the people
with the edge of the sword" (1 Sam. xv, 8). The defeat of Agag is
placed in 1067 B.C., 384 years after Moses.

25. "The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, ... until Shiloh come"
(Gen. xlix, 10).

These words are ascribed to Jacob; but they could not have been written
before Judah received the sceptre, which was not until David ascended
the throne, 396 years after the death of Moses.

26. "And the Canaanite was then in the land" (Gen. xii, 6).

When this was written the Canaanite had ceased to be an inhabitant of
Palestine. As a remnant of the Canaanites inhabited this country up
to the time of David, it could not have been written prior to his time.

27. "The Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelt then in the land"
(Gen. xiii, 7).

This, like the preceding passage, could not have been written before
the time of David. The Perizzites, also, inhabited Palestine for
a long period after the conquest. In the time of the Judges "the
children of Israel dwelt among the ... Perizzites" (Jud. iii, 5).

28. "The first of the first fruits of thy land thou shalt bring into
the house of the Lord thy God" (Ex. xxiii, 19).

This was not written before the time of Solomon; for God had no
house prior to the erection of the temple, 1004 B.C., 447 years
after Moses. When David proposed to build him a house, he forbade it
and said:

"I have not dwelt in any house since the time that I brought up the
children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but have walked
in a tent and in a tabernacle" (2 Sam. vii, 6).

The tabernacle itself was a tent (Tent of Meeting). During all this
time no house was ever used as a sanctuary.

29. "One from among the brethren shalt thou set king over thee.... But
he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return
to Egypt, to the end that he should multiply horses.... Neither shall
he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away; neither
shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold" (Deut. xvii,
15-17).

"And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses" (1 Kings iv,
26). "And Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt" (x, 28). "And he
had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines:
and his wives turned away his heart" (xi, 3). "The weight of gold
that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred three score and six
talents of gold" (x, 14). "And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem
as stones" (27).

Nothing can be plainer than that this statute in Deuteronomy was
written after Solomon's reign. The extravagance and debaucheries
of this monarch had greatly impoverished and corrupted the kingdom,
and to prevent a recurrence of such excesses this law was enacted.

30. "If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, ... thou
shalt come unto the priests the Levites, and unto the judge that shall
be in those days, and enquire; and they shall show thee the sentence
of judgment" (Deut. xvii, 8, 9).

This court was established by Jehoshaphat (2 Chron. xix,
8-11). Jehoshaphat commenced his reign 914 B.C., 537 years after Moses.

31. "But in the place which the Lord shall choose in one of thy tribes,
there thou shalt offer thy burnt offerings, and there shalt thou do
all that I command thee" (Deut. xii, 14).

"Is it not he [the Lord] whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah
hath taken away, and said to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship
before this altar?" (Is. xxxvi, 7).

Up to the time of Hezekiah the Hebrews worshiped at many
altars. Hezekiah removed these altars and established the one central
altar at Jerusalem. This was in 726 B.C.--725 years after Moses.

32. "And the Lord shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships"
(Deut. xxviii, 68).

This, critics affirm, was written when Psameticus was king of Egypt. He
reigned from 663 to 609 B.C.

33. "Neither shalt thou set thee up any image [pillar]" (Deut. xvi,
22).

This proves the late origin of the Pentateuch, or at least of
Deuteronomy. Isaiah (xix, 19) instructs them to do the very thing
which they are here forbidden to do, and as he would not have advised
a violation of the law it is evident that this statute could not have
existed in his time. Isaiah died about 750 years after Moses died.

34. The worship of the sun, moon, and stars by the Jews, is mentioned
and condemned (Deut. iv, 19; xvii, 3). This nature worship was adopted
by them in the reign of Manasseh, 800 years after Moses.

35. "Wherefore it is said in the book of the Wars of the Lord, what
he did in the Red Sea, and in the brooks of Arnon" (Num. xxi, 14).

The author of the Pentateuch here cites a book older than the
Pentateuch, which gives an account of the journeyings of the Israelites
from Egypt to Moab--from the Exodus to the end of Moses' career.

36. "And thou shalt write upon the stones all the words of this law
very plainly" (Deut. xxvii, 8).

"And he [Joshua] wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of
Moses" (Josh. viii, 32).

Christians affirm that the Law of Moses and the Pentateuch are
one. That this Law of Moses was not the one hundred and fifty thousand
words of the Pentateuch is shown by the fact that after the death of
Moses it was all engraved upon a stone altar.

37. "Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were
upon the face of the earth" (Num. xii, 3).

No writer would bestow such fulsome praise upon himself. This was
written by a devout admirer of Moses, but it was not written by Moses.

38. "And this is the blessing wherewith Moses the man of God blessed
the children of Israel before his death" (Deut. xxxiii, 1).

There are three reasons for rejecting the Mosaic authorship of this:
Moses is spoken of in laudatory terms; he is spoken of in the third
person; his death is referred to as an event that is already past.

39. "And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses"
(Deut. xxxiv, 10).

Not only is the highest praise bestowed upon Moses, a thing which
he would not have done, but the language clearly shows that it was
written centuries after the time he lived.

40. The religious history of the Hebrews embraces three periods of
time, each covering centuries. During the first period the worship of
Jehovah was confined to no particular place; during the second it was
confined to the holy city, Jerusalem; during the third it was confined,
not merely to Jerusalem, but to the temple itself. There are writings
in the Pentateuch belonging to each of these periods. The Encyclopedia
Britannica declares that this fact alone affords overwhelming disproof
of Mosaic authorship.

41. The religion of the Pentateuch was not a revelation, but an
evolution. The priestly offices, the feasts, the sacrifices, and
other religious observances underwent many changes, these changes
representing different stages of development in Israel's religion
and requiring centuries of time to effect.

42. The legislation of the Pentateuch was also the growth
of centuries. Some of the minor codes are much older than the
documents containing them. There is legislation older than David,
1055 B.C.--probably as old as Moses, 1451 B.C. There is legislation
belonging to the time of Josiah, 626 B.C., of Ezekiel, 575 B.C.,
of Ezra, 456 B.C. Would it not be absurd to claim that all the
laws of England from Alfred to Victoria were the work of one mind,
Alfred? And is it less absurd to claim that all the laws of the Jews
from Moses to Ezra were instituted by Moses?

43. The Pentateuch abounds with repetitions and contradictions. The
first two chapters of Genesis contain two accounts of the Creation
differing in every important particular. In the sixth, seventh, and
eighth chapters of Genesis two different and contradictory accounts
of the Deluge are intermingled. Exodus and Deuteronomy each contain a
copy of the Decalogue, the two differing as to the reason assigned for
the institution of the Sabbath. There are several different versions
of the call of Abraham; different and conflicting stories of the
Egyptian plagues; contradictory accounts of the conquest of Canaan.



The Work of Various Authors and Compilers.

44. The four preceding arguments suggest the concluding and most
important one. The character of the writings of the Pentateuch preclude
the possibility of unity of authorship, and consequently the Mosaic
authorship of the work as a whole. The books of the Pentateuch were
not all composed by one author. The book of Genesis is not the work
of one author. The first two chapters of Genesis were not written by
the same writer. The Pentateuch was written by various writers and
at various times.

The Pentateuch comprises four large documents known as the Elohistic
and Jehovistic documents, and the Deuteronomic and Priestly Codes. They
are distinguished by the initial letters E, J, D, and P. E and J
include the greater portion of Genesis and extend through the other
books of the Pentateuch, as well as through Joshua, Judges, Samuel,
and Kings. D includes the greater portion of Deuteronomy, fragments
of the preceding books, and a large portion of Joshua. P includes
the greater portion of the middle books of the Pentateuch and smaller
portions of the other books.

The author of each of these documents incorporated into his work one
or more older documents. These four works were afterwards united by
successive editors or redactors. E and J were first fused into one. A
subsequent redactor united D with this, and still later another united
this compilation with P.

In addition to these principal documents there are several minor
codes, chief of which is the Holiness Code comprising ten chapters of
Leviticus, xvii-xxvi. There are also several poems written by various
authors. Thus the Pentateuch instead of being the product of one mind
is the work of many writers and compilers, probably twenty or more.

These documents, especially the principal ones, notwithstanding
the intermingling of their contents, are easily distinguished and
separated from each other by Bible critics. The thoughts of the human
mind, like the features of the human face, controlled by the law of
variation, assume different forms. We who are familiar with faces
have no difficulty in distinguishing one face from another. No two
faces are alike. Critics who have devoted their lives to literature
can distinguish the writings of individuals almost as readily as
we distinguish the faces of individuals. There are certain idioms of
language, certain peculiarities of style, belonging to each writer. The
language and style of these documents are quite dissimilar. To quote
Dr. Briggs: "There is as great a difference in style between the
documents of the Hexateuch as there is between the Four Gospels." The
principal documents are thus described by this critic:

"E is brief, terse, and archaic; graphic, plastic, and realistic;
written in the theocratic interest of the kingdom of God. J is poetical
and descriptive, the best narrative in the Bible, giving us the history
of the kingdom of redemption. D is rhetorical and hortatory, practical
and earnest, written in the more theological interest of the training
of the nation in the fatherly instruction of God. P is annalistic
and diffuse, fond of names and dates, written in the interest of the
priestly order, and emphasizing the sovereignty of the Holy God and
the sanctity of the divine institutions" (Hexateuch, p. 265).

Each document abounds with characteristic words and phrases peculiar
to that document. Holzinger notes 108 belonging to E and 125 belonging
to J. Canon Driver gives 41 belonging to D and 50 belonging to P. One
of the chief distinguishing marks is the term used to designate the
Deity. In E it is Elohim, translated God; in J, Jehovah (Yahveh)
Elohim, translated Lord God. In D the writer continually uses the
phrase "The Lord thy God," this phrase occurring more than 200
times. "I am Jehovah" is a phrase used by P, including the Holiness
Code, 70 times. It is never used by E or D. "God of the Fathers"
is frequently used by E and D; never by P.

Bishop Colenso's analysis of Genesis is as follows: Elohist, 336
verses; Jehovist, 1,052 verses; Deuteronomist, 39 verses; Priestly
writer, 106 verses.

The Pentateuch was chiefly written and compiled from seven to ten
centuries after the time claimed. The Elohistic and Jehovistic
documents, the oldest of the four, were written at least 300 years
after the time of David and 700 years after the time of Moses. They
were probably written at about the same time. E belongs to the Northern
Kingdom of Israel, J to the Southern Kingdom of Judah. The unanimous
verdict of critics is that Deuteronomy was written during the reign
of Josiah, about 626 B.C., 825 years after Moses died. The Holiness
Code belongs to the age of Ezekiel, about fifty years later. The
Priestly Code was written after the Exile, in the time of Ezra,
1,000 years after Moses. Important changes and additions were made
as late as the third century B.C., so that, excepting the variations
and interpolations of later times, the Pentateuch in something like
its present form appeared about 1,200 years after the time of Moses.



The higher Criticism--Its Triumph and Its Consequences.

The certainty and the consequences of the Higher Criticism of the
Pentateuch are thus expressed by Hupfeld:

"The discovery that the Pentateuch is put together out of various
sources, or original documents, is beyond all doubt not only one
of the most important and most pregnant with consequences for the
interpretation of the historical books of the Old Testament, or
rather for the whole of theology and history, but it is also one of
the most certain discoveries which have been made in the domain of
criticism and the history of literature. Whatever the anti-critical
party may bring forward to the contrary, it will maintain itself,
and not retrograde again through anything, so long as there exists
such a thing as criticism, and it will not be easy for a reader upon
the stage of culture on which we stand in the present day, if he
goes to the examination unprejudiced, and with an uncorrupted power
of appreciating the truth, to be able to ward off its influence."

The critical labors of Hobbes, Spinoza, Peyrerius, Simon, Astruc,
Eichorn, Paine, Bauer, (G. L.) De Wette, Ewald, Geddes, Vater, Reuss,
Graf, Davidson, Colenso, Hupfeld, Wellhausen, Kuenen, Briggs, and
others, have overthrown the old notions concerning the authenticity
of the Pentateuch. There is not one eminent Bible scholar in Europe,
and scarcely one in America, who any longer contends that Moses wrote
this work.

The pioneers in the field of the Higher Criticism were the Rationalists
Hobbes and Spinoza and the Catholics Peyrerius, Simon, and Astruc. More
than two hundred years ago Benedict Spinoza, the greatest of modern
Jews, with his own race and the entire Christian church against him,
made this declaration, which the scholarship of the whole world
now accepts:

"It is as clear as the noonday light that the Pentateuch was not
written by Moses" (Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, Chap, viii,
Sec. 20).

A century passed, and Thomas Paine in France, in the most potent
volume of Higher Criticism ever penned, exposed in all their nakedness
the wretched claims of the traditionalists. He read the Pentateuch
and wrote:

"Those books are spurious." "Moses is not the author of them." "The
style and manner in which those books are written give no room to
believe, or even to suppose, they were written by Moses." "They were
not written in the time of Moses, nor till several hundred years
afterwards" (Age of Reason).

About the same time German scholars, ever foremost in the domain of
critical analysis, took up the work. The writings of Eichorn, Bauer,
Vater, and De Wette, "swept the field in Germany." De Wette, one of her
greatest theologians, thus presents the conclusion of German critics:

"The opinion that Moses composed these books is not only opposed by all
the signs of a later date which occur in the work itself, but also by
the entire analogy of the history of Hebrew literature and language"
(Books of Moses, Sec. 163).

Fifty years or more elapsed and Davidson and Colenso studied and wrote,
and British scholarship was soon arrayed against the old in favor of
the new. Dr. Davidson, in the following words, voices the opinion of
England's learned:

"There is little external evidence for the Mosaic authorship, and what
little there is does not stand the test of criticism. The succeeding
writers of the Old Testament do not confirm it.... The objections
derived from internal structure are conclusive against the Mosaic
authorship" (Introduction to the Old Testament).

At last, in our own land and in our own time, Dr. Briggs and others
attack the Mosaic theories, and, in spite of the efforts of Princeton's
fossils, the intelligence of America acknowledges the force of their
reasoning and accepts their conclusions. The Higher Criticism has
triumphed. Spinoza's judgment is confirmed, and the American critic
pronounces the verdict of the intellectual world:

"In the field of scholarship the question is settled. It only remains
for the ministry and people to accept it and adapt themselves to it"
(Hexateuch, p. 144).

But this is not the end. A victory has been achieved, but its full
results remain to be realized. The clergy, against their will,
and the laity, who are subservient to the clergy's will, are yet to
be enlightened and convinced. Even then, when the facts disclosed
by the Higher Criticism have gained popular acceptance, another
task remains--the task of showing men the real significance of these
facts. The critics themselves, many of them, do not seem to realize the
consequences of their work. The Rationalistic critics, like Hobbes,
Spinoza, Paine, Reuss, Wellhausen, Kuenen and others, have measured
the consequences of their criticisms and accepted them. The orthodox
critics have not. Some of them, like Dr. Briggs, while denying
the Mosaic authorship and great antiquity of the Pentateuch, while
maintaining its anonymous and fragmentary character, and conceding its
contradictions and errors, are yet loath to reject its divinity and
authority. But these also must be given up. This work as a divine
revelation and authentic record must go. Its chief theological
doctrine, the Fall of Man, is a myth. With this doctrine falls the
Atonement, and with the Atonement orthodox Christianity. This is the
logical sequence of the Higher Criticism of the Pentateuch. To these
critics, and to all who are intelligent enough to discern the truth
and courageous enough to meet it, I would repeat and press home the
admonition of our critic, "to accept it and adapt themselves to it."







