CHAPTER IX.

THE FOUR GOSPELS.


The lesser in size but the greater in importance of the two divisions
of the Bible is the New Testament. The principal books of the New
Testament, and the most highly valued by Christians of all the books
of the Bible, are the Four Gospels. These books, it is affirmed,
were written by Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, in the first century;
Matthew between 37 and 50, Mark and Luke between 56 and 63, and John
between 78 and 97 A.D.

The orthodox claims regarding the origin of these books are thus
expressed by Dr. Hitchcock:

"The Four Gospels are the best authenticated ancient writings in the
world; so clear, weighty, and extensive is the mass of testimony in
favor of them" (Analysis of the Bible, p. 1149).

"These four books, together constituting the best attested piece of
history in the world, were written by four eye-witnesses of the facts
narrated" (Ibid, p. 1151).

"Matthew and John were Apostles and Mark and Luke were companions
and disciples of Apostles" (Ibid).

If these books are authentic and divinely inspired, as claimed,
Christianity is built upon a rock, and the floods and winds of
adverse criticism will beat against it in vain; but if they are not
authentic--if they were not written by the Evangelists named--if they
are merely anonymous books, written one hundred and fifty years after
the events they purport to record, as many contend, then it is built
upon the sand and must fall.



The Apostles.

Christians claim to have an "unbroken chain of testimony" to the
genuineness and credibility of the Four Gospels from the alleged
dates of their composition down to the present time. I shall endeavor
to show that they have no such chain of testimony--that the most
important part of it is wanting.

Twenty books--all of the remaining books of the New Testament but
three--are ascribed to the Apostles Paul, Peter, and John. All of
these books, it is affirmed, were written after Matthew was written,
and about one-half of them after Mark and Luke were written. If this
be true, some proofs of the existence of the Synoptic Gospels ought
to be found in these books.

Of the fourteen Epistles credited to Paul all have been assigned
later dates than Matthew, and a portion of them later dates than Mark
and Luke. But there is not a word to indicate that any one of these
Gospels was in existence when Paul wrote.

The two Epistles of Peter, it is claimed, were written after Matthew,
Mark, and Luke were written. But these Epistles contain no mention
of them.

The four remaining books, First, Second, and Third John and Revelation,
are said to have been written after these Gospels were composed. Their
reputed author, however, knows nothing of these gospels.

The three great Apostles are silent--three links at the very beginning
of this chain are missing.



The Apostolic Fathers.

After the Apostles, and contemporary with the oldest of them, come the
Apostolic Fathers, Clement of Rome, Ignatius, and Polycarp. Clement
wrote about the close of the first century. There are two Epistles
credited to him, but in these Epistles are to be found no evidences
of the existence of the Four Gospels.

Ignatius is said to have suffered martyrdom in the year 116. There
are fifteen Epistles which bear his name. A few of these are believed
to be genuine, while the remainder are conceded to be forgeries. But
in none of them, neither in the genuine nor in the spurious, is there
any evidence that the Gospels had appeared when they were written.

Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, who is said to have been the companion of
John, died at a very advanced age, about the year 167. His Epistle to
the Philippians is extant, but it contains no reference to the Gospels.

Hermas and Barnabas are usually classed with the Apostolic Fathers. The
Shepherd of Hermas and the Epistle of Barnabas make no mention of
the Evangelists.

That the writings of the Apostolic Fathers contain no proofs of
the existence of the Four Gospels is admitted even by Christian
writers. Dr. Westcott admits it:

"Reference in the sub-apostolic age to the discourses or actions of our
Lord, as we find them recorded in the Gospels, show, as far as they go,
that what the Gospels relate was then held to be true; but it does
not necessarily follow that they were already in use, and were the
actual source of the passages in question. On the contrary, the mode
in which Clement refers to our Lord's teaching--'the Lord said,' not
'saith'--seems to imply that he was indebted to tradition, and not to
any written accounts, for words most closely resembling those which
are still found in our Gospels. The main testimony of the Apostolic
Fathers is, therefore, to the substance, and not to the authenticity
of the Gospels" (On the Canon of the New Testament, p. 52).

Bishop Marsh makes the following admission: "From the Epistle of
Barnabas, no inference can be deduced that he had read any part
of the New Testament. From the genuine Epistle, as it is called,
of Clement of Rome, it may be inferred that Clement had read the
First Epistle to the Corinthians. From the Shepherd of Hermas no
inference whatsoever can be drawn. From the Epistles of Ignatius it
may be concluded that he had read St. Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians,
and that there existed in his time evangelical writings, though it
cannot be shown that he has quoted them. From Polycarp's Epistle to the
Philippians it appears that he had heard of St. Paul's Epistle to that
community, and he quotes a passage which is in the First Epistle to
the Corinthians and another which is in the Epistle to the Ephesians;
but no positive conclusion can be drawn with respect to any other
epistle, or any of the Four Gospels" (Michaelis, Vol. I., p. 354).

Dr. Dodwell says: "We have at this day certain most authentic
ecclesiastical writers of the times, as Clemens Romanus, Barnabas,
Hermas, Ignatius, and Polycarp, who wrote in the order wherein I
have named them, and after all the writers of the New Testament. But
in Hermas you will not find one passage or any mention of the New
Testament, nor in all the rest is any one of the Evangelists named"
(Dissertations upon Irenæus).

Professor Norton says: "When we endeavor to strengthen this evidence by
appealing to the writings ascribed to Apostolic Fathers we, in fact,
weaken its force. At the very extremity of the chain of evidence,
where it ought to be strongest, we are attaching defective links which
will bear no weight" (Genuineness of the Gospels, Vol I., p. 357).

Clement, Ignatius, and Polycarp, all refer to the Epistles of Paul,
showing that they were in existence when they wrote and that they were
acquainted with them. But they never mention the Four Gospels, and this
silence affords conclusive evidence that these books as authoritative
documents did not exist in their time; for it is unreasonable to
suppose that they would use the least important and make no use of
the most important books of the New Testament. Three additional and
three of the principal links in this "unbroken chain of testimony"
are wanting, and must be supplied before the authenticity of the Four
Gospels can be established.



The Christian Fathers.

The early Christian Fathers had no knowledge of the existence of the
Four Gospels. One of the earliest and one of the most eminent of the
Christian Fathers was Justin Martyr. He lived and wrote about the
middle of the second century. His writings are rather voluminous,
and are devoted to the task of proving to both Jews and Gentiles
the divinity of Christ and the divine origin of Christianity. If
a Christian writer were to attempt to demonstrate this now, where
would he go for his authority? To the Four Gospels. These would
constitute his chief--almost his entire authority. Now, had these
books been extant when Justin wrote, and valued as they are by
Christians to-day, he would have used them, he would have quoted
from them, he would have named them. But he makes no use of them,
he never mentions them. He makes more than three hundred quotations
from the Old Testament--Messianic prophecies, etc.--and in nearly two
hundred instances he names the books from which he quotes. He makes
nearly one hundred quotations from Christian writings that are now
considered apocryphal, but he makes none from the Four Gospels.

This silence of Justin is the most damaging argument that has been
adduced against the authenticity of the Gospels. This demonstrates
one of two things: that these books were not in existence when Justin
Martyr wrote, were not in existence at the middle of the second
century, or if they were, the foremost Christian scholar of his age
rejected them.

Recognizing the significance of this damaging fact, Christian
apologists have attempted to show that Justin was acquainted with
our Gospels by citing extracts from his writings similar to passages
found in them. Westcott adduces seven passages, but admits that two
only are wholly identical. He says:

"Of the seven, five agree verbally with the text of St. Matthew
or St. Luke, exhibiting, indeed, three slight various readings not
elsewhere found, but such as are easily explicable. The sixth is a
condensed summary of words related by St. Matthew; the seventh alone
presents an important variation in the text of a verse, which is,
however, otherwise very uncertain" (Canon of the New Testament,
p. 131).

Think of this renowned defender of Christianity, Justin Martyr,
attempting to establish the divinity of Christ by citing four hundred
texts from the Old Testament and apocryphal books and two only from
the Evangelists!

There is really but one passage in the Gospels to be found in
Justin. But if it could be shown that they contain many passages
similar to, or even identical with, passages found in his writings,
this would not prove that he has quoted from them. It is not claimed
that these Gospels are mere fabrications of their authors, or that
they are composed entirely of original matter. They consist largely
of traditions, and these traditions, many of them, were embodied in
other and older books which were used by the early Fathers. While the
Four Gospels were not extant in Justin's time, some of the documents
of which they are composed, particularly those containing the reputed
sayings of Jesus, had already appeared and were frequently cited by
the Fathers. These citations, Paley, Lardner, Westcott, and others,
in their evidences of Christianity, have adduced as proofs of the
early origin of the Four Gospels.

Justin's quotations are chiefly from what he calls the "Memoirs of
the Apostles." These, it is claimed, were the Four Gospels. If so,
then the gospels we have are not genuine, for the quotations from the
"Memoirs" are not to be found in our Gospels. Justin says that Mary
(not Joseph) was descended from David; that Jesus was born in a cave;
that the Magi came from Arabia; that Jesus made ploughs and yokes;
that a fire was kindled in the Jordan at his baptism; that he was
called a magician. The "Memoirs," or Gospels, from which Justin quotes
are not our Gospels.

The Rev. Dr. Giles repudiates the claim that Justin Martyr recognized
the Gospels. He says:

"The very names of the Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,
are never mentioned by him--do not occur once in all his works. It
is, therefore, childish to say that he has quoted from our existing
Gospels" (Christian Records, p. 71).

Papias, a Christian bishop and a contemporary of Justin Martyr,
is cited as a witness for the Gospels. He is quoted by Eusebius as
referring to writings of Matthew and Mark. But the books he mentions
are plainly not the gospels of Matthew and Mark.

Of Matthew he says: "Matthew composed the oracles in the Hebrew
dialect, and every one interpreted them as he was able" (Eusebius'
Ecclesiastical History, book iii, p. 39).

This was not the biographical narrative known as "Matthew," but
probably an apocryphal book called the "Oracles of Christ," which
some ascribed to Matthew.

Mark is referred to as follows: "Mark having become the interpreter
of Peter, wrote accurately whatever he remembered, though he did
not arrange in order the things which were either said or done
by Christ. For he neither heard the Lord, nor followed him; but
afterwards, as I said, accompanied Peter, who adapted his teaching
to the occasion, and not as making a consecutive record of the Lord's
discourses" (Ecclesiastical History, book iii, p. 39).

This does not describe our Gospel of Mark, which, although
a compilation, is a consecutive narrative of events, and not a
collection of isolated fragments.

But even if Papias was acquainted with the Gospels, he is a poor
witness to their credibility, for he accepted the teachings of
tradition in preference to the books which he knew: "I held that what
was to be derived from books did not profit me as that from the living
and abiding voice [tradition]" (Ecclesiastical History, iii, 39).

Dr. Davidson admits that the books mentioned by Papias were not our
Gospels. He says:

"Papias speaks of Matthew and Mark, but it is most probable that he had
documents which either formed the basis of our present Matthew and Mark
or were taken into them and written over" (Canon of the Bible, p. 124).

"He neither felt the want nor knew the existence of inspired Gospels"
(Ibid, p. 123).

The writings of thirty Christian authors who wrote prior to 170 are
still extant. In all these writings there is to be found no mention
of the Four Gospels.

In the writings of Theophilus, bishop of Antioch, occurs the
following: "John says: 'In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was God.'" This was written in 180, after the middle of the latter
half of the second century, and is the earliest proof of the existence
of any one of the Four Gospels.

Irenæus, bishop of Lyons, who wrote about 190, is the earliest
writer who mentions all of the Four Gospels. He names them; he
declares them to be inspired; he makes four hundred quotations from
them. The Four Gospels were in existence when Irenæus wrote, and they
were undoubtedly composed between the time of Justin Martyr and the
time of Irenæus--that is, some time during the latter half of the
second century.

Writers on the evidences of Christianity endeavor to establish the
genuineness of the Four Gospels by showing that the Fathers who lived
and wrote during the two centuries following the ministry and death
of Jesus accepted and quoted them as authorities. They credit these
Fathers with more than four thousand evangelical quotations. But where
are these quotations to be found? Nearly all of them in Irenæus,
Clemens of Alexandria, Tertullian, and Origen, while in Clement
of Rome, Ignatius, Polycarp, and Justin Martyr few or none are
claimed. The fact that the writings of the Fathers which appeared
immediately after 180 contain thousands of evangelical references,
while in all the writings which appeared before 170 the evangelists
are not even named, affords conclusive evidence that the Four Gospels
were composed during or near the decade that elapsed between 170 and
180 A.D.



Internal Evidence.

The Four Gospels do not claim to have been composed by Matthew,
Mark, Luke, and John. The titles are not "The Gospel of Matthew,"
"The Gospel of Mark," "The Gospel of Luke," and "The Gospel of John,"
but "The Gospel According to Matthew," "The Gospel According to Mark,"
"The Gospel According to Luke," and "The Gospel According to John." The
titles simply imply that they are according to the real or traditional
teachings of these Evangelists. So far as the textual authorship is
concerned, they are, and do not purport to be other than, anonymous
books. Omit these titles, and not one word remains to indicate their
authorship. Now, it is admitted that these books did not originally
bear these titles. St. Chrysostom, who believes that they are genuine,
says (Homilies i) that the authors did not place their names at
the head of their Gospels, but that this was afterward done by the
church. There is nothing in them to support the claim that they were
written by those whose names have been prefixed. On the contrary,
their contents furnish conclusive proofs that they were not written
by these supposed authors, nor in the apostolic age.



Matthew.

Christians believe that Matthew's Gospel was written in Hebrew. Our
Matthew was written in Greek. An attempt has been made to explain
the discrepancy by assuming that Matthew wrote his book in Hebrew,
and subsequently rewrote it in Greek, or translated it into this
language. But another difficulty remains. The quotations from the
Old Testament in Matthew, and there are many, are taken, not from the
Hebrew, but from the Septuagint (Greek) version. This proves that it
was originally written in Greek and not in Hebrew.

The Gospel According to the Hebrews, it is affirmed, was the Hebrew
form of Matthew. If this be true, then our Greek Matthew cannot be a
correct translation, for the passages from the Gospel of the Hebrews
which have been preserved are not to be found in Matthew. The following
quotations are from the Gospel of the Hebrews, this supposed original
Gospel of Matthew:

"He who wonders shall reign, and he who reigns shall rest."

"Then the rich man began to smite his head, and it pleased him not."

"The Holy Ghost, my mother, lately took me by one of my hairs, and
bore me to the great mountain Tabor."

"I am a mason, who get my livelihood by my hands; I beseech thee,
Jesus, that thou wouldst restore to me my strength, that I may no
longer thus scandalously beg my bread."

If these passages are from the original Gospel of Matthew, then the
accepted Gospel of Matthew is spurious.

This Hebrew Gospel was the Gospel of the Ebionites and
Nazarenes. Eusebius says: "They [the Ebionites] made use only of that
which is called the Gospel According to the Hebrews." Epiphanius says:
"They [the Nazarenes] have the Gospel of Matthew most entire in the
Hebrew language." St. Jerome refers to it as "the Gospel which the
Nazarenes and Ebionites use."

Referring to these sects, Dr. Hug, the eminent Catholic critic, says:
"The Ebionites denied the miraculous conception of Christ, and,
with the Nazarenes, looked upon him only as an ordinary man." The
Gospel which these sects accepted as their authority could not have
been our Gospel of Matthew, because the most important part of this
Gospel is the story of the miraculous conception.

While the claim that Matthew wrote his Gospel in Hebrew is vigorously
maintained, the claim that he afterwards translated it into Greek
himself is so manifestly untenable that many have conceded its
improbability. Jerome says: "Who afterwards translated it [Matthew]
into Greek is not sufficiently certain."

The consequences of this admission are thus reluctantly expressed
by Michaelis: "If the original text of Matthew is lost, and we have
nothing but a Greek translation: then, frankly, we cannot ascribe
any divine inspiration to the words."

Two texts may be cited from Matthew which prove a later date for the
Gospel than that claimed. Jesus, in upbraiding the Jews, is reported
to have used the following language:

"Upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth,
from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias, son of
Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar" (xxiii, 35).

Zacharias, the son of Baruch (Barouchos), who is undoubtedly meant,
was slain in the temple about 69 A.D. Thus Matthew makes Jesus refer
to an event that occurred forty years after his death and twenty or
thirty years after the Gospel of Matthew is said to have been written.

Dr. Hug admits that this is the Zacharias referred to. He says:
"There cannot be a doubt, if we attend to the name, the fact and its
circumstances, and the object of Jesus in citing it, that it was the
same Zacharias Barouchos, who, according to Josephus, a short time
before the destruction of Jerusalem, was unjustly slain in the temple."

Regarding this passage in Matthew, Professor Newman, of University
College, London, says: "There is no other man known in history to
whom this verse can allude. If so, it shows how late, how ignorant,
how rash, is the composer of a text passed off on us as sacred truth"
(Religion Not History, p. 46).

"Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church; and the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto thee
the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on
earth shall be loosed in heaven" (xvi, 18, 19).

This passage was written at the beginning of the establishment of the
Roman Catholic hierarchy, for the purpose of securing the recognition
of the Church of Rome (the founding of which tradition assigned to
Peter) as the church of Christ.

Bishop Marsh, in his Michaelis, says: "If the arguments in favor of
a late date for the composition of St. Matthew's Gospel be compared
with those in favor of an early date, it will be found that the former
greatly outweigh the latter."

Dr. Davidson admits that Matthew is an anonymous work. He says:
"The author, indeed, must ever remain unknown" (Introduction to the
New Testament, p. 72).



Mark.

As to where the Gospel of Mark was written, whether in Asia, in Africa,
or in Europe, is unknown. Some believe that it was written at Antioch;
Chrysostom states that it was written at Alexandria; Irenæus says
that it was written at Rome. If it was written at Rome it was probably
written in Latin instead of Greek. Smith's "Bible Dictionary" concedes
that "it abounds in Latin words." The following is an example:

"And he asked him, What is thy name? And he answered, saying, My name
is Legion: for we are many" (v. 9).

Commenting on this passage, the Rev. Dr. Giles says: "The Four Gospels
are written in Greek, and the word 'legion' is Latin; but in Galilee
and Perea the people spoke neither Latin nor Greek, but Hebrew, or
a dialect of it. The word 'legion' would be perfectly unintelligible
to the disciples of Christ, and to almost everybody in the country"
(Christian Records, p. 197).

If it was written in Latin, then our Greek Mark, like Matthew, instead
of being an original Gospel, is simply an unauthenticated translation.

Mark has generally been considered a Petrine Gospel; orthodox
Christians claiming that Peter dictated the Gospel to Mark. Discussing
this claim, the author of "Supernatural Religion" says: "Throughout
the Gospel there is the total absence of anything which is specially
characteristic of Petrine influence and teaching" (Vol. I.,
p. 362). Volkmar and others declare it to be Pauline. One thing can
be affirmed with certainty; it was not written by John Mark, neither
was it dictated by Peter.

The last twelve verses of Mark, it is claimed, are an interpolation,
because they are not to be found in the older manuscripts of the
book. The Revision Committee which prepared the New Version of the
New Testament pronounced them spurious. If these verses are not
genuine, then it must be admitted that the second Gospel is either
an unfinished or a mutilated work; for with these verses omitted,
it ends abruptly with the visit of the women to the tomb, leaving the
most important events at the close of Christ's career, his appearance
and ascension--the proofs of his resurrection--unrecorded.

The greater portion of Mark is to be found in Matthew and Luke, and
much of it in the same or similar language. Judge Waite, in his review
of the Gospel, says: "Mark has almost a complete parallel in Luke and
Matthew taken together. There are but 24 verses which have no parallel
in either of the other synoptics" (History of Christianity, p. 350).

Regarding the origin of Mark, Strauss says: "Our second Gospel
cannot have originated from recollections of Peter's instructions,
i. e., from a source peculiar to itself, since it is evidently a
compilation, whether made from memory or otherwise, from the first
and third Gospels" (Life of Jesus, Vol. I., p. 51).

That neither Peter nor Mark had anything to do with the composition
of this book is admitted by Davidson. Referring to it he says: "It
has therefore no relation to the Apostle, and derives no sanction
from his name. The author is unknown" (Introduction to New Testament,
Vol. II, p. 84).



Luke.

In denying the authenticity of Mark and Luke, what I deny is that these
books were written by the traditional Mark and Luke, the companions
of Peter and Paul. I deny that they were written in the apostolic age
and by apostolic authority. As stated by "Chambers's Encyclopedia,"
"the question as to their genuineness is in the main question as
to the fact of their existence at this early period; the special
authorship of each Gospel is a comparatively less important question."

The book of Luke is anonymous; it does not claim to be written by
Luke. And yet the Fathers may have been correct in ascribing its
authorship to him. If so, who was this Luke? Where did he live? When
did he write his book? "Chambers's" says he "was born, according to
the accounts of the Church Fathers, at Antioch, in Syria." Smith's
"Bible Dictionary" says, "He was born at Antioch." The Gospel is
addressed to Theophilus. Who was Theophilus? The "Bible Dictionary"
says: "From the honorable epithet applied to him in Luke i, 3, it
has been argued with much probability that he was a person in high
official position." There is but one Theophilus known to history to
whom the writer can possibly refer, and this is Theophilus, Bishop
of Antioch, who lived in the latter part of the second century. Luke
and Theophilus, then, both belonged to Antioch, and it is undoubtedly
to this Theophilus that Luke's Gospel is addressed. This proves that
it was written more than one hundred years after the date assigned
for its composition. When Luke assumed the task of writing a Gospel,
Matthew, it has been claimed, was the only Gospel extant. And yet
Luke in his introduction declares that many had been written; all of
which he admits were genuine. Jerome says that one of the Gospels
which Luke refers to was the Gospel of Appelles: "The Evangelist,
Luke, declares that there were many who wrote Gospels.... They were
such as that according to the Egyptians, and Thomas, and Matthias,
and Bartholomew, that of the Twelve Apostles, and Basilides, and
Appelles, and others." The Gospel of Appelles was written about
60 A.D. If Luke's Gospel was written after the Gospel of Appelles,
it was written after the middle of the second century.

Dr. Schleiermacher, one of the greatest of modern theologians,
maintains that Luke is a compilation of thirty-three different
manuscripts; as follows: Chapter i, 1-4; i, 5-80; ii, 1-20; ii, 21;
ii, 22-40; ii, 41-52; iii, iv, 1-15; iv, 16-30; iv, 31-44; v, 1-11;
v, 12-16; v, 17-26; v, 27-39, vi, 1-11; vi, 12-49; vii, 1-10; vii,
11-50; viii, 1-21; viii, 22-56; ix, 1-45; ix, 46-50; ix, 51-62; x,
1-24; x, 25-37; x, 38-42; xi, 1-13; xi, 14-54; xii, xiii, 1-9; xiii,
10-22; xiii, 23-35; xiv, 1-24; xiv, 25-35; xv, xvi, xvii, 1-19; xvii,
20-37; xviii, xix, xx; xxi; xxii, xxiii, 1-49; xxiii, 50-56; xxiv.

Bishop Thirlwall's Schleiermacher contains the following in regard to
the composition of Luke: "The main position is firmly established that
Luke is neither an independent writer, nor has made a compilation from
works which extended over the whole course of the life of Jesus. He
is from beginning to end no more than the compiler and arranger of
documents which he found in existence, and which he allows to pass
unaltered through his hands" (p. 313).

The immediate source of Luke's Gospel was undoubtedly the Gospel
of Marcion, itself a compilation of older documents. Referring to
this Gospel, the Rev. S. Baring-Gould says: "The arrangement is so
similar that we are forced to the conclusion that it was either used
by St. Luke or that it was his original composition. If he used it,
then his right to the title of author of the Third Gospel falls to
the ground, as what he added was of small amount" (Lost and Hostile
Gospels).



The Synoptics.

The Synoptics Matthew, Mark, and Luke, it is claimed, are original
and independent compositions, and the oldest of all the Gospels,
both canonical and apocryphal. This claim is disproved by the
form and character of their contents. One of two things is certain:
either these writers copied from each other, or all copied from older
documents. The following, which are but a few of the many passages
that might be adduced, afford unmistakable evidence of this:

Matthew--"They were astonished at his doctrine" (xxii, 33).

Mark--"They were astonished at his doctrine" (i, 22).

Luke--"They were astonished at his doctrine" (iv, 32).



Matthew--"For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the
scribes" (vii, 29).

Mark--"For he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the
scribes" (i, 22).



Matthew--"While he yet spake, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came,
and with him a great multitude, with swords and staves, from the
chief priests," etc. (xxvi, 47).

Mark--"While he yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the twelve, and with
him a great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests,"
etc. (xiv, 43).



Matthew--"And without a parable spake he not unto them" (xiii, 34).

Mark--"But without a parable spake he not unto them" (iv, 34).



Matthew--"Sought opportunity to betray him" (xxvi, 16).

Luke--"Sought opportunity to betray him" (xxii, 6).



Mark--"But they understood not that saying" (ix, 32).

Luke--"But they understood not this saying" (ix, 45).

The theory that the Synoptics borrowed from each other will account
for the agreements in their books; but it will not account for the
disagreements, and these are quite as numerous as the agreements. The
following hypothesis, however, will account for both. When the
Synoptics were composed probably fifty gospels, some of recent and
others of early origin, were already in existence. In addition to
these were a hundred other documents pertaining to Christ and his
teachings. From this mass of Gospel literature the Synoptics were
compiled. Those portions that agree were taken from a common source;
those that do not agree were taken from different documents.

Dean Alford believes that in the early ages of the church there
existed what he terms a "common substratum of apostolic teachings,"
"oral or partially documentary." This, he says, "I believe to have been
the original source of the common part of our three Gospels." Canon
Westcott admits that "their substance is evidently much older than
their form."

Professor Ladd, of Yale College, says: "In some respects each of the
first three Gospels must be regarded as a compilation; it consists
of material which the others have in common with it, and which was
of a traditional kind more or less prepared before the author of
the particular Gospel took it in hand to modify and rearrange it"
(What Is the Bible? p. 295).

Bishop Marsh, in his Michaelis, says: "The notion of an absolute
independence, in respect to the composition of our three first Gospels,
is no longer tenable" (Vol. III, part 2, p. 170).

Prof. Robertson Smith, of Scotland, pronounces them "unapostolic
digests of the second century." Evanson goes further and declares
them to be "spurious fictions of the second century."

The Encyclopedia Britannica concedes the fact that Protestant
scholarship in Europe has virtually abandoned the popular orthodox
position regarding the origin of these books. It says:

"It is certain that the Synoptic Gospels took their present form only
by degrees, and that while they have their root in the apostolic age,
they are fashioned by later influences and adapted to special wants
in the early church. They are the deposits, in short, of Christian
traditions handed down first of all in an oral form, before being
committed to writing in such a form as we have them; and this is now
an accepted conclusion of every historical school of theologians in
England no less than in Germany, conservative no less than radical."



John.

In addition to what has already been adduced against the Johannine
authorship of the Fourth Gospel, I submit the following:

1. John, the disciple of Jesus, was an unlettered fisherman. The
author of the Fourth Gospel was an accomplished scholar and a polished
writer. His book is one of the classics of Christian literature.

2. The Apostle John was born at Bethsaida. The author of John says
that Bethsaida was in Galilee (xii, 21). Bethsaida was not in Galilee,
but in Perea, and to assert that John wrote this Gospel is to assert
that he was ignorant of the location of his own town.

3. "In Bethany beyond Jordan" (New Ver. i, 28). "In Enon near to Salim"
(iii, 23). "A city of Samaria, called Sychar" (iv, 5). These passages
were written by one little acquainted with the geography of Palestine
and unfamiliar with the scenes he attempts to describe.

4. John, the son of Zebedee, was a Jew. The manner in which the author
of the Fourth Gospel always refers to the Jews is conclusive evidence
that he was not a Jew.

5. The Synoptics state that Jesus celebrated the Passover with his
disciples, and was crucified on the following day. The author of
John states that he was crucified on the previous day, and therefore
did not partake of the Paschal supper. In the second century a great
controversy arose in the church regarding this. Those who accepted
the account given in the Synoptics observed the feast, while those
who accepted the account given in the Fourth Gospel rejected it. Now,
we have the testimony of Irenæus that John himself observed this
feast. "For neither could Anicetus persuade Polycarp not to observe it,
because he had ever observed it with John, the disciple of our Lord"
(Against Heresies, iii, 3). As John accepted the account which appears
in the Synoptics and rejected that which appears in the Gospel of John,
he could not have written the Fourth Gospel.

6. The disciple John is represented as standing at the cross and
witnessing the crucifixion. The author of John does not claim to
have been present, but appeals to the testimony of an eye-witness in
support of his statements: "And he that saw it bare record, and his
record is true" (xix, 35).

7. "Now, there was leaning on Jesus' bosom one of his disciples whom
he loved" (xiii, 23). "The disciple standing by, whom he loved" (xix,
26). "To Simon Peter, and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved"
(xx, 2). This beloved disciple is said to be John. The Synoptics,
however, do not represent John as the favorite disciple. If there was
one disciple whom Jesus loved more than the others, it was Peter. To
ascribe to John the authorship of the Fourth Gospel is to ascribe to
him a spirit of self-glorification that is simply disgusting.

8. "And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his
disciples, which are not written in this book: but these are written,
that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God:
and that believing ye might have life through his name" (xx, 30,
31). Thus concludes the original Gospel According to St. John. This
book was not written by John, but it was written by a disciple of
John for Johannine Christians. When the Roman Catholic hierarchy
was formed and the Gospel of John was admitted to the New Testament
canon, there was appended another chapter--a forgery. The hero of
this chapter is Peter. A dozen times Jesus calls him by name. To him
Jesus gives the oft repeated injunction, "Feed my lambs;" "feed my
sheep." This chapter was added to counteract the Johannine influence
and exalt the Petrine teachings so dear to Rome. To give an appearance
of genuineness to this forgery, "the disciple whom Jesus loved" is
again introduced and declared the author of the Gospel, thus making
John himself a supporter of Petrine supremacy.

9. Some of the most important events in the life of Jesus, the
Synoptics state, were witnessed by John. The author of the Fourth
Gospel knows nothing about them. "All the events said to have been
witnessed by John alone are omitted by John alone. This fact seems
fatal either to the reality of the events in question or to the
genuineness of the Fourth Gospel" (Greg).

10. Even Christians have tacitly admitted the hopelessness of
maintaining the authenticity of both the Fourth Gospel and the
Synoptics. If the Synoptics are authentic, the Fourth Gospel cannot
be. Smith's "Bible Dictionary" says: "In the Fourth Gospel the
narrative coincides with that of the other three in a few passages
only. Putting aside the account of the Passion, there are only
three facts which John relates in common with the other Evangelists"
(Art. Gospels).

11. The author of John declares Jesus to be God. The complete
deification of Jesus was the growth of generations. The early
Christians, including the Apostles, believed him to be a man. Later, he
became a demi-god, and the writings and traditions which represented
him as such formed the materials from which the Synoptics were
compiled. Not until the latter part of the second century was Jesus
placed among the gods, and not until this time was the Fourth Gospel
written.

Alluding to the Fourth Gospel, Canon Westcott says: "The earliest
account of the origin of the Gospel is already legendary."

Professor Davidson says: "The Johannine authorship has receded before
the tide of modern criticism, and though this tide is arbitrary at
times it is here irresistible" (Canon of the Bible, p. 127).

From a work entitled "The New Bible and Its Uses" Prof. Andrew
D. White, our present minister to Germany, in his "Warfare of Science"
(vol. ii, p. 306), quotes the following in relation to John, which
shows how rapidly the supposed authenticity of Bible books is
disappearing before the investigations of the Higher Critics:

"In the period of thirty years ending in 1860, of the fifty great
authorities in this line, four to one were in favor of the Johannine
authorship.... Of those who have contributed important articles
to the discussion from 1880 to 1890, about two to one reject the
Johannine authorship of the Gospel in its present shape--that is to
say, while forty years ago great scholars were four to one in favor
of, they are now two to one against, the claim that the Apostle John
wrote the Gospel as we have it."



The Four Gospels.

The principal reason for rejecting both the reputed authorship and the
credibility of the Four Gospels is the contradictory character of their
contents. If Jesus Christ was a historical personage, as Christians
believe, these alleged biographies were not written by his Apostles and
their companions; neither were they compiled from authentic records.

The Greek text of the Gospels disproves their authenticity. Their
assigned authors, or two of them at least, were unlearned Jews. Their
work was confined chiefly to the lower classes of their countrymen,
in a land where Greek was almost unknown. The absurdity of this is
shown by Mrs. Besant: "The only parallel for so curious a phenomenon
as these Greek Gospels, written by ignorant Jews, would be if a Cornish
fisherman and a low London attorney, both perfectly ignorant of German,
wrote in German the sayings and doings of a Middlesex carpenter, and as
their work was entirely confined to the lower classes of the people,
who knew nothing of German, and they desired to place within their
reach full knowledge of the carpenter's life, they circulated it among
them in German only, and never wrote anything about him in English."

The doctrines of the immaculate conception and of a material
resurrection, so prominent in the Four Gospels, are proofs of their
late origin. These doctrines are not taught in the older books of the
New Testament, and were unknown to the Christians of the first century.

The scholarly author of "Supernatural Religion," after a patient and
exhaustive examination of every accessible document relating to the
subject, writes as follows:

"After having exhausted the literature and the testimony bearing on
the point, we have not found a single distinct trace of any of those
Gospels during the first century and a half after the death of Jesus"
(Vol. II., p. 248).

Bishop Faustus, a heretical theologian of the fifth century, referring
to this so so-called Gospel history, says:

"It is allowed not to have been written by the Son himself nor by his
Apostles, but long after by some unknown men who, lest they should
be suspected of writing things they knew nothing of, gave to their
books the names of the Apostles."

Regarding these four books and their sequel, Acts, Rev. Dr. Hooykaas,
the noted theologian and critic of Holland, voices the opinion of
himself and his renowned associates, Dr. Kuenen and Dr. Oort, in the
following words:

"Our interest is more especially excited by the five historical
books of the New Testament. If we might really suppose them to have
been written by the men whose names they bear, we could never be
thankful enough for such precious authorities.... But, alas! not
one of these five books was really written by the person whose name
it bears--though for the sake of brevity we shall still call the
writers Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John--and they are all of more
recent date than their headings would lead us to suppose.... We
cannot say that the Gospels and the book of Acts are unauthentic,
for not one of them professes to give the name of its author. They
appeared anonymously. The titles placed above them in our Bibles owe
their origin to a later ecclesiastical tradition which deserves no
confidence whatever" (Bible for Learners, Vol. III., p. 24).

The Pentateuch was not written by Moses, nor the Four Gospels by
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. The authenticity of the chief books of
the New Testament, like that of the chief books of the Old, must be
given up. The results of our review of them may be summed up in the
words of the great German, Ferdinand Christian Baur: "These Gospels
are spurious, and were written in the second century."







