CHAPTER XXXIV.

CONCLUSION.


Twenty crimes and vices--lying, cheating, stealing, murder, wars of
conquest, human sacrifices, cannibalism, witchcraft, slavery, polygamy,
adultery, obscenity, intemperance, vagrancy ignorance, injustice
to woman, unkindness to children, cruelty to animals, tyranny,
persecution--are, we have seen, sanctioned by the Bible. Scattering
this book broadcast over the land, making it the chief text-book of
the Sunday-school and, above all, placing it in our public schools
and compelling our youth to accept it as infallible authority,
is a monstrous wrong; and you who advocate it are the enemies
of virtue and the promoters of vice. James Anthony Froude says:
"Considering all the heresies, the enormous crimes, the wickedness,
the astounding follies, which the Bible has been made to justify,
and which its indiscriminate reading has suggested; considering that
it has been, indeed, the sword which our Lord said he was sending,
and that not the devil himself could have invented an implement more
potent to fill the hated world with lies and blood and fury, I think
certainly that to send hawkers over the world loaded with copies of
this book, scattering it in all places, among all persons, ... is
the most culpable folly of which it is possible for man to be guilty."

There are within the lids of this Bible a hundred chapters sanctioning
the bloodiest deeds in all the annals of crime; and this is the book
you wish to place in the hands of our sons! There are within the
lids of this Bible a hundred chapters which no modest woman can read
without her cheek becoming tinged with the blush of shame; and this
is the book you wish to place in the hands of our daughters! If you
delight to feast upon such carrion you have the right to do so, but
you have no right to thrust it down the throats of your neighbors. As
a Liberal, I concede to the Christian cuckoo the right to propagate
her species; but I protest against her laying her eggs in the secular
nest and having them hatched by the state.

I contend that the Bible does not present an infallible moral
standard, and I have given many valid reasons why it does not. I
expect the defenders of this book to complete the task that I have here
essayed. They will claim that the Bible is opposed to crime. They will,
no doubt, cite numerous passages in confirmation of this claim. Let
them do this. Then place the results of our labors side by side. This
will show that the Bible abounds with teachings that conflict. This
fact established, the dogma of its divinity must fall. And this is what
I am endeavoring to do--to tear this dogma from the human brain. Not
until this is done can we have a pure morality. So long as men's
minds are confused and corrupted by these conflicting and demoralizing
teachings, so long will immorality prevail. You cannot make men moral
while they accept as their moral guide a book which sanctions every
crime and presents as the best models of human excellence the most
notorious villains. You cannot make them moral by teaching them that a
lie is better for being called inspired, that a vice becomes a virtue
with age, that a dead rogue should be canonized and a live one killed.

Not until this dogma is destroyed can you appreciate what is
meritorious in the Bible. There are in it some noble precepts. It
contains along with the false much that is true; along with the bad
much that is good; but while you are compelled to accept all--the
true and the false, the good and the bad, as alike infallible, as
alike divine--it can be of no value to you.

You may contend that I mistake the meaning of what I have quoted from
this book. But the language is too plain to be mistaken. Do not tell
me that it states one thing and means another. This is, you affirm,
the word of your God. Is your God wanting in candor?

So far as the Bible is concerned, the criminal has as much to
support the justness of his crime as the Christian has to sustain
the truthfulness of his creed. The various doctrines of the church
are not upheld by stronger Scripture proofs than have been cited in
justification of the crimes that I have named.

Bible apologists tell us that it is only in this book that wrongdoers
confess and record their sins, and that this is evidence of its
divinity. Were this true we might say that the Bible is the only book
whose authors are so devoid of shame as to parade their sins. But this
claim is not true. It was not the sinners who wrote these accounts
of their sins any more than it is the criminals to-day who write and
publish the accounts of their crimes.

Bible lands, we are told, are more moral than other lands. This is
false. The morality of Pagan China and Japan, without the Bible,
is not inferior to that of Christian Europe with it. Modern Europe
with its partial rejection of the Bible is superior in morality
to medieval Europe with its full acceptance of it. The morals of
the people have improved in about the same ratio that their faith
in the book has declined. A further declension of faith will bring
a further improvement in morals. In Christian countries those who
have discarded its teachings are morally superior to those who still
accept them. It is the ignorant who are the most devout believers
in this book, and it is the ignorant who are the most immoral. The
intelligence and morality to be found in Christian lands are not the
results of Bible teachings, but exist in spite of them.

That some great and good men have commended the Bible as a moral
guide is true. These commendations are given wide publicity. But the
testimonials of these men are, for the most part, not the result of
careful reading and study. They have been inspired by the teachings of
childhood, by the sentiment that prevails around them, or by a perusal
of only the choicest portions of the book. These testimonials, too,
are mostly from men who, while expressing admiration for many of
its teachings, do not believe and do not profess to believe in its
divinity. Many of these testimonials are forgeries.

"If you discard the Bible, what," asks the Christian, "will you give
us as a moral guide?" Enter a public library blindfolded; take from
its shelves a volume at random, and you will scarcely select a worse
one. The book you select may not pertain to morals. It may not even
contain the word "moral." But neither does the Bible. Must we go to
the ignorant past for our morality? Does human experience count for
nothing? Have the most marvelous advances been made in every other
department of human knowledge during the past two thousand years
and none in ethical science? Read Bentham, Mill, and Spencer. Let
your children study Count Volney's "Law of Nature," and Miss Wixon's
"Right Living." These books are not infallible and divine, they are
fallible and human; but they are immeasurably superior to any books
that supernaturalists can offer. Not in Moses nor Jesus, not in the
Decalogue nor Sermon on the Mount, is there to be found a statement of
moral duties so just and so comprehensive as the following from Volney:

"What do you conclude from all this? I conclude from it that all the
social virtues are only the habitude of actions useful to society
and to the individual who practices them; that they all refer to the
physical object of man's preservation; that nature having implanted
in us the want of that preservation, has made a law to us of all
its consequences, and a crime of everything that deviates from it;
that we carry in us the seed of every virtue, and of every perfection;
that it only requires to be developed that we are only happy inasmuch
as we observe the rules established by nature for the end of our
preservation; and that all wisdom, all perfection, all law, all virtue,
all philosophy, consist in the practice of these axioms founded on
our own organization:--Preserve thyself; Instruct thyself; Moderate
thyself; live for thy fellow-men, that they may live for thee."

The Bible moralist would have us believe that from this book all
morality has been derived; that God is the author and the Bible the
revelation and sole repository of moral laws. But it is not from
Gods and Bibles that these laws have come. In the words of Tyndall,
"Not in the way assumed by our dogmatic teachers has the morality of
human nature been propped up. The power that has molded us thus far
has worked with stern tools upon a rigid stuff.... That power did
not work with delusions, nor will it stay its hands when such are
removed. Facts, rather than dogmas, have been its ministers--hunger,
shame, pride, love, hate, terror, awe--such were the forces, the
interaction and adjustment of which during the immeasurable ages of
his development wove the triplex web of man's physical, intellectual,
and moral nature, and such are the forces that will be effectual to
the end."

Accepting the Bible--not for what it is claimed to be, the word of
God, but for what it is, the work of man--I can excuse, in a degree,
the crude ideas of right and wrong and the laxity of morals that
prevailed among the people whose history it purports to record. The
age in which they lived, the circumstances that surrounded them,
must palliate, to some extent, their deeds and theories. But it is
humiliating to think that in these better times, illuminated by the
light of a glorious civilization, there are those who spurn the robes
of virtue that Reason in the loom of grave Experience has woven,
and who from the dark and musty closets of the past drag forth for
use the soiled and blood-stained garments that barbarians wore.



With this chapter our review of the Bible ends. We have examined
successively the authenticity of its books, the credibility of its
statements, and the morality of its teachings. The authenticity of the
Bible must be abandoned. It will be abandoned, and abandoned soon. Its
credibility, impaired by a knowledge of its lack of authenticity and
the exposure of its numberless errors, will be contended for awhile
longer. But this, in turn, will go. When its credibility has been
destroyed, and it is acknowledged to be mostly a volume of fables
and legends, priestcraft continuing to survive, the clergy, as a
dernier resort, will descant upon the divine lessons of morality
taught by these fables and legends. But the relentless iconoclasts
of criticism will break this image also, and the Bible as a moral
guide and religious authority will be laid away forever.







APPENDIX.

Arguments Against the Divine Origin and in Support of the Human Origin
of the Bible.


A celebrated theologian has used with much ingenuity and effect the
watch as an argument in support of the divine origin of the universe. I
have a watch. Like other watches it is not infallible. But supposing
that I should claim for it infallibility and divinity; that while
other watches are of human invention and workmanship, this particular
make of watches is the work of God. The claim would be deemed too
absurd for serious consideration. I would be regarded as a lunatic
or a jester. Now, it is no more absurd to claim infallibility and
divinity for a watch than it is to claim infallibility and divinity for
a book. Yet millions of people of recognized sanity and intelligence
profess to believe, and many of them do sincerely believe, that a book
called the Bible is divine. How do we account for this? It is simply
the result of centuries of religious education. I could have taken
my children and taught them that my watch is divine. Had I kept them
isolated as far as possible from other people, had I commanded them
to shun discussion, and forbidden them to reason about it, as the
clergy do in regard to the Bible, they would probably believe it. I
was taught that the Bible is divine. I believed it. But in a fortunate
hour I listened to the voice of Reason; I examined the claims of its
advocates; I read it; and the halo of holiness surrounding the old
book vanished.

As a supplement to my review of the Bible I shall present some
arguments, thirty-six in number, against the divine origin and
in support of the human origin of the Bible. The brevity and
incompleteness of many of them will, I admit, justify the conclusion
not proven. I have space for little more than a mere statement of
them. The evidence supporting them will be found in the preceding
chapters of this book.

In a discussion of this question the champion of the Bible is placed
at a tremendous disadvantage--is handicapped as it were--at the very
commencement by this fact: While both the advocates and opponents of
Bible divinity admit that man exists and has written books, it has
not been proven that a God even exists, much less that he has written
or inspired a book. But let us concede, for the sake of argument,
that there is a God; that he is all-powerful, all-wise, and all-just;
and that he can write or inspire a book. Is the Bible the work of
such a Being? It is not. The following are my arguments:

1. Its mechanical construction and appearance. The Bible is printed
with type made by man, on paper made by man, and bound in a volume
by man. In its mechanical construction and appearance it does not
differ from other books.

2. The character of its contents. The contents of this book consist of
thoughts--human thoughts--every thought bearing unmistakable evidence
of having emanated from the human mind. There is not a thought
expressed in the Bible, the meaning of which can be comprehended,
that is beyond the power of man to conceive. If it contains thoughts,
the meaning of which cannot be comprehended, they are not a revelation,
and are self-evidently human.

3. The manner in which its contents were communicated to man. These
thoughts are expressed in human language. The Bible originally
appeared, it is claimed, in the Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek languages,
two of them obscure languages of Western Asia. The president of
the United States does not issue an important proclamation in the
Cherokee or Tagalese language, and the ruler of the universe would not
have issued a message intended for all mankind in the most obscure
languages of the world. Had he given a message to man he would have
provided a universal language for its transmission.

4. Lack of divine supervision in its translation into other
tongues. Failing to provide a universal language for its transmission,
God would at least have supervised its translation into other
languages. Only in this way could its inerrancy and divinity have
been preserved. Yet no divine supervision has been exercised over the
translators, the transcribers, and the printers of this book. Divine
supervision, it is admitted, was confined to the original writers.

5. Not given to man until at a late period in his existence. This is
an argument advanced by Napoleon Bonaparte. Napoleon rejected the
Bible. He said that if it had been given to man at the creation he
might have accepted it, but that its late appearance proved to him
that it was of human origin.

6. Not given as a guide to all mankind, but only to an insignificant
portion of it. Not only has the Bible been confined to a small period
of man's existence, it is nearly all addressed to one small race of
earth's inhabitants. While Christians affirm that it is a universal
message intended for all, its doctrines and ceremonies pertain to
the Jews. This is wholly true of the Old Testament, and, with the
exception of a few doubtful passages, true of the Four Gospels, the
chief books of the New Testament. Now, is it reasonable to suppose that
this great and just All-Father, as he is called, would for centuries
take into his special confidence and care a few of his children and
ignore and neglect the others?

7. It deals for the most part, not with the works of God, but with the
works of man. What man does and knows is not a divine revelation. Paine
says: "Revelation, therefore, cannot be applied to anything done upon
earth, of which man himself is the actor or witness; and consequently
all the historical and anecdotal part of the Bible, which is almost
the whole of it, is not within the meaning and compass of the word
revelation, and therefore is not the word of God."

8. But one of many Bibles. There are many Bibles. The world is divided
into various religious systems. The adherents of each system have their
sacred book, or Bible. Brahmins have the Vedas and Puranas, Buddhists
the Tripitaka, Zoroastrians the Zend Avesta, Confucians the five King,
Mohammedans the Koran, and Christians the Holy Bible. The adherents of
each claim that their book is a revelation from God--that the others
are spurious. Now, if the Christian Bible were a revelation--if it
were God's only revelation, as affirmed--would he allow these spurious
books to be imposed upon mankind and delude the greater portion of
his children?

9. Many versions of this Bible. Not only are there many Bibles in the
world, there are many versions of the Christian Bible. The believers
in a divine revelation have not been agreed as to what books belong
to this revelation. The ancient Jews, who are said to have sustained
more intimate relations with God than any other race, were not agreed
in regard to this. The accepted Hebrew version contains 39 books (22
as divided by the Jews), the Samaritan version contains but 6 books
(some copies 5); while the Septuagint version contains 50. The early
Christians were not agreed. The Syriac version of the New Testament
contains 22 books; the Italic 24 (some copies 25); the Egyptian 26;
the Vulgate 27. The Sinaitic and Alexandrian MSS. each contains 29
books, but they are not all the same. The Gothic version omitted four
books in the Old Testament. The Ethiopic omitted books in both the
Old and New Testaments which are now accepted, and included books
in both which are now rejected. The Bibles of the Roman Catholic,
of the Greek Catholic, and of the Protestant churches do not contain
the same books. This disagreement regarding the books of the Bible
is proof of their human origin.

10. Incompetency of those who determined the canon. If the Bible were
the word of God it would not have required the deliberations of a
church council to determine the fact. And yet the Christian canon
was determined in this manner; and it took centuries of time and
many councils to make a collection of books that was acceptable to
the church. Not until the close of the fourth century were all the
books of the Bible adopted.

It is commonly supposed that the members of these councils were men of
great learning and still greater honesty. On the contrary, they were
mostly men of little learning and less honesty. They were ignorant,
fanatical, and immoral. Their deliberations were characterized by
trickery, lying, mob violence, and even murder. Many of them, so far
from being able to read and critically examine the books of the Bible,
could not read their own names. Even the molders of their opinions
concerning the canon--Irenæus, Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria,
Jerome, and Augustine--were they living now, would be considered
very ordinary clay. The historical facts in regard to the formation
of the Bible, if generally known, would be sufficient to dispel all
illusions respecting its divinity.

11. Books belonging to this so-called revelation lost or
destroyed. There were many other Jewish and Christian writings for
which divinity was claimed and which Bible writers themselves declare
to be of as much importance and authority as those which still
exist. The transitory and perishable nature of these books proves
their human origin, and shows that while those that remain are more
enduring they are not immortal and imperishable, and hence not divine.

12. Different versions of the same book do not agree. There are a
hundred versions and translations of the books of the Bible. No two
versions of any book agree. The translators and copyists have altered
nearly every paragraph. The earlier versions alone contain more
than 100,000 different readings. The original text no longer exists
and cannot be restored. Every version, it is admitted, abounds with
corruptions. Now, to assert that a book is at the same time divine and
corrupt is a contradiction of terms. God, it is affirmed, is all-wise,
all-powerful, and all-just. If he is all-wise he knew when his work
was being corrupted; if he is all-powerful he could have prevented it;
if he is all-just he would have prevented it. This God, it is declared,
is everywhere and sees everything. He watches the sparrows when they
fall, and numbers the hairs of our heads. He knows the secrets of every
heart. If he made a revelation to his children, upon the acceptance
and observance of which depends their eternal happiness, and then
knowingly and wilfully allowed this revelation to be perverted and
misunderstood, he is not a just God, but an unjust devil.

13. The mutability of its contents. The alterations made by
transcribers and translators demonstrate the mutability of its
contents, and this disproves its divine character. To admit that man
can alter the work of God is to admit that human power transcends
divine power. If the thoughts composing the Bible were divine man
could not alter them.

14. The anonymous character of its books. If the Bible is to be
accepted even as a reliable human record its authors ought, at least,
to be persons of acknowledged intelligence and veracity. And yet
almost nothing is known of its authors. The authorship of fully fifty
books of the Bible is absolutely unknown. Its books are nearly all
either anonymous or self-evident forgeries. This is true of the most
important books. The Pentateuch we know was not written by Moses,
nor the Four Gospels by Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Aside from
the anonymous character of the writings of the Bible, with a few
exceptions, they evince neither a superior degree of intelligence
nor a high regard for the truth.

15. Its numerous contradictions. If the Bible were divine there would
be perfect harmony in all its statements. One contradiction is fatal
to the claim of inerrancy and divinity. Now the Bible contains not
merely one, but hundreds of contradictions. Nearly every book contains
statements that are contradicted by the writers of other books. This
is especially true of the Four Gospels. The writers of these agree that
a being called Jesus Christ lived and died; but regarding nearly every
event connected with his life and death they disagree. Human discord,
and not divine harmony, dwells in its pages.

16. Its historical errors. If the Bible were divine its history would
be infallible. But it is not. It presents as historical facts the most
palpable fictions, and denies or misstates the best authenticated
truths of history. Referring to Bible writers, the eminent Dutch
divines, Drs. Kuenen, Oort, and Hooykaas, in their preface to "The
Bible for Learners," say: "As a rule, they concern themselves very
little with the question whether what they narrated really happened
so or not." Its history is fallible and human.

17. Its scientific errors. God, the alleged author of this book,
it is claimed, created the universe. He ought, then, to be familiar
with his own works. The writers of the Bible, on the contrary,
display a lamentable ignorance of the universe and its phenomena. The
Rev. Dr. Lindsay Alexander, orthodox Calvinist, in his "Biblical
Theology," referring to these writers, says: "We find in their writings
statements which no ingenuity can reconcile with what modern research
has shown to be scientific truth." The demonstrated truths of modern
science were unknown to them. They give us the crude ideas of primitive
man and not the infallible knowledge of an omniscient God.

18. Its alleged miracles. The Bible is filled with marvelous
stories. The sun and moon stand still; the globe is submerged with
water to the depth of several miles; rods are transformed into
serpents, dust into lice, and water into blood and wine; animals
hold converse with man in his own language; men pass through fiery
furnaces unharmed; a child is born without a natural father; the
dead arise from the grave and walk the earth again. These marvelous
stories--these miracles--are adduced to prove the divine origin of
the Bible. They prove its human origin. If these miracles prove the
divinity of the Bible, then nearly all the books of old are divine,
for they abound with these same miracles. If these stories be true,
if these miracles occurred, the laws of nature were arrested and
suspended. The laws of nature are immutable. If the laws of nature
are immutable they cannot be suspended. The laws of nature cannot be
suspended; they never have been suspended; these stories are false;
and being false, the Bible is not divine.

19. Its immoral teachings. If the Bible were of divine origin its moral
teachings would be divine. It would be what its adherents affirm it to
be, an infallible moral guide. But its moral teachings are not divine;
it is not an infallible moral guide. It contains, like other Bibles,
some moral precepts; but it also sanctions nearly every crime and
vice. War and murder, bigotry and persecution, tyranny and slavery,
demonism and witchcraft, adultery and prostitution, drunkenness and
vagrancy, robbery and cheating, falsehood and deception, are all
authorized and commended by this book. It cannot, therefore, be divine.

20. Its inferior literary character. If the Bible were the word
of God, as a literary composition it would be above criticism. It
would be as far superior to all other books as God is superior to
man. Its rhetoric would transcend in beauty the glorious coloring
of a Titian. Its logic would be faultless. The Bible is not such a
book. It contains some admirable pieces and these owe much of their
literary merit to the translators, appearing as our version did in
the golden age of English literature. As a whole it is far inferior to
the literature of ancient Greece and Rome; inferior to the literature
of modern Italy, of France, of Germany, and of England. If the Bible
be the word of God it is a long way from God up to Shakespeare.

21. Its writers do not claim to be inspired. Had the writers of the
Bible been inspired they would have known it and would have proclaimed
it. Had they claimed to be inspired it would not prove the Bible
to be divine, for like Mohammed, they might have been deluded, or,
like a more recent finder of a holy book, impostors. But they do not
even claim that their books are divine revelations. Some of these
books contain what purport to be divine revelations, but the books
themselves do not pretend to be divine. The only exception is the
book called Revelation, admittedly the most doubtful book of the Bible.

"All scripture is given by inspiration." Waiving the questions of
authenticity and correct translation, who wrote this? Paul. What was
the scripture when he wrote? The Old Testament, the Old Testament
alone. The writers of the Old Testament do not claim to be divinely
inspired. This is a claim made by the later Jews and by the early
Christians. Paul and the other writers of the New Testament do not
claim that their writings are divine. This, too, is a claim made by
others long after they were written.

The fact that the writers of the Bible do not believe and do not
assert that their books are of divine origin, that this claim was
first made many years after they were composed, by those who knew
nothing of their origin, is of itself, in the absence of all other
evidence, sufficient to demonstrate their human origin.

22. God has never declared it to be his word. The Bible does not,
as we have seen, purport to be the word of God. Nowhere, neither in
the book nor outside of it, has he declared it to be his revealed
will. It contains various messages, chiefly of local concern, which
he is said to have delivered to man; but the book, as such, is not
ascribed to him nor claimed by him.

23. Whatever its origin it cannot be a divine revelation to us. Even
supposing that the writers of the Bible had claimed to be inspired
and that these books really were a divine revelation to them, they
would not, as Paine justly argues, be a divine revelation to us. The
only evidence we would have of their divinity would be the claim of
the writer--a claim that any writer might make--a claim that even
an honest writer might make were he, like many religious writers,
the victim of a delusion.

24. A written revelation unnecessary. To affirm the necessity of a
written revelation from God to man, as Christians do, is to deny his
divine attributes and ascribe to him the limitations of man. If God
be omnipotent and omnipresent a written revelation is unnecessary. To
impute to him an unnecessary act is to impute to him an imperfection,
and to impute to him an imperfection is to impugn his divinity. We do
not write a communication to one who is present. Think of an infinite,
all-powerful, and ever-present God communing with his living children
through an obscure and corrupted message said to have been delivered
to a tribe of barbarians three thousand years ago!

25. Its want of universal acceptance. A divine revelation intended
for all mankind can be harmonized only with a universal acceptance
of this revelation. God, it is affirmed, has made a revelation to
the world. Those who receive and accept this revelation are saved;
those who fail to receive and accept it are lost. This God, it is
claimed, is all-powerful and all-just. If he is all-powerful he can
give his children a revelation. If he is all-just he will give this
revelation to all. He will not give it to a part of them and allow
them to be saved and withhold it from the others and suffer them to
be lost. Your house is on fire. Your children are asleep in their
rooms. What is your duty? To arouse them and rescue them--to awaken
all of them and save all of them. If you awaken and save only a part
of them when it is in your power to save them all you are a fiend. If
you stand outside and blow a trumpet and say, "I have warned them,
I have done my duty," and they perish, you are still a fiend. If
God does not give his revelation to all; if he does not disclose its
divinity to all; if he does not make it comprehensible and acceptable
to all; in short, if he does not save all, he is the prince of fiends.

If all the world's inhabitants but one accepted the Bible and there was
one who could not honestly accept it, its rejection by one human being
would prove that it is not from an all-powerful and an all-just God;
for an all-powerful God who failed to reach and convince even one of
his children would not be an all-just God. Has the Bible been given
to all the world? Do all accept it? Three-fourths of the human race
reject it; millions have never heard of it.

26. Non-agreement of those who profess to accept it. If the Bible
were the work of God there would be no disagreement in regard to its
teachings. Its every word would be as clear as the light of day. Yet
those who profess to accept it as divine are not agreed as to what
it means. In the Christian world are a hundred sects, each with a
different interpretation of its various teachings. Take the rite of
baptism. Baptism is enjoined by the Bible. But what is baptism? The
three leading Protestant denominations of this country are the Baptist,
the Presbyterian, and the Methodist. I ask the Baptist what constitutes
baptism, and he tells me immersion; I ask the Presbyterian, and he
tells me sprinkling; I ask the Methodist which is proper, and he
tells me to take my choice. Sectarianism is conclusive proof that
the Bible is human.

27. Inability of those who affirm both a human and a divine element
in it to distinguish the one from the other. Confronted by its many
glaring errors and abominable teachings, some contend that a part of it
is the work of man and a part the work of God. And yet they are unable
to separate the one from the other. If a hundred attempts were made by
them to eliminate the human from the divine no two results would be the
same. Their inability to distinguish this supposed divine element from
the human is proof that both have the same origin--that both are human.

28. The character of its reputed divine author. The Bible is an
atrocious libel on God. It traduces his character, and denies his
divinity. The God of the Bible is not this all-powerful, all-wise,
and all-just Ruler of the universe, but a creature of the human
imagination, limited in power and knowledge, and infinite only in
vanity and cruelty.

29. The belief of primitive Christians in its divinity not an immediate
conviction but a growth. Had the books of the Bible been divinely
inspired their divinity would have been recognized at once. When they
originally appeared they were believed and known to be the works of
man and accepted as such.

Referring to the Old Testament, Dr. Davidson says: "The degree of
authority attaching to the Biblical books grew from less to greater,
till it culminated in a divine character, a sacredness rising even
to infallibility" (The Canon of the Bible, p. 274).

Of the New Testament Dr. Westcott says: "It cannot, however, be
denied that the idea of the inspiration of the New Testament, in
the sense in which it is maintained now, was the growth of time"
(On the Canon of the New Testament, p. 55).

The admitted fact that these books were originally presented and
received as human productions, and that the idea of inspiration
and divinity was gradually and slowly developed by the priesthood,
is conclusive proof that they are of human and not of divine origin.

30. Its acceptance by modern Christians the result of religious
teaching. In India the people believe that the Vedas and other sacred
books or Bibles are divine. Why do they believe it? Because for a
hundred generations they have been taught it by their priests. The
Turks believe that the Koran came from God. They believe it because
for twelve centuries this has been their religious teaching. For nearly
two thousand years Christian priests have taught that the Holy Bible is
the word of God. As a result of this the masses of Europe and America
believe it to be divine. Each generation, thoroughly impregnated with
superstition, transmitted the disease to the succeeding one and made
it easy for the clergy to impose their teachings on the people and
perpetuate their rule. The belief of Christians in the divinity of
the Bible, like the belief of Hindoos in the divinity of the Vedas,
and of Mohammedans in the divinity of the Koran, is the result of
religious teaching.

The ease with which a belief in the divine character of a book
obtains, even in an enlightened age, is illustrated by the inspired
(?) books that have appeared in this country from time to time,
and for several of which numerous adherents have been secured. About
seventy-five years ago a curious volume, called the Book of Mormon,
made its appearance. A few impostors and deluded men proclaimed its
divinity. A priesthood was established; Mormon education and Mormon
proselytism began their work, and already nearly a million converts
have been made to the divinity of this book.

Dr. Isaac Watts says: "The greatest part of the Christian world can
hardly give any reason why they believe the Bible to be the Word of
God, but because they have always believed it, and they were taught so
from their infancy." Really the entire Christian world--pope, bishop,
priest, and layman--the learned and the unlearned--can give no other
valid reason.

Profoundly true are these words of the historian Lecky: "The
overwhelming majority of the human race necessarily accept their
opinions from authority. Whether they do so avowedly, like the
Catholics, or unconsciously, like most Protestants, is immaterial. They
have neither time nor opportunity to examine for themselves. They
are taught certain doctrines on disputed questions as if they were
unquestionable truths, when they are incapable of judging, and every
influence is employed to deepen the impression. This is the origin
of their belief. Not until long years of mental conflict have passed
can they obtain the inestimable boon of an assured and untrammeled
mind. The fable of the ancient is still true. The woman even now sits
at the portal of life, presenting a cup to all who enter in which
diffuses through every vein a poison that will cling to them for
ever. The judgment may pierce the clouds of prejudice; in the moments
of her strength she may even rejoice and triumph in her liberty;
yet the conceptions of childhood will long remain latent in the
mind to reappear in every hour of weakness, when the tension of the
reason is relaxed, and when the power of old associations is supreme"
(History of Rationalism, Vol. II., pp. 95, 96).

Schopenhauer says: "There is in childhood a period measured by six,
or at most by ten years, when any well inculcated dogma, no matter how
extravagantly absurd, is sure to retain its hold for life." Considering
the impressionable character of the immature mind, and how nearly
impossible it is to eradicate the impressions of childhood, the
wonder is not that so many believe in the divinity of the Bible,
unreasonable as the belief is, but rather that so many disbelieve it.

31. An article of merchandise. Bibles are manufactured and sold just as
other books are manufactured and sold. Some are printed on poor paper,
cheaply bound, and sold at a low price; while others are printed on
the best of paper, richly bound, and sold at a high price. But all
are sold at a profit. The publisher and the book seller, or Bible
agent, derive pecuniary gain from their publication and sale. It
may be urged that the Bible can be obtained for the asking, that
millions of copies are gratuitously distributed. But this is done
in the interest of Christian propagandism. Nearly all religious,
political, and social organizations, to promote their work, make a
free distribution of their literature.

The printing and selling of Bibles is as much a part of the publishing
business as the printing and selling of novels. One of the leading
publishing houses of this country is that of the American Bible
Society. Wealthy and deluded Christians have been successfully
importuned to contribute millions to this Society. Directly or
indirectly the clergy reap the harvest, leaving the gleanings to
the lay employees, many of whom labor at starvation wages. In Great
Britain the crown has claimed the sole and perpetual right to print
the Bible (A. V.). For monetary or other considerations her kings have
delegated this right to publishers who have amassed fortunes from its
sale. Twenty years ago Bible publishing was characterized as the worst
monopoly in England. If the Bible were divine God would not allow it
to be used as merchandise. It would be as free as light and air.

32. A pillar of priestcraft. Not only is the Bible printed and sold
like other books, but its so-called divine teachings themselves are
used as merchandise. There are in Christendom half a million priests
and preachers. These priests and preachers are supported by the
people. Even the humble laborer and the poor servant girl are obliged
to contribute a portion of their hard earnings for this purpose. In
this country alone two thousand million dollars are invested for their
benefit; while two hundred million dollars are annually expended for
their support. For what are these men employed? To interpret God's
revelation to mankind, we are told. An all-powerful God needing an
interpreter! According to the clergy, God though omnipresent has had to
send a communication to his children, and though omnipotent he cannot
make them understand it. Those ignorant of other tongues and unable
to make known their wants require interpreters. The various Indian
tribes employ them. For the sake of gain these men degrade their God
to the level of an American savage, representing him as incapable of
expressing his thoughts to man, and representing themselves as the
possessors of both human and divine wisdom and authorized to speak
for him.

These Bibles are simply the agents employed by priests to establish
and perpetuate their power. They claim to be God's vicegerents
on earth. As their credentials they present these old religious
and mythological books. These books abound with the marvelous and
mysterious--the impossible and unreasonable--and are easily imposed
upon the credulous. If the contents of a book be intelligible
and reasonable you can not convince these people that it is other
than natural and human; but if its contents be unintelligible and
unreasonable it is easy to convince them that it is supernatural and
divine. Smith's Bible Dictionary says: "The language of the Apostles
is intentionally obscure." Of course; if it were not obscure there
would be no need of priests to interpret it, and what is Scripture
for if not to give employment to the priests?

We are triumphantly told that the Bible has withstood the assaults of
critics for two thousand years. But as much can be said of other sacred
books. Any business will thrive as long as it is profitable. Bibles
will be printed as long as there is a demand for them; and there
will be a demand for them as long as priests do a lucrative business
with them. Considering their abilities the vendors of the Gospel
are among the best paid men in the world to-day. The wealth of men
and the smiles of women are bestowed upon them more lavishly than
upon any other class. There are thousands in the ministry enjoying
comfortable and even luxurious livings who would eke out a miserable
subsistence in any other vocation.

33. Its advocates demand its acceptance by faith rather than by
reason. In the Gospels and in the Pauline Epistles, the principal
books of the New Testament, Christ, the reputed founder, and Paul, the
real founder of the Christian religion, both place religious faith,
i. e., blind credulity, above reason. This evinces a lack of divine
strength and is a confession of human weakness.

Modern advocates of the Bible in presenting the dogma of divine
inspiration ask us to discard reason and accept it by faith. In the
affected opinion of these men, to examine this question is dangerous,
to criticise the Bible is impious, and to deny or even doubt its
divinity is a crime. What is this but a tacit acknowledgment that
the faith they wish us to exercise is wanting in themselves? This
condemnation of reason and commendation of credulity is an insult
to human intelligence. A dogma which reason is obliged to reject,
and which faith alone can accept, is self-evidently false; and its
retention is not for the purpose of supporting a divine truth, but
for the purpose of supporting a human lie.

34. The refusal of its advocates to correct its acknowledged
errors. That the clergy are controlled by mercenary motives rather
than a love of truth is attested by the fact that they continue to
teach the admitted errors of the Bible. Our Authorized version, it is
conceded by Christian scholars, contains hundreds of errors. That the
Revisers corrected many of these errors is admitted. Yet the clergy
cling to these errors and refuse to accept a corrected text. The
principal reasons assigned for retaining the Old version instead of
adopting the New are these: 1. The English of three hundred years
ago possesses a certain charm which distinguishes the Bible from more
modern works and secures for it a greater reverence. 2. Its division
into chapters and verses renders it more convenient. 3. The adoption
of the New would expose the errors of the Old, suggest the possible
fallibility of the New, and sow the seeds of doubt. Thus expediency
prompts them to teach the acknowledged errors of man in preference
to what they claim to be the truths of God. This proves the human
character of the Bible and the insincerity of its professed exponents.

35. Its authority maintained by fraud and force. For sixteen hundred
years--from the time that Constantine, to gain a political advantage
over his rivals, became a convert to the Christian faith--corruption
and coercion have been the predominant agents in maintaining its
supremacy. Fagot, and sword, and gun, and gibbet, and rack and
thumbscrew, and every artifice that cunning and falsehood could devise,
have been used to uphold the dogma of this book's divinity. To-day,
in nearly every nation of Europe, the powers of the state are employed
to compel allegiance to it. And in this free Republic, everywhere, with
bribe and threat, the authorities are invoked to force its bloody and
filthy pages into the hands of innocent school girls to pollute with
superstition, lust, and cruelty their young and tender minds. These
deeds of violence, these pious frauds, these appeals to the civil
powers, all prove it to be the work of man and not the word of God.

36. The intelligence of the world for the most part rejects it. If
the Bible were divine the wise would be the best qualified to realize
and appreciate the fact; for while all may err the judgment of the
intelligent is better than the judgment of the ignorant. In Christendom
the ignorant nearly all believe the Bible to be the infallible word
of God, every verse of which is to be accepted literally. A more
intelligent class reject the objectionable portions of it, or give to
them a more rational and humane interpretation. Those of the highest
intelligence--the great leaders of the world in national affairs, in
the domain of literature, in science and philosophy, and in Biblical
and religious criticism--the Washingtons and Lincolns, the Franklins
and Jeffersons, the Fredericks and Napoleons, the Gambettas and
Garibaldis; the Shakespeares and Byrons, the Goethes and Schillers,
the Carlyles and Emersons, the Eliots and de Staëls; the Humboldts
and Darwins, the Huxleys and Haeckels, the Drapers and Tyndalls, the
Comtes and Spencers; the Humes and Gibbons, the Voltaires and Renans,
the Bauers and Strausses, the Paines and Ingersolls--all these reject
its divinity. A Gladstone is an anomaly.

Dr. Watson of Scotland gives frank expression to a fact of which
his fellow clergymen are fully cognizant, but which they are loth
to admit. He says: "The great, and the wise, and the mighty, are not
with us. These men, the master minds, the imperial leaders among men
are outside our most Christian church."

The ignorant suppose that the intelligent accept the Bible; because
the intelligent, dependent in a large degree upon the ignorant,
and knowing that of all passions religious prejudice and hatred are
the worst, do not care to arouse their antagonism by an unnecessary
avowal of their disbelief. This is especially true of men in public
life. But these men think; and to their intellectual friends they talk.

In his "History of the Bible," Bronson C. Keeler says: "The only men
distinguished for their learning who now believe it to be the inspired
word of God, are the men who are, either directly or indirectly, making
their living out of it." Do these learned divines themselves believe
it? Nearly every intelligent clergyman entertains and confidentially
expresses opinions regarding the Bible which he dare not proclaim
from the pulpit. But master and slave are alike growing weary--the
master of his duplicity, the slave of his burden. Emancipation for
both is approaching. To-day the clergy smile when they meet; some
day they will laugh outright, this stupendous farce will be ended,
and man will be free.

