CHAPTER XXXII.

INJUSTICE TO WOMEN--UNKINDNESS TO CHILDREN--CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.


Injustice to Women.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it has degraded
woman.

The holy offices of wife and mother it covers with reproach. Its
teachings carried out, as they were during the centuries of Christian
rule, leave woman but two paths in which to tread--the one leading into
slavery, the other into exile. Servitude in the house of a husband,
or self-banishment into a convent--these are the sad alternatives
presented for her choice.

"Thy desire shall be to thy husband and he shall rule over thee"
(Gen. iii, 16).

"Wives, submit yourselves to your own husbands" (Col. iii, 18).

"As the church is subject unto Christ so let the wives be to their
own husbands in everything" (Eph. v, 24).

"Let your women keep silence in the churches, for it is not permitted
unto them to speak, but they are commanded to be under obedience,
as also saith the law. And if they will learn anything, let them ask
their husbands at home; for it is a shame for a woman to speak in
the church" (1 Cor. xiv, 34, 35).

"Ye wives, be in subjection to your own husbands.... For after this
manner in the old time the holy women also, who trusted in God,
adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own husbands; even
as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord" (1 Peter iii, 1-6).

"Let woman learn in silence with all subjection. But I suffer not
a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be
in silence. For Adam was first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not
deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression"
(1 Tim. ii, 11-14).

Oh! the unspeakable outrage that woman has suffered because of that
old Jewish fable!

The teachings of the Bible respecting marriage are an insult to
every married woman. Christ discouraged marriage (Matt. xix, 10-12),
while a more despicable dissertation on marriage than Paul gives in
the seventh chapter of 1 Corinthians was never penned.

In contracting matrimonial alliances, woman's rights and choice are
not consulted. The father does his daughter's courting, and sells
or gives her to whom he pleases. A father is even allowed to sell
his daughter for a slave (Ex. xxi, 7). In the Decalogue the wife is
classed with slaves and cattle as a mere chattel.

Kidnapping is commanded for the purpose of obtaining wives.

"Therefore they [God's priests] commanded the children of Benjamin,
saying, Go and lie in wait in the vineyards; and see, and, behold, if
the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye out
of the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife of the daughters
of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin.... And the children of
Benjamin did so, and took them wives according to their number of
them that danced whom they caught" (Jud. xxi, 20-23).

The Levitical law makes motherhood a sin that can be expiated only
by offering a sin offering at the birth of every child. The degree
of sinfulness depends upon the sex of the child; giving birth to
a daughter being esteemed a greater sin than giving birth to a son
(Lev. xii).

The laws of the Bible in regard to divorce are most unjust. A husband
is permitted to divorce his wife if she displease him, while a wife
is not allowed to obtain a divorce for any cause whatever.

"When a man hath taken a wife, and marries her, and it come to pass
that she find no favor in his eyes, ... then let him write her a bill
of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house"
(Deut. xxiv, 1).

"When thou goest forth to war against thine enemies, and the Lord
thy God hath delivered them into thine hands, and thou hast taken
them captive, and seest among the captives a beautiful woman, and
hast a desire unto her, that thou wouldst have her to thy wife; then
thou shalt bring her home to thine house.... And it shall be, if thou
have no delight in her, then thou shalt let her go whither she will"
(Deut. xxi, 10-14).

Wives were compelled to suffer outrage for the sins of their husbands.

"Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out
of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes,
and give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in
the sight of this sun" (2 Sam. xii, 11).

"Their houses shall be spoiled and their wives ravished" (Is. xiii,
16).

"I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; and the
city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished"
(Zech. xiv, 2).

"Let their wives be bereaved of their children and be widows"
(Jer. xviii, 21).

The teachings of the Bible have been used by the church to keep woman
in a subordinate position.

"There is not a more cruel chapter in history," says Dr. Moncure
D. Conway, "than that which records the arrest by Christianity of the
natural growth of European civilization regarding woman. In Germany
it found woman participating in the legislative assembly, and sharing
the interests and counsels of man, and drove her out and away.... Even
more fatal was the overthrow of woman's position in Rome. Read the
terrible facts as stated by Gibbon, by Milman, and Sir Henry Maine;
read and ponder them, and you will see the tremendous wrong that
Christianity did to woman."

Even the priceless virtue of chastity, in the name of law and in the
name of the Bible, was trampled under foot. Mrs. Gage, in "Woman,
Church, and State," says:

"Women were taught by the church and state alike that the feudal lord,
or seigneur, had a right to them, not only against themselves, but as
against any claim of husband or father. The law known as Marchetta,
or Marquette, compelled newly-married women to a most dishonorable
servitude. They were regarded as the rightful prey of the feudal
lord from one to three days after their marriage.... France, Germany,
Prussia, England, Scotland, and all Christian countries where feudalism
existed, held to the enforcement of Marquette."

Respecting this law, Michelet writes: "The lords spiritual had this
right no less than the lords temporal. The parson, being a lord,
expressly claimed the first fruits of the bride" (La Sorcerie,
page 62).

In this country, while the most illiterate and depraved man is
clothed with the rights of a sovereign, the noblest woman is held in
a subordinate position; and from the Bible, priests and politicians
have procured the chains that hold her in subjection.

Referring to the Bible, America's greatest woman, Elizabeth Cady
Stanton, says: "I know of no other books that so fully teach the
subjection and degradation of woman" (Eighty Years and More).

Brave Helen Gardener says: "Every injustice that has ever been fastened
upon women in a Christian country has been 'authorized by the Bible'
and riveted and perpetuated by the pulpit" (Men, Women, and Gods,
page 14).

"Women are indebted to-day for their emancipation from a position of
hopeless degradation, not to their religion nor to Jehovah, but to the
justice and honor of the men who have defied his commandments. That
she does not crouch to-day where St. Paul tried to bind her, she
owes to the men who are grand and brave enough to ignore St. Paul,
and rise superior to his God" (Ibid, page 30).

George W. Foote of England says it will yet be the proud boast of
woman that she never contributed a line to the Bible.



Unkindness to Children.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because its teachings
respecting the treatment of children are cruel and unjust.

It advocates the use of corporal punishment for children.

"Thou shalt beat him with the rod" (Prov. xxiii, 14).

"Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him with
the rod he shall not die" (Ibid xxiii, 13).

"Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child; but the rod of
correction shall drive it far from him" (Ibid xxii, 15).

"The rod and reproof give wisdom" (Ibid xxix, 15).

It advocates capital punishment for children:

"If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey
the voice of his mother, and that when they have chastened him will
not hearken unto them; then shall his father and his mother lay hold
on him, and bring him out unto the elders of his city, and unto the
gate of his place.... And all the men of the city shall stone him
with stones that he die" (Deut. xxi, 18, 19, 21).

It advocates the indiscriminate and merciless slaughter of little
children:

"Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes"
(Isa. xiii, 16).

"Samaria shall become desolate; for she hath rebelled against her God;
they shall fall by the sword: their infants shall be dashed in pieces"
(Hosea xiii, 16).

"As he [Elisha] was going up by the way, there came forth little
children out of the city, and mocked him.... And he turned back,
and looked on them, and cursed them in the name of the Lord. And
there came forth two she bears out of the wood, and tare forty and
two children of them" (2 Kings ii, 23, 24).

It advocates the punishment of children for the misdeeds of their
parents.

"I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children" (Ex. xx, 5).

"I will stir up the Medes against them, ... their eye shall not spare
children" (Isa. xiii, 17, 18).

"I will also send wild beasts among you, which shall rob you of your
children" (Lev. xxvi, 22).

David prays that the children of his adversaries may become vagabonds
and beggars; and Jeremiah, that the children of his enemies may perish
by famine.

God kills Bath-sheba's child:

"And the Lord struck the child that Uriah's wife bore unto David,
and it was very sick.... And it came to pass on the seventh day that
the child died" (2 Sam. xii, 15-18).

Poor babe! tortured and murdered for its parents' crime!



Cruelty to Animals.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it sanctions
and enjoins unkindness and cruelty to animals.

Portions of the Old Testament, and particularly those relating to
sacrifices, are calculated to foster a spirit of brutality, and
a total disregard for animal life. God revels in the blood of the
innocent. The offering of fruits made by Cain is rejected by him;
the bloody sacrifice of Abel is accepted.

Nearly the entire book of Leviticus is devoted to such laws as these:

"If he offer a lamb for his offering, then shall he offer it before
the Lord. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering,
and kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation; and Aaron's
sons shall sprinkle the blood thereof round about upon the altar"
(Lev. iii, 7, 8).

"And if the burnt sacrifice for his offering to the Lord be of
fowls, then he shall bring his offering of turtle-doves, or of young
pigeons. And the priest shall bring it unto the altar, and wring off
his head, and burn it on the altar; and the blood thereof shall be
wrung out at the side of the altar" (Lev. i, 14, 15).

The minutest directions for conducting these bloody sacrifices come
from the lips of Jehovah himself, and are too brutal and disgusting
to repeat.

The number of animals sacrificed was incredible. At times whole
herds were killed. On one occasion Asa sacrificed 700 oxen and 7,000
sheep. David made an offering of 1,000 bullocks and 2,000 sheep. At
the dedication of the temple, 142,000 domestic beasts were sacrificed
by Solomon.

And this wholesale slaughter of innocent animals, we are told, was
highly pleasing to the Lord. But


            "What was his high pleasure in
        The fumes of scorching flesh and smoking blood,
        To the pain of the bleating mothers, which
        Still yearned for their dead offspring? or the pangs
        Of the sad ignorant victim underneath
        The pious knife?"

                                                         --Byron.


A God of mercy, it would seem, ought to protect the weaker orders of
his creation; but the God of the Bible manifests an utter disregard
for them. When the being created in his own image proved too true a
copy, and he wished to destroy it, he sent a deluge, "and all flesh
died that moved upon the earth." To wreak his vengeance upon Pharaoh,
he visited with disease and death his unoffending cattle. In times of
war, he ordered his followers to "slay both man and beast." Saul's
great transgression, the chief cause of his dethronement and death,
was that he saved alive some sheep and oxen instead of killing them
as God desired. David and Joshua, God's favorite warriors, houghed the
horses of their enemies, and thus disabled turned them loose to die.

We teach a child that it is wrong to rob the nests of birds. It opens
the Bible and reads:

"If a bird's nest chance to be before thee in the way in any tree,
or on the ground, whether they be young ones, or eggs, and the dam
sitting upon the young, or upon the eggs, thou shalt not take the
dam with the young; but thou shalt in any wise let the dam go, and
take the young to thee" (Deut. xxii, 6, 7).

Throughout Christendom "man's inhumanity to man" is only equaled by his
cruelty to the inferior animals. The Buddhist, who has not the Bible
for his guide, considers it a sin to harm the meanest creature. Even
the savage kills only what he needs for food, or such as threaten him
with danger. But the Christian, whose Bible gives him dominion over
the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, maims and murders
in pure wantonness, and after years of patient service, even turns
his beast of burden out to die of hunger and neglect.

For the sake of these dumb creatures, would that our world had less
theology, and more humanity; had fewer Moodys, and more Henry Berghs!







