CHAPTER XXIX.

SLAVERY--POLYGAMY.


Slavery.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it sanctions
the infamous crime of human slavery.

"Both thy bondmen and thy bondmaids, which thou shalt have, shall
be of the heathen that are round about you; of them shall ye buy
bondmen and bondmaids. Moreover, of the children of the strangers that
do sojourn among you; of them shall ye buy, and of their families
that are with you, which they begat in your land; and they shall be
your possession. And ye shall take them as an inheritance for your
children after you, to inherit them for a possession; they shall be
your bondmen forever" (Lev. xx. v, 44-46).

In certain cases they were even permitted to enslave the members of
their own race.

"If thou buy a Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve; and in the
seventh he shall go out free for nothing. If he came in by himself,
he shall go out by himself; if he were married, then his wife shall
go out with him. If his master have given him a wife, and she have
borne him sons or daughters, the wife and her children shall be her
master's and he shall go out by himself" (Ex. xxi, 2-4).

If he desires his liberty he must desert his wife and little ones. To
become a freeman he must become an exile.

"And if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife,
and my children; I will not go out free, then his master shall bring
him unto the judges; he shall also bring him unto the door, or unto
the door-post; and his master shall bore his ears through with an awl;
and he shall serve him forever" (5, 6).

"And he said, Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be
unto his brethren.

"And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem; and Canaan shall be
his servant.

"God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem;
and Canaan shall be his servant" (Gen. ix, 25-27).

Nor is it the Jewish Scriptures alone which sanction slavery. The
Christian Scriptures are not less emphatic in their indorsement of it.

"Let as many servants as are under the yoke count their own masters
worthy of all honor" (1 Tim. vi, 1).

"Exhort servants to be obedient unto their masters" (Titus ii, 9).

"Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to
the flesh, with fear and trembling" (Eph. vi, 5).

"Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear; not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward" (1 Pet. ii, 18).

It may be urged that the term "servant" here refers to a hired
servant. Not so; wherever the word "servant" occurs in the New
Testament, it means slave in its worst sense.

The Fugitive Slave law, which made us a nation of kidnappers, derived
its authority from the New Testament. Paul had established a precedent
by returning a fugitive slave to his master.

Referring to this act of Paul, the Rev. Dr. Stringfellow of Virginia
wrote:

"Oh, how immeasurably different Paul's conduct to this slave and
master, from the conduct of our abolition brethren! This is sufficient
to teach any man that slavery is not, in the sight of God, what it
is in the sight of the abolitionists" (Scriptural View of Slavery).

The Rev. Moses Stuart of Massachusetts wrote:

"What, now, have we here? Paul sending back a Christian servant,
who had run away from his Christian master.... Paul's conscience sent
back the fugitive slave. Paul's conscience, then, like his doctrines,
was very different from that of the abolitionists."

It was no easy task to convince the Bible moralist that slavery
was wrong. When the French Revolutionists rejected the Bible, they
abolished slavery in the colonies. When the church regained control
of the government, the Bible came back, and with it slavery. When
Clarkson's bill for the abolition of slavery was before Parliament,
Lord Chancellor Thurlow characterized it as a "miserable and
contemptible bill," and "contrary to the Word of God."

Charles Bradlaugh, in the North American Review, writing of his own
Christian England, says:

"George III., a most Christian king, regarded abolition theories with
abhorrence, and the Christian House of Lords was utterly opposed to
granting freedom to the slave. When Christian missionaries, some sixty
years ago, preached to Demerara negroes under the rule of Christian
England, they were treated by Christian judges, holding commission
from Christian England, as criminals for so preaching. A Christian
commissioned officer, member of the Established Church of England,
signed the auction notices for the sale of slaves as late as 1824."

The most zealous defenders of slavery in this country were Bible
moralists. The Rev. Alexander Campbell wrote: "There is not one verse
in the Bible inhibiting slavery, but many regulating it. It is not
then, we conclude, immoral."

The Rev. E. D. Simms, professor in Randolph-Macon College, wrote:
"These extracts from Holy Writ unequivocally assert the right of
property in slaves."

The Rev. R. Furman, D. D., Baptist, of South Carolina, said: "The
right of holding slaves is clearly established in the Holy Scriptures,
both by precept and example."

Rev. Thomas Witherspoon, Presbyterian, of Alabama, said: "I draw my
warrant from the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to hold the
slave in bondage."

Said the Rev. Mr. Crawder, Methodist, of Virginia: "Slavery is not
only countenanced, permitted, and regulated by the Bible, but it was
positively instituted by God himself."

You say that this is the testimony of interested parties, that the
South was interested in perpetuating slavery. True, but where did
your Northern theologians stand?

Rev. Dr. Wilbur Fisk, President of Wesleyan University, thus wrote:
"The New Testament enjoins obedience upon the slave as an obligation
due to a present rightful authority."

The Rev. Dr. Nathan Lord, President of Dartmouth College, wrote:
"Slavery was incorporated into the civil institutions of Moses; it
was recognized accordingly by Christ and his apostles. They regulated
it by the just and benevolent principles of the New Testament. They
condemned all intermeddlers with it."

Professor Hodge, of Princeton, said: "The Savior found it around him,
the Apostles met with it in Asia, Greece, and Italy. How did they
treat it? Not by denunciation of slave-holding as necessarily sinful."

Said the Rev. Dr. Taylor, Principal of the Theological Department of
Yale College: "I have no doubt that if Jesus Christ were now on earth,
he would, under certain circumstances, become a slaveholder."

It is now half-forgotten that the North as well as the South once
practiced slavery--that New England, New York, New Jersey, and
Pennsylvania all held slaves. Christian New England, which made the
Bible both its legal and moral code, for more than one hundred years,
held Negroes and Indians in slavery, and even sold Quaker children
into bondage. "Parish ministers all over New England," says the
Rev. William Goodell, "owned slaves" (American Slave Code, p. 106).

Clerical slaveholders in the South trampled under foot the relations
of wife and mother; and clerical slaveholders in the North did the
same. Mr. Goodell says:

"Even in Puritan New England, seventy years ago, female slaves,
in ministers' and magistrates' families, bore children, black or
yellow, without marriage. No one inquired who their fathers were, and
nothing more was thought of it than of the breeding of sheep or swine"
(Ibid., p. 111).

"A Congregational minister at Hampton, Conn. (Rev. Mr. Mosely),
separated by sale a husband and wife who were both of them members
of his own church, and who had been, by his own officiating act as
a minister, united in marriage" (Ibid., p. 114).

Let me cite one of the laws of the Bible relative to the treatment
of slaves--a law which demons would blush to indorse, but which a
merciful (?) God enacted for the guidance of his children:

"If a man smite his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he die
under his hand, he shall be surely punished. Notwithstanding, if he
continue a day or two, he shall not be punished: for he is his money"
(Ex. xxi, 20, 21).

Here a master may brutally beat his slave, and if that slave linger
in the agonies of death a day or two before dying, he shall not be
punished, because the slave "is his money."

Goodell's "American Slave Code," a work written by a Christian
clergyman, and which I have already quoted, contains four hundred
pages of outrages, like the following, committed by men who accepted
the Bible as their moral guide:

"A minister in South Carolina, a native of the North, had a stated
Sabbath appointment to preach, about eight miles from his residence. He
was in the habit of riding thither in his gig. Behind him ran his negro
slave on foot, who was required to be at the place of appointment
as soon as his master, to take care of his horse. Sometimes he fell
behind, and kept his master waiting for him a few minutes, for which
he always received a reprimand, and was sometimes punished. On one
occasion of this kind, after sermon, the master told the slave that
he would take care to have him keep up with him, going home. So he
tied him by the wrists, with a halter, to his gig behind, and drove
rapidly home. The result was that, about two or three miles from home,
the poor fellow's feet and legs failed him, and he was dragged on
the ground all the rest of the way by the wrists! On alighting and
looking round, the master exclaimed, 'Well; I thought you would keep
up with me this time!' So saying, he coolly walked into the house. The
servants came out and took up the poor sufferer for dead. After a
time he revived a little, lingered for a day or two, and died!"

Was this brutal minister punished? He was not. "If he continue a day or
two, he shall not be punished: for he is his money." Was he silenced
from preaching? was he even reprimanded by the church? No. Without
punishment, without censure, he continued to preach Bible morals and
abuse his slaves.

Frederick Douglass, the greatest of his race and a slave, says:
"My master found religious sanctity for his cruelty.... I have seen
him tie up a lame young woman and whip her with a heavy cowskin
upon her naked shoulders, causing the warm red blood to drip; and,
in justification of the bloody deed, he would quote this passage of
Scripture: 'He that knoweth his master's will and doeth it not shall
be beaten with many stripes.'"

Slavery flourished on this continent because the Bible taught
that it was lawful and just. To oppose slavery was to oppose the
plainest teachings of this book. The Abolition movement was an Infidel
movement. The Emancipation Proclamation was a nullification of "God's
law." The great Rebellion was a contest between Bible morality and
natural morality. The latter triumphed, but the conflict filled half
a million graves, brought grief to many million hearts, and covered
the land with desolation.

And this advocate of slavery is the idol Protestants worship; this
is the book they wish to become the law of our land; this is the
moral guide they wish to place in our public schools! In the name
of those who died for the freedom of their fellow-men; in the name
of those made childless, fatherless, and companionless by this cruel
strife; in the name of those whose backs still bear the scars of the
master's lash; in the name of human liberty, I protest against this
retrogressive movement!



Polygamy.

I refuse to accept the Bible as a moral guide because it sanctions
that other twin relic of barbarism, polygamy.

The Mosaic law provides that "if a man have two wives, one beloved
and another hated," he shall not ignore the legal rights of the hated
wife's children (Deut. xxi, 15-17). This statute recognizes both the
existence and the validity of the institution.

Another statute (Deut. xxv, 5) provides that if a man die, his
surviving brother shall become the husband of his widow, and this
regardless as to whether the brother be married or single.

The first eighteen verses of the eighteenth chapter of Leviticus
are devoted to what is termed "unlawful marriages." Here polygamy
is recognized and regulated to the extent of prohibiting a man from
marrying the sister of a living wife.

But there is one statute which places the validity of this institution,
so far as the Bible is concerned, beyond all controversy. Deuteronomy
(xxiii, 2) declares that no illegitimate child shall enter into the
congregation of the Lord, even up to the tenth generation. Now,
polygamy was either lawful or unlawful. If unlawful, then the
children of polygamists were illegitimate children, and disqualified
for the sanctuary. But the children of polygamists were not thus
disqualified. The founders of the twelve tribes of Israel were all
children of a polygamist.

The most renowned Bible characters were polygamists. Abraham had two
wives, and when he died the Lord said, "Abraham obeyed my voice,
and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws"
(Gen. xxvi, 6).

Jacob was a polygamist, and after he had secured four wives and
concubines, God blessed him and said, "Be fruitful and multiply"
(Gen. xxxv, 11).

Gideon had "many wives" (Jud. viii, 30), and it was to him an angel
came and said, "The Lord is with thee" (Jud. vi, 12).

David had a score of wives and concubines, and "David was a man after
God's own heart;" "David did right in the eyes of the Lord." God
himself said to David, "I delivered thee out of the hands of Saul;
and I gave thee thy master's house and thy master's wives" (2 Sam. xii,
7, 8).

"And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much,
and largeness of heart"--sufficient to hold a thousand wives and
concubines.

Many years ago the Mormon, Orson Pratt, wrote a defense of polygamy,
based upon the Bible. A noted lawyer of New York sent a copy of it
to the Rev. Dr. W. B. Sprague with the interrogation, "Can you answer
this?" Back came the frank reply, "No; can you?"

It is claimed that the New Testament is opposed to polygamy. It is
not. William Ellery Channing says:

"There is no prohibition of polygamy in the New Testament. It is an
indisputable fact that although Christianity was first preached in
Asia, which had been from the earliest ages the seat of polygamy,
the Apostles never denounced it as a crime, and never required their
converts to put away all wives but one."

Elizabeth Cady Stanton says: "It was at a Jewish polygamous wedding
that Jesus performed his first miracle, and polygamy was practiced
by Christians for centuries."

It is true that many primitive Christians did not practice
polygamy. And why? Because Pagan Greece and Rome had taught them
better. It was to them, and not to their Scriptures, that they were
indebted for the monogamic system of marriage. The Roman Catholic
church did not generally sustain polygamy; but it did sustain a
system of concubinage which was certainly as bad. For centuries the
keeping of concubines was almost universal among the Catholic clergy,
one abbot keeping no less than seventy.

The founders of the Protestant church, however, accepting the Bible
as their guide, attaching to it a degree of authority which had
never been attached to it before, were candid and consistent enough
to admit the validity of the institution. Referring to this subject,
Sir William Hamilton, a Christian and a Protestant, says:

"As to polygamy in particular, which not only Luther, Melanchthon,
and Bucer, the three leaders of the German Reformation, speculatively
adopted, but to which above a dozen distinguished divines among the
Reformers stood formally committed" (Discussions on Philosophy and
Literature).

Speaking of Luther and Melanchthon, Hamilton says:

"They had both promulgated opinions in favor of polygamy, to the
extent of vindicating to the spiritual minister a right of private
dispensation, and to the temporal magistrate the right of establishing
the practice if he chose by public law" (Ibid).

In accordance with these views, John of Leydon, a zealous Protestant,
established polygamy at Munster, and murdered or drove from their
homes all who dared to oppose the odious custom. Other Protestants
followed his example.

On the 19th of December, 1539, at Wittenberg, Luther and Melanchthon
drew up the famous "Consilium," authorizing the landgrave, Philip
of Hesse, to have a plurality of wives. This instrument bears
the signatures of Martin Luther, Philip Melanchthon, Martin Bucer,
Dionysius Melander, John Lening, Antony Corvinus, Adam Kraft, Justus
Winther, and Balthasar Raida, nine of the leading Protestant divines
of Germany.

It is a well-known fact that Luther advised Henry VIII. to adopt
polygamy in his case, but by divorcing two wives, and murdering two
more, the founder of the English church avoided it.

The advocacy of polygamy by the chief Reformers prevented Ferdinand
I. from declaring for the Reformation. The German princes, too,
generally opposed it; and this opposition, coupled with the fact that
the most licentious sects espoused it, finally caused a reaction in
favor of monogamy.

Protestants, it ill became you to point the finger of scorn at the
Mormons of Utah. Yet with characteristic consistency you were demanding
the suppression of polygamy in the territories, while at the same time
you were endeavoring to have the whole country accept as infallible
authority a book which sanctions the pernicious custom. Make the Bible
the fundamental law of the land, as you demand, and polygamy will
become, in theory at least, a national instead of a local institution.







