IX

REPRESENTATION

BEFORE me is a little bowl of old Satsuma. As I look at it there
wakens in me a responsive rhythm, and involuntarily my fingers
move as if to caress its suave and lovely lines. The rich gold and
mingled mellow browns of its surface pattern intricately woven are a
gracious harmony and a delight. Gradually, as I continue to look on
it, a feeling is communicated to me of the maker's own joy in his
work; and the bowl, its harmonies and rhythms, and all that it
expresses, become part of me. There it is, complete in itself,
gathering up and containing within itself the entire experience. My
thoughts, sensations, feelings do not go beyond the bowl.

Another time I am standing in the hall of the Academy in Florence.
At the end of the corridor towers a superb form. I see that it is the
figure of a youth. His left hand holds a sling drawn across his
shoulder; his right arm hangs by his side, his hand grasping a pebble
close to his thigh; calm and confident, his head erect, his strength
held in leash waiting to be loosed, he fronts the oncoming of the foe.
The statue is the presentation of noble form, and it wakens in me an
accordant rhythm; I feel in myself something of what youthful
courage, life, and conscious power mean. But my experience does
not stop there. The statue is not only presentation but representation.
It figures forth a youth, David, the Hebrew shepherd-boy, and he
stands awaiting the Philistine. I have read his story, I have my own
mental image of him, and about his personality cluster many
thoughts. To what Michelangelo shows me I add what I already
know. Recognition, memory, knowledge, facts and ideas, a whole
store of associations allied with my previous experience, mingle
with my instant emotion in its presence. The sculptor, unlike the
potter, has not created his own form; the subject of his work exists
outside of him in nature. He uses the subject for his own ends, but in
his treatment of it he is bound by certain responsibilities to external
truth. His work as it stands is not completely self-contained, but is
linked with the outer world; and my appreciation of it is affected by
this reference to extrinsic fact.

An artist is interested in some scene in nature or a personality or
situation in human life; it moves him. As the object external to him
is the stimulus of his emotion and is associated with it, so he uses
the object as the symbol of his experience and means of expression
of his emotion. Here, then, the feeling, to express which the work is
created, gathers about a subject, which can be recognized
intellectually, and the fact of the subject is received as in a measure
separate from the feeling which flows from it. In a painting of a
landscape, we recognize as the basis of the total experience the fact
that it is a landscape, so much water and field and sky; and then we
yield ourselves to the _beauty_ of the landscape, the emotion with
which the artist suffuses the material objects and so transfigures
them. Into representative art, therefore, there enters an element not
shared by the arts of pure form, the element of _the subject,_
carrying with it considerations of objective truth and of likeness to
external fact. Toward the understanding of the total scope of a
picture or a statue, and by inference and application of the principles,
toward the understanding of literature as well, it may help us if we
determine the relation of beauty to truth and the function and value
of the subject in representative art.

The final significance of a work of art is beauty, received as
emotional experience. Nature becomes beautiful to us at the point
where it manifests a harmony to which we feel ourselves attuned. At
the moment of enjoyment we unconsciously project our personality
into this harmony outside of us, identifying ourselves with it and
finding it at that instant the expression of something toward which
we reach and aspire. When we come consciously to reason about our
experience, we see that the harmony external to us which we feel as
the extension of ourselves does not stop with the actual material
itself of nature, but emanates from it as the expression of nature's
spirit. The harmony is a harmony of relations, made visible through
material, and significant to us and beautiful in the measure that we
respond to it.

It is the beauty of the object, its significance for the spirit, that
primarily moves the artist to expression. Why one landscape and not
another impels him to render it upon his canvas is not to be
explained. This impulse to immediate and concrete utterance is
inspiration. And inspiration would seem to be a confluence of forces
outside of the individual consciousness or will, focused at the instant
into desire, which becomes the urge to creation. "The mind in
creation," says Shelley, "is as a fading coal, which some invisible
influence, like an inconstant wind, awakens to transitory brightness;
this power rises from within, like the colour of a flower which fades
and changes as it is developed, and the conscious portions of our
natures are unprophetic either of its approach or its departure." The
artist does not say, "Lo, I will paint a landscape; let me find my
subject!" The subject presents itself. There it is, by chance almost,--a
sudden harmony before him, long low meadows stretching away to
the dark hills, the late sun striking on the water, gold and green
melting into a suffusing flush of purple light, a harmony of color and
line and mass which his spirit leaps out to meet and with which it
fuses in a larger unity. In the moment of contact all consciousness of
self as a separate individuality is lost. Out of the union of the two
principles, the spirit of man and the beauty of the object, is born the
_idea,_ which is to come to expression as a work of art.

But the artist is a mind as well as a temperament. Experience
is a swing of the pendulum between the momentary ecstasy of
immediate contact and the subsequent reaction upon the moment,
which is consciousness of it. In order to make his vision actual, the
artist rises out of the domain of feeling into that of thought. The
landscape has compelled him; it is now he who must compel the
landscape. To the shaping of his work he must bring to bear all his
conscious power of selection and organization and all his knowledge
of the capabilities and resources of his means. Art springs out of
emotion; painting is a science. The artist's command of his subject
as the symbol of his idea derives from the stern and vigorous
exercise of mind. The rightness of his composition is determined by
a logic more flexible, perhaps, but no less exacting than the laws of
geometry. By the flow of his line and the disposition of his masses,
the artist must carry the eye of the beholder along the way he wants
it to travel until it rests upon the point where he wants it to rest.
There must be no leaks and no false directions; there must be the
cosmos within the frame and nothing outside of it. The principles of
perspective have been worked out with a precision that entitles them
to rank as a science. Color has its laws, which, again, science is able
to formulate. These processes and formulas and laws are not the
whole of art, but they have their place. The power to feel, the
imaginative vision, and creative insight are not to be explained. But
knowledge too, acquired learning and skill, plays its part, and to
recognize its function and service is to be helped to a fuller
understanding of the achievement of the artist.

Gifted with a vibrant, sensitive temperament, endowed with
discriminating and organizing power of mind, equipped with a
knowledge of the science and the mechanics of his craft, and trained
to skill in manual execution, the artist responds to the impulse of his
inspiration. His subject is before him. But what is his subject? A
scene in nature furnishes him the objective base of his picture, but
properly his work is the expression of what he feels. A storm may
convey to different men entirely different impressions. In its
presence one man may feel himself overwhelmed with terror. These
wild, black skies piling in upon him, the hilltops that seem to race
through the clouds, the swaying, snapping trees, the earth caught up
in the mad grasp of the tempest, may smite his soul with the
pitilessness of nature and her inexorable blind power. Another thrills
with joy in this cosmic struggle, the joy of conflict which he has
known in his own life, the meeting of equal forces in fair fight,
where the issue is still doubtful and victory will fall at last upon the
strong, though it is not the final triumph but the present struggle that
makes the joy. In rendering the "subject" upon his canvas, by the
manipulation of composition and line and mass and color, he makes
the storm ominous and terrible, or glorious, according as he feels.
The import of his picture is not the natural fact of the storm itself,
but its significance for the emotions.

A work of representative art is the rendering of a unity of impression
and harmony of relations which the artist has perceived and to which
he has thrilled in the world external to him. He presents not the facts
themselves but their spirit, that something which endows the facts
with their significance and their power to stir him. As the meaning
of nature to the beholder is determined by the effect it produces on
his mind and temperament, so the artist, in the expression of this
meaning, aims less at a statement of objective accuracy of exterior
appearance than at producing a certain effect, the effect which is the
equivalent of the meaning of nature to him. Thus the painter who
sees beyond the merely intellectual and sensuous appeal of his
subject and enters into its spirit, tries to render on his canvas, not the
actual color of nature, but the sensation of color and its value for the
emotions. With the material splendor of nature,--her inexhaustible
lavish wealth of color, the glory of life which throbs through
creation, the mystery of actual movement,--art cannot compete. For
the hues and tones of nature, infinite in number and subtlety, the
painter has only the few notes within the poor gamut of his palette.
How can he quicken his dull paint with the life-beat of palpitating
flesh, or the sculptor animate the rigid marble with the vibrations of
vivid motion? But where nature is infinite in her range she is also
scattering in her effects. By the concentration of divergent forces, art
gains in intensity and directness of impression what it sacrifices in
the scope of its material. Michelangelo uses as his subject David, the
shepherd-boy; but the person, the mere name, does not signify. What
his work embodies is triumphant youth, made visible and
communicable. When Millet shows us the peasant, it is not what the
peasant is feeling that the artist represents, but what Millet felt about
him. The same landscape will be rendered differently by different
men. Each selects his details according to the interest of his eye and
mind and feeling, and he brings them into a dominant harmony
which stands to him for the meaning of the landscape. None of the
pictures is an accurate statement of the facts as they are, off there in
nature; all are true to the integrating inner vision. The superficial
observer sees only the accidents, and he does not distinguish relative
importance. The artist, with quicker sensibilities and a trained mind,
analyzes, discovers the underlying principle, and then makes a
synthesis which embodies only the essential; he seizes the
distinctive aspect of the object and makes it salient. There may be,
of course, purely descriptive representation, which is a faithful
record of the facts of appearance as the painter sees them, without
any feeling toward them; here he works as a scientist, not as an artist.
Merely imitative painting falls short of artistic significance, for it
embodies no meaning beyond the external fact. It is the
expressiveness of the object that the true artist cares to represent; it
is its expressiveness, its value for the emotions, that constitutes its
beauty.

To achieve beauty the representative artist bases his work upon the
truth of nature. It is nature that supplies him with his motive,--some
glimpse, some fragment, which reveals within itself a harmony. It
may be a form, as a tree, a man, a mountain range, the race of clouds
across the sky; it may be a color-harmony or "arrangement," in
which color rather than form is the dominant interest, as with a
landscape or an interior; it may be the effects of light, as the
sunshine playing over golden haystacks, or the glint of light on
metal, or the sheen of lovely fabrics. Out of the complex of interests
and appeals which an object offers, what is the _truth_ of the object?
The truth of nature resides not in the accidents of surface but in the
essential relations, of which the surface is the manifestation. A birch
tree and an apple tree are growing side by side. Their roots strike
down into the same soil, their branches are warmed by the same sun,
wet by the same rains, and swept by the same winds. The birch tree
is always lithe and gracious and feminine; the apple tree is always
bent and sternly gnarled like the hand of an old man. The life-force
which impels the tree to growth is distinctive to each kind. Within
all natural objects, then, a crystal, a tree, a man, there is a shaping
principle which determines their essential form. But no two
individual apple trees are precisely alike; from the essential form of
the tree there are divergences in the single manifestations. Though
subject to accident and variation, however, every tree exhibits a
characteristic, inviolate _tendency,_ and remains true to the inner
life-principle of its being. The "truth" of the apple tree is this
distinctive, essential form, by virtue of which it is an apple tree and
not some other kind, the form which underlies and allows for all
individual variations. What the painter renders on his canvas is not
the superficial accidents of some single tree, but by means of that,
he seeks to image forth in color and form the tendency of all trees.
The truth of an object presents itself to the imagination as design, for
this organic, shaping principle of things, expressed in colored
myriad forms throughout the endless pageantry of nature, is
apprehended by the spirit of man as a harmony; and in the
experience of the artist truth identifies itself with beauty.

The distinction between the accidental surface of things and the
significance that may be drawn out of them is exemplified by the
difference between accuracy and truth in representation. Accurate
drawing is the faithful record of the facts of appearance as offered to
the eye. Truth of drawing is the rendering in visible terms of the
meaning and spirit of the object, the form which the object takes not
simply for the eye but for the mind. A pencil sketch by Millet shows
a man carrying in each hand a pail of water. The arms are drawn
inaccurately, in that they are made too long. What Millet wanted to
express, however, was not the physical shape of the arms, but the
feeling of the burden under which the man was bending; and by
lengthening the arms he has succeeded in conveying, as mere
accuracy could not express it, the sensation of weight and muscular
strain. In Hals' picture of the "Jester" the left hand is sketched in
with a few swift strokes of the brush. But so, it "keeps its place" in
relation to the whole; and it is more nearly right than if it had been
made the centre of attention and had been drawn with the most
meticulous precision. The hand is not accurate, but it is true.
Similarly, size is an affair not of physical extent but of proportion. A
figure six inches high may convey the same value as a figure six feet
high, if the same proportions are observed. A statue is the
presentation, not of the human body, but of the human form, and
more than that, of what the form expresses. When I am talking with
my friend I am aware of his physical presence detaching itself from
the background of the room in which we are. But I feel in him
something more. And that something more goes behind the details
of his physical aspect. His eyes might be blue instead of brown, his
nose crooked rather than straight; he might be maimed and
disfigured by some mishap. These accidents would not change for
me what is the reality. My friend is not his body, though it is by his
body that he exists; the reality of my friend is what he essentially is,
what he is of the spirit. A photograph of a man registers certain facts
of his appearance at that moment. The eye and the mind of the artist
discern the truth which underlies the surface; the artist feels his sitter
not as a face and a figure, a mere body, but as a personality; and the
portrait expresses a man.

As grasped by our finite minds, there are partial truths and degrees
of truth. There are, for example, the facts of outer appearance,
modified in our reception of them by what we know as distinct from
what we really see. Thus a tree against the background of hill or sky
seems to have a greater projection and relief than is actually
presented to the eye, because we _know_ the tree is round. Manet's
"Girl with a Parrot," which appears to the ordinary man to be too flat,
is more true to reality than any portrait that "seems to come out of its
frame." Habitually in our observation of objects about us, we note
only so much as serves our practical ends; and this is the most
superficial, least essential aspect. Projection is a partial truth, and to
it many painters sacrifice other and higher truths. Manet, recovering
the "innocence of the eye" and faithful to it, has penetrated the
secrets and won the truth of light. Botticelli saw the world as
sonorous undulations of exquisite line; and his subtly implicated,
evanescent patterns of line movement, "incorrect" as they may be
superficially in drawing, caress the eye as music finds and satisfies
the soul. When such is his power over us, it is difficult to say that
Botticelli had not some measure of the truth. The world of the
Venetians sang full-sounding harmonies of glorious color.
Velasquez saw everything laved around with a flood of silver quiet
atmosphere. All in their own way have found and shown to us a
truth.

To render what he has seen and felt in the essence and meaning of it,
the artist seeks to disengage the shaping principle of the particular
aspect of truth, which has impressed him, from all accidents in its
manifestation. To make this dominant character salient beyond
irrelevant circumstance, art works by selection. Art is necessarily a
compromise. It isolates some elements and sacrifices others; but it is
none the less true on that account. The mere material of the object is
more or less fixed, but the relations which the object embodies are
capable of many combinations and adjustments, according to the
mind and temperament of the individual artist who is moved by it.
All art is in a certain sense abstraction; all art in a measure idealizes.
It is abstraction in the sense that it presents the intrinsic and
distinctive qualities of things, purged of accident.

Art does not compete with nature; it is a statement of the spirit and
intention of nature in the artist's own terms. The test of the work is
not apparent and superficial likeness, but truth. Art idealizes in the
measure that it disengages the truth. In this aspect of it the work is
ideal as distinct from merely actual. There is a practice in art which
draws its standard of beauty, its ideal, not from nature but from
other art, and which seeks to "improve nature" by the combination
of arbitrarily chosen elements and by the modification of natural
truth to fit a preconceived formula. The Eclectics of Bologna, in the
seventeenth century, sought to combine Raphael's perfection of
drawing and composition, Michelangelo's sublimity and his mastery
of the figure, and Correggio's sweet sentiment and his supremacy in
the rendering of light and shade, fondly supposing thus that the sum
of excellent parts is equivalent to an excellence of the whole. This is
false idealism. The Greeks carried their research for certain truths of
the human form to the point of perfection and complete realization.
The truth of the Greeks was mistaken by the pseudo-classicists and
misapplied. Thus Delacroix exclaimed ironically, "In order to
present an ideal head of a negro, our teachers make him resemble as
far as possible the profile of Antinöus, and then say, 'We have done
our utmost; if, nevertheless, we fail to make the negro beautiful,
then we ought not to introduce into our pictures such a freak of
nature, the squat nose and thick lips, which are so unendurable to the
eyes.'" True idealism treats everything after its own kind, making it
more intensely itself than it is in the play of nature; the athlete is
more heroically an athlete, the negro more vividly a negro. True
idealism seeks to express the tendency by virtue of which an object
is what it is. The abstraction which art effects is not an unreality but
a higher reality. It is not the mere type, that art presents, for the type
as such does not exist in nature. The individual is not lost but
affirmed by this reference to the inner principle of its being. A good
portrait has in it an element of caricature; the difference between
portraiture and caricature is the difference between emphasis and
exaggeration. Art is not the falsification of nature, but the fuller
realization of it. It is the interpretation of nature's truth, the
translation of it, divined by the artist, into simpler terms to be read
and understood by those of less original insight. The deeper the
penetration into the life-force and shaping principle of nature, the
greater is the measure of truth.

In representative art the truth of nature is the work's objective base.
What the artist finally expresses is the relation of the object to his
own experience. A work of art is the statement of the artist's insight
into nature, moulded and suffused by the emotion attending his
perception. Of the object, he uses that aspect and that degree of truth
which serve him for the expression of his feeling toward it. What is
called "realism" is one order of truth, one way of seeing.
"Impressionism" is another order of truth. "Idealism" is still another.
But all three elements blend in varying proportion in any work.
Even the realist, who "paints what he sees," has his ideal, which is
the effect he sets himself to produce by his picture, and he paints
according to his impression. He renders not the object itself but his
mental image of it; and that image is the result of his way of seeing
and feeling, his habit of mind, his interest, and his store of memories.
The idealist must base his work upon some kind of reality, or it is a
monstrosity; he is obliged to refer to the external world for his
symbols. The impressionist, who concerns himself with the play of
light over surfaces in nature, is seeking for truth, and he cares to
paint at all because that play of light, seemingly so momentary and
so merely sensuous, has a value for his spirit of which he may or
may not be wholly conscious; and these shifting effects are the
realization of his ideal. Unwitting at the moment of contact itself of
the significance that afterwards is to flow articulately from his work,
the artist, in the presence of his object, knows only that he is
impelled to render it. As faithfully as possible he tries to record what
he sees, conscious simply that what he sees gives him delight. His
vision wakens his feeling, and then by reaction his feeling
determines his vision, controlling and directing his selection of the
details of aspect. When Velasquez, engaged on a portrait of the king,
saw the maids of honor graciously attending on the little princess, he
did not set about producing a _picture,_ as an end in itself. In the
relation of these figures to one another and to the background of the
deep and high-vaulted chamber in which they were standing, each
object and plane of distance receiving its just amount of light and
fusing in the unity of total impression, were revealed to him the
wonder and the mystery of nature's magic of light. This is what he
tried to render. His revelation of natural truth, wrung from nature's
inmost latencies and shown to us triumphantly, becomes a thing of
beauty.

So the differences among the various "schools" in art are after all
largely differences of emphasis. The choice of subject or motive, the
angle from which it is viewed, and the method of handling, all are
determined by the artist's kind of interest; and that interest results
from what the man is essentially by inheritance and individual
character, and what he is moulded into by environment, training, and
experience. It may happen that the external object imposes itself in
its integrity upon the artist's mind and temperament, and he tries to
express it, colored inevitably by his feeling toward it, in all
faithfulness to the feet as he sees it. Millet said, "I should never paint
anything that was not the result of an impression received from the
aspect of nature, whether in landscape or figures." Millet painted
what he saw, but he painted it as only he saw it. Or again it happens
that an artist imposes his feeling upon nature. Thus Burne-Jones said,
"I mean by a picture a beautiful romantic dream of something that
never was, never will be--in a light better than any that ever shone--in
a land no one can define or remember, only desire." Whether true
to nature or true to the creative inner vision, the work of both men
embodies truth. Sometimes an artist effaces entirely his own
individuality, as in Greek sculpture and Gothic architecture, and the
mere name of the creator does not signify. George Frederick Watts
is reported to have said, "If I were asked to choose whether I would
like to do something good, as the world judges popular art, and
receive personally great credit for it, or, as an alternative, to produce
something which should rank with the very best, taking a place with
the art of Pheidias or Titian, with the highest poetry and the most
elevating music, and remain unknown as the perpetrator of the work,
I should choose the latter." Sidney Lanier wrote, "It is of little
consequence whether _I_ fail; the _I_ in the matter is small
business. . . . Let my name perish,--the poetry is good poetry and the
music is good music, and beauty dieth not, and the heart that needs it
will find it." Or on the contrary, a work may bear dominantly, even
aggressively, the impress of the distinctive individuality of its
creator, as with Carlyle's prose and Browning's poetry. Whistler
seems at times to delight less in the beauty of his subject than in the
_exercise_ of his own power of refinement. Where another man's art
is personal, as with Velasquez or Frans Hals, Whistler's art becomes
egotistical. He does not say, "Lo, how mysterious is this dusk
river-side, how tenderly serene this mother, how wistful and mighty is this
prophet-seer!" He exclaims rather, "Note how subtly I, Whistler,
have seen. Rejoice with me in my powers of vision and of
execution." There is no single method of seeing, no one formula of
expression and handling. The truth both of nature and of art is great
and infinitely various. For art, like nature, is organic, allowing for
endless modifications, while remaining true to the inner principle of
its being.

The judgment of truth is a delicate business. To test the truth of a
work of art by reference to the truth of nature is to presuppose that
our power of perception is equal to the artist's power, and that our
knowledge of the object represented is equal to his knowledge of it.
The ordinary man's habitual contact with the world is practical, and
his knowledge of natural fact, based upon the most superficial aspect
of it and used for practical purposes, tends to falsify his vision. The
artist's contact with the world, in his capacity as artist, is one of
feeling; he values life, not for its material rewards and satisfactions,
but for what it brings to him of emotional experience. The ordinary
man uses nature for his own workaday ends. The artist loves nature,
and through his love he understands her. His knowledge of natural
fact, instead of falsifying his vision, reinforces it. He studies the
workings of nature's laws as manifested in concrete phenomena
around him,--the movement of storms, the growth of trees, the
effects of light,--penetrating their inmost secrets, that he may make
them more efficient instruments of expression. He uses his
understanding of anatomy, of earth-structure, of the laws of color, as
the means to a fuller and juster interpretation. As he receives the
truth of nature with reverence and joy, so he transmutes truth into
beauty.

An artist's interest in the truth of nature is not the scientist's
interest, an intellectual concern with knowledge for the sake of
knowledge. The artist receives nature's revelation of herself with
emotion. The deeper he penetrates into her hidden ways, the greater
becomes her power to stir him. The artist values his "subject,"
therefore, as the stimulus of emotion and as the symbol by means of
which he expresses his emotion and communicates it. The value of the
subject to the appreciator, however, is not immediately clear. It is
not easy for us to receive the subject purely as the artist shows it
to us and independently of our own knowledge of it. About it already
gather innumerable associations, physical, practical, intellectual,
sentimental, and emotional, all of them or any of them, which result
from our previous contact with it in actual life. Here is a portrait of
Carlyle. I cannot help regarding the picture first of all from the point
of view of its likeness to the original. This is a person with whom I
am acquainted, an individual, by name Carlyle. And my reaction on
the picture is determined, not by what the artist has to say about a
great personality interpreted through the medium of color and form,
but by what I already know about Carlyle. Or here a painting shows
me a landscape with which I am familiar. Then instead of trying to
discover in the picture what the artist has seen in the landscape and
felt in its presence, letting it speak to me in its own language, I allow
my thoughts to wander from the canvas, and I enjoy the landscape in
terms of my own knowledge and remembrance of it. The artist's
work becomes simply a point of departure, whereas it should be not
only the beginning but also the end and fulfillment of the complete
experience. What is, then, we may ask, the relation of the fact of the
subject to the beauty and final message of the work?

The pleasure which attends the recognition of the subject is a
legitimate element in our enjoyment of art. But the work should
yield a delight beyond our original delight in the subject as it exists
in nature. The significance of a work of representative art depends
not upon the subject in and of itself, but upon what the artist has to
say about it. A rose may be made to reveal the cosmos; a mountain
range or cloud-swept spaces of the upper air may be niggled into
meanness. The ugly in practical life may be transfigured by the
artist's touch into supreme beauty. _"Il faut pouvoir faire servir le
trivial à l'expression du sublime, c'est la vraie force,"_ said one who
was able to invest a humble figure with august dignity. Millet's
peasants reveal more of godlike majesty than all the array of
personages in the pantheon of post-Raphaelite Italy and the classic
school of France. Upon his subject the artist bases that harmony of
relations which constitutes the beauty and significance of his work.
Brought thus into a harmony, the object represented is made more
vivid, more intensely itself, than it is in nature, with the result that
we receive from the representation a heightened sense of reality and
of extended personality. The importance of the subject, therefore, is
measured by the opportunity it affords the artist, and with him his
appreciators, to share in the beauty of nature and life. A picture
should not "standout" from its frame, but should go back into it,
reaching even into infinity. Our own associations attaching to the
subject lose themselves as they blend with the artist's revelation of
the fuller beauty of his object; and finally all becomes merged in the
emotional experience.

Eliminating the transient and accidental, a work of art presents the
essential and eternal. Art appeals not to the intellect and the reason,
but to the imagination and the emotions. The single work, therefore,
is concrete and immediate. But universal in its scope, it transcends
the particularities of limited place and individual name. We must
distinguish between the abstractly typical and the universal. The
representative artist does not conceive an abstraction and then seek
to find a symbol for it. That is the method of allegory, where spring,
for example, is figured as a young woman scattering flowers.
Allegory is decorative rather than representative in intention. The
artist receives his inspiration and stimulus from some actual
concrete bit of nature, a woodland wrapt in tender mists of green, a
meadow gold and softly white with blossoms, a shimmering gauze
of sun touched air, moist and vibrating, enfolding it. That is what he
paints. But he paints it so that it is spring, and instinct with the spirit
of all springs. Michelangelo does not intellectually conceive youth
and then carve a statue. Some boy has revealed to him the beauty of
his young strength, and the sculptor moves to immediate expression.
He calls his statue David, but the white form radiates the rhythm and
glory of all youth. And as we realize youth in ourselves, more
poignantly, more abundantly, the mere name of the boy does not
matter. The fact that the portrait shows us Carlyle is an incident.
Carlyle is the "subject" of the picture, but its meaning is the twilight
of a mighty, indomitable mind, made visible and communicable. His
work is done; the hour of quiet is given, and he finds rest. Into this
moment, eternal in its significance, into this mood, universal in its
appeal, we enter, to realize it in ourselves. The subject of picture or
statue is but the means; the end is life. Objective fact is transmuted
into living truth. Art is the manifestation of a higher reality than we
alone have been able to know. It begins with the particular and then
transcends it, admitting us to share in the beauty of the world, the
cosmic harmony of universal experience.



