CHAPTER II.


Miss St. John had, for at least six years, been the most renowned woman
in Europe. In Paris and St. Petersburg, no less than in London, her name
was equally familiar both to princes and to pot-boys; indeed, the gaze
of all the world was fixed on her. Yet, in spite of this exposed
situation, scandal had proved powerless to wrong her; she defied
detraction. Her enemies could but echo her friends' praise of her
beauty; her friends could but confirm her enemies' description of her
character. Though of birth that might almost be called humble, she had
been connected with the heads of many distinguished families; and so
general was the affection she inspired, and so winning the ways in which
she contrived to retain it, that she found herself, at the age of
thirty, mistress of nothing except a large fortune. She was now
converted with surprising rapidity by a Ritualistic priest, and she
became in a few months a model of piety and devotion. She made lace
trimmings for the curate's vestments; she bowed at church as often and
profoundly as possible; she enjoyed nothing so much as going to
confession; she learnt to despise the world. Indeed, such utter dross
did her riches now seem to her, that, despite all the arguments of her
ghostly counsellor, she remained convinced that they were far too
worthless to offer to the Church, and she saw nothing for it but to
still keep them for herself. The mingled humility and discretion of this
resolve so won the heart of a gifted colonial bishop, then on a visit to
England, that, having first assured himself that Miss St. John was
sincere in making it, he besought her to share with him his humble
mitre, and make him the happiest prelate in the whole Catholic Church.
Miss St. John consented. The nuptials were celebrated with the most
elaborate ritual, and after a short honeymoon the bishop departed for
his South Pacific diocese of the Chasuble Islands, to prepare a home for
his bride, who was to follow him by the next steamer.

Professor Paul Darnley, in his own walk of life, was even more famous
than Virginia had been in hers. He had written three volumes on the
origin of life, which he had spent seven years in looking for in
infusions of hay and cheese; he had written five volumes on the entozoa
of the pig, and two volumes of lectures, as a corollary to these, on the
sublimity of human heroism and the whole duty of man. He was renowned
all over Europe and America as a complete embodiment of enlightened
modern thought. He criticised everything; he took nothing on trust,
except the unspeakable sublimity of the human race and its august
terrestrial destinies. And, in his double capacity of a seer and a
_savant_, he had destroyed all that the world had believed in the past,
and revealed to it all that it is going to feel in the future. His mind
indeed was like a sea, into which the other great minds of the age
discharged themselves, and in which all the slight discrepancies of the
philosophy of the present century mingled together and formed one
harmonious whole. Nor was he less successful in his own private life.
He married, at the age of forty, an excellent evangelical lady, ten
years his senior, who wore a green gown, grey corkscrew curls, and who
had a fortune of two hundred thousand pounds. Deeply pledged though she
was to the most vapid figments of Christianity, Mrs. Darnley was yet
proud beyond measure of her husband's worldwide fame, for she did but
imperfectly understand the grounds of it. Indeed, the only thing that
marred her happiness was the single tenet of his that she had really
mastered. This, unluckily, was that he disbelieved in hell. And so, as
Mrs. Darnley conceived that that place was designed mainly to hold those
who doubted its existence, she daily talked her utmost and left no text
unturned to convince her darling of his very dangerous error. These
assiduous arguments soon began to tell. The Professor grew moody and
brooding, and he at last suggested to his medical man that a voyage
round the world, unaccompanied by his wife, was the prescription most
needed by his failing patience. Mrs. Darnley at length consented with a
fairly good grace. She made her husband pledge himself that he would not
be absent for above a twelvemonth, or else, she said, she should
immediately come after him. She bade him the tenderest of adieus, and
promised to pray till his return for his recovery of a faith in hell.

The Professor, who had but exceeded his time by six months, was now on
board the _Australasian_, homeward bound to his wife. Virginia was
outward bound to her husband.




CHAPTER III.


The sensation created by the presence of these two celebrities was
profound beyond description; and the passengers were never weary of
watching the gleaming spectacles and the square-toed boots of the one,
and the liquid eyes and the ravishing toilettes of the other. Virginia's
acquaintance was made almost instantly by three pale-faced curates, and
so well did their friendship prosper, that they soon sang at nightfall
with her a beautiful vesper hymn. Nor did the matter end here, for the
strains sounded so lovely, and Virginia looked so devotional, that most
of the passengers the night after joined in a repetition of this
touching evening office.

The Professor, as was natural, held quite aloof, and pondered over a new
species of bug, which he had found very plentiful in his berth. But it
soon occurred to him that he often heard the name of God being uttered
otherwise than in swearing. He listened more attentively to the sounds
which he had at first set down as negro-melodies, and he soon became
convinced that they were something whose very existence he despised
himself for remembering--namely, Christian hymns. He then thought of the
three curates, whose existence he despised himself for remembering also.
And the conviction rapidly dawned on him that, though the passengers
seemed fully alive to his fame as a man of science, they could yet know
very little of all that science had done for them; and of the death-blow
it had given to the foul superstitions of the past. He therefore
resolved that next day he would preach them a lay-sermon.

At the appointed time the passengers gathered eagerly round him--all but
Virginia, who retired to her cabin when she saw that the preacher wore
no surplice, as she thought it would be a mortal sin to listen to a
sermon without one.

The Professor began amidst a profound silence. He first proclaimed to
his hearers the great primary axiom on which all modern thought bases
itself. He told them that there was but one order of things--it was so
much neater than two; and if we would be certain of anything, we must
never doubt this. Thus, since countless things exist that the senses
_can_ take account of, it is evident that nothing exists that the senses
can _not_ take account of. The senses can take no account of God;
therefore God does not exist. Men of science can only see theology in a
ridiculous light, therefore theology has no side that is not ridiculous.
He then told them a few of the names that enlightened thinkers had
applied to the Christian deity--how Professor Tyndall had called him an
'atom-manufacturer,' and Professor Huxley a 'pedantic drill-sergeant'.
The passengers at once saw how demonstrably at variance with fact was
all religion, and they laughed with a sense of humour that was quite new
to them. The Professor's tones then became more solemn, and, having
extinguished error, he at once went on to unveil the brilliant light of
truth. He showed them how, viewed by modern science, all existence is a
chain, with a gas at one end and no one knows what at the other; and how
Humanity is a link somewhere; but--holy and awful thought!--we can none
of us tell where. 'However,' he proceeded, 'of one thing we can be quite
certain; all that is, is matter; the laws of matter are eternal, and we
cannot act or think without conforming to them; and if,' he said, 'we
would be solemn and high, and happy, and heroic, and saintly, we have
but to strive and struggle to do what we cannot for an instant avoid
doing. Yes,' he exclaimed, 'as the sublime Tyndall tells us, let us
struggle to attain to a deeper knowledge of matter, and a more faithful
conformity to its laws!'

The Professor would have proceeded, but the weather had been rapidly
growing rough, and he here became violently sea-sick.

'Let us,' he exclaimed hurriedly, 'conform to the laws of matter and go
below.'

Nor was the advice premature. A storm arose, exceptional in its
suddenness and its fury. It raged for two days without ceasing. The
_Australasian_ sprang a leak; her steering gear was disabled; and it was
feared she would go ashore on an island that was seen dimly through the
fog to the leeward. The boats were got in readiness. A quantity of
provisions and of the passengers' baggage was already stowed in the
cutter; when the clouds parted, the sun came out again, and the storm
subsided almost as quickly as it rose.




