CHAPTER XI.


At dinner, however, things wore a more promising aspect. The curate had
been so terrified by the Professor's threats, that he hardly dared to so
much as look at Virginia; and to make up for it, he drank and drank
champagne, till the strings of his tongue were loosed, and he was
laughing and chattering at a rate that was quite extraordinary.
Virginia, seeing herself thus neglected by the curate, began to fear
that, as Paul said, he really did not so much care to kiss her after
all. She, therefore, put on all her most enticing ways; she talked,
flirted, and smiled her best, and made her most effective eyes, that the
curate might see what a prize was for ever beyond his reach.

This state of affairs seemed full of glorious promise. Virginia's tears
were dried, she had never looked so radiant and exquisite before. The
curate had foregone every attempt to kiss Virginia, and yet apparently
he was happiness itself; and Paul took him aside, as soon as the meal
was over, to congratulate him on the holy state to which exact thought
had conducted him. 'You see,' Paul said, 'what a natural growth the
loftiest morality is. Virginia doesn't want to be kissed by you. I
should be shocked at your doing so shocking a thing as kissing her. If
you kissed her, you would make both of us miserable; and, as a necessary
consequence, you would be in an agony likewise; in addition to which, I
should inevitably kick you.'

'But,' said the curate, 'suppose I kissed Virginia on the sly,--I merely
put this as an hypothesis, remember,--and that in a little while she
liked it, what then? She and I would both be happy, and you ought to be
happy too, because we were.'

'Idiot!' said the Professor. 'Virginia is another man's wife. Nobody
really likes kissing another man's wife; nor do wives ever like kissing
any one except their husbands. What they really like is what Professor
Huxley calls "the undefined but bright ideal of the highest good,"
which, as he says, exact thought shows us is the true end of existence.
But, pooh! what is the use of all this talking? You know which way your
higher nature calls you; and, of course, unless men believe in God, they
cannot help obeying their higher nature.'

'I,' said the curate, 'think the belief in God a degrading superstition;
I think every one an imbecile who believes a miracle possible. And yet
I do not care two straws about the highest good. What you call my lower
nature is far the strongest; I mean to follow it to the best of my
ability; and I prefer calling it my higher, for the sake of the
associations.'

This plunged the Professor in deeper grief than ever. He knew not what
to do. He paced up and down the verandah, or about the rooms, and moaned
and groaned as if he had a violent toothache. Virginia and the curate
asked what was amiss with him. 'I am agonising,' he said, 'for the sake
of holy, solemn, unspeakably dignified Humanity.'

The curate, seeing the Professor thus dejected, by degrees took heart
again, and as Virginia still continued her fascinating behaviour to him,
he resolved to try and prove to her that, the test of morality being
happiness, the most moral thing she could do would be to allow him to
kiss her. No sooner had he begun to propound these views, than the
Professor gave over his groaning, seized the curate by the collar, and
dragged him out of the room with a roughness that nearly throttled him.

'I was but propounding a theory--an opinion,' gasped the curate. 'Surely
thought is free. You will not persecute me for my opinions?'

'It is not for your opinions,' said the Professor, 'but for the
horrible effect they might have. Opinions,' he roared, 'can only be
tolerated which have no possible consequences. You may promulgate any of
those as much as you like; because to do that would be a self-regarding
action.'




CHAPTER XII.


'Well,' said the curate, 'if I may not kiss Virginia, I will drink
brandy instead. That will make me happy enough; and then we shall all be
radiant.'

He soon put his resolve into practice. He got a bottle of brandy, he sat
himself down under a palm-tree, and told the Professor he was going to
make an afternoon of it.

'Foolish man!' said the Professor; 'I was never drunk myself, it is
true; but I know that to get drunk makes one's head ache horribly. To
get drunk is, therefore, horribly immoral; and therefore I cannot permit
it.'

'Excuse me,' said the curate; 'it is a self-regarding action. Nobody's
head will ache but mine; so that is my own look-out. I have been
expelled from school, from college, and from my first curacy for
drinking. So I know well enough the balance of pains and pleasures.'

Here he pulled out his brandy bottle, and applied his lips to it.

'Oh, Humanity!' he exclaimed, 'how solemn this brandy tastes!'

Matters went on like this for several days. The curate was too much
frightened to again approach Virginia. Virginia at last became convinced
that he did not care about kissing her. Her vanity was wounded, and she
became sullen; and this made the Professor sullen also. In fact, two
thirds of Humanity were overcast with gloom. The only happy section of
it was the curate, who alternately smoked and drank all day long.

'The nasty little beast!' said Virginia to the Professor, 'he is nearly
always drunk. I am beginning quite to like you, Paul, by comparison
with him. Let us turn him out, and not let him live in the cottage.'

'No,' said the Professor; 'for he is one third of Humanity. You do not
properly appreciate the solidarity of mankind. His existence, however, I
admit is a great difficulty.'

One day at dinner-time, shortly afterwards, Paul came in radiant.

'Oh holy, oh happy event!' he exclaimed; 'all will go right at last.'

Virginia inquired anxiously what had happened, and Paul informed her
that the curate, who had got more drunk than usual that afternoon, had
fallen over a cliff, and been dashed to pieces.

'What event,' he asked, 'could be more charming more unspeakably holy?
It bears about it every mark of sanctity. It is for the greatest
happiness of the greatest number. Come,' he continued, 'let you and me
together, purged of sin, and purged of sorrow as we are--let us begin
our love-feast. Let us each seek the happiness of the other. Let us
instantly be sublime and happy.'




