
THE NEW PAUL AND VIRGINIA

or

POSITIVISM ON AN ISLAND

BY

W.H. MALLOCK

AUTHOR OF 'THE NEW REPUBLIC' ETC.


LONDON

CHATTO & WINDUS, PICCADILLY

1890




_'Pessimism as to the essential dignity of man is one of the surest
marks of the enervating influence of this dream of a celestial glory.'_

                                                 Mr Frederic Harrison




'Those who can read the signs of the times read in them
that the kingdom of man is at hand'--Professor CLIFFORD

Thou art smitten, o God, thou art smitten; thy curse is
   upon thee, O Lord!
And the love song of earth as thou diest, resounds through
   the wind of its wings,
Glory to man in the highest, for man is the master of
   things
                              _Songs before Sunrise_




CONTENTS.

  Chapter I.
  Chapter II.
  Chapter III.
  Chapter IV.
  Chapter V.
  Chapter VI.
  Chapter VII.
  Chapter VIII.
  Chapter IX.
  Chapter X.
  Chapter XI.
  Chapter XII.
  Chapter XIII.
  Chapter XIV.
  Chapter XV.
  Chapter XVI.
  Chapter XVII.
  Chapter XVIII.

  Notes



_THE NEW PAUL AND VIRGINIA._




CHAPTER I.


The magnificent ocean-steamer the _Australasian_ was bound for England,
on her homeward voyage from Melbourne, carrying Her Majesty's mails and
ninety-eight first-class passengers. Never did vessel start under
happier auspices. The skies were cloudless; the sea was smooth as glass.
There was not a sound of sickness to be heard anywhere; and when
dinner-time came there was not a single absentee nor an appetite
wanting.

But the passengers soon discovered they were lucky in more than weather.
Dinner was hardly half over before two of the company had begun to
attract general attention; and every one all round the table was
wondering, in whispers, who they could possibly be.

One of the objects of this delightful curiosity was a large-boned,
middle-aged man, with gleaming spectacles, and lank, untidy hair; whose
coat fitted him so ill, and who held his head so high, that one saw at a
glance he was some great celebrity. The other was a beautiful lady of
about thirty years of age, the like of whom nobody present had ever seen
before. She had the fairest hair and the darkest eyebrows, the largest
eyes and the smallest waist conceivable; art and nature had been plainly
struggling as to which should do the most for her; whilst her bearing
was so haughty and distinguished, her glance so tender, and her dress so
expensive and so fascinating, that she seemed at the same time to defy
and to court attention.

Evening fell on the ship with a soft warm witchery. The air grew purple,
and the waves began to glitter in the moonlight. The passengers gathered
in knots upon the deck, and the distinguished strangers were still the
subject of conjecture. At last the secret was discovered by the wife of
an old colonial judge; and the news spread like wildfire. In a few
minutes all knew that there were on board the _Australasian_ no less
personages than Professor Paul Darnley and the superb Virginia St.
John.




