CHAPTER XIII.


'The supreme moment is come,' said Paul solemnly, as they sat down to
dinner. 'Let us prepare ourselves for realising to the full the
essential dignity of Humanity--that _grand être_, which has come, in the
course of progress, to consist of you and me. Virginia, consider this.
Every condition of happiness that modern thinkers have dreamed of is now
fulfilled. We have but to seek each the happiness of the other, and we
shall both be in a solemn, a significant, and unspeakable state of
rapture. See, here is an exquisite leg of mutton. I,' said Paul, who
liked the fat best, 'I will give up all the fat to you.'

'And I,' said Virginia, resignedly, 'will give up all the lean to you,'

A few mouthfuls made Virginia feel sick. 'I confess,' said she, 'I can't
get on with this fat.'

'I confess,' the Professor answered, 'I don't exactly like this lean.'

'Then let us,' said Virginia, 'be like Jack Sprat and his wife.'

'No,' said the Professor, meditatively, 'that is quite inadmissible. For
in that case we should be egoistic hedonists. However, for to-day it
shall be as you say. I will think of something better to-morrow.'

Next day he and Virginia had a chicken apiece; only Virginia's was put
before Paul, and Paul's before Virginia; and they each walked round the
table to supply each other with the slightest necessaries.

'Ah!' cried Paul, 'this is altruism indeed. I think already I can feel
the sublimity beginning.'

Virginia liked this rather better. But soon she committed the sin of
taking for herself the liver of Paul's chicken. As soon as she had eaten
the whole of it her conscience began to smite her. She confessed her
sin to Paul, and inquired, with some anxiety, if he thought she would go
to hell for it? 'Metaphorically,' said Paul, 'you have already done so.
You are punished by the loss of the pleasure you would have had in
giving that liver to me, and also by your knowledge of my knowledge of
your folly in foregoing the pleasure.'

Virginia was much relieved by this answer; she at once took several more
of the Professor's choicest bits, and was happy in the thought that her
sins were expiated in the very act of their commission, by the latent
pain she felt persuaded they were attended by. Feeling that this was
sufficient, she took care not to add Paul's disapproval to her
punishment, so she never told him again.

For a short time this practice of altruism seemed to Virginia to have
many advantages. But though the Professor was always exclaiming, 'How
significant is human life by the very nature of its constitution!' she
very soon found it a trifle dull. Luckily, however, she hit upon a new
method of exercising morality, and, as the Professor fully admitted, of
giving it a yet more solemn significance.

The Professor having by some accident lost his razors, his moustaches
had begun to grow profusely, and Virginia had watched them with a deep
but half-conscious admiration. At last, in a happy moment, she
exclaimed, 'Oh, Paul, do let me wax the ends for you,' Paul at first
giggled, blushed, and protested, but, as Virginia assured him it would
make her happy, he consented. 'Then,' she said, 'you will know that I am
happy, and that in return will make you happy also. Ah!' she exclaimed
when the operation was over, 'do go and examine yourself in the glass. I
declare you look exactly like Jack Barley--Barley-Sugar, as we used to
call him--of the Blues.'

Virginia smiled; suddenly she blushed; the Professor blushed also. To
cover the blushes she begged to be allowed to do his hair. 'It will make
me so much happier, Paul,' she said. The Professor again assented, that
he might make Virginia happy, and that she might be happy in knowing
that he was happy in promoting her happiness. At last the Professor, shy
and awkward as he was, was emboldened to offer to do Virginia's hair in
return. She allowed him to arrange her fringe, and, as she found he did
no great harm to it, she let him repeat the operation as often as he
liked.

A week thus passed, full, as the Professor said, of infinite solemnity.
'I admit, Paul,' sighed Virginia, 'that this altruism, as you call it,
is very touching. I like it very much. But,' she added, sinking her
voice to a whisper, 'are you quite sure, Paul, that it is perfectly
moral?'

'Moral!' echoed the Professor, 'moral! Why, exact thought shows us that
it is the very essence of all morality!'




CHAPTER XIV.


Matters now went on charmingly. All existence seemed to take a richer
colouring, and there was something, Paul said, which, in Professor
Tyndall's words, 'gave fulness and tone to it, but which he could
neither analyse nor comprehend.' But at last a change came. One morning,
whilst Virginia was arranging Paul's moustaches, she was frightened
almost into a fit by a sudden apparition at the window. It was a
hideous hairy figure, perfectly naked but for a band of silver which it
wore about its neck. For a moment it did nothing but grin and stare;
then, uttering a discordant scream, it flung into Virginia's lap a
filthy piece of carrion, and in an instant it had bounded away with an
almost miraculous activity.

Virginia shrieked with disgust and terror, and clung to Paul's knees for
protection. He, however, in some strange way, seemed unmoved and
preoccupied. All at once, to her intense surprise, she saw his face
light up with an expression of triumphant eagerness. 'The missing link!'
he exclaimed, 'the missing link at last! Thank God.--I beg pardon for
my unspeakable blasphemy--I mean, thank circumstances over which I have
no control. I must this instant go out and hunt for it. Give me some
provisions in a knapsack, for I will not come back till I have caught
it.'

This was a fearful blow to Virginia. She fell at Paul's feet weeping,
and besought him in piteous accents that he would not thus abandon her.

'I must,' said the Professor solemnly, 'for I am going in pursuit of
Truth. To arrive at Truth is man's perfect and most rapturous happiness.
You must surely know that, even if I have forgotten to tell it to you.
To pursue truth--holy truth for holy truth's sake--is a more solemn
pleasure than even frizzling your hair.'

'Oh,' cried. Virginia, hysterically, 'I don't care two straws for truth.
What on earth is the good of it?'

'It is its own end,' said the Professor. 'It is its own exceeding great
reward. I must be off at once in search of it. Good-bye for the present.
Seek truth on your own account, and be unspeakably happy also, because
you know that I am seeking it.'

The Professor remained away for three days. For the first two of them
Virginia was inconsolable. She wandered about mournfully with her head
dejected. She very often sighed; she very often uttered the name of
Paul. At last she surprised herself by exclaiming aloud to the
irresponsive solitude, 'Oh, Paul, until you were gone, I never knew how
passionately I loved you.' No sooner were these words out of her mouth
than she stood still, horror-stricken. 'Alas!' she cried, 'and have I
really come to this? I am in a state of deadly sin, and there is no
priest here to confess to! Alone, alone I must conquer my forbidden love
as I may. But, ah me, what a guilty thing I am!'

As she uttered these words, her eyes fell on a tin box of the
Professor's, marked 'Private,' which he always kept carefully locked,
and which had before now excited her curiosity. Suddenly she became
conscious of a new impulse. 'I will pursue truth!' she exclaimed. 'I
will break that box open, and I will see what is inside it. Ah!' she
added, as with the aid of the poker she at last wrenched off the
padlock. 'Paul may be right, after all. There is more interest in the
pursuit of truth than I thought there was.'

The box was full of papers, letters, and diaries, the greater part of
which were marked 'Strictly private.' Seeing this, Virginia's appetite
for truth became keener than ever. She instantly began her researches.
The more she read, the more eager she became; and the more private
appeared the nature of the documents, the more insatiable did her
thirst for truth grow. To her extreme surprise, she gathered that the
Professor had begun life as a clergyman. There were several photographs
of him in his surplice; and a number of devout prayers, apparently
composed by himself for his own personal use. This discovery was the
result of her labours.

'Certainly,' she said, 'it is one of extreme significance. If Paul was a
priest once, he must be a priest now. Orders are indelible--at least in
the Church of England I know they are.'




