CHAPTER V.

AS TO SPECIFIC STABILITY.

    What is meant by the phrase "specific stability;" such stability to be
    expected _a priori_, or else considerable changes at once.--Rapidly
    increasing difficulty of intensifying race characters; alleged causes
    of this phenomenon; probably an internal cause co-operates.--A certain
    definiteness in variations.--Mr. Darwin admits the principle of
    specific stability in certain cases of unequal variability.--The
    goose.--The peacock.--The guinea fowl.--Exceptional causes of variation
    under domestication.--Alleged tendency to
    reversion.--Instances.--Sterility of hybrids.--Prepotency of pollen of
    same species, but of different race.--Mortality in young gallinaceous
    hybrids.--A bar to intermixture exists
    somewhere.--Guinea-pigs.--Summary and conclusion.

As was observed in the preceding chapters, arguments may yet be advanced in
favour of the opinion that species are stable (at least in the intervals of
their comparatively sudden successive manifestations); that the organic
world consists, according to Mr. Galton's before-mentioned conception, of
many facetted spheroids, each of which can repose upon any one facet, but,
when too much disturbed, rolls over till it finds repose in stable
equilibrium upon another and distinct facet. Something, it is here
contended, may be urged, in favour of the existence of such facets--of such
intermitting conditions of stable equilibrium.

A view as to the stability of species, in the intervals of change, has been
well expressed in an able article, before quoted from, as follows:[104]--"A
given animal or plant appears to be contained, as it were, within a   {114}
sphere of variation: one individual lies near one portion of the surface;
another individual, of the same species, near another part of the surface;
the average animal at the centre. Any individual may produce descendants
varying in any direction, but is more likely to produce descendants varying
towards the centre of the sphere, and the variations in that direction will
be greater in amount than the variations towards the surface." This might
be taken as the representation of the normal condition of species (_i.e._
during the periods of repose of the several facets of the spheroids), on
that view which, as before said, may yet be defended.

Judging the organic world from the inorganic, we might expect, _a priori_,
that each species of the former, like crystallized species, would have an
approximate limit of form, and even of size, and at the same time that the
organic, like the inorganic forms, would present modifications in
correspondence with surrounding conditions; but that these modifications
would be, not minute and insignificant, but definite and appreciable,
equivalent to the shifting of the spheroid on to another facet for support.

Mr. Murphy says,[105] "Crystalline formation is also dependent in a very
remarkable way on the medium in which it takes place." "Beudant has found
that common salt crystallizing from pure water forms cubes, but if the
water contains a little boracic acid, the angles of the cubes are
truncated. And the Rev. E. Craig has found that carbonate of copper,
crystallizing from a solution containing sulphuric acid, forms hexagonal
tubular prisms; but if a little ammonia is added, the form changes to that
of a long rectangular prism, with secondary planes in the angles. If a
little more ammonia is added, several varieties of rhombic octahedra
appear; if a little nitric acid is added, the rectangular prism appears
again. The changes take place not by the addition of new crystals, but by
changing the growth of the original ones." These, however, may be said{115}
to be the same species, after all; but recent researches by Dr. H.
Charlton-Bastian seem to show that modifications in the conditions may
result in the evolution of forms so diverse as to constitute different
organic species.

Mr. Murphy observes[106] that "it is scarcely possible to doubt that the
various forms of fungi which are characteristic of particular situations
are not really distinct species, but that the same germ will develop into
different forms, according to the soil on which it falls;" but it is
possible to interpret the facts differently, and it may be that these are
the manifestations of really different and distinct species, developed
according to the different and distinct circumstances in which each is
placed. Mr. Murphy quotes Dr. Carpenter[107] to the effect that "No
_Puccinia_ but the _Puccinia rosae_ is found upon rose bushes, and this is
seen nowhere else; _Omygena exigua_ is said to be never seen but on the
hoof of a dead horse; and _Isaria felina_ has only been observed upon the
dung of cats, deposited in humid and obscure situations." He adds, "We can
scarcely believe that the air is full of the germs of distinct species of
fungi, of which one never vegetates until it falls on the hoof of a dead
horse, and another till it falls on cat's dung in a damp and dark place."
This is true, but it does not quite follow that they are necessarily the
same species if, as Dr. Bastian seems to show, thoroughly different and
distinct organic forms[108] can be evolved one from another by modifying
the conditions. This observer has brought forward arguments and facts from
which it would appear that such definite, sudden, and considerable
transformations may take place in the lowest organisms. If such is really
the case, we might expect, _a priori_, to find in the highest organisms a
tendency (much more impeded and rare in its manifestations) to        {116}
similarly appreciable and sudden changes, under certain stimuli; but a
tendency to continued stability, under normal and ordinary conditions. The
proposition that species have, under ordinary circumstances, a definite
limit to their variability, is largely supported by facts brought forward
by the zealous industry of Mr. Darwin himself. It is unquestionable that
the degrees of variation which have been arrived at in domestic animals
have been obtained more or less readily in a moderate amount of time, but
that further development in certain desired directions is in some a matter
of extreme difficulty, and in others appears to be all but, if not quite,
an impossibility. It is also unquestionable that the degree of divergence
which has been attained in one domestic species is no criterion of the
amount of divergence which has been attained in another. It is contended on
the other side that we have no evidence of any limits to variation other
than those imposed by physical conditions, such, _e.g._, as those which
determine the greatest degree of speed possible to any animal (of a given
size) moving over the earth's surface; also it is said that the differences
in degree of change shown by different domestic animals depend in great
measure upon the abundance or scarcity of individuals subjected to man's
selection, together with the varying direction and amount of his attention
in different cases; finally, it is said that the changes found in nature
are within the limits to which the variation of domestic animals
extends,--it being the case that when changes of a certain amount have
occurred to a species under nature, it becomes _another species_, or
sometimes _two or more other species_ by divergent variations, each of
these species being able again to vary and diverge in any useful direction.

But the fact of the rapidly increasing difficulty found in producing by
ever such careful selection, any further extreme in some charge already
carried very far (such as the tail of the "fan-tailed pigeon" or the crop
of the "pouter"), is certainly, so far as it goes, on the side of the {117}
existence of definite limits to variability. It is asserted in reply, that
physiological conditions of health and life may bar any such further
development. Thus, Mr. Wallace says[109] of these developments: "Variation
seems to have reached its limits in these birds. But so it has in nature.
The fantail has not only more tail-feathers than any of the three hundred
and forty existing species of pigeons, but more than any of the eight
thousand known species of birds. There is, of course, some limit to the
number of feathers of which a tail useful for flight can consist, and in
the fantail we have probably reached that limit. Many birds have the
oesophagus or the skin of the neck more or less dilatable, but in no known
bird is it so dilatable as in the pouter pigeon. Here again the possible
limit, compatible with a healthy existence, has probably been reached. In
like manner, the differences in the size and form of the beak in the
various breeds of the domestic pigeon, is greater than that between the
extreme forms of beak in the various genera and sub-families of the whole
pigeon tribe. From these facts, and many others of the same nature, we may
fairly infer, that if rigid selection were applied to any organ, we could
in a comparatively short time produce a much greater amount of change than
that which occurs between species and species in a state of nature, since
the differences which we do produce are often comparable with those which
exist between distinct genera or distinct families."

But in a domestic bird like the fantail where Natural Selection does not
come into play, the tail-feathers could hardly be limited by "utility for
flight," yet two more tail-feathers could certainly exist in a fancy breed
if "utility for flight" were the only obstacle. It seems probable that the
real barrier is an _internal_ one in the nature of the organism, and the
existence of such is just what is contended for in this chapter. As to{118}
the differences between domestic races being greater than those between
species or even genera, that is not enough for the argument. For upon the
theory of "Natural Selection" all birds have a common origin, from which
they diverged by infinitesimal changes, so that we ought to meet with
sufficient changes to warrant the belief that a hornbill could be produced
from a humming-bird, proportionate time being allowed.

But not only does it appear that there are barriers which oppose change in
certain directions, but that there are positive tendencies to development
along certain special lines. In a bird which has been kept and studied like
the pigeon, it is difficult to believe that any remarkable spontaneous
variations would pass unnoticed by breeders, or that they would fail to be
attended to and developed by some one fancier or other. On the hypothesis
of _indefinite_ variability, it is then hard to say why pigeons with bills
like toucans, or with certain feathers lengthened like those of trogans, or
those of birds of paradise, have never been produced. This, however, is a
question which may be settled by experiment. Let a pigeon be bred with a
bill like a toucan's, and with the two middle tail-feathers lengthened like
those of the king bird of paradise, or even let individuals be produced
which exhibit any marked tendency of the kind, and indefinite variability
shall be at once conceded.

As yet all the changes which have taken place in pigeons are of a few
definite kinds only, such as may be well conceived to be compatible with a
species possessed of a certain inherent capacity for considerable yet
definite variation, a capacity for the ready production of certain degrees
of abnormality, which then cannot be further increased.

Mr. Darwin himself has already acquiesced in the proposition here
maintained, inasmuch as he distinctly affirms the existence of a marked
internal barrier to change in certain cases. And if this is admitted in one
case, the _principle_ is conceded, and it immediately becomes probable that
such internal barriers exist in all, although enclosing a much larger {119}
field for variation in some cases than in others. Mr. Darwin abundantly
demonstrates the variability of dogs, horses, fowls, and pigeons, but he
none the less shows clearly the _very small_ extent to which the goose, the
peacock, and the guinea-fowl have varied.[110] Mr. Darwin attempts to
explain this fact as regards the goose by the animal being valued only for
food and feathers, and from no pleasure having been felt in it on other
accounts. He adds, however, at the end the striking remark,[111] which
concedes the whole position, "but the goose seems to have _a singularly
inflexible organization_." This is not the only place in which such
expressions are used. He elsewhere makes use of phrases which quite
harmonize with the conception of a normal specific constancy, but varying
greatly and suddenly at intervals. Thus he speaks[112] of a _whole
organization seeming to have become plastic, and tending to depart from the
parental type_. That different organisms should have different degrees of
variability, is only what might have been expected _a priori_ from the
existence of parallel differences in inorganic species, some of these
having but a single form, and others being polymorphic.

To return to the goose, however, it may be remarked that it is at least as
probable that its fixity of character is the cause of the neglect, as the
reverse. It is by no means unfair to assume that _had_ the goose shown a
tendency to vary similar in degree to the tendency to variation of the fowl
or pigeon, it would have received attention at once on that account.

As to the peacock it is excused on the pleas (1), that the individuals
maintained are so few in number, and (2) that its beauty is so great it can
hardly be improved. But the individuals maintained _have not been too few_
for the independent origin of the black-shouldered form, or for the
supplanting of the commoner one by it. As to any neglect in selection,{120}
it can hardly be imagined that with regard to this bird (kept as it is all
but exclusively for its beauty), any spontaneous beautiful variation in
colour or form would have been neglected. On the contrary, it would have
been seized upon with avidity and preserved with anxious care. Yet apart
from the black-shouldered and white varieties, no tendency to change has
been known to show itself. As to its being too beautiful for improvement,
that is a proposition which can hardly be maintained. Many consider the
Javan bird as much handsomer than the common peacock, and it would be easy
to suggest a score of improvements as regards either species.

The guinea-fowl is excused, as being "no general favourite, and scarcely
more common than the peacock;" but Mr. Darwin himself shows and admits that
it is a noteworthy instance of constancy under very varied conditions.

These instances alone (and there are yet others) seem sufficient to
establish the assertion, that degree of change is different in different
domestic animals. It is, then, somewhat unwarrantable in any Darwinian to
assume that _all_ wild animals have a capacity for change similar to that
existing in _some_ of the domestic ones. It seems more reasonable to assert
the opposite, namely, that if, as Mr. Darwin says, the capacity for change
is different in different domestic animals, it must surely be limited in
those which have it least, and _a fortiori_ limited in wild animals.

Indeed, it cannot be reasonably maintained that wild species certainly vary
as much as do domestic races; it is possible that they may do so, but at
least this has not been yet shown. Indeed, the much greater degree of
variation amongst domestic animals than amongst wild ones is asserted over
and over again by Mr. Darwin, and his assertions are supported by an
overwhelming mass of facts and instances.

Of course, it may be asserted that a tendency to indefinite change exists
in all cases, and that it is only the circumstances and conditions of {121}
life which modify the effects of this tendency to change so as to produce
such different results in different cases. But assertion is not proof, and
this assertion has not been proved. Indeed, it may be equally asserted (and
the statement is more consonant with some of the facts given), that
domestication in certain animals induces and occasions a capacity for
change which is wanting in wild animals--the introduction of new causes
occasioning new effects. For, though a certain degree of variability
(normally, in all probability, only oscillation) exists in all organisms,
yet domestic ones are exposed to new and different causes of variability,
resulting in such striking divergencies as have been observed. Not even in
this latter case, however, is it necessary to believe that the variability
is indefinite, but only that the small oscillations become in certain
instances intensified into large and conspicuous ones. Moreover, it is
possible that some of our domestic animals have been in part chosen and
domesticated through possessing variability in an eminent degree.

That each species exhibits certain oscillations of structure is admitted on
all hands. Mr. Darwin asserts that this is the exhibition of a tendency to
vary which is absolutely indefinite. If this indefinite variability _does_
exist, of course no more need be said. But we have seen that there are
arguments _a priori_ and _a posteriori_ against it, while the occurrence of
variations in certain domestic animals greater in degree than the
differences between many wild species, is no argument in favour of its
existence, until it can be shown that the causes of variability in the one
case are the same as in the other. An argument against it, however, may be
drawn from the fact, that certain animals, though placed under the
influence of those exceptional causes of variation to which domestic
animals are subject, have yet never been known to vary, even in a degree
equal to that in which certain wild kinds have been ascertained to vary.

In addition to this immutability of character in some animals, it is  {122}
undeniable, that domestic varieties have little stability, and much
tendency to reversion, whatever be the true explanation of such phenomena.

In controverting the generally received opinion as to "reversion," Mr.
Darwin has shown that it is not all breeds which in a few years revert to
the original form; but he has shown no more. Thus, the feral rabbits of
Porto Santo, Jamaica, and the Falkland Islands, have not yet so reverted in
those several localities.[113] Nevertheless, a Porto Santo rabbit brought
to England reverted in a manner the most striking, recovering the proper
colour of its fur "in rather less than four years."[114] Again, the white
silk fowl, in our climate, "reverts to the ordinary colour of the common
fowl in its skin and bones, due care having been taken to prevent any
cross."[115] This reversion taking place in spite of careful selection, is
very remarkable.

Numerous other instances of reversion are given by Mr. Darwin, both as
regards plants and animals; amongst others, the singular fact of bud
reversion.[116] The curiously recurring development of black sheep, in
spite of the most careful breeding, may also be mentioned, though, perhaps,
reversion has no part in the phenomenon.

These facts seem certainly to tell in favour of limited variability, while
the cases of non-reversion do not contradict it, as it is not contended
that all species have the same tendency to revert, but rather that their
capacities in this respect, as well as for change, are different in
different kinds, so that often reversion may only show itself at the end of
very long periods indeed.

Yet some of the instances given as probable or possible causes of reversion
by Mr. Darwin, can hardly be such. He cites, for example, the occasional
presence of supernumerary digits in man.[117] For this notion, however, he
is not responsible, as he rests his remark on the authority of a      {123}
passage published by Professor Owen. Again, he refers[118] to "the greater
frequency of a monster proboscis in the pig than in any other animal." But
with the exception of the peculiar muzzle of the Saiga (or European
antelope), the only known proboscidian Ungulates are the elephants and
tapirs, and to neither of these has the pig any close affinity. It is
rather in the horse than in the pig that we might look for the appearance
of a reversionary proboscis, as both the elephants and the tapirs have the
toes of the hind foot of an odd number. It is true that the elephants are
generally considered to form a group apart from both the odd and the
even-toed Ungulata. But of the two, their affinities with the odd-toed
division are more marked.[119]

Another argument in favour of the, at least intermitting, constancy of
specific forms and of sudden modification, may be drawn from the absence of
minute transitional forms, but this will be considered in the next chapter.

It remains now to notice in favour of specific stability, that the
objection drawn from physiological difference between "species" and "races"
still exists unrefuted.

Mr. Darwin freely admits difficulties regarding the sterility of different
species when crossed, and shows satisfactorily that it could never have
arisen from the action of "Natural Selection." He remarks[120] also: "With
some few exceptions, in the case of plants, domesticated varieties, such as
those of the dog, fowl, pigeon, several fruit trees, and culinary
vegetables, which differ from each other in external characters more than
many species, are perfectly fertile when crossed, or even fertile in  {124}
excess, whilst closely allied species are almost invariably in some degree
sterile."

Again, after speaking of "the general law of good being, derived from the
intercrossing of distinct individuals of the same species," and the
evidence that the pollen of a distinct _variety_ or race is prepotent over
a flower's own pollen, adds the very significant remark,[121] "When
distinct _species_ are crossed, the case is directly the reverse, for a
plant's own pollen is almost always prepotent over foreign pollen."

Again he adds:[122] "I believe from observations communicated to me by Mr.
Hewitt, who has had great experience in hybridizing pheasants and fowls,
that the early death of the embryo is a very frequent cause of sterility in
first crosses. Mr. Salter has recently given the results of an examination
of about 500 eggs produced from various crosses between three species of
Gallus and their hybrids. The majority of these eggs had been fertilized,
and in the majority of the fertilized eggs the embryos either had been
partially developed and had then aborted, or had become nearly mature, but
the young chickens had been unable to break through the shell. Of the
chickens which were born, more than four-fifths died within the first few
days, or at latest weeks, 'without any obvious cause, apparently from mere
inability to live,' so that from 500 eggs only twelve chickens were reared.
The early death of hybrid embryos probably occurs in like manner with
plants, at least it is known that hybrids raised from very distinct species
are sometimes weak and dwarfed, and perish at an early age, of which fact
Max Wichura has recently given some striking cases with hybrid willows."

Mr. Darwin objects to the notion that there is any special sterility
imposed to check specific intermixture and change, saying,[123] "To grant
to species the special power of producing hybrids, and then to stop   {125}
their further propagation by different degrees of sterility, not strictly
related to the facility of the first union between their parents, seems a
strange arrangement."

But this only amounts to saying that the author himself would not have so
acted had he been the Creator. A "strange arrangement" must be admitted
anyhow, and all who acknowledge teleology at all, must admit that the
strange arrangement was designed. Mr. Darwin says, as to the sterility of
species, that the cause lies exclusively in their sexual constitution; but
all that need be affirmed is that sterility is brought about somehow, and
it is undeniable that "crossing" _is_ checked. All that is contended for is
that there _is_ a bar to the intermixture of _species_, but not of
_breeds_; and if the conditions of the generative products are that bar, it
is enough for the argument, no special kind of barring action being
contended for.

He, however, attempts to account for the modification of the sexual
products of species as compared with those of varieties, by the exposure of
the former to more uniform conditions during longer periods of time than
those to which varieties are exposed, and that as wild animals, when
captured, are often rendered sterile by captivity, so the influence of
union with another species may produce a similar effect. It seems to the
author an unwarrantable assumption that a cross with what, on the Darwinian
theory, can only be a slightly diverging descendant of a common parent,
should produce an effect equal to that of captivity, and consequent change
of habit, as well as considerable modification of food.

No clear case has been given by Mr. Darwin in which mongrel animals,
descended from the same undoubted species, have been persistently infertile
_inter se_; nor any clear case in which hybrids between animals, generally
admitted to be distinct species, have been continuously fertile _inter se_.

It is true that facts are brought forward tending to establish the
probability of the doctrine of Pallas, that species may sometimes be  {126}
rendered fertile by domestication. But even if this were true, it would be
no approximation towards proving the converse, _i.e._ that races and
varieties may become sterile when wild. And whatever may be the preference
occasionally shown by certain breeds to mate with their own variety, no
sterility is recorded as resulting from unions with other varieties.
Indeed, Mr. Darwin remarks,[124] "With respect to sterility from the
crossing of domestic races, I know of no well-ascertained case with
animals. This fact (seeing the great difference in structure between some
breeds of pigeons, fowls, pigs, dogs, &c.) is extraordinary when contrasted
with the sterility, of many closely-allied natural species when crossed."

It has been alleged that the domestic and wild guinea-pig do not breed
together, but the specific identity of these forms is very problematical.
Mr. A. D. Bartlett, superintendent of the Zoological Gardens, whose
experience is so great, and observation so quick, believes them to be
decidedly distinct species.

Thus, then, it seems that a certain normal specific stability in species,
accompanied by occasional sudden and considerable modifications, might be
expected _a priori_ from what we know of crystalline inorganic forms and
from what we may anticipate with regard to the lowest organic ones. This
presumption is strengthened by the knowledge of the increasing difficulties
which beset any attempt to indefinitely intensify any race characteristics.
The obstacles to this indefinite intensification, as well as to certain
lines of variation in certain cases, appear to be not only external, but to
depend on internal causes or an internal cause. We have seen that Mr.
Darwin himself implicitly admits the principle of specific stability in
asserting the singular inflexibility of the organization of the goose. We
have also seen that it is not fair to conclude that all wild races can vary
as much as the most variable domestic ones. It has also been shown    {127}
that there are grounds for believing in a tendency to reversion generally,
as it is distinctly present in certain instances. Also that specific
stability is confirmed by the physiological obstacles which oppose
themselves to any considerable or continued intermixture of species, while
no such barriers oppose themselves to the blending of varieties. All these
considerations taken together may fairly be considered as strengthening the
belief that specific manifestations are relatively stable. At the same time
the view advocated in this book does not depend upon, and is not identified
with, any such stability. All that the Author contends for is that specific
manifestation takes place along certain lines, and according to law, and
not in an exceedingly minute, indefinite, and fortuitous manner. Finally,
he cannot but feel justified, from all that has been brought forward, in
reiterating the opening assertion of this chapter that something is still
to be said for the view which maintains that species are stable, at least
in the intervals of their comparatively rapid successive              {128}
manifestations.

       *       *       *       *       *


