CHAPTER XXIV.
NIGHTMARE


I had not closed my eyes the night before on the Twentieth Century, and
what of that and of my exhaustion I slept soundly. When I first awoke,
it was night. Garthwaite had not returned. I had lost my watch and had
no idea of the time. As I lay with my eyes closed, I heard the same
dull sound of distant explosions. The inferno was still raging. I crept
through the store to the front. The reflection from the sky of vast
conflagrations made the street almost as light as day. One could have
read the finest print with ease. From several blocks away came the
crackle of small hand-bombs and the churning of machine-guns, and from
a long way off came a long series of heavy explosions. I crept back to
my horse blankets and slept again.

When next I awoke, a sickly yellow light was filtering in on me. It was
dawn of the second day. I crept to the front of the store. A smoke
pall, shot through with lurid gleams, filled the sky. Down the opposite
side of the street tottered a wretched slave. One hand he held tightly
against his side, and behind him he left a bloody trail. His eyes roved
everywhere, and they were filled with apprehension and dread. Once he
looked straight across at me, and in his face was all the dumb pathos
of the wounded and hunted animal. He saw me, but there was no kinship
between us, and with him, at least, no sympathy of understanding; for
he cowered perceptibly and dragged himself on. He could expect no aid
in all God’s world. He was a helot in the great hunt of helots that the
masters were making. All he could hope for, all he sought, was some
hole to crawl away in and hide like any animal. The sharp clang of a
passing ambulance at the corner gave him a start. Ambulances were not
for such as he. With a groan of pain he threw himself into a doorway. A
minute later he was out again and desperately hobbling on.

I went back to my horse blankets and waited an hour for Garthwaite. My
headache had not gone away. On the contrary, it was increasing. It was
by an effort of will only that I was able to open my eyes and look at
objects. And with the opening of my eyes and the looking came
intolerable torment. Also, a great pulse was beating in my brain. Weak
and reeling, I went out through the broken window and down the street,
seeking to escape, instinctively and gropingly, from the awful
shambles. And thereafter I lived nightmare. My memory of what happened
in the succeeding hours is the memory one would have of nightmare. Many
events are focussed sharply on my brain, but between these indelible
pictures I retain are intervals of unconsciousness. What occurred in
those intervals I know not, and never shall know.

I remember stumbling at the corner over the legs of a man. It was the
poor hunted wretch that had dragged himself past my hiding-place. How
distinctly do I remember his poor, pitiful, gnarled hands as he lay
there on the pavement—hands that were more hoof and claw than hands,
all twisted and distorted by the toil of all his days, with on the
palms a horny growth of callous a half inch thick. And as I picked
myself up and started on, I looked into the face of the thing and saw
that it still lived; for the eyes, dimly intelligent, were looking at
me and seeing me.

After that came a kindly blank. I knew nothing, saw nothing, merely
tottered on in my quest for safety. My next nightmare vision was a
quiet street of the dead. I came upon it abruptly, as a wanderer in the
country would come upon a flowing stream. Only this stream I gazed upon
did not flow. It was congealed in death. From pavement to pavement, and
covering the sidewalks, it lay there, spread out quite evenly, with
only here and there a lump or mound of bodies to break the surface.
Poor driven people of the abyss, hunted helots—they lay there as the
rabbits in California after a drive.[1] Up the street and down I
looked. There was no movement, no sound. The quiet buildings looked
down upon the scene from their many windows. And once, and once only, I
saw an arm that moved in that dead stream. I swear I saw it move, with
a strange writhing gesture of agony, and with it lifted a head, gory
with nameless horror, that gibbered at me and then lay down again and
moved no more.

 [1] In those days, so sparsely populated was the land that wild
 animals often became pests. In California the custom of rabbit-driving
 obtained. On a given day all the farmers in a locality would assemble
 and sweep across the country in converging lines, driving the rabbits
 by scores of thousands into a prepared enclosure, where they were
 clubbed to death by men and boys.

I remember another street, with quiet buildings on either side, and the
panic that smote me into consciousness as again I saw the people of the
abyss, but this time in a stream that flowed and came on. And then I
saw there was nothing to fear. The stream moved slowly, while from it
arose groans and lamentations, cursings, babblings of senility,
hysteria, and insanity; for these were the very young and the very old,
the feeble and the sick, the helpless and the hopeless, all the
wreckage of the ghetto. The burning of the great ghetto on the South
Side had driven them forth into the inferno of the street-fighting, and
whither they wended and whatever became of them I did not know and
never learned.[2]

 [2] It was long a question of debate, whether the burning of the South
 Side ghetto was accidental, or whether it was done by the Mercenaries;
 but it is definitely settled now that the ghetto was fired by the
 Mercenaries under orders from their chiefs.

I have faint memories of breaking a window and hiding in some shop to
escape a street mob that was pursued by soldiers. Also, a bomb burst
near me, once, in some still street, where, look as I would, up and
down, I could see no human being. But my next sharp recollection begins
with the crack of a rifle and an abrupt becoming aware that I am being
fired at by a soldier in an automobile. The shot missed, and the next
moment I was screaming and motioning the signals. My memory of riding
in the automobile is very hazy, though this ride, in turn, is broken by
one vivid picture. The crack of the rifle of the soldier sitting beside
me made me open my eyes, and I saw George Milford, whom I had known in
the Pell Street days, sinking slowly down to the sidewalk. Even as he
sank the soldier fired again, and Milford doubled in, then flung his
body out, and fell sprawling. The soldier chuckled, and the automobile
sped on.

The next I knew after that I was awakened out of a sound sleep by a man
who walked up and down close beside me. His face was drawn and
strained, and the sweat rolled down his nose from his forehead. One
hand was clutched tightly against his chest by the other hand, and
blood dripped down upon the floor as he walked. He wore the uniform of
the Mercenaries. From without, as through thick walls, came the muffled
roar of bursting bombs. I was in some building that was locked in
combat with some other building.

A surgeon came in to dress the wounded soldier, and I learned that it
was two in the afternoon. My headache was no better, and the surgeon
paused from his work long enough to give me a powerful drug that would
depress the heart and bring relief. I slept again, and the next I knew
I was on top of the building. The immediate fighting had ceased, and I
was watching the balloon attack on the fortresses. Some one had an arm
around me and I was leaning close against him. It came to me quite as a
matter of course that this was Ernest, and I found myself wondering how
he had got his hair and eyebrows so badly singed.

It was by the merest chance that we had found each other in that
terrible city. He had had no idea that I had left New York, and, coming
through the room where I lay asleep, could not at first believe that it
was I. Little more I saw of the Chicago Commune. After watching the
balloon attack, Ernest took me down into the heart of the building,
where I slept the afternoon out and the night. The third day we spent
in the building, and on the fourth, Ernest having got permission and an
automobile from the authorities, we left Chicago.

My headache was gone, but, body and soul, I was very tired. I lay back
against Ernest in the automobile, and with apathetic eyes watched the
soldiers trying to get the machine out of the city. Fighting was still
going on, but only in isolated localities. Here and there whole
districts were still in possession of the comrades, but such districts
were surrounded and guarded by heavy bodies of troops. In a hundred
segregated traps were the comrades thus held while the work of
subjugating them went on. Subjugation meant death, for no quarter was
given, and they fought heroically to the last man.[3]

 [3] Numbers of the buildings held out over a week, while one held out
 eleven days. Each building had to be stormed like a fort, and the
 Mercenaries fought their way upward floor by floor. It was deadly
 fighting. Quarter was neither given nor taken, and in the fighting the
 revolutionists had the advantage of being above. While the
 revolutionists were wiped out, the loss was not one-sided. The proud
 Chicago proletariat lived up to its ancient boast. For as many of
 itself as were killed, it killed that many of the enemy.

Whenever we approached such localities, the guards turned us back and
sent us around. Once, the only way past two strong positions of the
comrades was through a burnt section that lay between. From either side
we could hear the rattle and roar of war, while the automobile picked
its way through smoking ruins and tottering walls. Often the streets
were blocked by mountains of debris that compelled us to go around. We
were in a labyrinth of ruin, and our progress was slow.

The stockyards (ghetto, plant, and everything) were smouldering ruins.
Far off to the right a wide smoke haze dimmed the sky,—the town of
Pullman, the soldier chauffeur told us, or what had been the town of
Pullman, for it was utterly destroyed. He had driven the machine out
there, with despatches, on the afternoon of the third day. Some of the
heaviest fighting had occurred there, he said, many of the streets
being rendered impassable by the heaps of the dead.

Swinging around the shattered walls of a building, in the stockyards
district, the automobile was stopped by a wave of dead. It was for all
the world like a wave tossed up by the sea. It was patent to us what
had happened. As the mob charged past the corner, it had been swept, at
right angles and point-blank range, by the machine-guns drawn up on the
cross street. But disaster had come to the soldiers. A chance bomb must
have exploded among them, for the mob, checked until its dead and dying
formed the wave, had white-capped and flung forward its foam of living,
fighting slaves. Soldiers and slaves lay together, torn and mangled,
around and over the wreckage of the automobiles and guns.

Ernest sprang out. A familiar pair of shoulders in a cotton shirt and a
familiar fringe of white hair had caught his eye. I did not watch him,
and it was not until he was back beside me and we were speeding on that
he said:

“It was Bishop Morehouse.”

Soon we were in the green country, and I took one last glance back at
the smoke-filled sky. Faint and far came the low thud of an explosion.
Then I turned my face against Ernest’s breast and wept softly for the
Cause that was lost. Ernest’s arm about me was eloquent with love.

“For this time lost, dear heart,” he said, “but not forever. We have
learned. To-morrow the Cause will rise again, strong with wisdom and
discipline.”

The automobile drew up at a railroad station. Here we would catch a
train to New York. As we waited on the platform, three trains thundered
past, bound west to Chicago. They were crowded with ragged, unskilled
laborers, people of the abyss.

“Slave-levies for the rebuilding of Chicago,” Ernest said. “You see,
the Chicago slaves are all killed.”




CHAPTER XXV.
THE TERRORISTS


It was not until Ernest and I were back in New York, and after weeks
had elapsed, that we were able to comprehend thoroughly the full sweep
of the disaster that had befallen the Cause. The situation was bitter
and bloody. In many places, scattered over the country, slave revolts
and massacres had occurred. The roll of the martyrs increased mightily.
Countless executions took place everywhere. The mountains and waste
regions were filled with outlaws and refugees who were being hunted
down mercilessly. Our own refuges were packed with comrades who had
prices on their heads. Through information furnished by its spies,
scores of our refuges were raided by the soldiers of the Iron Heel.

Many of the comrades were disheartened, and they retaliated with
terroristic tactics. The set-back to their hopes made them despairing
and desperate. Many terrorist organizations unaffiliated with us sprang
into existence and caused us much trouble.[1] These misguided people
sacrificed their own lives wantonly, very often made our own plans go
astray, and retarded our organization.

 [1] The annals of this short-lived era of despair make bloody reading.
 Revenge was the ruling motive, and the members of the terroristic
 organizations were careless of their own lives and hopeless about the
 future. The Danites, taking their name from the avenging angels of the
 Mormon mythology, sprang up in the mountains of the Great West and
 spread over the Pacific Coast from Panama to Alaska. The Valkyries
 were women. They were the most terrible of all. No woman was eligible
 for membership who had not lost near relatives at the hands of the
 Oligarchy. They were guilty of torturing their prisoners to death.
 Another famous organization of women was The Widows of War. A
 companion organization to the Valkyries was the Berserkers. These men
 placed no value whatever upon their own lives, and it was they who
 totally destroyed the great Mercenary city of Bellona along with its
 population of over a hundred thousand souls. The Bedlamites and the
 Helldamites were twin slave organizations, while a new religious sect
 that did not flourish long was called The Wrath of God. Among others,
 to show the whimsicality of their deadly seriousness, may be mentioned
 the following: The Bleeding Hearts, Sons of the Morning, the Morning
 Stars, The Flamingoes, The Triple Triangles, The Three Bars, The
 Rubonics, The Vindicators, The Comanches, and the Erebusites.

And through it all moved the Iron Heel, impassive and deliberate,
shaking up the whole fabric of the social structure in its search for
the comrades, combing out the Mercenaries, the labor castes, and all
its secret services, punishing without mercy and without malice,
suffering in silence all retaliations that were made upon it, and
filling the gaps in its fighting line as fast as they appeared. And
hand in hand with this, Ernest and the other leaders were hard at work
reorganizing the forces of the Revolution. The magnitude of the task
may be understood when it is taken into.[2]

 [2] This is the end of the Everhard Manuscript. It breaks off abruptly
 in the middle of a sentence. She must have received warning of the
 coming of the Mercenaries, for she had time safely to hide the
 Manuscript before she fled or was captured. It is to be regretted that
 she did not live to complete her narrative, for then, undoubtedly,
 would have been cleared away the mystery that has shrouded for seven
 centuries the execution of Ernest Everhard.

