CHAPTER III

ILLUSION OF SUSPENSION AND MOTION IN THE AIR

     With the assistance of drapery--Of clouds--Of winged
     figures--Miscellaneous devices.


The representation of figures suspended in the air, or moving through
it, has never offered much trouble to painters, though necessarily
involving an apparent miracle. The very slightest pretended physical
assistance suffices for the illusion, and this help is usually rendered
in the shape of flying drapery, winged figures, clouds, or artificial
devices based upon the contact of two or more figures. The only
difficulty met with is in respect of an upward vertical movement. Here,
wings or clouds can scarcely be made to differentiate between a rising
and a falling movement, and flying drapery is of little service inasmuch
as a rush through the air would, if the feat were actually performed,
cause the drapery to cling to the figure. The surest remedy for the
disabilty is to support the figure directly by winged figures placed at
a considerable angle from the vertical, but this plan is only rarely
adopted by great masters because of the consequent complications in the
design of the group. Since flying drapery is commonly added to the
figure presumed to be ascending, and seeing that artists almost
invariably insist upon giving their ascending figures upright attitudes,
it is seldom that the movement is correctly expressed. Usually the
figure appears to be held immovably in suspension, but occasionally,
owing to the drapery arrangement, a descending movement is indicated.[a]
Without the assistance of winged figures, the illusion of ascension can
only be given when the figure is shown directed upwards at an angle of
at least fifteen or twenty degrees from the vertical. As a rule the
larger the angle, the more easy is the production of an illusion. With a
fairly large angle, and an appropriate arrangement of limbs and drapery,
heavy figures can be made to appear naturally ascending, as in Rubens's
Boreas and Orithyia, both voluptuous forms.[b]

  [a] As in Murillo's Ascension of Christ, Madrid Academy.

  [b] Venice Academy.

Only a very few of the first artists have been able to give an illusion
of movement in the air by use of drapery alone, the device adopted by
Michelangelo in the Sistine Chapel frescoes being perhaps the most
effective. He throws behind the moving figure of the Deity a large fold
of drapery, which assumes an oval or nearly round shape, the whole
acting as a concave framework for the Deity and attending Angels.[a] The
success of the plan arises of course from the apparent resistance to the
air offered by a large and compact surface. This form with more or less
marked modifications in the concavity was probably used by the ancient
Greeks in their paintings, as a nearly similar arrangement is found in a
sculptured figure which has come down to us, though in this case a
running movement is indicated.[b] It is also seen in some Pompeian
frescoes, where it is applied to figures moving through the air and on
the ground.[c] Raphael adopted the device occasionally,[d] but generally
varied it with excellent effect by flowing out from the waist a large
scarf-like fold to take a circular form above the head and shoulders of
the figure,[e] or by causing heavy drapery to flow out from the lower
part of the body.[f] No doubt in the case of Raphael, the extraordinary
grace of figure, and the perfect pose of the limbs, assist the illusion.
Tintoretto and other artists of the Renaissance used an oval drapery in
a similar way; while sometimes the figure is half hidden within it,[g]
and Le Sueur wrapped part of the figure in folds before forming the
oval.[h] There seems to be a simple virtue in any oval form connected
with figures presumed to be suspended in the air. It was quite common in
the early days of the Renaissance for the Deity or Virgin and Child to
be placed in a regular oval framework, sometimes supported by Angels or
cherubs, and the illusion was usually successful.[i] Rubens by way of
experiment went a little further in one picture, for he placed the
Virgin and Child in an oval picture frame supported by cherubs.[j] This
however does not seem so novel as some of Perugino's ovals which are
bordered with the heads of cherubs.[k]

  [a] See Plate 24.

  [b] The Son of Niobe, Uffizi Gallery, Florence.[72]

  [c] Herculanum et Pompei, vol. iv., by Roux Ainé.

  [d] Ceiling of the Hall of Heliodorus, Vatican.

  [e] Vatican frescoes God Separating Water and Earth, and God Appearing
        to Isaac.

  [f] The Creation of the Sun and Moon.

  [g] Poussin's St. Francis Zavier, Louvre.

  [h] The Virgin appearing to St. Martin.

  [i] See the Assumption of Orcagna, and of Luca di Tome; Giunto
        Pisano's Christ and the Virgin; and Mainardi's Madonna giving
        her Girdle to St. Thomas.

  [j] Virgin and Child, Chiesa Nuovo, Rome.

  [k] Ascension of Christ, Perugia; Assumption, Florence Academy, and
        others.

Wings are seldom sufficient to suggest lightness in the air, because
they can scarcely be designed of the size and strength which we judge to
be proportionate to the presumed weight of the body, without making the
form appear abnormal, though there are instances in which partial
success has been achieved by using comparatively small figures and
giving them unusually large wings.[a] The use of more than a single pair
of wings is hardly permissible because of the apparent anomaly. Actually
one pair is not less incomprehensible from an anatomical point of view
than several pairs, but custom has driven from our minds any suggestion
of incongruity in respect of the representation of the common type of
Angel. Naturally when skilfully arranged, the more wings, the stronger
the illusion of flight, and if a habit of giving four wings to an Angel
were engendered, we should perhaps see nothing strange in them. Even six
wings have been given to Angels without making them appear
ungraceful.[b]

  [a] J. H. Witt's Bless the Lord.

  [b] Picart's The Burning Coal.

When there is no assistance, as clouds or flowing drapery, lent to
Angels to promote the illusion of suspension, it is necessary to give
them an attitude which is nearly horizontal. Properly managed, a pair
of comparatively small wings may in this way appear to support a heavy
form.[a] Luini actually adds the weight of the body of St. Catherine to
three Angels, flying horizontally, who carry her to the tomb[b]; an
invention, strangely enough, followed by Kulmbach in Germany at about
the same time.[c] In both cases the illusion is excellent. Some of the
early Flemish and German masters, including Van Eyck[d] and Holbein,[e]
employed Angels in scenes with the Virgin to hold suspended behind her
seat, large falls of brocaded material, and it is curious to note that
the Angels themselves seem to be supported by the drapery. In order to
assist the suggestion of lightness, Perugino sometimes arched the lower
limbs of the Angels, adding a narrow tape scroll[f]; an addition
improved upon by Raphael who substituted for the scroll a loosened
girdle flying out from the waist.[g]

  [a] Rembrandt's The Angel quitting Tobias, Louvre.

  [b] The Brera, Milan.

  [c] St. Mary's, Krakan.

  [d] Virgin and Child at the Fountain, Antwerp.

  [e] Virgin and Child, Augsburg.

  [f] The Ascension, Borgo San Sepolcro, Perugia.

  [g] Creation of Woman, Castello Gallery; Prophets and Sybils, Perugia,
        and others.

The most frequently used form of support for figures in suspension are
irregular masses of clouds, upon which the figures sit or stand, and
occasionally are partly enfolded therein. Sometimes the cloud bank is
more or less shaped for the purpose of relief, or for variety in design.
Thus, Raphael makes part of the cloud a perfect footrest for the
Virgin,[a] and Palma Giovane does a similar thing for a figure of
Christ,[b] but in this case the illusion is hazarded as the seat is not
directly indicated. Ingres produces an excellent illusion by making the
footrest a small separate cloud,[c] which is a variation from the
practice of many painters of the Renaissance, who used a separate cloud
for each personage in the composition, or even with each foot as with
Carlo Crivelli.[d] In a fresco of the Evangelists at Florence, each of
them sits with his insignia on a foliated bank of clouds.[e] Perugino in
using a similar plan sometimes places the clouds at the bottom of the
picture, no part of the earth being seen, so that the illusion is
considerably enhanced.[f] At other times he shows Angels apparently
running through the air, with each front foot resting on a tiny cloud,
giving the impression that it is fastened there.[g] Durer extended this
plan by directly attaching a small cloud to each foot, the effect being
somewhat whimsical.[h] Titian was unsuccessful in the use of an isolated
cloud.[i] In a Resurrection scene Christ stands on a small thin cloud,
and holds a flag-pole, the lower end of which rests upon the cloud.
Obviously with such a design no suggestion of ascent can enter the mind.

  [a] Foligna Madonna, Vatican.

  [b] Christ in Judgment, Venice.

  [c] The Oath of Louis XIII.

  [d] Coronation of the Virgin, Milan.

  [e] Santa Maria. By an unknown artist of the Ghirlandaio school.

  [f] Christ's Rule.

  [g] Madonna and Child with Penitents, and others.

  [h] The Virgin with a Canary, Berlin.

  [i] Urbino Gallery.

  [Illustration: PLATE 23 (See page 247)
  Patricia, by Lydia Emmet (_Private owner, N. Y._)]

Some artists, as Luca Signorelli,[a] hide the lower part of the figure
behind clouds, but this method, while indicating suspension, cannot
provide an illusion of movement without an assisting device. Thus
Schonherr shows an Angel so concealed in a nearly horizontal position
with wings fully expanded, the effect being good.[b] When a figure is
suspended on clouds, very rarely indeed is repose emphasized by placing
it in a horizontal position, but Poussin once adopts the plan,[c] and
Guercino goes so far as to represent a reclining Angel resting her head
on her hand as if suffering from fatigue.[d] Perfect repose of the Deity
in an upright position on clouds is produced by Gustave Doré, who
reduces the size of the earth, above which He stands, to an
insignificant proportion, so that the imagination sends it moving round
below Him.[e]

  [a] Madonna and Child in Glory, Arezzo.

  [b] The Agony in the Garden.

  [c] Adam and Eve.

  [d] Martyrdom of St. Peter, Modena.

  [e] Creation of the Earth.

Quite a number of artists represent the suspended figures standing on
the backs of cherubs or cupids, which in their turn are supported by
clouds, as for instance, R. Ghirlandaio,[a] Liberale di Verona,[b] and
Francesco da Cotignola.[c] Fra Bartolommeo places a single foot of the
Deity on a cherub who holds a banderole, the illusion being
excellent.[d] Domenichino adopts a most ingenious device in St. Paul's
Vision. He shows the Apostle being carried to Heaven by winged cherubs,
who appear to find the weight considerable, and to struggle under it.
There is little else to induce the illusion, which is complete.[e] A
similar scheme is successfully managed in Prud'hon's Abduction of
Psyche. Tassaert uses a like device, but in addition has a cherub
supporting each arm of the Virgin. Palma Vecchio makes the Virgin stand
on the outstretched wings of a cherub, but her robe blows upwards,
giving her the appearance of descending instead of ascending.[f] Rubens
has three alternatives in the use of cherubs. The figure sits on clouds
with feet resting on small globes sustained by cherubs[g]; or the
cherubs hold the dress and mantle of the Virgin; or they help to control
the clouds upon which she sits.[h] In some of his pictures of the
Immaculate Conception, Murillo also uses globes, but places the cherubs
on them instead of under. Francia has a picture in which cherubs hold up
clouds bearing the Virgin,[i] a device once used by Rembrandt.[j] Genga
shows the Deity kneeling upon the heads of cherubs, a scheme not
satisfactory.[k] Cherubs were used by Titian to hold up the Virgin and
clouds,[l] while Velasquez rested the robes on clouds, but used cherubs
to sustain the Holy Mother.[m]

  [a] The Madonna giving her Girdle to St. Thomas, Prato.

  [b] The Magdalene and Saints.

  [c] Adoration of the Shepherds, Ravenna Academy.

  [d] The Deity with SS. Catherine and Magdalene.

  [e] Assumption of the Virgin.

  [f] Assumption of the Virgin, Venice.

  [g] The Deity and Christ, Weimar.

  [h] Assumption of the Virgin at Dusseldorf, Augsburg, Brussels, and
        Vienna.

  [i] Madonna and Child in Glory, Berlin.

  [j] The Ascension, Munich.

  [k] The Magdalene and Saints, Milan.

  [l] Assumption of the Virgin, Venice.

  [m] Coronation of the Virgin, Madrid.

The illusion is usually more complete when Angels are used instead of
cherubs for support, apparently because they may be presumed to have
greater strength, and the plan was adopted by some of the earlier
masters of the Renaissance. The simple design of Rubens in resting the
foot of Christ on the arm of a flying Angel is quite successful.[a]
Fontana places the Deity on clouds supported by Angels,[b] a method
adopted by Granacci, who however assists the illusion by adding two
Angels who are directly supporting the figure.[c] Peter Cornelius has
the Deity with His foot on a small globe which is held in position by
Angels.[d] A fine example of their use is shown by Gutherz. Two Angels
with large outstretched wings are bearing the body of a woman to Heaven.
She lies recumbent upon a lengthy hammock formed by the robes of the
Angels, the ends of the drapery being gathered up by the flying
cherubs.[e] The illusion is perfect. Rembrandt also has a beautiful
design in a Resurrection scene, for he shows the figure of Christ as a
shade whose hands are held by a flying Angel lifting Him to Heaven.[f] A
few artists, as Poussin[g] and Bouguereau,[h] use Angels to carry the
figure with no other assisting device, but if the body is recumbent it
is necessary that the Angels should be in a nearly upright position,
otherwise they will appear to be moving horizontally.[i] Rubens in an
Ascension uses the strange method of placing an Angel beneath Christ,
but without touching Him.[j] The drapery flies out at the back, so that
without some assistance he would appear to be descending; but the Angel
below, with her hands held up, seems to correct the position. Guido Reni
carries the Virgin up with Angels who support her beneath, and she seems
in fact to be standing on their shoulders.[k] In one instance Correggio
substitutes a smiling boy for an Angel, and he holds up a cloud on which
the Virgin sits.[l] There are many works where winged figures hold a
body in suspension, most of them providing excellent illusions. Among
the best is Lux's Sarpedon, where the body of the Trojan is held up for
Jupiter to kiss.[m]

  [a] Ascension of Christ, Vienna.

  [b] Vision of the Resurrection.

  [c] The Virgin giving her Girdle to St. Thomas, Uffizi Gallery,
        Florence.

  [d] Let there be Light.

  [e] "They shall bear thee up."

  [f] Munich Gallery.

  [g] Assumption of the Virgin, and Vision of St. Paul.

  [h] Assumption of the Virgin.

  [i] Bouguereau's Une Ame au Ciel.

  [j] The Academy, Venice.

  [k] Assumption of the Virgin, Munich.

  [l] Madonna and Child with Saints, Parma.

  [m] The Luxembourg.

Even a simple banderole or scarf suffices to indicate movement in the
air if well arranged. Usually a flying cherub holds an end of the
banderole, and Ferri shows a wingless putto even, flying with no other
assistance.[a] Boucher creates an illusion by the bold device of
connecting two cupids with a narrow scarf blown out into a
semicircle[b]; and in another instance very narrow tape streamers
suffice.[c]

  [a] David plans a Temple.

  [b] Birth of Venus.

  [c] Altdorfer's Nativity at Berlin.

The use of thick smoke for suspension purposes is nearly always
successful, because volumes of smoke in nature necessarily tend to move
upwards; but obviously this scheme can only be arranged when an altar is
possible. The plan is not uncommon in pictures relating to Cain and
Abel, and the Translation of Enoch. In one of the latter subject, Hoet
makes part of the smoke from an altar envelop the surrounding ground so
as to widen the volume, while Schnorr achieves the same end by curling
round the smoke as it ascends into the form of a large saucer upon which
the Deity sits,[a] a method slightly varied by Amiconi.[b]

  [a] God's Promise to Abraham.

  [b] God Appearing to Moses.

Where a number of figures are connected together in a circular form in
the air, the double illusion of suspension and motion follows naturally,
provided their attitudes indicate a circular movement. An excellent
example of this is shown in a picture by Botticelli, where Angels dance
in the air over the hut of the Nativity.[a] The finest work of the kind
in existence is probably Schwind's Pleiads, in which the stars are
represented by a circle of beautiful nude women.[b] Extraordinary
activity is suggested by the perfect arrangement of the limbs and light
flowing drapery used. Bouguereau has a work of a similar kind, The Lost
Pleiad, but here the dancers are upright, and the circle is only
accessory to the title figure.[c] Watteau is fairly successful in giving
an illusion of suspension to cupids even with a half circle, though the
invention is somewhat formal.[d]

  [a] National Gallery, London.

  [b] Denner Collection. See Plate 25.

  [c] Brooklyn Museum, New York.

  [d] The Berlin example of the Embarkation for Cythera.

Some of the devices used to bring about an illusion are most ingenious.
Thus in his Bacchus and Ariadne,[a] Tintoretto actually applies a
disability of his art for the purpose. Venus is shown in a horizontal
position in the air, placing a crown of stars upon the head of Ariadne.
Bacchus is standing by, and the form of the goddess floats just at the
back of him, the lower side of her hip being on a level with the top of
his head. Seeing that the head is covered with a profusion of vine
leaves, it is impossible for the artist to indicate, or the observer to
recognize, that the goddess does not actually touch the head of Bacchus,
and she apparently balances herself upon his head while crowning
Ariadne, the artist having been careful to place the centre of gravity
of her figure over the apparent point of contact. A similar kind of
illusion is provided by Burne-Jones, whose Angel of the Annunciation is
upright in midair near the ground, but her feet seem to find support
on the branches of a shrub.[b] Rossetti, in the same subject, shows the
Angel with his feet wrapped in flames, the weight being thus apparently
removed. The design seems bizarre, perhaps because of the absence of an
expression of surprise which one would expect to see on the countenance
of the Virgin at so extraordinary a phenomenon.[73] Schwind also uses a
disability of his art for an illusion in his Phantom of the Forest.[c]
She moves near the ground away from the spectator with such rapidity
that her robe, a simple rectangular piece of drapery, has opened out
wide from the front, and hides her figure from the shoulders down, so
that from the point of view of the observer she may, or may not, be
touching the ground as she moves.

  [a] Ducal Palace, Venice.

  [b] Tate Gallery, London.

  [c] Schack Gallery, Munich.

How slight the apparent support need be, is indicated in Bouguereau's
Aurora and Twilight. Each figure is represented by a nude woman holding
a light scarf, the first rapidly, and the second slowly, skimming the
surface of a stream of water with soft touches of the feet, and yet
there is no anomaly that strikes the mind. A still more daring device is
used by Battistello, though quite successfully. He places two wingless
putti in the air, but one holds up the other, and this action seems to
sustain them both.[a] Another amazing design is from the hand of A. P.
Roll, who shows a nude-man in the air clutching another, and apparently
struggling to pull him down, yet the action seems perfectly natural.[b]

  [a] Adoration of the Shepherds, San Martino, Naples.

  [b] Design for the Petit Palais, Paris.


       *       *       *       *       *




NOTES



NOTE 1. PAGE 2

It is usual and proper to distinguish three kinds of beauty in painting,
namely, of colour, of form, and of expression. But form must be defined
by tones, and colour without form is meaningless: hence in the general
consideration of the painter's art, it is convenient to place form and
colour together as representing the sensorial element of beauty.
Nevertheless colour and form are not on the same plane in regard to
sense perception. Harmony of colour is distinguished involuntarily by
nerve sensations, but in the case of harmony of form there must be a
certain consideration before its æsthetic determination. The recognition
of this harmony commonly appears to be instantaneous, but still it is
delayed, the delay varying with the complexity of the signs, that is to
say, with the quality of the beauty.



NOTE 2. PAGE 2

Benedetto Croce, the inventor of the latest serious æsthetic system,
talks of the "science of art," but he says[a]:

     Science--true science, is a science of the spirit--Philosophy.
     Natural sciences spoken of apart from philosophy, are complexes
     of knowledge, arbitrarily abstracted and fixed.

It is perhaps needless to say that Croce's æsthetic system, like all the
others, collapses on a breath of inquiry. On the purely philosophical
side of it, further criticism is unnecessary, and its practical outcome
from the point of view of art is not far removed from the amazing
conclusions of Hegel. From the latter philosopher we learn that an idol
in the form of a stone pillar, or an animal set up by the primitive
races, is higher art than a drama by Shakespeare, or a portrait by
Titian, because it represents the Idea (Hegel's unintelligible
abstraction--see Note 5), while Croce tells us that "the art of savages
is not inferior, as art, to that of civilized peoples, provided it be
correlated to the impressions of the savages." Clearly if this be so, we
are not surprised to learn from Croce that Aristotle "failed to discern
the true nature of the æsthetic." Nevertheless, whatever be the outcome
of Croce's arguments, his system is at least more plausible than that of
either Hegel or Schopenhauer, for while these two invent highly
improbable abstractions upon which to base their systems, Croce only
gives new functions to an old and reasonable abstraction.

  [a] _Æsthetic_, Douglas Ainslie Translation, 1909.



NOTE 3. PAGE 3

The writer does not mean to suggest that these systems are set up for
the purpose of being knocked down: he desires only to indicate surprise
that in new works dealing with the perception of beauty, it is
considered necessary to restate the old æsthetic theories and to point
out their drawbacks, albeit the fatal objections to them are so numerous
that there is always fresh ground available for destructive criticism.
The best of the recent works on the subject that have come under the
notice of the writer, is E. F. Carritt's review of the present position
in respect of æsthetic systems. Though profound, he is so comprehensive
that he leaves little or nothing of importance for succeeding critics to
say till the next system is put forward. Yet here is his conclusion[a]:

     If any point can be thought to have emerged from the foregoing
     considerations, it is this: that in the history of æsthetics we
     may discover a growing pressure of emphasis upon the doctrine that
     all beauty is the expression of what may be generally called
     emotion, and that all such expression is beautiful.

This is all that an acute investigator can draw from the sum of the
æsthetic systems advanced. Now what does this mean? Let us turn to the
last page of Carritt's book and find the object of the search after a
satisfactory æsthetic system. It is, he says, "the desire to understand
goodness and beauty and their relations with each other or with
knowledge, as well as to practise or enjoy them." If we accept beauty as
the expression of emotion, how far have we progressed towards the
indicated goal? Not a step, for we have only agreed upon a new way of
stating an obvious condition which applies to the animal world as well
as to human beings. Beyond this there is nothing--not a glimpse of
sunshine from all the æsthetic systems laid down since the time of
Baumgarten.

More than twenty years ago Leo Tolstoy pointed out the unintelligible
character of these systems, but no further light has been thrown upon
them. Nevertheless Tolstoy's own interpretation of the significance of
beauty cannot possibly meet with general approval. He disputes that art
is directly associated with beauty or pleasure, and finds in fact that
what we call the beautiful representation of nature is not necessarily
art, but that[b]

     Art is a human activity, consisting in this, that one man
     consciously, by means of certain external signs, hands on to others
     feelings he has lived through, and that other people are affected
     by these feelings, and also experience them.

This definition may mean almost anything, and particularly it may imply
pure imitation which Tolstoy condemns as outside of art. But it
certainly does not include many forms of what we call art, the author
specially condemning for instance, _Romeo and Juliet_, and declaring
that while _Faust_ is beautiful, "it cannot produce a really artistic
impression." The definition then seems to represent little more than a
quibble over terms. Tolstoy says that the beautiful representation of
nature is not art, but something else is. Very well then, all we have to
do is to find a new term for this representation of nature, and the
position remains as before except that the meaning of the term "art" has
been changed.

  [a] _The Theory of Beauty_, 1914.

  [b] _What is Art?_ Aylmer Maude Translation.



NOTE 4. PAGE 8

The evolutionary principle has been applied to art by Herbert Spencer
and J. A. Symonds, but not in the sense in which it is used in
connection with the development of living organisms. Spencer traces a
progression from the simple to the complex in the application of the
arts, but not in the arts themselves[a]; and Symonds endeavours to prove
that each separate marked period of art shows a progression which is
common to all; that is, from immature variations to a high type, then
downwards through a lower form represented by romanticism or elegance,
to realism, and from this to hybrid forms.[b] Spencer's argument is
suggestive, but his conclusions have been mostly upset by archaeological
discoveries made since his great book was published. The illustrations
given by Symonds are highly illuminating, but they are very far from
postulating a general law of evolution operating in the production of
art.

  [a] _First Principles_.

  [b] Essay on _Evolutionary Principles_.



  [Illustration: PLATE 24 (See page 260)
  The Creation of Adam, by Michelangelo (_Vatican_)]



NOTE 5. PAGE 8

It seems necessary to mention Hegel's art periods, though one can only
do so with a feeling of regret that a man who achieved a high reputation
as a philosopher should have entered the province of art only to
misconstrue its purpose with fantastic propositions which have no
historical or other apparent foundation. He divides art history into
Symbolic, Classic, and Romantic periods respectively. To accomplish this
he invents or discovers a new abstraction which he calls the Idea, this
representing man's conception, not of God, but of His perfection--His
supreme qualities, so that in one sense the Idea may be called the
Absolute, in another the Spirit, and in another, Truth. These terms are
in fact interchangeable, and each may be a manifestation of another, or
of God. This Idea, he says, being perfect beauty, is the basic concept
of art. In archaic times man was unable to give expression to this
concept, so he represented it by symbols: hence the earliest art was
Symbolic art. In the time of the Greeks man had so advanced that he was
able to give higher expression to the Idea, and he embodied it in a
perfect human form. This is the Classic period, which Hegel indicates
continued till Christianity spread abroad, when Classic form, though
perfect as art, was found insufficient for the now desired still higher
expression of the Idea. This expression could not be put into stone, so
other arts than sculpture were used for it, namely, poetry, painting,
and music, which are placed together as Romantic art. This is as nearly
as possible a statement of the periods of Hegel in short compass. It is
impossible to interpret logically his arguments, nor is it necessary,
for his conclusions when tested in the light of experience, develop into
inexplicable paradoxes and contradictions which border on the
ridiculous. Needless to say, the acceptance of this division means the
annihilation of our ideas of the meaning of art, and the condemnation to
the limbo of forgetfulness of nearly all the artists whose memory is
honoured.

The general interpretation of the terms "Classic Art" and "Romantic Art"
widely differs from that of Hegel, and varies with the arts. In the
literary arts the distinction is obvious, but the terms are used to
define both periods and classes; in architecture the Gothic period is
usually called the Romantic epoch; and in painting the terms have
reference to manner, the more formal manner being called Classic, and
the soft manner, Romantic; though it is commonly understood that
Romantic art is especially concerned with subjects associated with the
gentler side of life. But there is no general agreement. Some writers
assert that Giorgione was the first of the romanticists, others give the
palm to Watteau, a third section to Delacroix, and a fourth to the
Barbizon School. We must await a clear definition of "Romantic Art."



NOTE 6. PAGE 8

It may be reasonably argued that the want of development of the plastic
arts in England during the literary revival, was largely due to
artificial restrictions. Fine paintings were ordered out of the churches
by Elizabeth, and many were destroyed; while, following the lead of the
court, there was little or no encouragement offered by the public to
artists except perhaps in portraiture. Flaxman truly said of the
destruction of works of art in this period, that the check to the
national art in England occurred at a time which offered the most
essential and extraordinary assistance to its progress.



NOTE 7. PAGE 16

During the last half century or so, various writers of repute, including
Ruskin and Dean Farrar, have professed to find in the poorer works of
the Italian painters of the fourteenth century, and even in paintings of
Margaritone and others of the previous century, evidence of strong
religious emotion on the part of the artists. It is claimed that their
purpose in giving simple solemn faces to their Madonnas and Saints, was
"to tell the sacred story in all its beauty and simplicity"; that they
possessed a "powerful sincerity of emotion"; that they "delivered the
burning messages of prophecy with the stammering lips of infancy," and
so on. It is proper to say that there is nothing to support this view of
the early painters. We find no trace of any suggestions of the kind till
the last of these artists had been dead for about four hundred years,
while their lives, so far as we have any record, lend no warranty to the
statements. The painters of the fourteenth century took their art
seriously, but purely as a craft, and it was not uncommon with them to
combine two or three other crafts with that of painting. They designed
mostly sacred subjects for the simple reason that the art patrons of the
day seldom ordered anything else. In their private lives they associated
together, were generally agreeable companions, and not averse to an
occasional escapade. Moreover the time in which they lived was notable
for what we should call loose habits, and indeed from the thirteenth
century to the end of the fifteenth, religious observances and practices
were of a more hollow and formal character than they have ever been
since.

The position occupied by these painters in the progression of art from
the crude Byzantine period upwards, corresponds with that of the Roman
painters of the third and fourth centuries in the progression downwards
to the Byzantine epoch, and there is no more reason for supposing that
the Italians were actuated by special emotions in their work, than that
the Romans were so moved. In both cases the character of the work, as
Reynolds put it in referring to the Italians, was the result of want of
knowledge. The countenances usually presented by both Roman and Italian
artists have a half sad, half resigned expression, because this was the
only kind of expression that could be given by an immature painter whose
ideal was restricted by the necessity of eliminating elements which
might indicate happiness. Giotto, Taddeo Gaddi, Duccio, and a few more,
were exceptions in that their art was infinitely superior to the average
of the century, but all from Giotto downwards, laboured as craftsmen
only. No doubt they often worked with enthusiasm, and in this way their
emotions may have been brought into play, but there is no possible means
of identifying in a picture the emotions which an artist may have
experienced while he was painting it.

As to the sad expression referred to in these Italian works, it may be
observed that Edgar A. Poe held that the tone of the highest
manifestation of beauty is one of sadness. "Beauty of whatever kind," he
says, "in its supreme development invariably excites the sensitive soul
to tears."[a] But Poe is clearly mistaken here. It is not the beauty of
the work that affects the emotions to tears, when they are so affected,
but the subject of the design exhibiting the beauty. A picture or poem
representing a sad subject may be very beautiful, but the sadness itself
would not assist the beauty, though it might increase the emotional
effect. The higher forms of beauty rarely draw our tears, but elicit our
admiration without direct thought of anything but the beauty.

Who would weep when in front of the greatest marvels of Greek sculpture?

  [a] _The Philosophy of Composition._



NOTE 8. PAGE 21

It is commonly, but wrongfully, supposed that Rembrandt used his
broadest manner in painting commissioned portraits. The number of his
portraits known to exist is about 450, of which fifty-five are
representations of himself, and fifty-four of members of his household,
or relatives. There are, further, more than seventy studies of old men
and women, and thirty of younger men. The balance are commissioned
portraits or groups. This last section includes none at all of his
palette knife pictures, and not more than two or three which are
executed with his heaviest brushes. Generally his work broadened in his
later period, but up to the end of his life his more important works
were often painted in a comparatively fine manner, though the handling
was less careful and close.[a] The broadest style of the artist is
rarely exhibited except in his studies and family portraits. Further it
is extremely unlikely that a palette-knife picture would have been
accepted in Holland during Rembrandt's time as a serious work in
portraiture.

  [a] See among works dating after 1660, The Syndics of the Drapers,
        Portrait of a Young Man, Wachtmeister Collection; Lady with
        a Dog, Colmar Museum; and Portrait of a Young Man, late Beit
        Collection.



NOTE 9. PAGE 22

Darwin pointed out the permanent character of the changes in the nerves,
though he submitted another demonstration[a]:

     That some physical change is produced in the nerve cells or nerves
     which are habitually used can hardly be doubted, for otherwise it
     is impossible to understand how the tendency to certain acquired
     movements is inherited.

  [a] _The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals._



NOTE 10. PAGE 23

Reynolds evidently had little faith in original genius. Addressing Royal
Academy students, he said[a]:

     You must have no dependence on your own genius. If you have great
     talents, industry will improve them; if you have but moderate
     abilities, industry will supply the deficiency. Nothing is denied
     to well-directed labour; nothing is to be obtained without it.... I
     will venture to assert that assiduity unabated by difficulty, and a
     disposition eagerly directed to the object of its pursuit, will
     produce effects similar to those which some call the result of
     natural powers.

On another occasion Reynolds observed of Michelangelo[b]:

     He appears not to have had the least conception that his art was to
     be acquired by any other means than great labour; and yet he of all
     men that ever lived, might make the greatest pretensions to the
     efficacy of native genius and inspiration.

Gibbon said that Reynolds agreed with Dr. Johnson in denying all
original genius, any natural propensity of the mind to one art or
science rather than another.[c] Hogarth also agreed with Reynolds, for
he describes genius as "nothing but labour and diligence."

Croce says that genius has a quantitative and not a qualitative
signification, but he offers no demonstration.[d] Evidently he is
mistaken, for the signification is both quantitative and qualitative. It
is true that what a Phidias, or a Raphael, or a Beethoven puts together
is a sum of small beauties, any one of which may be equalled by another
man, but he does more than represent a number of beauties, for he
combines these into a beautiful whole which is superior in quality and
cannot be estimated quantitatively. We may possibly call Darwin a genius
because of the large number of facts he ascertained, and the correct
inferences he drew from them, but we particularly apply the term to him
by reason of the general result of all these facts and inferences, this
result being qualitative and not quantitative. Croce probably took his
dictum from Schopenhauer, who, however, represented degrees of quality
as quantitative,[e] which is of course confusing the issue.

  [a] Reynolds's Second Discourse.

  [b] His Fifth Discourse.

  [c] Gibbon's _Memoirs of my Life and Writings_.

  [d] _Æsthetic._

  [e] Essay on "Genius."



NOTE 11. PAGE 32

It is often observed by advocates of "new" forms of art that the work of
many great artists has been variously valued at different periods--that
leaders of marked departures in art now honoured, were frequently more
or less ignored in their own time, while other artists who acquired a
great reputation when living, have been properly put into the background
by succeeding generations. For the first statement no solid ground can
be shown. In painting, the artists since the Dark Age who can be said to
have led departures of any importance, are Cimabue, Giotto, the Van
Eycks, Masaccio, Lionardo, Dürer, Giorgione, Raphael, Michelangelo,
Titian, Holbein, Claude, Rubens, Rembrandt, Velasquez, Watteau,
Reynolds, and Fragonard. All of these had their high talents recognized
and thoroughly appreciated in their lifetime. In sculpture the
experience is the same, for there is no sculptor now honoured whose work
was not highly valued by his contemporaries. So with poetry, but before
the invention of printing and in the earlier days of this industry,
poetry of any kind was very slow in finding its way among the people.
What might seem nowadays to have been inappreciation of certain poets
was really want of knowledge of them.

There is more truth in the assertion that many artists who had a high
reputation in their lifetime are now more or less disregarded, though
it does not follow from this that there has been a reversal of opinion
on the part of the public, or a variation in the acuteness of æsthetic
perception. Generally we find that these artists very properly held the
position they occupied in their time and country, and if they do not now
stand on exalted pedestals it is only because we compare them with men
of other periods and places, which their contemporary countrymen did
not do, at least for the purpose of establishing their permanent
position in art. Carlo Maratta for instance was celebrated in Italy as
the best painter of his country in his time, and even now we must so
regard him, but his contemporaries as with ourselves did not place him
on so high a level as his great predecessors of the sixteenth century,
and some of the seventeenth. A special reason why many of the
seventeenth century artists of Italy have fallen in public esteem may be
found in the fact that they excelled mostly in the production of
sensorial beauty, paying little attention to intellectual grace, and the
ripening of general intelligence as time goes on makes us more and more
sensitive to beauty of mind.



NOTE 12. PAGE 34

There have been many definitions of "Impressionism" given, but they vary
considerably. Professor Clausen describes it as the work of a number of
artists whose interest is in recording effects of light, seeking to
express nature only and disregarding old conventions.[a] Mr. D. S.
MacColl says that an impressionist is[b]

     a painter who, out of the completed contacts of vision constructs
     an image moulded upon his own interest in the thing seen, and not
     on that of any imaginary schoolmaster.

This definition is insufficient by itself, but the writer makes his
meaning clearer in the same article when he says:

     Impressionism is the art that surveys the field, and determines
     which of the shapes and tones are of chief importance to the
     interested eye, and expresses these and sacrifices the rest.

According to C. Mauclair, an acknowledged authority on impressionism,
the impressionist holds:

     Light becomes the one subject of a picture. The interest of the
     objects on which it shines is secondary. Painting thus understood
     becomes an art of pure optics, a seeking for harmonies, a species
     of natural poem, entirely distinct from expression, style, drawing,
     which have formed the main endeavour of preceding painting. It is
     almost necessary to invent a new word for this special art, which,
     while remaining throughout pictural, approaches music in the same
     degree as it departs from literature or psychology.[c]

What can be said of so amazing a declaration? The arts of painting and
music do not, and cannot, have any connection with each other. They are
concerned with different senses and different signs, and by no stretch
of the imagination can they be combined. Seeing that musical terms when
used in respect of painting by modern critics are almost invariably made
to apply to colour harmonies, we may infer that a confusion of thought
arises in the minds of the writers from the similar physical means by
which colour and sound are conveyed to the senses concerned. But this
similarity has nothing to do with the appreciation of art. The æsthetic
value of a work is determined when it is conveyed to the mind,
irrespective of the means by which it is so conveyed.

According to La Touche it was Fantin Latour who invented modern
impressionism. Braquemond relates that La Touche told him the following
story.[d] He (La Touche) was one day at the Louvre with Manet, when they
saw Latour copying Paolo Veronese's Marriage at Cana in a novel manner,
for instead of blending his colours in the usual way, he laid them on in
small touches of separate tones. The result was an unexpected brilliancy
("papillotage imprevu") which amazed but charmed the visitors.
Nevertheless when Manet left the Louvre with La Touche, he appeared
anything but satisfied with what he had seen, and pronounced it humbug.
But Latour's method evidently sunk into his mind, for a few days later
he commenced to use it himself. Thus, added La Touche, was modern
impressionism unchained. The date of this visit was not given by La
Touche, but 1874 was subsequently suggested. This account does not fit
in with the statement of MacColl that when Monet and Pissarro were in
London during the siege of Paris, the study of Turner's pictures gave
them the suggestion of these broken patches of colour.[e] If this be
true Monet must have antedated Manet in the application of isolated
tones.

D. S. Eaton asserts that in the Salon of 1867, there was exhibited a
picture by Monet which was entitled Impressions,[f] and from this arose
the word "Impressionist"; but Phythian says that the word resulted from
Monet's "Impression, soleil levant," exhibited in 1874 at the Nadar
Gallery in Paris with other works from Le Société Anonyme des Artistes,
Peintres, Sculpteurs, et Graveurs. Phythian adds[g]:

     Thus, unwittingly led by one of the exhibitors, visitors to the
     exhibition came to use the word "impressioniste," and within a few
     days a contemptuously unfavourable notice of the exhibition
     appeared in _Le Charivari_ under the heading "Exposition des
     Impressionistes." It was not until the lapse of several years that
     the name came into general use. The painters to whom it was applied
     disowned it because it was used in a depreciatory sense. Eventually
     however, unable to find a better one, they adopted it.

Another origin of Impressionism is given by Muther. He says[h]:

     The name "Impressionists" dates from an exhibition in Paris which
     was given at Nadar's in 1871. The catalogue contained a great deal
     about impressions--for instance, "Impression de mon pot au feu,"
     "Impression d'un chat qui se promene." In his criticism Claretie
     summed up the impressions, and spoke of the Salon des
     Impressionistes.

But the real origin of impressionism must be sought earlier than 1871,
for in 1865 Manet exhibited his Olympia in the Salon des Refusés. This
picture did not represent what was understood as impressionism ten years
later, but it led the way towards the establishment of the innovation,
in that it pretended that healthy ideas and noble designs were secondary
considerations in art. Certainly Manet could not descend lower than this
wretched picture, and in this sense his subsequent work was a distinct
advance.

  [a] Royal Academy Lectures.

  [b] Article on "Impressionism," _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 11th
        Edition.

  [c] _L'Impressionism, son histoire, son esthétique, ses maîtres._

  [d] _Le Journal des Arts_, 1909.

  [e] Article on "Impressionism," _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 11th
        edition.

  [f] _Handbook of Modern French Painting._

  [g] _Fifty Years of Modern Painting._

  [h] _History of Modern Painting_, vol. iii.



NOTE 13. PAGE 35

The reason given by impressionists for the juxtaposition of pure colours
is that the natural blend produced is more brilliant than the tone from
the mixed colours applied, but it is pointed out by Moreau-Vauthier that
the contrary is the case. He says[a]:

     We find in practice that the parent colours do not, with material
     colours, produce the theoretical binaries. We get dark, dull
     greens, oranges, and violets, that clash with the parent colours.
     To make them harmonize we should be obliged to dim these material
     colours, to transform them, and consequently to lose them partly.

  [a] _The Technique of Painting_, 1912.



NOTE 14. PAGE 37

Cézanne and Van Gogh are not usually put forward as representative
impressionists, but it is impossible to differentiate logically between
the various "isms" of which impressionism is the mother, and to attempt
a serious argument upon them would be apt to reflect upon the common
sense of the reader. The sincere impressionist certainly produces a
thing of beauty, however ephemeral and lacking in high character the
beauty may be, but most of the productions of the other "isms" only
serve the purpose of degrading the artist and the art.



NOTE 15. PAGE 40

This form of picture is by no means new, though except among the
inventors of sprezzatura, and the modern impressionists, it has always
been executed as a rough sketch for the purpose of settling harmonies
for serious work. Lomazzo relates that Aurelio, son of Bernadino Luini,
while visiting Titian, asked him how he managed to make his landscape
tones harmonize so well. For reply the great master showed Aurelio a
large sketch, the character of which could not be distinguished when it
was closely inspected, but on the observer stepping back, a landscape
appeared "as if it had suddenly been lit up by a ray of the sun."[a]
From Luini's surprise, and inasmuch as we have no record of similar work
before his time, it is reasonable to suppose that Titian was the first
great artist to use this form of sketch for experimental purposes.

  [a] _Trattato dell' Arte de la Pittura._



  [Illustration: PLATE 25 (See page 269)
  The Pleiads, by M. Schwind]



NOTE 16. PAGE 40

The example of this picture at the Pitti Palace is specially noted
because it seems impossible that the duplicate in the Uffizi Gallery can
be by Raphael, for it has obvious defects, some of which have many times
been pointed out. The expression is vastly inferior to that in the Pitti
portrait, for instead of a calm, noble, benign countenance, we have a
half-worried senile face which is anything but pleasant. Raphael was the
last man to execute a portrait of a Pope without generalizing high
character in the features. It will be observed also that in the Uffizi
portrait, the left hand is stiff and cramped, and the drapery
ungracefully flowing, while both uprights of the chair are actually out
of drawing. There are other examples of the same picture in different
museums, but the Pitti work is far above these in every respect, and
seems the only one which can be properly attributed to the master.
Passavant affirms that some of the repetitions of the work were
certainly made in the studio of Raphael under his orders, and thinks
that the duplicates passed for originals even in his time.[a]

  [a] _Raphael d'Urbin_, vol. ii.



NOTE 17. PAGE 41

To the knowledge of the writer, the only logical connection between the
work of Rembrandt and impressionism that has been suggested, is from the
pen of Professor Baldwin Brown, who remarks[a]:

     Rembrandt in his later work attended to the pictorial effect alone,
     and practically annulled the objects by reducing them to pure tone
     and colour. Things are not there at all, but only the semblance, or
     effect, or impression of things. Breadth is in this way combined
     with the most delicate variety, and a new form of painting, now
     called "impressionism" has come into being.

The professor is mistaken here. During the last fifteen years of his
life, apart from portraits, a few studies of heads, and some colour
experiments with carcases of meat, Rembrandt executed, so far as is
known, about three dozen pictures, and in all of these he effectually
prevents us from forming a general impression of the designs before
considering the more important details, by concentrating nearly all the
available light upon the countenances of the principal personages
represented; while in the management of the features, the whole purpose
of the chiaroscuro is for the purpose of obtaining relief. Moreover the
pictures are nearly all groups of personages in set subjects, and there
would be no meaning in the designs if the objects were "practically
annulled," for particular action and expression are necessary for their
comprehension.

As to Velasquez there is no evidence tending to support the statement
that he was an impressionist. The first authority on the artist has
definitely pointed out that he never took up his brushes except for an
important and definite work: "he neither painted impressions nor
daubs."[b]

  [a] Article on "Painting," _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 11th edition.

  [b] _Velasquez_, by De Beruete, 1902.



NOTE 18. PAGE 49

It will always be a matter of surprise that so much popularity was
secured by the light sketches of the Barbizon School, considering their
general insignificance from the point of view of art, and the
conspicuously artificial means adopted for their exploitation. Some of
the artists of this school, having accomplished many studio works of
merit, acquired the habit of painting in the open air. By this method
it is impossible to execute a comprehensive natural scene, and the
painters did not attempt the task, but they produced numberless sketchy
works of local scenes under particular atmospheric conditions. They
laboured honestly and conscientiously, and their sketches were put out
for what they were and nothing more. The paintings would probably have
retained their place as simple studies had not some commercial genius
conceived the idea of putting them into heavy, gorgeous, gilt frames.
With this embellishment they were successfully scattered round the
world, mostly in the newer portions, much to the general astonishment.
The _raison d'être_ of the frames puzzled many persons, though it was
frequently observed that the pictures do not look well unless surrounded
by ample gold leaf. Thus, C. J. Holmes, Director of the London National
Gallery, and an authority on impressionism, notes[a]:

     Barbizon pictures are almost invariably set in frames with an
     undeniably vulgar look. Yet in such a rectangle of gilded
     contortion a Corot or a Daubigny shows to perfection: place it in a
     frame of more reticent design, and it becomes in a moment flat,
     empty, and tame.

The purpose of this frame is obvious. The eye is caught by the dazzling
glitter, and feels immediate relief when it rests upon the quiet grey
tone of the painting, the pleasurable sensation resulting therefrom
being mistaken for involuntary appreciation of the beauty of the work.

As finished paintings these Barbizon sketches are novel, but as studies
they are not, for similar work has been executed for two or three
centuries, and particularly by the Dutch artists of the seventeenth
century. In every considerable collection of drawings such sketches may
be found, and there is scarcely a Barbizon painter whose work was not
anticipated by a Dutch master. One has only to examine the drawings in
the public art institutions of Europe by De Molyn, Blyhooft, Jan de
Bischop, Lambert Doomer, Berghem, Avercamp, and others, to find examples
which, if executed now, might easily be taken for works by the Barbizon
masters.

  [a] _Notes on the Science of Picture-Making._



NOTE 19. PAGE 52

In recent times attempts have been made to upset the dictum of Aristotle
as to the imitative character of the arts generally, exception being
taken in respect of music and architecture. The first objection as to
music arose with Schopenhauer, though he does not appear to have been
quite certain of his position. He stated that while the other arts
represent ideas, music does not, but being an art it must represent
something, and he suggested that this something is the "Will," the term
being used in the Schopenhauer philosophical sense, that is to say,
implying the active principle of the universe, not being God. This means
nothing at all from the point of view of art, and cannot even be
seriously considered. The most notable essay on the subject since
Schopenhauer is from the pen of Sidney Colvin who places music and
architecture in a non-imitative group by themselves, the former on the
principal ground that "it is like nothing else; it is no representation
or similitude of anything whatever"; while architecture, he says,
"appeals to our faculties for taking pleasure in non-imitative
combinations of stationary masses."[a] But what Aristotle meant is that
the arts are imitative in character, and not that they necessarily
attempt to produce works of similitude with nature, this being evident
from the fact that he pointed out that the higher works of art surpass
nature, and he divided poetry and painting into three sections, of
which the first is better than life, and the third inferior to it.

The musician in producing his art proceeds in precisely the same way as
the poet or painter. He takes natural signs and rearranges them in a new
order, producing a combination which is not to be found complete in
nature, but every sign therein is natural and must necessarily be so.
The higher the flight of the poet, or musician, or painter, or sculptor,
the farther is the result from nature, but nevertheless the whole aim of
the musician, as of the poet, is to represent emotional effects or
natural phenomena beyond experience in life, as the great sculptor
represents form and expression, and the great poet besides these things,
every abstract quality, passion, and emotional effect, above this
experience; but he cannot do more; he cannot represent something outside
of nature, and so must imitate, that is, in the sense of representation.

Darwin notes that even a perfect musical scale can be found in nature.
He says[b]:

     It is a remarkable fact that an ape, a species of the gibbon
     family, produces an exact octave of musical sounds, ascending and
     descending the scale by half tones. From this fact, and from the
     analogy of other animals, I have been led to infer that the
     progenitors of man probably uttered musical tones, and that
     consequently, when the voice is used under any strong emotion, it
     tends to assume, through the principle of association, a musical
     character.

It has been further demonstrated that the strength of the sensory
impressions from certain sounds is due to the structure of the ear, and
that generally a particular kind of sound produces a similar kind of
emotional effect in animals as in man. Obviously the musician is
powerless to do more than widen or deepen this effect. Colvin admits
that the musician sometimes directly imitates, as when he produces the
notes of birds or the sounds of natural forces, or when he represents
particular emotions; but he regards the former instances as hazardous
and exceptional, and indicates that a particular emotional harmony may
affect the hearers differently. True, but the hazard of the first
condition is the result of the limitations of the artist, and the second
condition is the consequence of the limitations of the art. The effect
of music being purely sensorial must vary with the emotional conditions
surrounding the hearer. The musician does what he can, but he is unable
to go so far as the poet and produce an emotional effect which will with
certainty be recognized by every person affected, at all times, as
having the same particular bearing.

Taine separates music ("properly so called" as distinguished from
dramatic music) and architecture from the imitative arts, as they
"combine mathematical relationships so as to create works that do not
correspond with real objects."[c] Obviously the whole purpose of
dramatic music is to imitate the effects of the passions, but its
necessary inclusion amongst the imitative arts upsets the dictum of
Taine, for the emotional effects of one kind of music only differ from
those of another kind when they differ at all, in the character of the
natural emotional effects represented.

In the case of the architect, seeing that his art is subordinated to
utility, his scheme, his measurements, and the character of his
materials, are largely or almost entirely governed by conditions outside
of his art, and consequently it is only possible for him to represent
nature to a limited extent. Rarely can he vaguely suggest a natural
aisle beneath the celestial dome, a rock-walled cave whose roof soars
into obscurity, or a fairy grotto backed by a beetling cliff. Sometimes
he may cause us to experience similar effects in kind to those we feel
when we recognize grandeur in nature, but usually he is compelled to
confine his beauty to harmonies produced by symmetrical designs of
straight lines and curves. But in his simplest as in his most complex
designs, he must follow nature as closely as possible. Purely ornamental
forms always appear more beautiful when the parts have a direct
mathematical relationship with each other than when they have not; that
is to say, when the parts appear to be naturally related. Thus, that a
cross appears to be less agreeable to the sight when the horizontal bar
is below the centre of the perpendicular than when it is above this
point, is due to what appears to be a want of balance because the form
is unobservable in nature. In trees the horizontal parts are usually
above the middle of the height of the observable trunk, and in the
exceptions nature gives the whole tree a conical or other shape, the
relative position of the horizontal parts being obscured in the general
form.

As with parts of forms, so with the forms as wholes. Other things being
equal, that design is the best where the forms are directly proportioned
one with the other and with the whole, and this is because we are
accustomed to the order of design in nature where everything is balanced
by means of direct proportions and corresponding relations. The
architect therefore, like the musician or poet, must represent nature so
far as he can within the limits of his art, though his representation is
comparatively weak owing to the artificial restrictions imposed upon
him.

  [a] Article on "Fine Arts," _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 11th Edition.

  [b] _The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals._

  [c] _On the Ideal in Art._



NOTE 20. PAGE 54

The dictum of Aristotle in reference to metre in poetry related only to
epic and dramatic verse, for what we understand as lyric poetry was
separated by the Greeks as song in which of course metre is compulsory.
It is doubtful whether a single definition can cover both epic poetry,
whose beauty lies almost wholly in the substance, and lyric verse where
the beauty rests chiefly in qualities of expression and musical form,
and in which indeed the substance may be altogether negligible. A
cursory examination of Watts-Dunton's definition of "Poetry," which is
admittedly the best put forward in recent times, shows its entire
inadequacy. "Absolute poetry," he says, "is the concrete and artistic
expression of the human mind in emotional and rhythmical language."[a]
This would exclude from the art some of the finest sacred verse, which,
though in the form of prose, has been recognized as poetry from time
immemorial. Metre is only one of the devices of the poet for
accomplishing his end---the presentation of beautiful pictures upon the
mind, but in high poetry there is a still more compulsory artifice which
is not included in Watts-Dunton's definition, and that is metaphor. In
the form of words the details of a picture can only be dealt with
successively, and not simultaneously, and without metaphor the poet
would sometimes be in the position of the painter who should present a
dozen different pictures each containing only one part of a composition,
and call upon the observer to put the pieces together in his mind.
Further the term "absolute" in the definition quoted has no
comprehensible meaning if it does not exclude a good deal of verse which
is commonly recognized as poetry, while, as is admitted by Watts-Dunton,
there is much accepted lyric verse without concrete expression.

In high poetry as in high painting, the beauty appeals both to the
senses and the mind, and in each art the quality descends as the
sensorial overbalances the intellectual appeal, and the effect becomes
more ephemeral. In the very highest of the plastic arts, colour has
little value except in assisting definition; and in the very highest
poetry musical form has only an emphasizing value, for the sensorial
beauty arising from form in the one case, and form and action in the
other, entirely overpowers the harmonies of colour and tone
respectively. But colour without design is meaningless, so that it
cannot be applied in the fine arts apart from design: hence in painting,
colour presents no complication in respect of definition. On the other
hand music, with or without association with poetry, is equally an art
since in either case it imitates the effects of human emotions in a
beautiful way. Thus, where metre is present poetry is a combined art,
and seeing that metre may not be present, a definition of "Poetry" must
cover what may be in one case a pure, and in another, a compound art.

  [a] Article on "Poetry," _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 11th edition.



NOTE 21. PAGE 55

There seems to be a tendency to overestimate the disparity between
translations of high poetry and the originals. The value of a
translation depends primarily upon the character of the thing
translated, since it is the form that is unreproducible in another
tongue, and not the substance. In epic and dramatic poetry where the
form is of secondary importance, a good literal translation may come
much nearer to the original than a translation of a lyric where the form
is usually of at least equal importance with the substance. We lose less
of Homer or Sophocles than of Sappho or Theocritus in translation. In
the case of epic poetry the higher its character, the closer to the
original appears the translation, because the form is of less relative
importance. More of Dante is lost than of Homer in literal translation,
but the difference narrows when the new versions are in metrical form,
for the use of metre in translation is necessarily more detrimental as
the substance of the original increases in power, and this relative
weakening is emphasized as the beauty of form in the translation is
raised. Pope is farther from Homer than Chapman, and Chapman than the
prose translations of Buckley and Lang. As we descend in the scale of
the art, so it becomes more difficult to reproduce the poet in
translation, and in most lyric poetry the beauty seems almost entirely
lost in another tongue from the original, though when the substance is
of weight, and the translator is himself a good poet, he sometimes gives
us a paraphrase with a high beauty of its own. Some modern poets seem to
eschew substance altogether. Much of the verse of esteemed French and
Belgian poets is quite meaningless in literal translation, the authors
relying for the effects entirely upon musical form and beauty of
expression.



NOTE 22. PAGE 66

Lessing points out this remarkable picture of Homer as emphasizing the
beauty of Helen, observing:

     What could produce a more vivid idea of beauty than making old age
     confess that it is well worth while the war which cost so much
     blood, and so much treasure?

Nevertheless the remark of the old men does not seem to mean so much as
the description of the sages and their reference to the goddesses. It is
difficult to imagine several wise men agreeing that the sanguinary war
of nine years was really excusable in view of Helen's beauty, and the
statement therefore is naturally received as a permissible overcolour.
Consequently the effect of the remark would be discounted, and unlikely
to be sufficient for the purpose of the poet. True, the Greeks seem to
have been childlike sometimes in their simplicity, but there is no
evidence that they were so wanting in a sense of proportion as to accept
literally this opinion of the elders. But when we observe the senility
of the elders, and the physical feebleness which has apparently rendered
them incapable of sensual pleasures, then indeed we must marvel at a
beauty which excites their emotions so powerfully as to bring the
goddesses to their minds.[a]

In discussing the suitableness of this incident as a subject for a
painting, Lessing remarks that the passion felt by the old men was "a
momentary spark which their wisdom at once extinguished," but later on,
referring to the possibility that the veil worn by Helen when she passed
through the streets of Troy had not been removed when she was seen by
the elders, he points out[b]:

     When the elders displayed their admiration for her, it must not be
     forgotten that they were not seeing her for the first time. Their
     confession therefore did not necessarily arise from the present
     momentary view of her, for they had doubtless often experienced
     before the feelings which they now for the first time acknowledged.

This is very true, but it only serves to deepen the impression of
Helen's beauty, for the element of surprise is removed from the minds of
the elders, the mere sight of her, veiled or unveiled, being sufficient
to recall the passionate thrills previously experienced.

  [a] See on this subject Quintilian, viii., 4.

  [b] _Laocoon_, Rönnfeldt translation.



NOTE 23. PAGE 67

In nearly all the instances of sublimity quoted by Longinus there is
this particular merit of brevity---the picture is thrown upon the brain
immediately, without pause or anything whatever to complicate the
beauty. But the learned critic directs attention only to the magnificent
thoughts and the appropriate use of them, without pointing out the
extraordinary condensation of the language employed. Apart from the
instance from Genesis given, there is another of his examples in which
practically the whole beauty of the picture is produced by the rapidity
of its presentation. This is the exclamation of Hyperides when accused
of passing an illegal decree for the liberation of slaves--"It was not
an orator that made this decree, but the battle of Chæronea." Longinus
observes[a]:

     At the same time that he exhibits proof of his legal proceedings,
     he intermixes an image of the battle, and by that stroke of art
     quite passes the bounds of mere persuasion.

But it was rather the manner in which the battle was introduced than the
fact of its introduction, that gave force to the argument. If instead of
confining himself to a short brilliant observation, Hyperides had
carefully traced cause and effect in the matter, he would still have
intermixed an image of the battle, but he would not then have produced a
work of art.

Still finer instances of the use of brevity in expresssion by the orator
are to be found in the speeches of Demosthenes. For example in his
oration On the Crown he says: "Man is not born to his parents only, but
to his country." A whole volume on the meaning and virtue of patriotism
could not say more: hence the sublime art. The simple statement lights
a torch by which we examine every convulsion in history; presents a
moving picture in which we see the motives and aspirations guiding the
patriots of a hundred generations; sets an eternal seal of nobility upon
the love of man for his native country. And a few words suffice. The
same thought might be elaborated into a large volume, but the art would
fly with the brevity.

  [a] _On the Sublime_, XV., William Smith translation.



NOTE 24. PAGE 68

There are many translations of the Ode to Anactoria, but the best of
them reflects only slightly the depth of passion in the original. The
version which most nearly represents the substance, while maintaining
the unhalting flow of language, is perhaps that of Ambrose Philips
(1675-1749), which runs thus:--

  Blest as th' immortal gods is he,
  The youth who fondly sits by thee,
  And hears, and sees thee all the while
  Softly speak, and sweetly smile.

  'Twas this deprived my soul of rest,
  And raised such tumults in my breast;
  For while I gazed, in transport tost,
  My breath was gone, my voice was lost.

  My bosom glowed; the subtle flame
  Ran quick through all my vital frame;
  O'er my dim eyes a darkness hung;
  My ears with hollow murmurs rung.

  In dewy damps my limbs were chilled;
  My blood with gentle horrors thrilled;
  My feeble pulse forgot to play;
  I fainted, sunk, and died away.

The English reproductions of this ode in the Sapphic measure are not
very successful, the difficulty of course being due to the practical
impossibility of fulfilling the quantitative conditions of the strophe
without stilting the flow of language, or unduly varying the substance.
But it has been shown by Dr. Marion Miller in his translation of
Sappho's Hymn to Aphrodite, which is much higher in substance and
somewhat less condensed in expression than the Ode to Anactoria, that
with certain liberties in respect of quantities, a very beautiful
semblance of the Sapphic measure may be produced in English. His
translation of this hymn is unquestionably the best in our language,
though this is perhaps partly due to the fact that he is almost the only
translator who has adhered to the text in regard to the sex of the loved
person. To make the object of affection a man seems inappropriate to the
language employed in the verse. (It is proper to mention that a license
taken by Dr. Miller in his translation---where he renders the passage
relating to the sparrows, as "clouding with their pinions, Earth's wide
dominions"--suggested to the present writer the somewhat similar picture
to be found on Page 111.)



  [Illustration: PLATE 26 (See page 250)
  St. Margaret, by Raphael (_Louvre_)]



NOTE 25. PAGE 68

The gradual decadence of the great period of Grecian sculpture is well
marked by the successive variations of the Cnidian Aphrodite of
Praxiteles. The copy of this at the Vatican is no doubt a close
representation of the original, but later there was commenced a long
series of variations, all of them more or less complicating the design.
First a pillar was substituted for the vase, reaching nearly to the
armpits, and the left forearm rested upon it, while drapery fell down
the front, so that some exertion was required to separate the figure to
the eye. Then a dolphin was substituted for the pillar, the head of the
animal resting on the ground, and the body rising up straight with
the bent tail forming the support. Then for this was placed a dolphin
with its body corkscrew shaped, which was particularly weak as it tended
to deprive the figure of repose. After this, while the dolphin was
maintained, a cestus was sometimes added, and heavy drapery applied in
various folds. Finally the attitude of the figure was changed, that of
the Venus de' Medici being adopted, while the pillar or dolphin was
retained. Each alteration necessarily diminished the beauty of the
figure.



NOTE 26. PAGE 69

Reynolds seems to have been disappointed with the frescoes of Raphael
when he first saw them, and this fact has been called in evidence by
some modern critics to support their contention that the art of the
great masters is really inferior to that wherein design is subordinated
to colour. But Reynolds very definitely admitted that his first
impression was wrong, for after studying the frescoes, he notes[a]:

     In a short time a new taste and a new perception began to dawn upon
     me, and I was convinced that I had originally formed a false
     opinion of the perfection of art, and that this great painter was
     well entitled to the high rank which he holds in the admiration of
     the world.

Reynolds was quite a young man when he went to Rome, and his
appreciation of Raphael increased as his experience matured. More than
twenty years after the visit, he remarked that Raphael had "a greater
combination of the high qualities of the art than any other man,"[b] and
ten years later he affirmed that the Urbino artist stood foremost among
the first painters.[c] Reynolds supposed that his lack of appreciation
of the frescoes when he first saw them arose from want of immediate
comprehension of them: he was unaccustomed to works of such great power,
but it is to be observed that his inspection was a very short one, and
we may reasonably draw the conclusion that changing light conditions had
much to do with the effect the paintings left upon him at the time. When
one enters a room where the light differs materially in intensity or
quality from that experienced just previously, it is advisable to rest
quietly for a little while before examining works defined by colour, in
order that the eyes may become accustomed to the new light.

  [a] Reynolds's _Italian Note Book_.

  [b] His Fifth Discourse at the Royal Academy.

  [c] His Twelfth Discourse.



NOTE 27. PAGE 73

That the judgment of the public upon a work of art is final seems to
have been recognized by all the ancient writers who dealt with the
matter, and that the Greeks generally held this view is evident from
many incidents, notably the reference to public judgment in the great
competition between Phidias and Alcamenes. During the Renaissance also
the opinion held good, and it is worth noting that the suggestion
sometimes made that Michelangelo did not conform to this view is
unsupported by evidence. Vasari relates the following anecdote[a]:

     He [Michelangelo] went to see a work of sculpture which was about
     to be sent out because it was finished, and the sculptor was taking
     much trouble to arrange the lights from the windows to the end that
     it might show up well; whereupon Michelangelo said to him: "Do not
     trouble yourself, the important thing will be the light of the
     piazza"; meaning to infer that when works are in public places, the
     people must judge whether they are good or bad.

Lionardo went so far as to advise artists to hear any man's opinion on
his work, "for," he said, "we know very well that though a man may not
be a painter, he has a true conception of the form of another man."[b]
It is a common misconception with the general public, though not among
serious artists, that by reason of their profession artists are better
judges of works of art than other men. Obviously the recognition of
beauty in art is apart altogether from the means by which it is created,
and subject to the exceptions noted elsewhere, all men are alike able to
appreciate high beauty. Winckelmann even advised his readers against the
judgment of artists on the ground that they generally preferred what is
difficult to what is beautiful,[c] but experience with the great art
bodies in Europe who hold exhibitions does not support this view. It is
only the weaker artists who are liable to be prejudiced in such matters,
and when the judges are of high attainments in art, they almost
invariably make the same choice in competitions that would be made if
general opinion were solicited. But although artists cannot be better
judges of high-class works of art (as beautiful things) than other men
of equal intelligence, their training usually enables them to
distinguish obscure forms of beauty which would be unrecognized by the
general public, and in matters of colour to differentiate between
ephemeral and more or less permanent harmonies. Hence while the public
interests would not suffer from the introduction of the lay element in
judging high class sculpture and painting, it is obvious that the
consideration of works where the lower forms of beauty only are
produced, as in formal decoration, should be confined to the profession.

In music alone of the arts, for reasons already given, special
cultivation is necessary for the judgment of the higher forms of beauty.

  [a] _Life of Michelangelo Buonarotti_, De Vere translation.

  [b] McCurdy's _Lionardo da Vinci's Note Books_.

  [c] _History of Ancient Art_, Part V., 6.



NOTE 28. PAGE 74

It is commonly supposed that the vast multitude of men and women--the
toilers in the fields and factories, and their families, do not
appreciate great works of art; that rarely they take an interest in any
kind of art, and then only in simple representations of everyday
incidents. This is so apparently, but it is not strictly true. The great
bulk of working people grow up amidst surroundings where they do not
have an opportunity of seeing good works of art. They toil from morn to
eve during their whole life: their imaginations are almost entirely
confined to their means of livelihood, their daily routine of labour,
and their household duties. A "mute inglorious Milton" remains mute
because he wants the knowledge and experience around which his fancy may
roam, and a potential Raphael dies in obscurity from the enforced
rigidity of his imagination. But even so, notwithstanding that the
nervous activities and the imaginations of the poorer workers remain
undeveloped, they are still subservient to the irrevocable laws of
nature. Their faculties may be little changed from childhood in respect
of matters appertaining to the higher senses, but they still exist. So
it comes about that in all times since art has been practised, the
paintings and sculptures of the greater masters have been well
appreciated by the multitude when they could come into contact with
them. In modern times great works of art are seldom available to the
masses except in public galleries where their sense perception and minds
are quickly confused and fatigued--in fact rendered incapable of
legitimate use, but the trend of popular opinion is very decidedly
settled by the experience of those business houses which undertake the
reproduction of important works. There are many times the demand for
prints and cards of pictures belonging to the higher forms of art, as
for instance, sacred and historical subjects, and portraits, than for
interiors and landscapes, and so incessant is this demand for the better
works, that a painter desiring to copy one of the great Raphael or
Correggio Madonnas at Florence for reproduction, will usually have to
wait three or four years after entering his name, before his turn comes
to set up his easel. It is rather the want of intelligent contact with
them, than indifference to them, that is due the apparent lack of
interest in great works of art on the part of the labouring classes.

There is a deal of truth in the incisive remarks of Leo Tolstoy when
dealing with this question. He says [a]:

     Art cannot be incomprehensible to the great masses only because it
     is very good, as artists of our day are fond of telling us. Rather
     we are bound to conclude that this art is unintelligible because it
     is very bad art, or even is not art at all. So that the favourite
     argument (naïvely accepted by the cultured crowd), that in order to
     feel art one has first to understand it (which really means to
     habituate oneself to it), is the truest indication that what we are
     asked to understand by such a method, is either very bad art,
     exclusive art, or is not art at all.

One may observe however that, as a rule, it is only inferior artists who
complain of the want of public appreciation of great works of art.

  [a] _What is Art?_ Aylmer Maude translation, 1904.



NOTE 29. PAGE 78

According to Lessing and Watts-Dunton, what the former calls the
dazzling antithesis of Simonides--"Poetry is speaking painting, and
painting dumb poetry"--has had a wide and deleterious effect upon art
criticism. Lessing, who wrote _Laocoon_ about 1761, said in his preface
in reference to this saying:

     It was one of those ideas held by Simonides, the truth of which is
     so obvious that one feels compelled to overlook the indistinctness
     and falsehood which accompany it.... But of late many critics, just
     as though no difference existed, have drawn the crudest conclusions
     one can imagine from this harmony of painting and poetry.

Watts-Dunton, writing a few years ago, added to this[a]:

     It [the saying of Simonides] appears to have had upon modern
     criticism as much influence since the publication of Lessing's
     _Laocoon_ as it had before.

Lessing points out that the Greeks confined the saying to the effect
produced by the two arts, and (evidently referring to Aristotle) did not
forget to inculcate that these arts differed from each other in the
things imitated and the manner of imitation.

Since the business of both poetry and painting is to throw pictures on
the mind, the declaration of Simonides must be accepted, but it has no
particular meaning as applied either to criticism or the practice of the
arts. It is merely a fact of common knowledge put into the form of a
misleading _jeu d'esprit_, though one has a natural reluctance in so
describing a time-honoured saying. There is room for doubt whether it
really had the effect upon criticism that is alleged. Annibale Carracci
varied it slightly into a better form with "Poets paint with words, and
painters speak with the pencil," and it was certainly as well known in
his time as in the eighteenth century, yet we find no particular
evidence of weak art criticism either in the sixteenth or seventeenth
century. Moreover allegorical painting was not less common in these
centuries than in the century following; and while there was
unquestionably a spurt of descriptive poetry in the eighteenth, it is
difficult to trace a connection between this phenomenon and general
criticism based upon the dictum of Simonides. In regard to later times,
the statement of Watts-Dunton wants demonstration.

  [a] Article on "Poetry," _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 11th edition.



NOTE 30. PAGE 79

A few distinguished poets have attempted to portray beauty of form by
description of features, but they have all been signally unsuccessful.
The best known essay of the kind is Ariosto's portrait of Araminta,
where he closely describes all details of her features and form, using
forty lines for the purpose; but put together the pieces as one will, it
is quite impossible to gain from them an idea of the beauty of her
countenance.[a] This is pointed out by Lessing. The very length of the
catalogue is apt to kill the beauty as one endeavours to dovetail the
separate elements. Perhaps the lines of Cornelius Gallus to Lydia form
the most perfect poetical delineation of a beautiful face known to us,
but as will be seen from the translation below, they are quite
insufficient to enable us to picture the beauty of the combined features
on our minds.[b]

  Lydia! girl of prettiest mien,
  And fairest skin, that e'er were seen:
  Lilies, cream, thy cheeks disclose;
  The ruddy and the milky rose;
  Smooth thy limbs as ivory shine,
  Burnished from the Indic mine.
  Oh, sweet girl! those ringlets spread
  Long and loose, from all thy head;
  Glistening like gold in yellow light
  O'er thy falling shoulders white.
  Show, sweet girl! thy starry eyes,
  And black brows that arching rise:
  Show, sweet girl! thy rose-bloom cheeks,
  Which Tyre's vermillion scarlet streaks:
  Drop those pouting lips to mine,
  Those ripe, those coral lips of thine.

  [a] _Orlando Furioso_, C. VII.

  [b] C. A. Elton translation.



NOTE 31. PAGE 80

If there be one example of descriptive poetry relating to landscape
which throws upon the mind a complete natural scene during the process
of reading, it is the beautiful chant of the Chorus in _Oedipus
Coloneus_. The perfection of form and majestic diction of this poetry
are remarkable, but the successful presentation of the picture on the
mind is largely due to the simple and direct language used, and the
astonishing brevity with which the many features of the scene are
described. Green dells, fields, plains, groves, rocks, flowers, fruit,
and rushing waters, are all brought in, and the few lines used do not
prevent the introduction of the Muses, the jovial Bacchus with the
nursing nymphs, and radiant Aphrodite. All modern poetry descriptive of
landscape entirely fails in presenting a comprehensive view. It is too
discursive--over descriptive, to permit of the mind collecting the
details together as one whole. Here is the best prose version of the
lines of Sophocles[a]:

     Thou hast come, O stranger, to the seats of this land, renowned for
     the steed; to seats the fairest on earth, the chalky Colonus; where
     the vocal nightingale, chief abounding, trills her plaintive note
     in the green dells, tenanting the dark-hued ivy, and the leafy
     grove of the god, untrodden, teeming with fruits, impervious to the
     sun, and unshaken by the winds of every storm; where Bacchus the
     reveller ever roams attending his divine nurses. And ever day by
     day the narcissus, with its beauteous clusters, bursts into bloom
     by heaven's dew, the ancient coronet of the mighty goddesses, and
     the saffron with golden ray; nor do the sleepless founts of
     Cephisus that wander through the fields fail, but every day it
     rushes o'er the plains with its limpid wave, fertilizing the bosom
     of the earth; nor have the choirs of the Muses loathed this clime;
     nor Aphrodite too, of the golden reign.

  [a] Oxford translation.



NOTE 32. PAGE 81

It is perhaps necessary to remind some readers that the term "invention"
is used in two senses in art, referring to the original idea or scheme,
or to the preparation of the design embodying the idea. In poetry and
fiction the term has the former significance; in painting and sculpture
the latter. The restriction in the use of the term in the last named
arts is compulsory. (See Chap. III., and Note 33.)



NOTE 33. PAGE 81

Apparently Lessing did not observe that inasmuch as the painter cannot
present the beginning and end of an incident, he must necessarily take
his moment of action from the literary arts or from nature. The critic
notices that the painter does not invent the action he depicts, but
states that this is due to his indifference towards invention, developed
by the natural readiness of the public to dispense with the merit of
invention in his case. That is to say, the public expects the painter to
take his idea from the poet or from nature, and looks to him only for
correct design and execution: hence the painter is under no necessity to
invent his own scheme.

It is curious that a reason of this kind for the practice of the painter
should be put forward by so keen a critic as Lessing, but it is not
altogether surprising when we remember the discussion as to whether
Virgil drew his representation of the Laocoon incident from the
celebrated sculptured group, or the sculptors adopted the device of the
poet. Lessing definitely settled the point in favour of the poet as the
author of the design, and since his time this decision has been
confirmed over and over again by practical evidence. But the conclusion
of Lessing seems obvious in the absence of any such evidence. As we
must exclude the possibility of both poet and sculptors taking the
design from the same original source, it is clear that the poet could
only have imitated the sculptors on the supposition that they had so
widely varied the legend as to necessitate a new beginning and end of
the story, these being provided by the poet. Consideration of such a
series of events is not permissible, as it would reflect upon the common
sense of the sculptors, and actually degrade the poet.

Consequent upon the inability of the painter to originate a scheme for a
picture, the famous proposition of Lessing as to the relative importance
of invention and execution with the poet and painter, must fall to the
ground. The critic states that our admiration of Homer would be less if
we knew that he took certain of his work from pictures, and asks[a]:

     How does it happen that we withdraw none of our esteem from the
     painter when he does no more than express the words of the poem in
     forms and colours?

He suggests as an answer to this:

     With the painter, execution appears to be more difficult than
     invention: with the poet on the other hand the case seems to be
     reversed, and his execution seems to be an easier achievement than
     the invention.

The word "invention" is to be taken here in the sense of plot or fable,
and not as the details of design invented by the painter for the purpose
of representing the action described by the poet. The premisses of
Lessing's argument therefore will not stand, for the painter cannot
originate a fable by means of a picture. And sequential to this of
course, the painter can be of no service to the poet. Homer could not
draw an original scheme from a painting. Nor may the poet take a detail
from the painter, for this has already been borrowed. A poet may vary a
detail in a legend because he can make the successive parts of his
relation fit in with the variation, but the painter can only deal with a
single moment of action, and if this does not correspond with an
accepted legend, then his design appears to be untrue.

It may be said in regard to painting, that the relative difficulty of
the invention (the work of gathering and arranging the signs) and the
execution, varies with the character of the art. In the higher forms, as
sacred and historical work, the invention is the more difficult; in
ordinary scenes of life and labour the trouble involved in invention
would about equal that in execution; while in the lower forms, as
landscape and still-life, the execution is obviously the more difficult.
In the case of the poet, the idea or fable is the hardest part of his
work, but the relative difficulty of the arrangement of the parts, and
the execution, would naturally depend upon the general character of the
composition, and the form of the poem.

  [a] _Laocoon_, Phillimore translation.



NOTE 34. PAGE 82

The works here referred to are those designed for the purpose of
achieving a political or social aim, or conveying instruction or moral
lessons. There are many examples of good art where advocacy of a social
or administrative reform is presented by way of incident or accessory,
though the art itself is never, and cannot be, assisted thereby.
"Didactic Art," if such a term may be appropriately used, is practically
a thing of the past, but judging from certain conventions the opinion
seems to be rather widely held that art should point a moral when
possible, and an opinion of Aristotle is not infrequently called in to
support this view. But when Aristotle connected morals with art, he
evidently did not mean to suggest that art should have a moral purpose,
but that it should have a moral tendency in not being morally harmful,
for art which is not morally harmful must necessarily be morally
beneficial. The general connection of the good with the beautiful in
ancient Greece seems to have merely implied that what is good is
beautiful, and what is beautiful is good, or should be good, and not
that goodness is a manifestation of beauty, or beauty of goodness. It
was admitted that the two things may not coincide.



NOTE 35. PAGE 85

That landscape painting may be of considerable value in assisting
scientific exploration is instanced by an anecdote related to the writer
by a geological friend. Professor Jack, formerly Government Geologist of
Queensland, while travelling in that colony, having put up one night at
the house of a small squatter, noticed on the walls of the interior, a
number of colour drawings which had been painted by a son of the settler
from views in the neighbouring hills. One of these drawings showed a
reddish-brown tint running down the slope of a grey and nearly barren
hill. This caught the eye of the professor who asked the artist if the
colours roughly represented the natural conditions, and receiving an
affirmative reply, recommended the squatter to prospect the ground for
minerals. This was done with the result that profitable copper deposits
were found. It seems that in Australia many of the best mineral veins
are capped with iron, and run through schistose rocks traversed by
dioritic dykes. Professor Jack was well aware that the hills in the
district were formed of these rocks and dykes, and as the reddish-brown
streak indicated iron oxide, it occurred to him that the iron might be
the cap of a lode holding valuable minerals.[a]

  [a] This note is from _The Position of Landscape in Art_, by the
        present author.



NOTE 36. PAGE 87

Remarkable evidence of the universality of ideals, is afforded by the
galaxy of French sculptors who appeared in the thirteenth century. They
could have had no teachers beyond those responsible for the stiff and
formal works characterizing the merging of Norman with Gothic art; they
could have seen few of the fragments of ancient sculpture; and yet they
left behind them monuments which rival in noble beauty much of the work
produced in the greatest art period. How their art grew, and how it
withered; how such a brilliant bloom in the life of a nation should so
quickly fade, needs too detailed an argument to be ventured upon here,
if indeed a properly reasoned explanation can be given at all; but the
flower remains, as great a pride to mankind as it is a glory to France:
remains, though sadly drooping, for the petals of Rheims are gone.

Now these Frenchmen were in much the same position as the early Greeks.
They were confronted with the task of making images of their objects of
worship for great temples. They had no more real knowledge of the
Personality of Christ, the Virgin, and most of the Saints than had the
Greeks of the Homeric gods and legendary heroes, and like the Grecian
sculptors they fully believed in the spiritual personages and religious
events with which they dealt. The Grecian and French artists therefore
started from the same line with similar general ideals, for the ancient
workers took no heed of Homer and Hesiod in respect of the failings of
their gods; and they both had only pure formalities in sculpture behind
them. And what was the result? The ideal divine head of the Christian
Frenchman is much the same as that of the Greeks in regard to form, and
only varies in expression with the character of the respective religious
conceptions.

The French sculptors did not reach the sublime height of the Phidian
school, nor did they attempt the more human beauty typified by the
giants of the fourth century B.C.; but apart from these, and leaving
aside considerations of the nude with which they were little concerned,
they climbed to the highest level of the latter end of the fourth
century and the beginning of the third--the level attained by those
Grecian sculptors who more or less idealized portrait heads by adding
Phidian traits. And it would appear that in reaching towards their goal
they followed the same line of thought as the Greeks, and arrived at
similar conclusions in respect to every detail of the head and pose of
the figure. As a rule they gave to the faces of Christ and the Saints a
large facial angle, set the eyes in deeply and the ears close to the
head, and generally worked on parallel lines with the principal
sculptors of Peloponesia living sixteen hundred years before their time.
It is perhaps natural that they should make similar variations in the
proportions of the figures to provide for the different levels from
which they were to be seen, but it is curious that they should adopt the
practice followed by the Greeks in the representation of children in
arms, by minimizing to the last degree the figure of the Infant Christ
in the arms of the Madonna. They could not have more closely imitated
the Greeks in this respect had they had Grecian models in front of them.
No doubt they fixed the position of the Child at the side of the Virgin
in order that the line of her majestic form might not be broken, and
that her face might be revealed to observers below the level of the
statues, but that they should have made the Child so extremely small and
insignificant considering His relative importance compared with that of
the Grecian infant in arms, is remarkable.



NOTE 37. PAGE 90

It is too early yet to fix definitely the position of Rodin in art.
There is much sifting of his works to be done, for of all artists with a
wide reputation, he was perhaps the most variable. Still he may be
called one of the greater artists, and so is amongst the rare exceptions
mentioned, for he executed one or two hideous figures, the most notable
being La Vieille Heaulmière.[a] This cannot properly be described as a
work of art because it is revolting to the senses: it is merely a
species of writing--a hieroglyph, and Rodin's own apology for it is a
direct condemnation, since a work of sculpture cannot be good if general
opinion does not approve of it. He says[b]:

     What matters solely to me is the opinion of people of taste, and I
     have been delighted to gain their approbation for my La Vieille
     Heaulmière. I am like the Roman singer who replied to the jeers of
     the populace, _Equitibus Cano_. I sing only for the nobles; that is
     to say for the connoisseurs. The vulgar readily imagine that what
     they consider ugly is not a fit subject for the artist. They would
     like to forbid us to represent what displeases and offends them in
     nature. It is a great error on their part. What is commonly called
     "ugliness" in nature can in art become full of great beauty. In the
     domain of art we call ugly what is deformed, whatever is
     unhealthy.... Ugly also is the soul of the vicious or criminal
     man.... But let a great artist or writer make use of one or other
     of these uglinesses, instantly it becomes transfigured: with a
     touch of his fairy wand he has turned it into beauty: it is
     alchemy: it is enchantment.

Rodin then goes on to refer to the description of ugly objects by the
poets, in support of his argument that they may be represented by the
painter! It was his error in confusing the objects of the literary with
those of the plastic arts, that led him to carve La Vieille Heaulmière,
for he admitted that he wished to put into sculpture what Villon had put
into a poem. Professor Waldstein properly pointed out that, this being
so, the observer of the sculpture should be provided with a copy of the
poem when in front of the statue, adding[c]:

     and even then the work remains only the presentation of a female
     figure deformed in every detail by the wear and tear of time, and
     of a life ending in disease and nothing more. It is the worst form
     of literary sculpture, of which we have had so much by artists who
     represent the very opposite pole of the modern realists.

Elsewhere the respective positions of the poet and painter (or sculptor)
in the representation of ugliness are dealt with, but it may be added
that in the case of La Vieille Heaulmière, Rodin does not render in
sculpture the poem of Villion, but only a part of it, for of course he
could not show the progression in the life of the courtesan, indicated
by the poet, which progression puts an entirely different complexion
upon the ugly figure of the poet compared with that of the sculptor.
Clearly Rodin was misled when he said that people of taste have given
their approbation to his appalling figure, for it has been condemned
among all classes, while its few defenders have failed to support their
opinions by reason or experience.

We may note that at another time Rodin reflected upon the character of
the ancient Greek sculpture for the very reason upon which he bases his
claim for public approval of La Vieille Heaulmière. He says[d]:

     That was the fault of the Hellenic ideal. The beauty conceived by
     the Greeks was the order dreamed of by intelligence, but it only
     appealed to the cultivated mind, disdaining the humble.

Here also is a confusion of ideas, for the intelligence cannot dream of
a special kind of beauty which would not be recognized by the humble,
unless it were so feeble as to be altogether below Greek conceptions.
The aim of the Greek sculptors was to appeal to all classes, and in this
they were eminently successful.

  [a] At the Luxembourg.

  [b] Gsell's _Art, by Auguste Rodin_.

  [c] _Greek Sculpture and Modern Art_, 1914.

  [d] Gsell's _Art, by Auguste Rodin_.



  [Illustration: PLATE 27 (See page 254)
  Diana and Nymphs, by Rubens (_Prado, Madrid_)]



NOTE 38. PAGE 92

Ruskin considered the figure of Christ, known as Le Bon Dieu d'Amiens,
at Amiens Cathedral, the noblest ideal of Christ in existence,[a] and
Dean Farrar wrote of it: "Christ is represented as standing at the
central point of all history, and of all Revelation."[b] It is true that
the sculpture is a noble representation of Christ, but this is not
because it is a Christian ideal. In type it is purely Greek of the late
fourth or early third century B.C. The expression is general, exhibiting
the calm repose that the Greeks gave to a great philosopher.

  [a] _The Bible of Amiens._ See Plate 2.

  [b] _The Life of Christ as Represented in Art._



NOTE 39. PAGE 97

In the case of the Madonna, Michelangelo does not appear to produce an
ideal woman: he only gives an improved woman. His nearest approach to
the ideal is in his early Pieta at St. Peter's, but even here the Virgin
is only a less earthly prototype of his later figures. The Madonna in
the Holy Family at the Uffizi is much inferior, being merely a slightly
ennobled Italian peasant. The other Madonnas are far higher in character
and seem to suggest the antique, except that the more material
qualities of woman are always present. The Madonnas at the Bargello and
San Lorenzo are of the same general type as the figure in the Last
Judgment, the Night in the Medici Chapel, the Leda in the Bargello, and
the Venus in the sketch made for Pontormo. This being so, it may be
imagined when the Leda is called to mind, that it is hard to associate
the two Madonnas with Christian ideals. The figures are magnificent
works, but they are behind the Madonnas of Raphael from the point of
view of Christian conceptions. The expression is general, and all the
countenances except one, indicate unconcern with surroundings; not the
sublime unconcern of a Phidian god, which implies an apparent disregard
of particulars because they are necessarily understood with an
all-powerful comprehension of principles, but an unconcern which
suggests a want of deep interest in life. The exception is the San
Lorenzo Madonna, in which a certain calm resignation is the principal
feature in expression. Michelangelo was more successful with his men
than with his women. His painted prophets in the Sistine Chapel are as
sublime as his scenes from the Creation; and his Moses in St. Peter's is
rightly regarded as the first sculpture of the Renaissance.



NOTE 40. PAGE 99

When the Pieta of Michelangelo (in St. Peter's, Rome) was first exposed,
some comment was made upon the comparatively youthful appearance of the
Virgin, and Condivi relates that he spoke to the sculptor on the
subject. In reply Michelangelo said[a]:

     Don't you know that chaste women preserve their beauty and youthful
     character much longer than those who are not chaste? How youthful
     then must appear the immaculate Virgin who cannot be supposed ever
     to have had a vitiated thought. And this is only according to the
     natural order of things: but why may not we suppose in this
     particular case, that nature might be assisted by Divine
     interposition, to demonstrate to the world the virginity and
     perpetual purity of the Mother? This was not necessary in the Son,
     nay, rather on the contrary, since Divine omnipotence was willing
     to show that the Son of God would take upon Him, as he did, the
     body of man, with all his earthly infirmities except that of sin.
     Therefore it was not necessary for me to make the human subordinate
     to the Divine character, but to consider it in the ordinary course
     of nature under the actual existing circumstances. Hence you ought
     not to wonder that from such a consideration, I should make the
     most holy Virgin-Mother of God, in comparison with the Son, much
     younger than would otherwise be required, and that I should have
     represented the Son at His proper age.

  [a] Lanzi's _History of Painting in Italy_, Roscoe translation,
        vol. i.



NOTE 41. PAGE 100

A few modern painters have produced works in which the Holy Family are
pictured in lowly surroundings, but generally they appear to shock the
public sense of propriety. Many persons will remember the sensation
caused by Millais's The Carpenter's Shop, where Christ is shown as a boy
of about ten years of age in the workshop of St. Joseph, and Holman
Hunt's Shadow of the Cross. Later artists have been still more
realistic, notably Uhde, whose sacred scenes almost stagger one with
their modern suggestions, and Demont-Breton, whose Divine Apprentice
represents the Boy Christ sharpening a tool at a grindstone which is
turned by the Virgin.



NOTE 42. PAGE 108

Unquestionably the rapid advance in Italian art in the fifteenth century
was largely due to the influence of the ancient Greek and Roman remains.
Indeed there are very few sculptors of the period who fail to show
evidence of studies in Greek forms and ornaments, while in painting
there are hundreds of figures which could scarcely have been designed in
the absence of antique models. True in some cases the artists do not
appear to have gone beyond the ancient literature, as with Masaccio who
must have had Homer in his mind when he painted his figures of Eve in
the Florence frescoes, and Piero di Cosimo, whose fanciful compositions
savour of the old legends wrapped up in fairy stories; but many painters
were steeped both in the art and literature of Greece and Rome, and made
good use of them.

But the most direct evidence of the influence of Greek art upon Italian
artists of the fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries, is to be found
in the splendid series of bronze statuettes of the period. In their
monumental figures the sculptors were more or less confined in their
designs by considerations of portraiture, conventional drapery and
symbols, and local requirements, and while they were greatly assisted by
Greek experience, yet only rarely were they strictly at liberty except
with ornaments and accessories. But in the small bronze figures their
fancy could roam at will, and they made good use of this freedom in
displaying their ready acceptance of the first principle in the design
of the human figure recognized by the Greeks--that the sculptor must
arrive at perfection of form if that be possible; that this perfection
is not to be found in any single form in life, and consequently the
artist must combine perfected parts into a harmonious whole,
independently of particular models. The agreement with this principle
was general, with scarcely an exception amongst the bronze figure
designers, and the result was that in the period say, from 1450 to 1525,
there was executed a series of bronzes fully representative of the
highest level which plastic art has reached since the greater days of
Greece. Right up to the time of the maturity of Michelangelo, nearly
every bronze figurine cast is purely Grecian in type, and every
ornament, and even every accessory which is not from its nature of
contemporary style, can be traced to Greece, either directly or through
Rome.

Michelangelo brought about a change in accentuating the muscular
development of the body, and before the middle of the sixteenth century
most sculptors had come under his influence. This was unfortunate for he
alone seemed to be capable of harmoniously combining Greek lines with
muscular power. A few of his contemporaries, as Sansovino, Leone,
Cellini, learned how to join, with due restraint, his innovations with
modifications of the Greek torso, but generally the imitation of the
great Florentine initiated a decadence, as it was bound to do, for it
was accompanied with life modelling, and so meant a radical departure
from the Greek forms. Giovanni di Bologna alone among the later
sixteenth century sculptors, was strong enough to move in an independent
direction. He restrained the accentuation of the muscles, and lightened
the Greek type of torso, combining with these conditions an elegance in
design which has never since been surpassed.

This then is the principal cause of the high æsthetic value of the
Renaissance bronzes: the human form exhibited by them is altogether more
beautiful than the form coming within the compass of life experience.
Then the details of work on the bronzes are immensely superior to those
of the general modern handiwork. For instance the chiselling of such men
as Riccio and Cellini, has never been equalled since their time, save
perhaps by Gouthière. And how poor, comparatively, are the present-day
castings! How carefully the old masters worked; how particular they were
with their clay; how skilfully they prepared their wax, and how slowly
and deliberately the mould! How many artists now would have the patience
to make such a mould? For the beautiful patinas on many of the
Renaissance bronzes, age is mostly responsible, though lacquers were
often used for the provision of artificial patinas, particularly after
the middle of the sixteenth century, the finest being found on some of
the works of Giovanni di Bologna. The tone of natural patina depends
largely upon the kind of oxidation to which the bronze has been
subjected, and it is no doubt often affected by the alloy used. Few
modern artists have given close attention to the alloys, while the
method of casting is now usually regarded as a detail of minor
importance.

Seeing that the production of figurines accompanied every civilization
from the dawn of history to the collapse of the Roman Empire, it is
curious that the renaissance of sculpture after the Dark Age should have
progressed a long way before general attention was again turned to these
bronzes. There are a few figures of animals which seem to be Italian
work of the late trecento, but beyond these the small cast bronzes made
in Italy before the maturity of Ghiberti, were practically confined to
Madonnas and Saints, mostly gilt, made to fill Gothic niches, or adorn
the altars of churches and private chapels. Slender Saints they were as
a rule, but always elegant, with serene countenances and delicate
features; beautifully modelled as became the inheritors of the
traditions of the Pisanos. It was somewhere about the middle of the
fifteenth century that Italy commenced to make ungilt statuettes
suitable for household ornaments, and fully ten or fifteen years more
passed away before they were produced with any regularity. The earliest
of them of any importance appear to be a couple of Flagellators from the
design of Ghiberti. They are fine pieces of work, evidently from clay
models made for the scourging scene in one of the gates of the Florence
Baptistry--gates described by Michelangelo as worthy to fill the portals
of Paradise. These figures date about 1440. There is a Child Christ of a
few years later by Luca della Robbia; and two or three figures from
models of Donatello may be assigned to the neighbourhood of 1450. In the
next ten years were turned out some figures from remaining models of
Donatello which had been used for his work at Prato and Padua.

So far the small bronzes made were from studies for larger works of
sculpture, but about this time intense interest began to be taken in the
remains of Greek and Roman art, and no doubt it was the increased
importance attached to the antique bronze figures, mostly household gods
of the Greeks, Etruscans, and Romans, that first led the principal
Renaissance artists to turn their attention to similar work. From this
time on, for a century and a half, these bronze figures were regularly
made. The existing figurines may be broadly classified in four
divisions, namely, the Paduan and Florentine figures executed prior to
1525; those of the school of Michelangelo; those of the Venetian school
headed by Sansovino; and those of Giovanni di Bologna and his school.
Leaving out of consideration the small ornaments for inkstands, vases,
etc., the little animals, and the purely commercial imitations, chiefly
Venetian, made at the end of the sixteenth century, the total number of
Renaissance bronzes now known is roughly six thousand. Of these under a
hundred are from models for larger works by Ghiberti, Donatello,
Verrocchio, Lionardo, Michelangelo, and a few lesser lights; about two
thousand represent original designs specially prepared for bronze
production; some three thousand five hundred are duplicates of, or
slight variations from, these originals, executed by pupils or near
contemporaries of the masters; and the balance of four hundred or so,
are direct reproductions of, or variations from, antique sculptures.
Naturally all collectors aim for the first two sections, but the third
section contains many fine bronzes, often close to the originals, with
equally good patinas. They vary greatly, though they are all ascribed in
commerce to the artists responsible for the originals.

The character of these variations is best seen in the case of Riccio,
the most prolific of the bronze workers of the Renaissance. He designed
and executed under forty small bronze figures and groups, besides some
large bronze works of high importance. Of his small pieces there are in
existence about a hundred duplicates made by his pupils and immediate
contemporaries, who also adapted into household ornaments, various
details from his larger works, bringing up the number of Riccios made
from his models during his lifetime, other than by himself, to about a
hundred and fifty. These are all bronzes of a high order. Then about an
equal number of both kinds of models were reproduced during the twenty
years following his death, all fairly good, but often slightly varied
from the originals; and finally there are Riccios copied by Venetian
craftsmen in the third quarter of the sixteenth century, sometimes
considerably varied, and occasionally with purely Venetian ornaments
added. These last mark the first distinct decadence in the small bronze
art of the period. Next to Riccio among the earlier sculptors, in the
number of bronzes designed, was his great contemporary, Antico, who
accomplished some thirty or so. He differed from Riccio in that while
the latter adhered to the Grecian practice in the design of details and
ornaments, but varied the modelling somewhat to bring it more in
conformity with the contemporary ideas of elegance, Antico kept strictly
to the Grecian modelling, but commonly varied the ancient designs.
There are few duplicates of Antico's work, made either during his
lifetime or after. As with Riccio, his imitators overcame the difficulty
of the chiselling by leaving it out, relying upon the wax to give close
enough resemblance to the originals.

Of the other small bronze sculptors prior to the maturity of
Michelangelo, few executed more than half a score of figures. The best
known are the immediate successors of Donatello in the Paduan school, as
Bertoldo and Bellano, and the giants of the Florentine school, as
Filarete and A. Pollaiuolo. Bronzes by these artists are very rare, and
so are the duplicates of them made by pupils, though Bertoldo, who
reminds one strangely of Lysippus, had occasional imitators for the next
two centuries. These bronzes include many models which have not been
equalled by the greatest of later sculptors, and they will never be
matched until there arises a new school of sculptors resolved to imbibe
the truths which the Renaissance artists gleaned from the ancient
Greeks.



NOTE 43. PAGE 110

The writer has used Greek and Roman names for these gods to some extent
indiscriminately, in accordance with the universal custom in art.
Nevertheless the practice is to be regretted as it tends to complicate
the general ideas of the Greek and Roman religions. Notwithstanding the
occasional direct association of some of their deities with human
personages by their poets, the Romans regarded their gods as purely
spiritual beings, having no special earthly habitation, or sex relations
with the human race, while their powers widely differed from those of
the respective Greek deities with whom they are commonly identified.
Authorities differ as to whether the gods were supposed to have
spiritual marital relations with each other.[a] In any case the whole
nature of their religion precluded the development amongst the Romans of
a separate sacred art. Their sculptured gods, which were taken from
Grecian models, were symbols rather than presumed types.

  [a] See J. G. Frazer's _Adonis, Attis, Osiris_, 1914, vol. ii.; and W.
        W. Fowler's _Religious Experience of the Roman People_, 1911.



NOTE 44. PAGE 111

If we may judge from the headless figures of the goddesses, commonly
known as the Three Fates, from the east pediment of the Parthenon, there
seems to be little difference between the general lines of the feminine
torso represented by the Phidian ideal, and those of the Praxitelean
model. The Parthenon torsos are more massive proportionately, but the
object of both Phidias and Praxiteles was evidently to straighten the
outer lines of the torso as nearly as possible, making due allowance for
the varied natural swellings of their respective forms. It is obvious
that the use of attire gave Phidias (presuming the Parthenon figures
referred to were designed by him, as they probably were) a latitude in
varying the proportions of the torsos which he could not have exercised
in the case of nude forms. Unclothed, the figures would appear unwieldy,
and the graceful flowing lines resulting from the partly clinging
drapery could not be so completely presented with nude reclining or
semi-reclining figures. There are other features also which prevent the
nude representation of such massive forms. Thus, the breasts would
necessarily be out of proportion in size, and widely separated. These
conditions are common in fifth century and archaic figures, and do not
appear to be defects in forms of life size or less, but they would be
strikingly noticeable in super figures of the broad massive type with
Phidian lines. The addition of light drapery, however, converts the
apparent faults into virtues, for the artist is enabled therewith to
give new sweeping curves to the forms which conspicuously enhance the
general beauty of the figure.

A still more amazing instance where the use of drapery allows the artist
to vary the recognized proportions of the feminine form to an extent
which would be impossible with nude figures, is the celebrated Ariadne
at the Vatican.[a] This beautiful work, which is of the Hellenistic
period, shows the daughter of Minos attired in a light flowing single
garment, and reclining on a couch, asleep. The upper part of her body
leans against the head of the couch, but the remainder is extended
nearly at full length. The extraordinary feature of the work is that the
length of the figure is altogether out of proportion with the head and
with the breadth of the torso, being much too great, and yet so
skilfully is the drapery arranged that this very defect becomes an
advantage, for it enables a lofty grace, almost approaching grandeur, to
be given to the figure, which would be impossible without the
exaggeration. By the excellent device of a closely arranged cross fold
of drapery passing round the middle of the figure, the artist apparently
shortens it, so that the eye of the observer is not held by its great
length. Only one other example of the supreme use of drapery in this way
seems to be known--a bronze sitting figure of Calliope,[b] which is of
the late Hellenistic period, and is obviously of the same school as the
Ariadne marble.

  [a] See Plate 29.

  [b] Dreicer Collection, New York.



NOTE 45. PAGE 112

Praxiteles is known to have executed at least four other statues of
Aphrodite besides the Cnidian example, but this last is the only one as
to which we have fairly complete records, and of which copies have been
closely identified. It is also the most celebrated. We may therefore
accept the work as typical for comparative purposes.



NOTE 46. PAGE 113

There has been much discussion as to whether Apelles showed the same
extent of figure as is represented in the sculpture, a common suggestion
being that he brought the surface of the water to the waist line; but it
is evident that the painting corresponded with the sculpture in this
particular. The artist had to represent the goddess walking towards the
shore. If he brought the water to the waist line he could not definitely
suggest movement, as a deflection of the shoulder line might mean that
the goddess was in an attitude of rest, corresponding to the pose of
nearly all the sculptured figures of the Praxitelean school. On the
other hand if he carried the water line down towards the knees, the
advance of the right leg would be most marked, and the effect disturbing
because of the loss of repose, a quality at all times valuable in a
painting of a single figure, and really necessary in the representation
of Venus. The artist very properly reduced the portion of the thighs
visible to the smallest fraction possible compatible with an expression
of movement, in order to give the figure the greatest repose attainable.
Under any circumstances there was nothing to gain by showing the water
reaching to the waist.

Certain details of the picture by Apelles are to be obtained from
Grecian epigrams. Thus, one by Antipater of Sidon contains these
lines[a]:

  Venus, emerging from her parent sea,
    Apelles' graphic skill does here portray:
  She wrings her hair, while round the bright drops flee,
    And presses from her locks the foamy spray.

From this it would appear that the position of the goddess when painted
was presumed to be comparatively near the artist, otherwise the separate
drops of falling water would not have been observed. The last line in
the following epigram by Leonides of Tarentum indicates the ideal
character of the countenance, though evidence of this is scarcely
necessary[b]:

  As Venus from her mother's bosom rose
  (Her beauty with the murmuring sea-foam glows),
  Apelles caught and fixed each heavenly charm;
  No picture, but the life, sincere and warm.
  See how those finger tips those tresses wring!
  See how those eyes a calm-like radiance fling!

  [a] Translated by Lord Neaves.

  [b] Translated by Lord Neaves.



NOTE 47. PAGE 124

So far as the writer knows, Piero was the only artist of the Renaissance
who used this mythological story for a composition (his picture has
hitherto been called an allegory), a circumstance which is rather
singular considering the suitableness of the subject for the provision
of effective designs. The Greek sculptors in dealing with the legend
confined themselves to the moment when Athena threw down the pipes,
apparently for the reason that this instant gave an opportunity of
rendering Marsyas in a strong dramatic action. The famous statue of the
faun after Myron in Rome, is supposed to have formed part of a group
representing Athena and Marsyas immediately after the pipes were
dropped, and the design appears on still existing coins and vases of the
fifth and fourth centuries B.C. Piero takes a later moment, showing
Marsyas comfortably squatting in the foreground of a delightful fanciful
landscape, expressing boyish satisfaction with the prizes he is about to
try. He is properly shown as a satyr instead of in the faun form of the
sculptor. There appears to be no legitimate place in painting for a
faun, while a satyr may at times be appropriately introduced into a
pastoral composition.



NOTE 48. PAGE 125

Controversy has raged around this picture for something like seventy
years. The work came to light before 1850 at a public auction sale when
it was attributed to Mantegna, with whom of course it had nothing to do.
Then it was pronounced a Raphael, but this was disputed by Passavant who
held that on account of the thin lower limbs of the figures, and the
minute way in which the landscape was painted, it could not be by
Raphael, but was of the school of Francia, or by Timoteo della Viti.
Morelli brought back the attribution to Raphael, and the work then came
into the possession of the Louvre. Subsequently Pinturicchio and
Perugino were alternately suggested as the painter, and to the latter
the picture was assigned by the Louvre authorities. All are agreed that
the date of the work is about 1502. It does not seem possible that
Perugino could have painted the picture, for the subject and invention
are entirely foreign to him, while the lithe active form of Apollo does
not consort with the least formal of his known figures. The landscape is
much in his manner, but so it is also in the style of Raphael's early
period, while the small buildings therein are closely finished as in
some of Raphael's other works of the time.[a] Perugino used similar
towers and buildings, but being a more experienced painter he did not so
finely elaborate the details. The suggestion relating to the school of
Francia was afterwards very properly withdrawn, and Pinturicchio must be
ruled out on account of the landscape, apart from the supple figure of
Apollo of which he was incapable. There remain then only Timoteo della
Viti and Raphael as the possible painters of the work. But it cannot
reasonably be suggested that Timoteo could have accomplished so perfect
a figure as the Apollo, and moreover so original a figure. It certainly
required an exceptionally bold mind to overcome the difficulty in
rendering the traditionally semi-feminine form of Apollo by representing
him as a young man just past his teens. Besides, the general delicacy of
the work is not in the style of Timoteo. Passavant's objection to the
limbs is overruled by the presence of similar limbs in the Mond
Crucifixion. It would seem then that Morelli was right in assigning the
beautiful little picture to the youthful period of the greatest of all
painters.

  [a] See Portrait of a young Man at Budapest, and the Terranuova Virgin
        and Child at Berlin.



NOTE 49. PAGE 138

The white races are here referred to merely by way of example, and there
is no intention to suggest that the more or less uncivilized peoples
have no perception of beauty. It is well known that both semi-civilized
and savage races differ from the whites in the matter of beauty, and the
fact has been partly responsible for several theories for explaining
æsthetic perception, notably that of association, laid down by Alison
and Jeffrey, but long since discarded. Seeing that there is no
difference in kind between the sense nerves of the whites and the
blacks, they must necessarily act in the same way. That the blacks
appreciate as beautiful forms which the whites disregard, seems to
arise partly from want of experience, partly from training, and partly
from neglect in the exercise of the sense nerves. Take for example an
inhabitant of Morocco where corpulency is commonly regarded as an
element of beauty in women. If none but Moroccan women are seen or
pictured, it is impossible for a higher form of beauty than is to be
found amongst them to be conceived, for the imagination cannot act
beyond experience. In cases where the Moroccan has had experience of
both white and black, it is certain that, other things being equal, the
white woman would be the more admired, for this is the general
experience among the black races, and is strikingly noticeable in
America with the descendants of African tribes. The appreciation of very
fat women can easily be understood on the ground of custom or training.
A youthful Moroccan may be firmly of opinion that corpulency is not an
element of beauty, but seeing that his older acquaintances hold a
contrary view, he may well form the conclusion that his judgment is
wrong, and so accept the decision of his more mature countrymen. It is
quite common among the whites for people to doubt their own æsthetic
perceptions when an inferior work of art is put forward as a thing of
beauty. The general want of appreciation of certain musical harmonies on
the part of uncivilized peoples is undoubtedly due to the neglect of the
sense nerves concerned, for these are not cultivated except to a small
extent involuntarily. The most ignorant and poor of the whites
unavoidably come into frequent contact with the simpler forms of art,
but the savage races see only the result of their own handiwork. The
uncivilized races can scarcely be expected to admire the higher reaches
of art wherein intellectual considerations enter, except for their
sensorial excellence.



  [Illustration: PLATE 28 (See page 256)
  Automedon and the Horse of Achilles, by Regnault (_Boston Museum_)]



NOTE 50. PAGE 139

There seems to be some uncertainty as to whether Fragonard intended his
splendid series of the Frick collection to represent the subjects
usually assigned to them, namely, The Pursuit (or The Flight of Design,
a title given to the original sketch for the picture); The Rendezvous
(or The Surprise, or The Escalade); Souvenirs (or Confidences, or The
Reader); The Lover Crowned (or Before the Painter); and The Abandonment
(or The Reverie). It is suggested that the works have an allegorical
signification connected with art, and certainly three of them--the
first, second, and fourth--could be so interpreted. But magnificent
paintings of this kind are usually fitted for many allegorical
suggestions. Each picture represents an incident of common experience,
elaborated with beautiful figures in a perfect setting. This approaches
the summit of the painter's art, for no conception can be greater apart
from spiritual ideals. It is symbolism in its highest form--of universal
experience in which all are interested. The works are not to be taken as
a necessary sequence (the last of the series was painted twenty years
after the others), but the scheme of one or more of them has come within
the experience of every man and woman since the world began.



NOTE 51. PAGE 149

Seeing that this precise dignified pose, coming so near the line of
exaggeration, but never crossing it, is present in all the authenticated
portraits of Titian, save those of very aged persons, we may reasonably
consider the pose an important factor in determining the validity of
certain portraits as to which a doubt has arisen. Thus in the case of
the Physician of Parma[a] (this title is admittedly wrong), which has
been variously given to Titian and Giorgione, the verdict must be in
favour of Titian, for the pose is certainly his, while it is unknown in
any work of Giorgione. On the other hand, the portrait of Catherine
Cornara,[b] commonly ascribed to Titian, but also attributed to
Giorgione,[c] cannot be by the former master; nor is the Portrait of a
Man (with his hand on a bust),[d] which seems to pair with the Cornara
portrait. The portrait known as An Old Man Asleep,[e] sometimes given to
Titian, clearly does not belong to him.

It should be noted that the general confusion observable for many years
in the estimation of Giorgione's work arose from the attribution to him
of paintings executed in the comparatively broad manner of Titian, but
which this artist did not adopt till Giorgione had been dead for a
decade or more. The recent exhaustive critique of Lionelli Venturi[f] of
the earlier master has cleared the air, and we now know the range of his
work very positively. Giorgione was less fine in some of his paintings
than in others, for he paid more attention to chiaroscuro as he matured,
but there is no instance where he painted in the broader manner
occasionally exhibited by Titian. All the works in the style of The
Concert and The Three Ages are now known to be by other hands than those
of Giorgione, and it must be unfortunately admitted that not a single
painting by him exists either in England or America.

  [a] Vienna Gallery.

  [b] Cook Collection, London.

  [c] By Herbert Cook in _Giorgione_.

  [d] Uffizi Gallery, Florence.

  [e] The Brera, Milan.

  [f] _Giorgione e il Giorgionismo_, 1913.



Note 52. Page 156

Hals is another artist as to whom many misconceptions have arisen in
regard to his use of a very broad manner in his portraits. There is a
total of about 350 works attributed to him, of which some two thirds are
single portraits, and twenty are portrait groups. The balance includes
over thirty genre pictures, mostly with single figures, and fifty heads
of boys and girls generally shown in the act of laughing. It is in his
genre work that the broad manner is mostly observable, and only very
occasionally is it to be found in his portraits. In the more important
works of the artist, even during his later period, his manner is by no
means broad,[a] though it is not so fine as in his best years, say from
1635 to 1650. This estimate can however only be general, as his dated
paintings of different periods after 1630 often correspond so closely
that it is difficult to assign dates to the other pictures with
certainty.

Perhaps the frequent attribution to Hals of works by his pupils and
imitators, has had something to do with the public estimation of the
breadth of his manner. This was often greatly exaggerated by his
followers, and many portraits are given to him which he could not
possibly have painted. In his important work on the artist, Dr. von Bode
points out that some of the duplicates of his pictures were apparently
executed by his pupils, but these are not separated in the book.[b] It
is a simple matter to divide the works painted by Hals from the studio
copies and the portraits of imitators. His brushwork and impasto were
quite exceptional. He had a firm direct stroke, never niggled or
scumbled, and his loading was restrained though very effective. Quite
naturally his pupils, however industrious and skilled, could not
closely imitate his remarkable freedom in handling. They were incapable
of firm decisive strokes throughout a portrait, and endeavoured to
overcome the loading difficulty by using brushes of a coarseness foreign
to the master when rendering light tones. Moreover Hals was nearly
perfect in drawing, and in this there are usually marked defects in the
studio copies.

  [a] See Stephanus Gereardts, Antwerp Museum; Isabella Coymans,
        E. Rothschild Collection, Paris; Lady with a Fan, National
        Gallery, London; and William van Heythuysen, Liechtenstein
        Collection, Vienna.

  [b] _Frans Hals: his Life and Work_, 1914.



NOTE 53. PAGE 161

The term "grace" as applied in art has so many significations that it is
difficult to deal with one of them without confusion. What is here
specially referred to is the grace of pose designed by the artist. The
object of the portrait painter is to pose his sitter so that the grace
indicated shall appear natural and habitual, a feature as important now
in the appearance of women as it was twenty-five centuries ago when
Sappho asked[a]:

  What country maiden charms thee,
    However fair her face,
  Who knows not how to gather
    Her dress with artless grace?

But the grace of pose never appears to be artless, after the first
inspection, unless there is something in the expression to hold the
mind. Without this appeal to the mind the portrait must soon tire, and
the pose become artificial and stiff, that is to say, in representations
of life size, for in miniature portraiture the countenance seldom or
never crosses the vision involuntarily.

In the ancient Greek forms, Winckelmann distinguishes four kinds of
grace--lofty, pleasing, humble, and comic--but the grace exhibited by
sculptured forms necessarily depends upon the harmony of expression,
character of form, and pose. This should be the case with painted
portraits also, but drapery restrictions and accessories commonly compel
a limitation in the design of the artist. In three quarter and full
length portraits it is impossible to depart from the dress customary at
the period of execution, unless the sitter assume a classical character,
and this is only possible in comparatively few instances. In any case
the pose should always be subordinated to the expression.

  [a] Free translation (quoted by Wharton), the term "artless grace"
        being implied but not expressed by Sappho.



NOTE 54. PAGE 167

The remarkable range of Raphael in expression has been commented upon by
many critics, and practically all agree with Lanzi in his eloquent
summary[a]:

     There is not a movement of the soul, there is not a character of
     passion known to the ancients and capable of being expressed in
     art, that he (Raphael) has not caught, expressed, and varied in a
     thousand different ways, and always within the bounds of
     propriety.... His figures are passions personified; and love, hope,
     fear, desire, anger, placability, humility, and pride, assume their
     places by turns as the subject changes; and while the spectator
     regards the countenances, the air, and the gestures of the figures,
     he forgets that they are the work of art, and is surprised to find
     his own feelings excited, and himself an actor in the scene before
     him.

  [a] _History of Painting in Italy_, vol. i., Roscoe translation.



NOTE 55. PAGE 169

This Pompeian fresco is supposed to be a copy of the picture of
Timanthes, but there is an ancient marble relief of the same subject at
Florence, the design of which is also said to have been taken from the
Grecian painter, though it differs considerably from the fresco.
Quintilian observes as to the work of Timanthes, that having rendered
Calchas sad, Ulysses still more sad, and Menelaus with the deepest
expression of grief possible in art, the painter could not properly
portray the countenance of Agamemnon, who as father of Iphigenia was
presumed to be the most deeply affected of all present, and so covered
his head, leaving the intensity of his suffering to be understood.[a]

  [a] _School of Oratory_, ii.



NOTE 56. PAGE 172

The authenticity of the Boston example of Mona Lisa is still in dispute.
So far no serious objection to it has been brought forward, and there
are certain points in its favour, as the presence of the columns which
are reproduced in Raphael's sketch, and the bold brushwork of the
drapery where this can be distinguished. But there is another example of
the work in existence, and this fact, with the natural hesitation in
pronouncing definitely on so important a matter, will probably leave the
authenticity of the picture undecided for a long time. Meanwhile the
literature upon Mona Lisa is ever increasing, and some important facts
have been recently brought out. Amongst these is an announcement by A.
C. Coppier that the lady was not a Florentine, but a Neapolitan of the
Gheradini family, and that she was married in 1495, when eighteen years
of age.[a] She would therefore be twenty-seven years old in 1504 when
the picture which Raphael sketched is supposed to have been painted. But
the Mona Lisa in the Louvre was completed between 1515 and 1519; hence
there is much to ascertain as to the history of the work.

  [a] _Les Arts_, No. 145, 1914.



NOTE 57. PAGE 172

The various suggestions that have been made as to the meaning of Mona
Lisa's smile, seem to have no other foundation than the fancies of
mystic minds. The smile has been called dangerous, sinister, ambiguous,
provocative, purposely enigmatic, significant of a loose woman,
expressive of sublime motherhood, reminiscent of Eastern intrigue, and
so on, the mildest criticism of this kind affirming that the smile will
ever remain an enigma. It is of course impossible for any meaning to be
put into a smile by the painter, other than that of pleasure.
Psychological suggestions are possible with the poet or novelist, but
not with the painter. If there be any enigma or mystery in a picture,
then the art is bad, for the work is incomprehensible, but there is no
problem to be solved in Mona Lisa's smile. It is not different from any
other smile except in degree, and of course in the quality appertaining
to the particular countenance. Lionardo, with his scientific turn of
mind, was not likely to attempt the impossible by trying to mix
psychology with paint.



NOTE 58. PAGE 178

It is necessary to dissent from the conclusion of Lessing as to the
representation of ugliness by the poet. He says in referring to Homer's
portrayal of Thersites[a]:

     Why in the case of ugliness did he adopt a method from which he so
     judiciously refrained in that of beauty? Does not a successive
     enumeration of its compound parts diminish the effect of ugliness,
     just as a similar enumeration of its parts destroys that of beauty?
     Undoubtedly it does, but in this very fact lies Homer's
     justification. For the very reason that ugliness in the poet's
     description is reduced to a less repulsive appearance of bodily
     imperfection, and in point of its effect ceases as it were to be
     ugliness, the poet is enabled to make use of it.

It is true that as he cannot present a particular form of beauty by
description, so the poet cannot describe an ugly countenance in such a
way that it may be pictured on the mind as a whole; but on the other
hand, as he can, by reference to its effect, or by imagery, present a
greater beauty than the painter can portray, so he may by similar means
suggest a more hideous form of ugliness. And apart from this, while a
detail in the description of a beautiful countenance is immaterial until
it is combined with other details, a detail of ugliness may in itself be
sufficient to render the countenance wholly repulsive to the reader.
Thus, if one said of a maid that her cheeks were a compound of the lily
and the rose, this would not necessarily imply that she was generally
beautiful; but if it were said of a man that he had a large bulbous
nose, we should consider him ugly whatever the character of his other
features. It was only necessary for Milton to refer to one or two
details of the figure of Sin, to throw upon our minds a form of
appalling ugliness.[b]

A successive enumeration of its component parts, does not therefore
diminish the effect of ugliness, as Lessing claims, but increases it. On
the other hand a successive enumeration of the parts of beauty does not
destroy the beauty, but simply fails to represent it.

The poet may use ugliness where the painter cannot, because his ugly
form does not dominate the scene, save for an instant or two, being
quickly subordinated by surrounding conditions of speech and action;
whereas the ugly figure of the painter is fixed for ever. Further, the
poet may surround his description of the ugly thing with beautiful
imagery and lofty sentiment, practically hiding the ugliness with a
cloak of beauty; but the painter can only depict the ugly thing as it
is, naked to the sight, without gloss or apology.

  [a] _Laocoon_, Ronnfeldt translation.

  [b] _Paradise Lost_, ii.



NOTE 59. PAGE 190

It has been suggested that the foot of Hercules in this fine bronze was
placed upon the skull of an ox to indicate a successful hunt,[a] but
Hercules was a demigod, and so could not be connected in art with any
but a superhuman task or exploit. Moreover the only instance recorded in
mythological history where Hercules fought with an ox (unless the feat
of strength against the white bull of Augeas be called a fight), is that
of the Cretan bull, which was captured and not killed. There is no other
sculptured figure now known where a foot is placed on the skull of an
ox, but Pausanias records that he saw one in a temple of Apollo at
Patræ, the figure being that of the god himself.[b] Pausanias attributes
the motive of the design to Apollo's love of cattle. There is no doubt
about the significance of the Frick bronze. The skull of an ox, and
rams' heads are frequently found on ancient tombs, and acanthus leaves
were commonly used both in Greece and Rome as funereal signs, while the
base of the statuette, which is cast with the figure, is clearly
intended to represent an altar. It is noticeable that the form of
acanthus leaf used is Roman, suggesting that Pollaiuolo had access to
the reproductions of tomb inscriptions made to the order of Lorenzo de'
Medici.

There is apparently no other existing design of a hero contemplating
death, but Lysippus carved several figures, now lost, of Hercules in a
sad or depressed mood. In the most celebrated of these, the demigod was
seated in a thoughtful attitude on a lion's skin, and it is possible
that this design was connected with the contemplation of death, because
it was produced in relief soon after the time of Lysippus, and later in
a Pompeian fresco, in both cases in the presence of Lichas, the bearer
of the poisoned garment.

  [a] Bode's Preface to the _Catalogue of the Morgan Bronzes_.

  [b] Pausanias, vii.



NOTE 60. PAGE 192

The attempt of Ruskin to raise landscape to a high level in the art of
the painter[a] need scarcely be referred to here, so completely have his
arguments been refuted elsewhere.

The authority of Alexander Humboldt has been sometimes quoted in support
of the assertion that landscape can appeal to the higher attributes, the
passage relied upon affirming that descriptive poetry and landscape
painting "are alike capable in a greater or lesser degree of combining
the visible and invisible in our contemplation of nature." But it is
clear from the whole references of the writer to these arts, that he
means nothing more by his statement than that a painting or descriptive
poem may, like an actual landscape, induce a feeling of wonder at the
powers of the original Cause of nature. The opinion of Humboldt upon the
position of landscape painting may be gathered from his definite
observation that it has "a more material origin and a more earthly
limitation than the art which deals with the human form."[b]

  [a] _Modern Painters_, vols i. and ii., and the preface to the second
        edition of the work.

  [b] _Cosmos_, vol. ii.



NOTE 61. PAGE 194

It is doubtful whether an artist can invent a form of tree which does
not exist in nature, without producing something of the character of a
monstrosity. From the point of view of dimensions, the two extreme forms
of trees used in painting, are represented in Raphael's Madonna with
the Goldfinch[a] as to the slender forms, and as to the giant trunks, in
two or three of Claude's pictures. The very beautiful trees of Raphael
have been often regarded as pure inventions, and Ruskin was actually
surprised that the artist did not delineate the "true form of the trees
and the true thickness of the boughs";[b] but as a matter of fact
precisely similar trees (a variety of ash) are to be found in the
valleys of the Apennines to this day. All the change that Raphael made
was to transport the trees from a sheltered spot to an open position.
Very similar trees are introduced in the same master's Apollo and
Marsyas.[c] Perugino was the first painter to use them, and in some of
his earlier works he made them of great height,[d] but he gradually
modified the form till he approached the perfect symmetry and delicacy
of Raphael's examples.[e] Marco Basaiti introduced them into at least
three of his pictures, and they are also to be found in works by Timoteo
della Viti and Francia.[f] Higher and equally slender trees have been
appropriately used by Antonio della Ceraiuolo,[g] and even by so late a
painter as Nicholas Poussin.[h]

  [a] Uffizi Gallery, Florence.

  [b] _Modern Painters_, vol. iv.

  [c] The Louvre.

  [d] Baptism of Christ, Perugia; and The Crucifixion, Florence.

  [e] The Deposition, Pitti Palace.

  [f] Madonna and Child in a Rose Garden, Munich.

  [g] The Crucifixion, Florence Academy.

  [h] Diana sleeps in the Forest, Prado, Madrid.



NOTE 62. PAGE 194

In noting the fact that the great landscape artist invents his designs,
Byron observes that nature does not furnish him with the scenes that he
requires, and adds[a]:

     Nature is not lavish of her beauties; they are widely scattered,
     and occasionally displayed, to be selected with care, and gathered
     with difficulty.

Had Byron been a painter, he would have known that the trouble of the
artist is due to the over, and not the under, supply of beauty by
nature. The artist sees the beauty, but cannot identify it with
particular signs, and so has to invent a scene himself, using nature
only for sketches or ideas.

  [a] _Art and Nature._



NOTE 63. PAGE 200

"The force of natural signs," says Lessing, "consists in their
resemblance to the things they represent."[a] In a criticism upon the
second part of _Faust_, G. H. Lewes writes[b]:

     The forms which are his (the artist's) materials, the symbols which
     are his language, must in themselves have beauty and an interest
     readily appreciable by those who do not understand the occult
     meaning. Unless they have this they cease to be art: they become
     hieroglyphs. Art is picture painting, not picture writing.

While this is generally true, beauty in the lesser signs of the poet is
of greater importance than in those of the painter, because a painting
is looked upon direct as a whole, while a poem has to be comprehended in
its parts before it can be properly considered as a whole.

  [a] Laocoon.

  [b] _Life of Goethe_, 2d edition.



NOTE 64. PAGE 203

Although those of the fifteenth-century artists who treated landscape
seriously did not thoroughly understand perspective, yet they were
seldom at a loss in representing distance, that is, in the clear
atmosphere which they invariably used. They were diffident in attempting
distance with unbroken level country, and till quite the end of the
century there is no instance where middle and far distance are shown
together, even with the assistance of hilly ground. The almost
invariable practice of the leading painters who made landscape a feature
in their works, was to introduce water leading back from the foreground,
so that breaks therein could be used to indicate distance. More or less
numerous jutting forks of low lying land were thrown into the stream
from either side, this plan being successfully adopted in Italy,[a]
Flanders,[b] and Germany.[c]

Early in the sixteenth century much improvement was made in the use of
water for providing distance, and a few of the Venetian painters gave
some consideration to aerial perspective, but the most perfect example
of this perspective in the period is contained in an early work of
Raphael.[d] In the background is a lake extending into a gradually
deepening haze, and in this a boat is so skilfully placed as to increase
considerably the apparent distance to the horizon. This picture is a
distinct advance upon the Venetian distance work of the time.[e] Later
on in the century an artist rarely introduced water into a view
specially to assist in producing distance by means of boats, more
advanced methods being adopted. Titian used sunlight effects with
varying shadows,[f] or alternating clear and wooded ground.[g] These
plans, and the use of water with the addition of trees and low hills,[h]
constitute the chief devices to be found in the late sixteenth-century
Italian pictures. Some of the sun effects rendered for distance purposes
even before Titian's best time are quite effective, though formal.[i]

  [a] See Piero di Cosimo's Death of Procris, National Gallery, London,
        and Mars and Cupid, Berlin.

  [b] Van Eyck's Chancellor Rollin before the Virgin, and Bout's
        Adoration of the Magi.

  [c] Lucas Moser's Voyage of the Saints (1431), Tiefenbroun, Germany.

  [d] Central panel in a triptych of the Crucifixion, Hermitage,
        Petrograd. This picture has been sometimes attributed to
        Perugino, but it is unquestionably from the hand of Raphael.

  [e] See Titian's Jacopo Pesaro presented to St. Peter, Antwerp.

  [f] Charles V. at Mühlberg, Madrid.

  [g] Meeting of Joachim and Anna, Padua; and others.

  [h] Bronzino's Venus and Cupid, Uffizi, Florence.

  [i] Schiavone's Jupiter and Io, Hermitage.



NOTE 65. PAGE 204

Lessing apparently overlooked the possibilities of landscape painting in
his dictum as to progressive actions. He writes[a]:

     If painting on account of the signs and means of imitation which it
     employs, and which can only be combined in space, must entirely
     renounce time, then progressive actions cannot, in so far as they
     are progressive, be included in the number of its subjects, but it
     must content itself with coexistent actions, or with mere bodies,
     which on account of their position cause an action to be suspected.

It is true that a series of progressive human actions cannot be included
in one painting, but progressive natural actions can be so included when
the progression is regular and repeated and the actions are clearly
separated to the eye. Although the painter can only depict a moment of
time, he can show the whole progression, which is not the case in a
series of human actions, as in the example quoted by Lessing, of
Pandarus arranging his bow, opening his quiver, choosing an arrow, and
so on.

Strange to say, De Quincey, in an explanatory note to Lessing's
observations, also overlooks the movement of water broken by rocks,
though he refers specially to landscape painting. He says[b]:

     In the succession of parts which make up appearance in nature,
     either the parts simply repeat each other (as in the case of a man
     walking, a river flowing, etc.), or they unfold themselves through
     a cycle, in which each step effaces the preceding, as in the case
     of a gun exploding, where the flash is swallowed up by the smoke
     effaced by its own dispersion.

But for the purpose of the painter, the action of water breaking over
ledges and boulders does not correspond with the case of a man walking
or a river flowing, because the series of events forming the progression
in the case of the water breaking, cover such time and space that the
events can be distinctly separated by the eye. Clearly also this action
should not be included in De Quincey's second category, because the
repetition is both regular and (to all intents and purposes) perpetual.
There should therefore be a third category to comprise those repeated
progressive acts in which the events can be so separated by the eye as
to be portrayed on canvas in the order of their progression, and in such
a way that the whole progression, and the meaning of it, are at once
apparent.

  [a] _Laocoon_, Phillimore translation.

  [b] Essay on "Lessing."



  [Illustration: PLATE 29 (See page 329)
  Greek Sculpture of Ariadne (_Vatican_)]



NOTE 66. PAGE 208

Professor Clausen relates that Whistler told him that his object in
painting nocturnes was to try and exhibit the "mystery and beauty of the
night." It is obvious that Whistler was here confusing psychological
with visual impressions. The depth of gloom, the apparently limitless
dark void which the eye cannot penetrate, mean mystery in a sense,
because we can never accustom ourselves to the suggestion of infinity
involved in something which is boundless to the senses. A sensation of
the sublime may consequently arise, and this means beauty in a
psychological sense. But we are considering art and not psychology.
Where nothing is distinguished, nothing can be painted, and if there be
sufficient light for objects to be determined, there can be no mystery
for the painter. If he be desirous of representing Night, he must follow
the example of Michelangelo and symbolize it.

It is curious that since the death of Whistler, a picture entitled
Mysteries of the Night has been painted by another American artist--J.
H. Johnston. A figure of a beautiful nude woman is standing on a rocky
shore in a contemplative attitude, with the moonlight thrown upon her.
The design is excellent, but the realistic modelling of the figure
effectually kills any suggestion of mystery.



NOTE 67. PAGE 231

Vasari mentions that Michelangelo, though admiring the colour and manner
of Titian regretted that the Venetian painters did not pay more
attention to drawing in their studies.[a] In quoting this, Reynolds
observed[b]:

     But if general censure was given to that school from the sight of a
     picture by Titian, how much more heavily and more justly would the
     censure fall on Paolo Veronese, and more especially on Tintoretto.

Reynolds himself rightly excluded Titian when he condemned the later
Venetian painters of the Renaissance for their exaggeration of colour,
and no doubt Titian was also exempted by J. A. Symonds in his trenchant
criticism of the work of this school. When dealing with the decline of
Lesbian poetry after the brilliant period of Sappho, he wrote[c]:

     In this the Lesbian poets were not unlike the Provençal
     troubadours, who made a literature of love, or the Venetian
     painters, who based their art on the beauty of colour, the
     voluptuous charms of the flesh. In each case the motive of
     enthusiastic passion sufficed to produce a dazzling result. But as
     soon as its freshness was exhausted there was nothing left for art
     to live on, and mere decadence to sensuality ensued.

  [a] _Life of Titian_.

  [b] Reynolds's Fourth Discourse.

  [c] _Studies of the Greek Poets_, vol. i.



NOTE 68. PAGE 232

Sir George Beaumont relates of Reynolds[a]:

     On his return from his second tour over Flanders and Holland, he
     observed to me that the pictures of Rubens appeared much less
     brilliant than they had done on his former inspection. He could not
     for some time account for this little circumstance; but when he
     recollected that when he first saw them he had his notebook in his
     hand for the purpose of writing down short remarks, he perceived
     what had occasioned their now making a less impression than they
     had done formerly. By the eye passing immediately from the white
     paper to the picture, the colours derived uncommon richness and
     warmth; but for want of this foil they afterwards appeared
     comparatively cold.

  [a] Cunningham's _Lives of the British Painters_.



NOTE 69. PAGE 249

Rodin[a] observes that in giving movement to his personages, the artist

     represents the transition from one pose to another--he indicates
     how insensibly the first glides into the second. In his work we
     still see a part of what was, and we discover a part of what is to
     be.

Rodin points to Rude's fine statue of Marshal Ney, and practically says
that here the illusion is created by a series of progressive actions
indicated in the attitude: the legs remaining as they were when the
sword was about to be drawn, and the hand still holding the scabbard
away from the body, while the chest is being thrown out and the sword
held aloft. Thus the sculptor

     compels, so to speak, the spectator to follow the development of an
     act in an individual. The eyes are forced to travel upwards from
     the lower limbs to the raised arm, and as in so doing they find the
     different parts of the figure represented at successive instants,
     they have the illusion of beholding the movement performed.

Rodin himself has followed a similar course with much success. The
ancient Greek sculptors, when representing a figure in action,
invariably chose a moment of rest between two progressive steps in the
action. The Discobolus and Marsyas of Myron, and particularly the
Atalanta in the Louvre, are fine examples.

  [a] _Art, by Auguste Rodin_, compiled by Paul Gsell, 1916.



NOTE 70. PAGE 250

Mengs, in referring to the arrangement of the drapery in Raphael's
figures, says[a]:

     With him every fold has its proper cause; either in its own weight
     or in the motion of the limbs. Sometimes the folds enable us to
     tell what has preceded; herein too Raphael has endeavoured to find
     significance. It can be seen by the position of the folds, whether
     an arm or a leg has been moved forwards or backwards into the
     attitude which it actually occupies; whether a limb has been, or is
     being, moved from a contracted position into a straightened one, or
     whether it was extended at first and is being contracted.

  [a] _The Works of Anton Raphael Mengs_, vol. ii., D'Azara translation.



NOTE 71. PAGE 258

Besides assisting in providing an illusion, the title of a picture may
lend great additional interest to it. Thus in Millet's The Angelus the
associations called up by the title act most powerfully on the mind, and
one almost listens for the sound of the bell.[a] A work of a
similar character is Bonvin's Ave Maria, where the nuns of a convent are
answering the call[b]; and Horace Walker has a picture with the same
title, in which a boy who is driving cattle, stops in front of a
Crucifix by the wayside[c]. An excellent example of this added interest
is the title of Turner's great picture of the _Temeraire_,[d] as to
which R. Phillimore writes[e]:

     It is not difficult to imagine the picture of an old man-of-war
     towed by a steam tug up a river. The execution of such a subject
     may deserve great praise and give great satisfaction to the
     beholder. But add to the representation the statement that it is
     "The fighting Temeraire towed to her last berth, " and a series of
     the most stirring events of our national history fills our
     imagination.

  [a] The Louvre.

  [b] The Luxembourg.

  [c] Corcoran Gallery, Washington.

  [d] National Gallery, London.

  [e] Preface to translation of Lessing's _Laocoon_.



NOTE 72. PAGE 261

There is an antique sculptured group in the Vatican in which a precisely
similar figure of the son of Niobe has his left hand on the shoulder of
his sister who has fallen to her knees from the effect of a wound, and
it is very reasonably suggested that the Florence figure originally
formed part of a like group. But the explanation of the act given by
Perry[a] and others, that the drapery was raised by the brother to
shield the girl, will scarcely hold good, as the folds are spread out at
the back, forming a concavity, whereas they would fall loosely if the
youth were resting. Apart from this, his legs are widely separated, and
in a running position. It may therefore be surmised that in the Vatican
group the artist intended to represent the precise moment when the
fleeing youth reached his sister.

  [a] _Greek and Roman Sculpture._



NOTE 73. PAGE 270

It is curious that among the countless pictures of the Annunciation, in
very few indeed has surprise been expressed in the countenance and
attitude of the Virgin, though it is impossible to imagine an incident
more properly calling for profound astonishment on the part of the
principal personage in a composition, even in the absence of startling
miraculous accessories such as that introduced by Rossetti. Probably the
reason for this is connected with the difficulty of expressing great
surprise unaccompanied with some other feeling, as pleasure, or sorrow,
or fear, but there does not seem to be any cause why an exalted joyful
excitement should not be exhibited. Mrs. Jameson thinks that the Virgin
should not appear startled, as She was "accustomed to the perpetual
ministry of Angels who daily and hourly attended on Her,"[a] but it is
questionable whether this can be properly assumed by the artist, and in
any case from the point of view of art, the action should correspond
with the nature of the event as it is generally understood. Of the few
masters who have indicated surprise in an Annunciation picture,
Tintoretto has gone the farthest. He shows the Virgin with Her lips
parted, and both hands held up, evidently with astonishment,[b] an
example followed by Paris Bordone.[c] Raphael in an early picture
represents Her holding up one hand, but the attitude might signify the
reception of an announcement of importance.[d] Perugino shows Her with
both hands raised, but otherwise She appears unconcerned.[e] A few other
artists, including Venusti and Foppa, and among modern men, Girodet,
adopt Raphael's method of composition. Rubens goes a step farther, and
represents the Virgin apparently standing back with surprise, though
this is only faintly suggested by the facial expression.[f]

  [a] _Legends of the Madonna._

  [b] Scuolo di San Rocoo, Venice.

  [c] Sienna Gallery.

  [d] The Vatican.

  [e] Santa Maria Nouvo, Perugia.

  [f] Vienna Gallery.




INDEX OF SCULPTORS, PAINTERS, AND WORKS OF ART


NOTE.--The Schools to which the earlier Italian painters belonged are
given in brackets.


A

  Adam, Franz, 1815-1886, German
    --Bavarian Regiment before Orleans, 257

  Aivasovsky, I. K., 1817-1900, Russian, 205

  Albani, Francesco, 1578-1660, Italian, 163
    --Toilet of Venus, 118

  Albertinelli, Mariotto, 1467-1512, Italian [Florentine]
    --The Salutation, 243

  Alcamenes, fifth century B.C., Greek, 304

  Altdorfer, A., 1480 (_c._)-1538, German
    --The Nativity, 268

  Aman, Jean, 1860-, French
    --Sorbonne panels, 254

  Ancher, Anna K., 1859-, Danish
    --The Funeral, 189

  Andreani, A., 1540-1623, Italian, 257

  Angelico, Fra (Giovanni da Fiesole), 1387-1455,
          Italian [Florentine], 17, 101

  Antico (Pier Giacomo Ilario), worked late 15th and early 16th century,
          Italian, 326

  Antonella da Messina, 1421 (_c._)-1493, Italian [Venetian]
    --Crucifixion, 243

  Antonio del Ceraiolo, worked first half sixteenth century,
          Italian [Florentine], 345

  Apelles, fourth century B.C., Greek, 10, 44
    --Venus Anadyomene, 113, 330, Plate 4;
    Alexander in the character of Jupiter, 209

  Avercamp, Hendrick van, 1585-1663, Dutch, 292


B

  Bartolommeo da Bagnacavallo (Bart. Ramenghi), 1484-1542,
          Italian [Bolognese]
    --Holy Family, 103

  Bartolommeo, Fra (Baccio della Porta, or Bart. di Pagholo), 1475-1517,
          Italian [Florentine]
    --Adoration of the Shepherds, 265

  Bartolozzi, Francesco, 1725-1815, Italian, 164

  Basaiti, Marco, died after 1521, Italian [Venetian]
    --The Dead Christ, 93;
    Calling of the Children of Zebedee, 93;
    Christ on the Mount of Olives, 243

  Baschenis, Evaristo, 1617-1677, Italian, 247

  Battistello (Giovanni Battista Caracciolo), 1580-1641, Italian, 17
    --Adoration of the Shepherds, 271

  Bellano, Bartolommeo, 1430-1498, 327

  Benjamin-Constant, J. J., 1845-1902, French, 184

  Benoit-Levy, Jules, 1866-, French
    --Morning of July 4, 1789, 253

  Berghem, Nicholas (or Berchem), 1620-1683, Dutch, 47, 292

  Bernadino da Conti, died 1525, Italian [Venetian]
    --Virgin and Child, 245

  Bernini, G. L., 1598-1669, Italian, 31, 33

  Berritini, Pietro, 1596-1669, Italian, 31

  Bertoldo di Giovanni, 1420 (_c._)-1491, Italian, 327

  Bischop, C, 1630-1674, Dutch, 292

  Blyhooft, Z., 1622 (_c._)-1698, Dutch, 292

  Boecklin, A., 1827-1901, German, 208
    --Vita Somnium breve, 180;
    Pietà, 170

  Boltraffio, G. A., 1467-1516, Italian [Milanese]
    --Virgin and Child, 103

  Bonfiglio, Benedetto, 1420-1496 (_c._) Italian [Perugian]
    --Virgin and Child, 103

  Bonheur, Rosa, 1822-1899, French
    --Ploughing in Nivernois, 256

  Bordone, Paris, 1500-1570, Italian [Venetian]
    --Annunciation, 354

  Both, Andries, 1609-1644, Flemish, 47

  Both, Jan, 1610 (_c._)-1652, Flemish, 47

  Botticelli, Sandro (Alessandro di Mariano dei Filippi), 1444-1510,
          Italian [Florentine] 96
    --Pietà, 169;
    Nativity, 269;
    Reposing Venus, 117;
    Athena and the Centaur, 124

  Boucher, François, 1704-1770, French
    --Louvre Portrait, 173;
    Sleeping Venus, 118;
    Birth of Venus, 268

  Bough, S., 1822-1878, British
    --Borrowdale, 204

  Bouguereau, A. W., 1825-1905, French
    --Assumption of the Virgin, 267;
    Une âme au Ciel, 267;
    Birth of Venus, 115;
    Aurora, 271;
    Twilight, 271;
    The Lost Pleiad, 269

  Bouts, Dirk, 1400-1475, Flemish
    --Adoration of the Magi, 347

  Braquemond, J. F., 1833-, French, 285

  Bramantino (Bartolommeo Suardi), 1468-(_c._) 1530, Italian [Milanese]
    --Christ, 93;
    Virgin and Child, 103

  Breton, Jules, 1827-1906, French
    --Cry of Alarm, 253

  Breughel, Jan, 1569-1642, Flemish, 46

  Breughel, Pieter, 1528-1569, Flemish, 90

  Bril, Paul, 1554-1626, Flemish, 46

  Bronzino (Angelo Allori), 1502-1572, Italian [Florentine]
    --Venus and Cupid, 348

  Brown, Arnesby, 1866-, British
    --The Drove, 257

  Burne-Jones, E. B., 1833-1898, British
    --Annunciation, 270;
    Golden Stairs, 252;
    Dies Domini, 93


C

  Cabanel, Aexandre, 1823-1889, French
    --Venus Anadyomene, 115

  Calamis, fifth century B.C., Greek, 9

  Canaletto (Antonio Canale), 1697-1768, Italian, 47

  Canova, Antonio, 1757-1822, Italian
    --L'Amour et Psyche, 191

  Cappelle, Jan van de, 1624(_c._)-1679, Dutch, 46

  Carracci, Agostino, 1558-1601, Italian, 31

  Carracci, Annibale, 1560-1609, Italian, 31

  Carracci, Ludovico, 1555-1619, Italian, 31

  Caravaggio, M. (Michelangelo Amerighi), 1569-1609, Italian, 17, 246

  Cavalori, Mirabello, middle sixteenth century, Italian [Florentine]
    --The Carpet Weavers, 252

  Cellini, Benvenuto, 1500-1571, Italian, 17, 323

  Cephisodostos, early fourth century B.C., Greek
    --Irene and Pluto, 101

  Cézanne, Paul, 1839-1906, French, 37, 288

  Chardin, J. S., 1699-1779, French, 173, 247

  Chartier, H., 1870 (_c._)-, French
    --Jena, 256;
    Hanan, 256

  Chase, W. M., 1849-1916, American
    --Master Roland, 165

  Cignani, Carlo, 1628-1719, Italian, 32, 164

  Cimabue, Giovanni, 1240 (_c._)-1302, Italian [Florentine] 92, 95, 283
    --Virgin and Child, 101

  Cipriani, G. B., 1727-1785, Italian, 164

  Claude Lorraine (Claude Gelée), 1600-1682,
          French, 17, 30, 47, 195, 198, 201, 283
    --Arcadian Landscape, Plate 17

  Clausen, George, 1852-, British, 284, 349

  Cogniet, L., 1794-1880, French.
    --Tintoretto Painting his Dead Daughter, 191

  Colton, W. R., 1867-, British
    --Royal Artillery Memorial, 253

  Constable, John, 1776-1837, British, 48, 195, 208

  Copley, J. S., 1737-1815, American
    --Death of Chatham, 190

  Corenzio, Bellisario, 1588 (_c._)-1643, Greek, 17

  Cornelius, Peter, 1783-1867, German
    --Let there be Light, 267

  Correggio (Antonio Allegri), 1494-1534,
          Italian [Parma], 43, 69, 102, 108, 142
    --Vice, 179;
    Virtue, 179;
    Mercury instructing Cupid, 130;
    Madonna and Child with Saints (Parma), 268;
    Parma frescoes, 229

  Costa, Lorenzo, 1460-1535, Italian [Ferrarese]
    --Coronation of the Virgin, 102;
    Cupid crowning Isabella d'Este, 225

  Cosway, Richard, 1742-1821, British, 164

  Cot, P. A., 1837-1883, French
    --The Storm, 210

  Courbet, G., 1819-1877, French
    --Funeral at Ornans, 189

  Coypel, Antoine, 1661-1742, French, 163

  Coypel, Noel, 1628-1707, French, 163

  Crivelli, Carlo, 1440 (_c._)-1496, Italian (Venetian)
    --Coronation of the Virgin, 264

  Crome, John, 1769-1821, British, 208

  Cuyp, Albert, 1605-1691, Dutch, 203, 245


D

  Dalsgaard, Christen, 1824-, Danish
    --The Child's Coffin, 189

  Damophon, second century B.C., Greek, 122

  Danby, F., 1793-1861, British, 209

  Dehodencq, E. A., 1822-1882, French
    --Bohemians returning from a Fête, 253

  Delacroix, E. V. E., 1798-1863, French, 278

  Delaroche, Paul (Hippolyte Delaroche), 1797-1856, French
    --Death of Queen Elizabeth, 190

  Demont-Breton, V., 1859-, French
    --The Divine Apprentice, 321

  Diaz, N., 1807-1876, French
    --Descent of the Bohemians, 253

  Dolci, Carlo, 1616-1686, Italian
    --Christ Blessing, 175

  Domenichino (Domenico Zampieri), 1581-1641, Italian, 19
    --St. Cecilia, 176;
    St. Paul's Vision, 265

  Donatello (Donate di Betto Bardi), 1385 (_c._)-1466,
          Italian, 30, 101, 108, 325

  Doomer, Lambert, 1647 (_c._)-1694, Dutch, 292

  Doré, Gustave, 1832-1883, French
    --Creation of the Earth, 265;
    Samson Slaying the Philistines, 252

  Dossi, Dosso, 1479-1552, Italian [Ferrarese]
    --Muse instructing a Court Poet, 175;
    Nymph and Satyr, 175

  Dow, Gerard, 1613-1675, Dutch, 46, 248
    --The Dentist, 176

  Duccio, Boninsegna di, 1260 (_c._)-1340, Italian [Siennese], 280
    --Madonna and Child, 101

  Dumont, Jacques (Le Romain), 1701-1781, French
    --Madame Mercier and Family, 173

  Dürer, Albrecht, 1474-1528, German, 45
    --The Virgin with a Canary, 264

  Dyce, William, 1806-1864, British
    --St. John leading the Virgin from the Tomb, 245


E

  Eakins, Thomas, 1844-1916, American
    --Dr. Cross's Surgical Clinic, 185

  Emmet, Lydia, 1866-, American
    --Patricia, 247, Plate 23

  Ercole di Roberti (E. di R. Grandi), 1470 (_c._)-1531,
          Italian [Ferrarese]
    --The Concert, 175

  Everdingen, E. van, 1612-1675, Dutch, 204


F

  Falconet, P. E., 1741-1791, French, 169

  Ferrari, Gaudenzio, 1484-1549, Italian [Milanese]
    --Madonna and Child, 173

  Ferri C., 1634-1689, Italian
    --David plans a Temple, 268

  Feuerbach, A., 1828-1880, German
    --Medea, 170

  Filarete (Antonio Averlino), (_c._) 1399-1470, Italian, 327

  Flaxman, John, 1755-1826, British, 130

  Fontana, B. (G. B. Farinati), 1532-1592, Italian
    --Vision of Resurrection, 267

  Foppa, Vincenzo, 1427 (?)-1515, Italian [Milanese]
    --Annunciation, 354

  Fragonard, J. H., 1732-1806, French, 43, 283
    --The Pursuit, 139;
    The Rendezvous, 335;
    Souvenirs, 335;
    The Lover Crowned, 335;
    The Abandonment, 335;
    Venus Awakened by Aurora, 118

  Francesco da Cotignola (F. dei Zaganelli), worked early sixteenth
          century, Italian [Parma]
    --Adoration of the Shepherds, 265

  Francia (Francesco Raibolini), 1450-1517, Italian [Bolognese], 332
    --Madonna and Child in Glory, 266;
    Madonna and Child in a Rose Garden, 345

  Fries, Hans, (_c._) 1450-1520, German
    --Virgin and Child with St. Anne, 103

  Frith, W. P., 1819-1909, British
    --Poverty and Wealth, 178

  Fromentin, E., 1820-1886, French, 185
    --Couriers des Ooled Nayls, 257


G

  Gaddi, Taddeo, 1300-1366, Italian [Florentine], 280

  Gainsborough, T., 1727-1788, British, 160
    --Mrs. Leybourne, 174;
    Lady Sheffield, 174

  Genga, Girolamo, 1476-1551, Italian.
    Magdalene with Saints, 266

  Géricault, Jean Louis, 1791-1824, French
    --Epsom, 257

  Ghiberti, Lorenzo, 1381-1455, Italian, 324

  Ghirlandaio, Domenico, 1449-1494, Italian [Florentine], 30, 96
    --Old Man and Boy, 151;
    Birth of St. John Baptist, 251;
    Death of St. Francis, 144

  Ghirlandaio, Ridolfo, 1483-1560, Italian [Florentine]
    --Madonna giving her girdle to St. Thomas, 265

  Gilbert, John, 1817-1897, British
    --Slaying of Job's Sheep, 209

  Giordano, Luca, 1632-1705, Italian, 32

  Giorgio, Francesco di, 1439-1502, Italian [Siennese]
    --Christ bereft of His clothes before the Crucifixion, 93

  Giorgione (Giorgio Barbarelli), 1477-1510,
          Italian [Venetian], 278, 283, 336
    --Adrastus and Hysipyle, 210, 225;
    The Sleeping Venus, 116

  Giotto (Giotto di Bondone), 1267 (_c._)-1337,
          Italian [Florentine], 95, 108, 280, 283
    --Madonna and Child, 101

  Giovanni di Bologna (Jean de Douai), 1524-1608, French or Flemish, 323
    --Mercury, 129

  Girodet de Roncy, A. L., 1767-1842, French
    --Burial of Atala, 191;
    Annunciation, 355

  Girolamo da Libri, 1472-1555, Italian [Venetian]
    --Virgin and Child, 244

  Gouthière, Pierre, 1740-1806, French, 323

  Goyen, Jan van, 1596-1656, Dutch
    --View of The Hague, 195

  Granacci, Francesco, 1477-1544, Italian [Florentine]
    --The Virgin giving her girdle to St. Thomas, 267

  Grant, Francis, 1803-1878, British
    --Countess of Chesterfield and Mrs. Anson, 245

  Greco, El (Dominico Theotocopuli), 1547 (_c._)-1614, Greek, 19

  Grien, Hans Baldung, 1480-1545, German
    --The Three Ages, 180;
    Sacred and Profane Love, 182;
    Pictures representing Death, 186

  Gros, A. J., 1771-1835, French
    --The Combat of Nazareth, 256;
    Timoleon of Corinth, 170

  Guardi, Francesco, 1712-1793, Italian
    --Regatta on the Grand Canal, 252

  Guercino (G. F. da Cento), 1590-1666, Italian
    --Martyrdom of St. Peter, 265

  Gutherz, C, 1844-1907, Swiss
    --"They shall bear thee up," 267


H

  Hacker, A., 1858-, British
    --The Cry of Egypt, 170

  Hals, Franz, 1580-1666, Dutch, 155, 248, 336
    --The Laughing Cavalier, 177;
    Stephanus Gereardts, 337;
    Isabella Coymans, 337;
    Lady with a Fan, 337;
    Willem van Heythuysen, 337;
    Merry Company at Table, 175

  Hanneman, Adrian, 1611-1680, Dutch
    --Constantine Huygens and Children, 248

  Heim, F. J., 1787-1865, French, 184

  Henneberg, R. F., 1825-1876, German
    --Race for Fortune, 187

  Hobbema, M., 1638-1709, Dutch, 46, 49, 202
    --Landscape, Plate 18

  Hoet, G., 1648-1733, Dutch
    --Translation of Enoch, 269

  Hogarth, W., 1697-1764, British, 225, 282

  Holbein, Hans, 1497-1543, German, 283
    --The Barber Surgeons, 220;
    Holy Family, 103;
    The Ambassadors, 40, 157;
    Virgin and Child, 263

  Homer, Winslow, 1836-1910, American
    --All's Well, 176, Plate 15

  Hoppner, John, 1758-1810, British, 161

  Humphrey, Ozias, 1742-1810, British, 164

  Hunt, W. H., 1827-1910, British
    --Shadow of the Cross, 321;
    The Scapegoat, 227


I

  Ingres, J. A. D., 1780-1867, French
    --Oath of Louis XIII., 264;
    [OE]dipus and the Sphinx, 186;
    Birth of Venus, 115

  Innes, George, 1825-1894, American
    --Niagara Falls, 211


J

  Johnstone, J. H., 1857-, American
    --Mysteries of the Night, 350


K

  Kampf, Arthur, 1864-, German
    --Night of March 31, 1888, 189

  Kauffmann, Maria Angelica, 1741-1807, German, 164

  Kaulbach, W. von, 1805-1874, German
    --Marguerite, 170

  Keyser, Thomas de, 1596 (_c._)-1679, Dutch
    --Lesson in Anatomy, 185

  Kulmbach, Hans (Hans Suess), 1476 (_c._)-1522, German
    --Entombment of St. Catherine, 263


L

  Lancret, Nicolas, 1660-1743, French, 180

  Lard, F. M., late nineteenth century, French
    --Glory Forgets not Obscure Heroes, 191

  La Touche, G., 1854-1913, French, 285
    --Firework pictures, 213

  La Tour, Maurice Q., 1704-1788, French
    --Madame de la Popelinière, 174;
    Mdlle. Camargo, 174;
    Madame de Pompadour, 174

  Latour, I. H. Fantin, 1836-1904, French, 285

  Lawrence, Thomas, 1769-1830, British, 161, 224

  Le Brun, Charles, 1619-1690, French, 163
    --Death of Cato, 191

  Leighton, F., 1830-1896, British
    --Captive Andromache, 171

  Leoni, Leone, died 1590, Italian, 323

  Le Sueur, E., 1616-1655, French, 163
    --Venus reposing, 118;
    The Virgin appearing to St. Martin, 261

  Levy, H. L., 1840-1904, French
    --Young Girl and Death, 191

  Liberale di Verona, 1452-1519, Italian [Veronese]
    --Magdalene with Saints, 265

  Lionardo da Vinci, 1452-1519,
          Italian [Milanese], 16, 18, 30, 96, 172, 283, 325
    --The Last Supper, 69, 93;
    Mona Lisa (Paris), 151, 242, 341
      --(formerly Boston), 242, 340;
    Litta Madonna, 240, Plate 21;
    Virgin and Child with St. Anne, 172, 243

  Lippi, Filippo, 1406-1469, Italian [Florentine], 96
    --Virgin and Child, 103, 251

  Loefftz, L., 1845-, German
    --The Dead Christ, 171

  Longepied, L., 1849-1888, French
    --Immortality, 191

  Longhi, Pietro, 1702-1762, Italian, 31

  Lorenzetto, P., first half fourteenth century, Italian [Siennese]
    --Madonna and Child, 101

  Lotto, Lorenzo, 1480-1556, Italian [Venetian]
    --Three Ages of Man, 179;
    Triumph of Chastity, 226

  Luca di Tome, first half fourteenth century, Italian [Siennese], 261

  Luini, Aurelio (A. del Lupino), 1530-1593, Italian [Milanese], 288

  Luini, Bernadino (B. del Lupino), 1475 (_c._)-1536, Italian [Milanese]
    --Entombment of St. Catherine, 263;
    Salome, 173

  Lux, H. L., late nineteenth century, French
    --Sarpedon, 268

  Lysippus, fourth century B.C., Greek, 10
    --Hercules in depressed mood, 344


M

  Mainardi, S., died about 1515, Italian [Florentine]
    --Madonna giving her girdle to St. Thomas, 261

  Maître de Flemelle (Robert Campin), 1375 (_c._)-1444,
          French or Flemish, 93, 170

  Manet, Edouard, 1832-1883, French, 286
    --Boy with a Sword, 165;
    Déjeuner sur l'Herbe, 181;
    Olympia, 287

  Mantegna, Andrea, 1431-1506, Italian [Paduan]
    --The Infant Christ, 102;
    Virgin and Child, 175

  Margaritone of Arezzo, 1216-1293, Italian [Tuscan], 279

  Maratta, Carlo, 1625-1713, Italian, 33, 284

  Martin, John, 1789-1854, British
    --Plague of Hail, 210;
    Destruction of Pharaoh, 210;
    "I have Set My Bow in the Cloud," 210

  Masaccio (Tommaso Guidi), 1402-1429, Italian [Florentine], 283, 322
    --The Madonna enthroned, 104;
    Tribute Money, 250

  Matisse, Henry, 1876-, French, 37

  Matsys, Quentin, 1463 (_c._)-1530, Flemish, 93

  Meissonier, J. L. E., 1815-1891, French
    --1814, 256

  Mengs, Anton R., 1728-1779, German, 352
    --St. John Baptist Preaching, 175

  Menzel, A., 1815-1905, German
    --Market Place in Verona, 252;
    Iron Mill, 252

  Meyer, K., 1618-1689, Swiss, 179

  Michelangelo Buonarotti, 1475-1564,
          Italian [Florentine, Roman], 10, 13, 16, 18, 19, 30, 43, 69,
          92, 229, 260, 233, 350
    --Holy Family (Florence), 182;
    Last Judgment, 90, 93;
    Reposing Venus, 117;
    Leda, 320;
    Night, 320;
    San Lorenzo Madonna, 320;
    Bargello Madonna, 320;
    Pietà, 320;
    Moses, 320;
    Bacchus, 132;
    St. Stephen, 93;
    Creation of Adam, Plate 24

  Mignard, Pierre, 1610-1695, French, 163

  Millais, J. E., 1829-1896, British
    --The Carpenter's Shop, 321

  Millet, J. F., 1814-1875, French
    --The Angelus, 352

  Molyn, P., 1592(_c._)-1661, Dutch, 292

  Monet, C. J., 1840-, French, 286

  Montagna, B., 1450(_c._)-1523, Italian [Venetian]
    --The Virgin Enthroned, 102

  Moro, Antonio, 1512-1575, Flemish
    --Catilina of Portugal, 159;
    Maria of Austria, 159

  Morot, A. N., 1850-, French
    --Reichsoffen, 256

  Moser, Lucas, first half fifteenth century, German
    --Voyage of the Saints, 347

  Murillo, B. E., 1618-1682, Spanish, 19, 163
    --Holy Family, 103;
    Ascension of Christ, 260;
    Immaculate Conception pictures, 266

  Myron, fifth century B.C., Greek, 9, 249
    --Discobolus, 352;
    Marsyas, 331, 352


N

  Nattier, J. M., 1685-1766, French, 164
    --Madame Louise, 173


O

  Orcagna (Andrea di Cione), 1308(_c._)-1370, Italian [Florentine]
    --Assumption of the Virgin, 261

  Orchardson, W. Q., 1835-1907, British
    --The Borgia, 189


P

  Palma Giovane (Jacopo Palma), 1544-1628, Italian [Venetian]
    --Christ in Judgment, 264

  Palma Vecchio (Jacopo Palma), 1480(_c._)-1528, Italian [Venetian]
    --Reposing Venus, 117;
    Assumption, 266

  Parmigiano (Francesco Mazzuoli), 1504-1540, Italian [Parma]
    --Madonna and Child with Saints, 103

  Pedrini, Giovanni (Giampietrino), late fifteenth and early sixteenth
          centuries, Italian [Milanese]
    --Madonna, 173

  Perronneau, J. B., 1715-1783, French
    --Madame Olivier, 173

  Perugino, Pietro (Pietro Vanucci), 1446-1524,
          Italian [Umbrian], 17, 332
    --Christ's Rule, 264;
    Deposition, 345;
    Assumption of the Virgin, 262;
    Ascension, 262, 263;
    Baptism of Christ, 345;
    Madonna with Child and Penitents, 264;
    Annunciation, 354;
    Crucifixion (Florence), 345

  Phidias, fifth century B.C., Greek, 7, 10, 44, 57, 91, 108, 122, 328
    --Olympian Zeus, 68;
    Parthenon Athena, 68, 123

  Picart, B., 1673-1733, French
    --The Burning Coal, 262

  Piero di Cosimo (Piero Rosselli or Piero di Lorenzo), 1462-1521,
          Italian [Florentine], 322
    --Marsyas and the Pipes of Athena, 124, 225, 331;
    Death of Procris, 347;
    Mars and Cupid, 347

  Pinturicchio, B., 1454-1513, Italian [Umbrian], 332

  Pisano, Giovanni, fourteenth century, Italian
    --Madonna and Child, 101

  Pisano, Giunto, first half thirteenth century, Italian
    --Christ and the Virgin, 261

  Pisano, Niccolo, 1206 (_c._)-1278, Italian
    --Infant Christ, 108

  Pissarro, C., 1830-1903, French, 286

  Polidoro da Caravaggio (Polidoro Caldara), died 1543,
          Italian [Neapolitan], 169

  Pollaiuolo, Antonio (A. di Jacopo Benci), 1429-1498,
          Italian [Florentine], 327
    --Hercules contemplating death, 190, Plate 16, 343

  Polyclitus, fifth century B.C., Greek
    --Hera, 120

  Polygnotus, fifth century B.C., Greek
    --Frescoes from Homer, 69

  Pontormo (Jacopo Carrucci), 1493-1558, Italian [Florentine], 142
    --Venus Reposing, 117

  Potter, Paul, 1625-1654, Dutch, 203, 245

  Poussin, Gaspar (Gaspar Dughet), 1613-1675, French, 195

  Poussin, Nicholas, 1594-1665, French, 16, 30, 47, 163, 195
    --Jonah cast into the sea, 210;
    Assumption of the Virgin, 267;
    St. Francis Xavier, 261;
    Vision of St. Paul, 267;
    Venus Reposing, 117;
    Adam and Eve, 265;
    Diana Sleeps in the Forest, 345;
    Descent from the Cross, 168

  Poynter, E. J., 1836-, British
    --Building the Treasure City, 253

  Praxiteles, fourth century B.C., Greek, 7, 10, 13, 44, 136, 328
    --The Cnidian Aphrodite, 112, 329;
    Hermes and the Infant Bacchus, 101, 109, 129

  Prevost, Jean, died 1529, French
    --Old Man and Death, 186

  Prudhon, P. P. 1758-1823, French
    --Crucifixion, 170;
    Abduction of Psyche, 266


R

  Raeburn, Henry, 1756-1823, British, 161
    --The Farmer's Wife, 174;
    Mrs. Lauzun, 174;
    Mrs. Balfour, 174;
    Dr. N. Spens, 166

  Raphael (Raffaello Sanzio), 1473-1520,
          Italian [Umbrian, Florentine, Roman], 7, 10, 13, 16, 18, 28,
          43, 57, 69, 92, 108, 125, 137, 142, 167, 229, 283
    --God Appearing to Isaac, 261;
    God Separating Water from Earth, 261;
    Creation of the Sun and Moon, 261;
    Transfiguration, 251;
    Julius II., 40, 151, 289;
    School of Athens, 144;
    Parnassus, 125;
    Prophets and Sybils, 243, 263;
    Foligna Madonna, 263;
    Creation of Woman, 263;
    Maddalena Doni, 242;
    Angelo Doni, 242;
    Study from Mona Lisa, 242;
    The Redeemer, 243;
    Madonna and Child (Bridgewater), 102;
    Madonna and Child with St. John (Berlin), 102;
    Holy Family (Madrid), Deliverance of St. Peter, 251;
    Fire at the Borgo, 251;
    Flight of Lot and his Family, 251;
    Crucifixion, 347;
    Moses Striking the Rock, 251;
    Saint Cecilia, 176;
    Saint Sebastian, 243;
    Venus Anadyomene, 113;
    Christ Blessing, 93;
    Casa Tempi Madonna, 173;
    Cowper Madonna, 173;
    Leo N. and the Cardinals Medici, 157;
    Fornarina, 173;
    Portrait of a Young Man, 173;
    Mercury and Psyche, 129;
    St. Margaret, 250, Plate 26;
    Annunciation, 354;
    Apollo and Marsyas, 125, 332, 345;
    Virgin with a Goldfinch, 173, 345;
    Sistine Madonna, 230

  Ravestyn, Jan van, 1572-1657, Dutch, 158

  Redon, O., died 1917, French
    --Death, the Friend, 188

  Regnault, H., 1843-1871, French
    --Automedon and the Horses of Achilles, 256, Plate 28

  Rembrandt van Ryn, H., 1606-1669, Dutch, 20, 21, 152, 160, 283, 289
    --Rembrandt and Saskia, 177;
    Angel quitting Tobias, 263;
    Lesson in Anatomy, 185;
    Lady with a Dog, 281;
    Ascension of Christ, 266, 267;
    Night Watch, 21;
    Syndics of the Drapers, 281;
    Portrait Young Man (Beit Coll.), 281;
    do. (Wachtmeister Coll.), 281;
    Martin Day, 150;
    Machteld von Doorn, 150;
    Samson menacing his father-in-law, 248

  Reni, Guido, 1575-1642, Italian
    --Assumption of the Virgin, 268

  Rethel, A., 1816-1859, German
    --Death at a Masked Ball, 187;
    Death the Friend, 188

  Reynolds, Joshua, 1723-1792, British, 142, 154, 160, 224, 282, 350
    --The Infant Hercules, 176;
    Mrs. Siddons as Tragedy, 161;
    Mrs. Billington as Cecilia, 161;
    Hon. Lavinia Bingham, 174;
    Mrs. Abington, 174;
    Viscountess Crosbie, 166

  Riccio (Andrea Briosco), 1470-1532, Italian, 323, 326

  Ribera, Giuseppe, 1593-1656, Italian, 17

  Rigaud, H., 1659-1743, French, 163
    --Louis XV. as a boy, 173

  Robbia, Luca della, 1400-1482, Italian, 325

  Robbia, Andrea della 1435-1525, Italian, 104

  Roberts, David, 1796-1864, British
    --The Israelites depart, 257

  Rodin, A., 1840-1917, French, 249, 351
    --La Vieille Heaulmière, 317

  Roll, A. P., 1847-, French, 271

  Romano, Giulio (G. Pippi), 1492-1546, Italian [Roman]
    --Holy Family, 104

  Romney, George, 1734-1802, British, 142, 161, 164
    --Lady Hamilton as a Bacchante, 174;
    William Booth, 174;
    Mrs. Thomas Raikes, 165;
    The Ladies Spencer, 166;
    Mrs. Yates, 174;
    Mrs. Tickle, 174

  Rosa, Salvator, 1615-1673, Italian, 32
    --Samuel's Curse, 179

  Rosalba (Rosalba Carriera), 1675-1757, Italian, 164

  Roslin, A., 1718-1793, French, 173.

  Rossellino, Antonio, 1429-1479, Italian, 104

  Rossetti, D. G., 1828-1882, British
    --Annunciation, 270

  Rubens, P. P., 1577-1640, Flemish, 16, 20, 30, 46, 152, 226, 283
    --Assumption of the Virgin (Dusseldorf), 266;
    do. (Vienna), 266;
    do. (Augsburg), 266;
    do. (Brussels), 266;
    Ascension (Vienna), 267;
    do (Venice), 268;
    Deity and Christ, 266;
    Diana and Nymphs, 254, Plate 27;
    Harvest Landscape (Munich), 211;
    do. (Wallace Coll.), 211;
    Virgin and Child (Rome), 262;
    Birth of Venus, 115;
    Landscape with a Rainbow, 211;
    Shipwreck of Æneas, 211;
    Annunciation (Vienna), 355;
    Landscape with Baucis and Philemon, 210;
    Funeral of Decius, 188;
    Boreas and Oreithyia, 260;
    Landscape by Moonlight, 209;
    Toilet of Venus, 118;
    Christ on the Cross, 244;
    Death of Seneca, 190;
    The Four Philosophers, 157;
    David's Last Song, 176;
    Marie de' Medici series, 226

  Rude, François, 1794-1855, French
    --Marshal Ney, 351;
    Marseillaise, 254

  Ruysdael, Jacob, 1628 (_c._)-1682, Dutch, 49, 203, 208
    --The Rising Storm, 206, Plate 20;
    Landscape with flowing water, 204, Plate 19;
    The Marsh, 203


S

  Sacchi, Andrea, 1600-1661, Italian, 164

  Saint-Bonvin, F., 1817-1887, French
    --Ave Maria, 353

  Saint-Gaudens, A., 1848-1907, American
    --Shaw Memorial Relief, 254

  Salviati, F. (Francesco de Rossi), 1510-1563, Italian [Florentine]
    --Justice, 179

  Sansovino (Jacopo Tatti), 1486-1570, Italian, 323

  Sarto, Andrea del (Andrea Agnolo), 1488-1530,
          Italian [Florentine], 142
    --Holy Family (Hermitage), 104

  Sassoferrato (Giovanni Battisto Salvi), 1605-1685, Italian, 164

  Scheffer, Ary, 1795-1858, Dutch
    --Temptation of Christ, 178

  Schiavone, Andrea, 1462-1522, Italian [Venetian]
    --Jupiter and Io, 348

  Schnorr, J. von K., 1794-1872, German
    --God's Promise to Abraham, 269

  Schongauer, Martin, (_c._) 1445-1491, German, 45

  Schonherr, C., nineteenth century, German
    --Agony in the Garden, 265

  Schreyer, Adolf, 1828-1899, German
    --The Attack, 257

  Schwind, M., 1804-1871, Austrian
    --The Pleiads, 269, Plate 25;
    Rainbow, 212;
    Phantom in the Forest, 270

  Scopas, fourth century B.C., Greek, 10
    --Demeter, 122, Plate 7

  Sebastiano del Piombo (Sebastiano Luciani), 1485-1547,
          Italian [Venetian]
    --Concert, 181

  Signorelli, Luca, 1440 (_c._)-1521, Italian [Umbrian], 191
    --Portrait of a Man, 182;
    Madonna and Child, 103, 264

  Simson, William, 1800-1847, British, 245

  Snyders, Frans, 1579-1677, Flemish, 216, 257

  Sodoma, Il, (Giovanni A. Bazzi), 1477-1549, Italian [Siamese]
    --Sacrifice of Abraham, 244

  Steen, Jan, 1629-1679, Dutch
    --Terrace Scene, 245


T

  Tassaert, O., 1800-1874, French, 17
    --Assumption of the Virgin, 266

  Teniers, David, 1610-1690, Dutch, 90

  Terburg (or Terborch), Gerard, 1617-1681, Dutch, 46
    --Peace of Munster, 158

  Thoma, Hans, 1839-, German
    --Temptation of Christ, 187;
    Cupid and Death, 178;
    Sin and Death, 187;
    Progress of the gods to Walhalla, 212;
    Rainbow, 211;
    View of Laufenburg, 204

  Thomson, John, 1778-1840, British
    --Fast Castle, 207;
    Dunluce Castle, 207

  Tiepolo, G. B., 1692-1769, Italian, 31

  Timanthes, fourth century B.C., Greek
    --Sacrifice of Iphigenia, 168, Plate 14, 339

  Tintoretto (Jacopo Robusti), 1518-1594, Italian [Venetian], 261
    --Bacchus and Ariadne, 270;
    Annunciation, 354;
    Presentation of the Virgin, 243

  Titian (Titiano Vecelli), 1477-1576,
          Italian [Venetian], 13, 40, 108, 148, 152, 283, 336, 350
    --Assumption of the Virgin, 266;
    Sacred and Profane Love, 138, 181;
    Resurrection, 264;
    Madonna of the Cherries, 102;
    Meeting of Joachim and Anna, 102;
    Three Ages of Man, 179;
    Madonna with SS. Anthony and John, 104, 348;
    Jacopo Pesaro presented to St. Peter, 347;
    Paul III. with the two Brothers Farnese, 157, 164;
    Reposing Venus (Uffizi), 116;
    Venus Anadyomene, 115;
    Aretino, 144;
    Man with the Gloves, 151;
    Duke of Alba, 144;
    portraits of Philip II., 144;
    Charles V. at Mühlberg, 149, 347;
    portraits of his Daughter, 149;
    Duke of Ferrara, 149;
    Physician of Parma, 336;
    Toilet of Venus, 118;
    Christ on the Cross, 244;
    Pharaoh's Host overwhelmed, 257;
    self-portrait, 149;
    Venus and the Organ Player, 166

  Turner, J. M. W., 1775-1851, British, 16, 17, 201
    --Arundel Castle, 210;
    The _Temeraire_ towed to her last berth, 353


U

  Uhde, Fritz von, 1848-, German, 321
    --Cavalry going into action, 257;
    Revenge, 187;
    The Three Magi, 104


V

  Van der Neer, A., 1619-1683, Dutch, 208

  Van de Velde, W., 1633-1707, Dutch, 46

  Van der Venne, A. P., 1589-1661, Dutch
    --The Soul Fishery, 211

  Van der Weyden, Roger, 1400 (_c._)-1464, Flemish, 93, 170

  Van Dyck, Anthony, 1599-1641, Flemish, 142, 148, 157, 216
    --Four Ages, 180;
    Christ on the Cross, 244, Plate 22;
    Earl of Pembroke, 165;
    Earl of Bedford, 150;
    Philip le Roy, 165;
    Henrietta Maria (Windsor), 150;
    portrait of his Wife, 166;
    Earl of Newport, 150;
    Countess of Devonshire, 165

  Van Eyck, Jan, 1385 (_c._)-1441, Flemish, 283
    --Virgin and Child at the Fountain, 263;
    Arnolfini and his Wife, 40;
    Chancellor Rollin before the Virgin, 347

  Van Gogh, V., 1853-1890, Dutch, 37, 288

  Velasquez, D. R. de Silva, 1599-1660, Spanish, 152 _et seq._, 283
    --Christ at the Column, 246;
    Las Meninas, 155, 247;
    Coronation of the Virgin, 266;
    The Drinkers, 182;
    The Three Musicians, 175;
    The Breakfast, 155;
    portraits of Philip IV., 153;
    Olivares, 149;
    Innocent X., 151;
    Don Antonio el Ingles, 149;
    Rokeby Venus, 119;
    Surrender of Breda, 155;
    Christ in the house of Martha, 155

  Venusti, Marcello, died after 1579, Italian [Florentine]
    --Annunciation, 354

  Verestchagin, V., 1842-1904, Russian, 184

  Vermeer, Jan (of Delft), 1632-1675, Dutch, 20

  Vernet, E. J. Horace, 1789-1863, French
    --La Smalah, 256

  Veronese, Paolo (Paolo Caliari), 1528-1588,
          Italian [Venetian], 231, 286, 350

  Verrocchio, Andrea del, 1435-1488, Italian, 325

  Viti, Timoteo della, 1470-1523, Italian [Umbrian], 332, 345


W

  Walker, Horatio, 1858-, American
    --Ave Maria, 353

  Watteau, Antoine, 1684-1721, French, 278, 283
    --Embarkation for Cythera (Paris), 254;
    do. (Berlin), 269

  Watts, George F., 1817-1904, British
    --Death, the Friend, 188, 191

  West, Benjamin, 1738-1820, American
    --Death of General Wolfe, 190

  Whistler, J. A. McN., 1834-1903, American, 50, 349

  Wiertz, A., 1806-1865, Belgian
    --The Orphans, 189;
    Things of the Past, 226

  Wilson, Richard, 1714-1782, British, 48

  Witt, J. H., 1840-1901, American
    --Bless the Lord, 262

  Wouverman, Philip, 1614-1670, Dutch, 203, 245


Z

  Zurbaran, Francisco, 1598-1662, Spanish, 19




GENERAL INDEX


A

  Actors in stage rôles, portraits of, 223

  Aerial perspective, Claude the first master of, 47;
    its importance, 198;
    method of producing, 200

  Æsthetic systems, all of them untenable, 3, 274;
    Carritt on, 274;
    of Hegel, 277;
    of Croce, 273

  Ages of man, pictures contrasting the, 179

  Allegorical painting, when secondary art, 225

  Angel of Death in art, instances of, 191;
    symbol of, 188

  Angels, representation of, in aerial suspension and flight, 262, 266

  Animal painting, in action, 255;
    ideals in, not possible, 56

  Annunciation, The, indication of surprise in expression, 270, 354

  Apelles, his Venus Anadyomene, 113, 330;
    epigrams on, 331

  Aphrodite (_see_ Venus)

  Apollo, his representation in art, 124

  Architecture, its position in the Fine Arts, 53;
    imitative character of, 53, 294;
    unconcerned with ideals, 58;
    produces sensorial beauty only, 64;
    simplicity its keynote, 75;
    standard of judgment in, 75;
    S. Colvin on, 292

  Ares (_see_ Mars)

  Aristotle, on imitation in art, 215, 292;
    on metrical form in poetry, 54, 296;
    his division of the painter's art, 62;
    his connection of morals with art, 314

  Art, definition of, 1;
    its mimetic character, 52;
    sensorial beauty, first aim of, 72;
    must deal chiefly with types, 55;
    independent of social and political conditions, 4;
    of psychological impulses, 8, 14;
    great periods of, 8;
    suggested evolution in, 7;
    "Classic" and "Romantic," 278;
    relation of, to nature, 55;
    popular appreciation of, 74;
    Grecian, cause of its decline, 10;
    Italian Renaissance of, cause of its decline, 11;
    limitation of sculpture and painting in, 81;
    Tolstoy's definition of, 275;
    ideals in (_see_ The Ideal in Art)

  Artemis (_see_ Diana)

  Artists, training necessary for, 25;
    cause of variation in work of, 20;
    reputations of great, 283;
    as judges of works of art, 305

  Arts (_see_ Fine Arts)

  Assent, Law of General, 72 _et seq._

  Associated Arts, the arts associated, 53;
    first law of the, 60;
    highest art in, recognized by general opinion, 77;
    ideals in, 58;
    cannot properly be used for moral or social purposes, 82;
    their method of producing beauty, 78 _et seq._;
    limitations of, 80

  Athena, her representation in art, 123

  Atmospheric effects, limitations in producing, 202;
    exceptional phases, 202


B

  Bacchus, his representation in art, 131

  Barbizon School, anticipated by Dutch masters, 291;
    sketches of the, of little importance, 290;
    use of heavy gilt frames for works of the, 291

  Beauty, definitions of, unsatisfactory, 2, 59;
    alleged objectivity of, 2;
    highest form of, 72;
    unconnected with philosophy, 2;
    first law of, in the Associated Arts, 60;
    ideal, 86;
    kinds of, in the arts, 4, 60, 273;
    degrees of, in the arts generally, 60, in painting, 83;
    sensorial (or emotional), 60, 72;
    intellectual (or beauty of expression), 2, 273;
    of form, 273;
    of color, 228 _et seq._;
    methods of producing, 78;
    as the "expression of emotion," 275;
    Longinus on the highest, 73;
    standard of judgment of, in poetry, 77,
      in sculpture, 77,
      in painting, 77,
      in architecture, 75,
      in fiction, 77,
      in landscape, 194,
      in still-life, 214,
      in secondary art, 219 _et seq._;
    general agreement in respect of, 86

  Bon Dieu d'Amiens, Ruskin on, 319;
    Farrar on, 319;
    corresponds with certain Greek art, 319, Plate 2

  Brevity in expression, highest beauty in poetry, marked by, 65

  Broad style of painting, cause of, with great artists, 21;
    its limitations, 39;
    advocacy of, by impressionists, 38;
    as used by Rembrandt, 281;
    by Hals, 336

  Bronze statuettes of the Renaissance, 321 _et seq._

  Byron on nature and art in respect of landscape, 345


C

  Caricature, its place in art, 225

  Carritt, E. F., on the result of æsthetic systems, 275

  Cave men, their art, 5

  Ceres (_see_ Demeter)

  Chaldean Art, Illustration of, Plate 1

  Character of Artists, influence of, in their work, 16

  Cherubs, use of, in assisting illusion of suspension in the air, 265

  Christ, representation in art, 92;
    the established ideal, 92;
    Ruskin on the best ideal of, 319

  Christian conception of the Deity, its effect in art, 88

  "Classic Art," Hegel's definition, 277;
    varied meanings of the term, 278

  Claude Lorraine, the first great landscape painter, 47;
    the cause of his success, 16;
    Goethe on, 49;
    the model for Turner, 49

  Clausen, G., his definition of Impressionism, 284;
    on Whistler's nocturnes, 349

  Clouds, use of, in relation to air-suspended figures, 263

  Coast views, illusion of motion in, 206

  Color, beauty of, 228 _et seq._;
    its relative importance, 228;
    in landscape, 194;
    juxtaposition of pure colors, 35, 287;
    by Venetian artists, 231, 350;
    exceptional color effects, 234;
    its use by impressionists, 34 _et seq._

  Colvin, S., claims music and architecture as non-imitative arts, 292

  Comedy, its place in the painter's art, 224

  Contentment, quality of expression in the Madonna, 97;
    in Venus, 119

  Contrast, its use in composition, 177;
    of forms, 177;
    of ages, 179;
    of beauty and strength, 177;
    of Good and Evil, 178;
    of Poverty and Wealth, 178;
    of Vice and Virtue, 178;
    of nude and clothed figures, 180

  Correggio, and the sublime, 229

  Criticism, the new, 29

  Croce, B., his æsthetic system, 273;
    on genius, 282


D

  Darwin, C., on the result of nerve exercise, 281;
    on natural music, 293

  Death, representation of, 183 _et seq._;
    in the Crucifixion, 184;
    typified by a skeleton, 186;
    in massacres and executions, 184;
    in interior scenes, 190;
    funeral scenes, 188;
    scenes of approaching, 190;
    Angel of, 188

  Decorative art, imitation in, 218

  Deformity in art, 89

  Deity, the, representation of, 92;
    ideals of, 91

  Demeter, representation of, 121, Plate 7

  Demosthenes, example of his art, 300

  De Quincey, T., on the representation of progressive actions, 348

  Descriptive poetry, its limits, 79;
    in the seventeenth century, 308;
    example from Sophocles, 310,
      from Cornelius Gallus, 309

  Diana, representation of, 126

  Dignity, in portraiture, 146;
    practice of Titian, 148;
    of Van Dyck, 148;
    of Velasquez, 149

  Dionysus (_see_ Bacchus)

  Drama, The, pictures from the written, 221;
    from the acted, 222;
    importance of tragedy in painting, 221

  Drapery, with use of in sculpture,
    proportions possible which are not feasible in nude figures, 328;
    use of, in painting by Raphael, 251, 352;
    for assisting illusions, 260

  Dutch painters of the seventeenth century,
    their limited imaginations, 19


E

  Eaton, D. C., on the origin of impressionism, 286

  Egyptian art, its early high development, 7, Plate 1

  Emotional element in beauty (_see_ Beauty)

  Emotions, The, influence of, in the work of artists, 16;
    expression of, in relation to beauty, 275

  Evolution, not applicable to art generally, 7;
    Spencer on, 276;
    Symonds on, 276

  Execution in painting, must be balanced with imagination, 18;
    of Hals, 155;
    of Lionardo, 18;
    of Rembrandt, 19;
    of Velasquez, 153

  Expression, in ideals generally, 86;
    in Christian ideals, 91 _et seq._;
    in classical ideals, 106 _et seq._;
    in portraiture, 141 _et seq._;
    in the representation of grief, 168;
    with the smile, 171;
    the open mouth, 174;
    in the exhibition of deformity, 89;
    in scenes of death, 183;
    of Raphael, 339;
    of Rembrandt, 42;
    of the fourteenth century Italian painters, 279;
    of the thirteenth century French sculptors, 315;
    in the literary arts, 65 _et seq._


F

  Falconet, E., on the representation of grief, 169

  Farrar, Dean, on the ideal of Christ, 319;
    on the early Italian painters, 279

  Fiction, as a fine art, 4, 52;
    one of the Associated Arts, 53;
    imitation in, 52;
    forms of, 69;
    basic and structural in character, 81;
    standard of judgment in, 73;
    in relation to sensorial beauty, 79;
    unconcerned with ideals, 58
    (_see also_ Novel)

  Fine Arts, imitative in character, 52;
    classified according to their signs, 53;
    their methods of producing beauty, 78;
    standards of judgment in the, 77

  Fireworks, unsuitable for the painter, 212

  Flight, representation of
    (_see_ Illusion of suspension and motion in the air)

  Flowers, their representation in still-life, 216;
    in decorative art, 217

  Foreground in landscape, illusion of opening distance in, 202

  Form, beauty of, 273;
    ideal, 86

  Frames of pictures, their use in Barbizon works, 291;
    exclusion of, in artificial means to secure relief, 240

  French sculptors of the thirteenth century,
    their forms in the Greek manner, 315;
    their representation of the Virgin and Child, 101, 315

  Frescoes, necessarily divided into sections, 69;
    Reynolds on Raphael's, 303

  Funeral scenes in art, 188


G

  General opinion, standard of judgment in all arts except music, 73, 77

  Genius, how produced, 21 _et seq._;
    Reynolds on, 282;
    Johnson on, 282;
    Hogarth on, 282

  Geology, study of, may be assisted by landscape painting, 315

  Gods, Mythological (_see_ Grecian, under their separate headings);
    Roman, 328

  Grace, inferior as a special quality in portraiture, 164;
    as applied in Greece and Rome, 162;
    in sixteenth century art, 163;
    in seventeenth century art, 163;
    in England in the eighteenth century, 164;
    in France, 163;
    kinds of, 338

  Grandeur, highest quality of beauty in architecture, 75;
    practically impossible in landscape, 193;
    in portraiture, 160;
    in Van Dyck's works, 160;
    in Gainsborough's works, 160

  Grecian art, cause of its decline, 10;
    development of, compared with that of the Renaissance, 10 _et seq._

  Grecian sculpture, its high place in art, 106;
    ideals in, 88, 95;
    representation of adults with children in, 100;
    studied by the great masters of the Renaissance, 108;
    in portraiture, 145


H

  Hals, Franz, his facility, 155;
    his limited imagination, 155;
    his broad manner, 336;
    the works of pupils attributed to him, 337

  Hegel, G. W., his "periods" in art, 277

  Hephæstus (_see_ Vulcan)

  Hera (_see_ Juno)

  Hercules, his representation as contemplating death, 190

  Hermes (_see_ Mercury)

  Historical painting, its place in art, 83

  Hogarth, W., on genius, 282

  Holmes, C. J., on the framing of Barbizon pictures, 291

  Homer, example of his art, 65

  Hood, T., his moods and his work, 17

  Horses, representation in action, 255

  Human figure, principal sign in the Associated Arts, 53, 73;
    produces highest form of beauty, 72;
    general ideal of, 86;
    Greek ideals, 106

  Humboldt, A., on the position of landscape in art, 344

  Humorous subjects, their place in the painter's art, 224

  Hyperides, example of his art, 300


I

  Ideal in art, The, only possible in respect of the human form, 57, 87;
    inapplicable to form without expression, 86;
    definition of, 86;
    must be general, 86;
    general agreement in respect of, 87;
    can only be applied to excellence, 89;
    limitation of, 56;
    ideals of the Greeks, 89, 91,
      of the early Italians, 94,
      of the thirteenth century French sculptors, 315,
      of the Deity, 88, 91,
      of Christ, 92, 94,
      of the Madonna, 95,
      of Zeus, 88,
      of the other Grecian deities, 89,
      of Phidias, 10,
      of Raphael, 97, 137,
      of Praxiteles, 10,
      in, of Michelangelo, 320;
    general ideals, 135;
    universality of, 138, 315;
    ideal qualities, 89

  Illusion of continuity, in death scenes, 189

  Illusion of movement, in landscape, 197;
    in sea views, 205;
    in coast views, 206;
    in sculpture, 249, 351;
    in figure painting, 250 _et seq._;
    in animal painting, 255 _et seq._;
    may be suggested by title of work, 257

  Illusion of opening distance, in distance landscape, 197;
    in nearground work, 203;
    in sea views, 205

  Illusion of relief, its value in painting, 236;
    mechanical methods of producing, 240

  Illusion of suspension and motion in the air, with the assistance
    of flowing drapery, 260;
    of clouds, 263;
    of cherubs, 265;
    of Angels, 266;
    of smoke, 268

  Imagination, The,
    influence of precocious, in the production of genius, 23;
    must be balanced with skill in execution, 18;
    of Lionardo, 18;
    of the Dutch painters, 19;
    of the Spanish painters, 19;
    of Shakespeare, 23, 24

  Imitation, the province of art, 52;
    should be generalized, 237;
      in landscape, 194,
      in still-life, 214,
      in decorative art, 218,
      in architecture, 294,
      in music, 293;
    of other arts by the painter, 221 _et seq._;
    Aristotle on, 215;
    S. Colvin on, in respect of the fine arts, 292

  Impressionism, definitions of, 25, 284 _et seq._;
    its origin, 285 _et seq._;
    its influence, 38;
    its limitations, 35;
    its defects, 34 _et seq._;
    its effects, 51;
    its correspondence with Sprezzatura, 32

  Industry, the key to success in art, 24, 282

  Inspiration in art, not recognized by great artists, 16;
    actual instances of, unknown, 15;
    suggested national, 9 _et seq._;
    individual, 14

  Interiors, pictures of, their place in art, 84

  Invention in art, its relative importance, 54;
    in poetry, 54;
    in painting, 312;
    Lessing on, in poetry and painting, 312;
    in landscape, 193;
    the term used in two senses, 311

  Irony, works conveying, unsuitable for the painter, 224

  Italy, Art of, decline of the Renaissance, 11 _et seq._;
    in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, 30 _et seq._;
    Renaissance ideals, 12


J

  Japanese, their practice in decoration, 217

  Johnson, Dr., on genius, 282

  Juno, representation of, by the painter, 120

  Jupiter, Greek representation of, 88, 89;
    ideal of, 89, 91;
    by the painter, 109


L

  Landscape painting, its place in art, 48, 84;
    produces only sensorial beauty, 192;
    Humboldt on, 344;
    signs in, 199;
    disadvantages of, 44;
    limitations in, 192 _et seq._, 348;
    varieties of, 49;
    relative difficulty of execution in, 48;
    compositions must be invented, 194;
    illusion of motion in, 197 _et seq._;
    precise imitation necessary in, 194;
    as a useful art, 314;
    early development of, 46,
      in ancient Rome, 45,
      in Italy, 47,
      in Holland, 46,
      in England and France, 48

  Lanzi, A. L., on the range of Raphael in expression, 339

  La Touche, G., on the origin of impressionism, 286

  Latour, Fantin, and the origin of impressionism, 285

  Laugh, a, when unobjectionable in painting, 177

  Lessing, G., on progressive actions, 348;
    on the relative importance of invention and execution, 312;
    on the representation of grief, 169;
    on descriptive poetry, 309;
    on signs in art, 346;
    on Homer and the beauty of Helen, 298;
    on the Laocoon design, 311;
    on the dictum of Simonides, 307;
    on ugliness in poetry and painting, 341

  Lewes, G. H., on the execution of signs in art, 346

  Lightning, its use in landscape, 209;
    must be subordinated, 209;
    where used in painting by great masters, 210

  Lionardo da Vinci, his imagination compared with his execution, 18;
    his relief, 239;
    on success in painting, 16;
    his representation of Christ, 93

  Literary arts,
    the painter must take his action from them or from nature direct, 81
    (_see_ Poetry and The Novel).

  Literary movement in England in the sixteenth century, 278

  Longinus, on the test of the sublime and beautiful, 73;
    on certain examples of beauty in the literary arts, 300

  Luini, A., On an "impressionist" landscape by Titian, 288


M

  MacColl, D. S., on the origin of impressionism, 284

  Madonna, The, her representation,
      the test of art during the Renaissance, 12,
      by Cimabue and Giotto, 95,
      in Crucifixion scenes, 99;
    her surroundings in art, 99,
      her representation at different ages, 98,
      Michelangelo on her presumed age, 320;
    her presumed social condition, 100;
    the ideal of the early Italian, 12, 95,
      of Raphael, 97,
      Michelangelo's portrayals of, 320;
    limitations in the ideal of, 98

  Madonna and Child,
    representation of, by thirteenth century French sculptors, 101, 315;
    in Italy, 101;
    changes in grouping of, in the fifteenth century, 101;
    practice of later artists, 102 _et seq._

  Manner in painting, its limitations, 39;
    the public indifferent to, 39;
    of Rembrandt, 21;
    of Hals, 336

  Manet, E., his connection with the rise of impressionism, 287

  Marine painting (_see_ Sea views)

  Mars, representation of, in painting, 128

  Mauclair, C., on impressionism, 285

  Mengs, A. R., on Raphael's treatment of drapery, 352

  Mercury, his representation in painting, 129

  Metaphor, with the poet, 65, 227, 296;
    with the painter, 226

  Michelangelo, and the sublime, 229;
    his studies in Greek art, 108;
    Reynolds on, 282;
    his ideals of the Madonna, 320;
    on her presumed age at the Crucifixion, 320;
    on the cause of Raphael's success, 16;
    on the public judgment of works of art, 304;
    on the Venetian painters, 350

  Miller, Marion M., his translation of Sappho's Hymn to Aphrodite, 302

  Minerva (_see_ Athena)

  Modesty, quality in expression unsuitable to a goddess, 119

  Mona Lisa, the Louvre example, 151, 172;
    the Boston example, 172;
    her reputed age in the picture, 240;
    her smile, 341

  Mood, influence of, in the work of artists, 17

  Moonlight scenes, their place in art, 208

  Morals, pictures illustrating, their place in art, 85

  Moreau-Vautier, C., on the juxtaposition of pure colors, 287

  Music,
    highest beauty in, produced by complex combinations of signs, 73;
    greatest works in, the least popular, 75;
    ideals not possible in, 58;
    cannot present intellectual beauty, 64;
    standard of judgment in, 305;
    cannot be connected with painting, 285;
    its connection with poetry, 54, 76;
    imitative character of, 53, 293;
    claimed by Colvin as non-imitative, 292;
    Darwin on natural, 293

  Muther, R., on the origin of Impressionism, 287

  Mystery in painting, indicates inferior art, 341

  Mythological subjects, their place in painting, 83, 133


N

  Nature, relation of, to art, 57;
    and landscape, Byron on, 345

  Near-ground painting in landscape, 202

  Neptune, his representation in painting, 127

  Nerves of the senses,
    their advanced condition at birth cause of precocity in art, 21;
    alike in all people, 86;
    connection of genius with development of, 22;
    physiological changes in, 22, 72;
    Darwin on the, 281

  Night, should be symbolized in painting, 350;
    Whistler attempts to represent beauty of, 349

  Nocturnes, origin of Whistler's, 349

  Norwich school of painting, 48

  Novel, the, compared with the short story, 70;
    limit of, 71;
    of little service to the painter, 221 (_see_ Fiction)

  Nude with clothed figures, contrasts of, 180


O

  Objectivity of beauty, 2

  Open Mouth, The, 174;
    when not objectionable, 177


P

  Painter, the, his requirements, 25

  Painting, imitative character of, 52;
    degrees of beauty in, 83;
    compared with sculpture, 135;
    its relation to poetry, 307;
    general ideals in, 86 _et seq._;
    classical ideals in, 106 _et seq._;
    Christian ideals in, 91 _et seq._;
    action cannot be originated in, 81;
    great, marked by simplicity, 69;
    standard of judgment in, 73;
    general expression in, 167;
    relation of invention to execution in, 312;
    broad manner of, 39;
    of divinities, 109;
    of classical scenes, 133;
    of humorous subjects, 224;
    of contrasts, 177 _et seq._;
    of scenes from fiction, 221,
      from the written drama, 221,
      from the acted drama, 222;
    of portraits in character, 222;
    of ugliness, 341;
    deformity in, 178;
    representation of death in, 183;
    portrait, 141 _et seq._;
    landscape, 192 _et seq._;
    of moonlight scenes, 208;
    of still-life, 214;
    secondary art of, 85, 219;
    metaphor in, 226;
    color in, 228 _et seq._;
    impressionist, 25;
    of events in time, 219;
    symbolical, 227;
    Barbizon school of, 290;
    quality of grace in, 161,
      of contentment, 97,
      of modesty in respect of goddesses, 119;
    illusion of relief in, 239 _et seq._;
    illusion of movement in, 249,
      in animal action, 255,
      of opening distance, 197,
      of suspension in the air, 259,
      in representation of progressive actions, 204,
      of continuity, 189,
      assisted by title, 257;
    portraiture, 141 _et seq._

  Pastoral occupations, pictures representing, 84

  Periods of art, not attributable to national æsthetic stimulus, 8;
    Hegel's, 277

  Phidias, his exalted position in art, 10;
    his ideals, 91

  Philips, A., his translation of Sappho's Ode to Anactoria, 301

  Philosophy, art not specially related to, 2

  Pythian, F., on the origin of impressionism, 286

  Poe, Edgar A., on sadness and beauty, 280

  Poetry, the highest art, 81;
    its imitative scope, 52;
    not primarily a combined art, 55;
    value of metrical form in, 54;
    its association with music, 76;
    its relation to painting, 307;
    cannot depict sensorial beauty by description, 79;
    descriptive, 309;
    in relation to human beauty, 79,
      to natural beauty, 79;
    basic and structural in character, 81;
    its range unlimited, 81;
    ugliness in, 341;
    standard of judgment in, 73, 76;
    Watts-Dunton's definition of, 296;
    translations of, 297

  Pompeian Frescoes, 45, 162, 169, 170, 171, 261, 344

  Popular appreciation of art, 73 _et seq._, 306;
    Tolstoy on, 307

  Portraiture, its position in art, 141;
    variation in work of portraitists, 141;
    generalization, 143;
    added qualities in, 148;
    quality of dignity in, 146;
    quality of nobility in, 161;
    action in, 164;
    use of the smile in, 171;
    of stage characters, 223;
    in ancient Greece, 145, 162;
    in ancient Rome, 145;
    of women, 158;
    of Raphael, 151;
    of Titian, 148;
    of Moro, 159;
    of Van Dyck, 150;
    of Rembrandt, 150;
    of Velasquez, 149, 152;
    of Hals, 155;
    of Reynolds, 160;
    of Gainsborough, 160;
    of Romney, 161;
    effects of fashion in, 159;
    quality of grace in, 161;
    limitations in, 141, 143;
    decoration in, should be subordinated, 156;
    multiple portraits, 156

  Poseidon (_see_ Neptune)

  Praxiteles, his development of new ideals, 111;
    his Cnidian Aphrodite, 111

  Precocity in art, cause of, 22

  Progressive actions, in figure subjects, 254;
      in sea views, 204;
      in coast scenes, 206;
      in landscape, 203;
    Lessing on, 348;
    De Quincey on, 349

  Psychological influence in art conceptions, alleged, 14


Q

  Quintilian: on the Sacrifice of Iphigenia, by Timanthes, 340


R

  Rainbow, its use in landscape, 210 _et seq._

  Raphael, and the sublime, 229;
    his superiority the cause of the decline of the Renaissance, 11;
    his achievement in the ideal Madonna, 12 _et seq._, 140;
    the composition of his ideal, 97;
    his range in expression, 167;
    Lanzi on, 339;
    his representation of movement, 250;
    his portraiture, 151;
    his drapery arrangements, 250;
    his representation of suspension in the air, 261;
    his study of ancient art, 108;
    his fresco work, 69;
    Michelangelo on, 16;
    his trees, 345

  Recognition, Law of, explanation of, 57;
    examples of, 65 _et seq._;
    music and architecture excluded from the, 64;
    division of the arts in applying, 62

  Relief (_see_ "Illusion of Relief")

  Rembrandt, his imagination compared with his execution, 20;
    cause of variation in his work, 21;
    his simplicity, 150;
    his broad work, 289;
    his use of color, 152;
    his position in art, 44;
    his representation of character, 42;
    suggested as impressionist, 41, 290;
    compared with the idealists, 43;
    his palette-knife pictures, 281;
    classification of his portraits, 281

  Renaissance (_see_ Italy, Art of)

  Repose, in portraiture, 164;
    in the representation of Venus, 116

  Reynolds, Joshua, his high position in portraiture, 160;
    on color, 350;
    on the representation of grief, 169;
    on the cause of excellence in painting, 282;
    on genius in art, 282;
    nobility in his portraits, 160;
    as a painter of women, 161;
    on the work of Raphael, 303;
    on Michelangelo, 282;
    on the early Italian painters, 280;
    on the Venetian painters, 350;
    his portraits of actors in character, 224;
    his use of the smile, 174

  Rodin, A., on the suggestion of movement in sculpture, 249, 351;
    on ugliness in art, 317;
    his La Vieille Heaulmière, 317;
    on Greek ideals, 319

  Romans, The ancient, had no separate sacred art, 328

  "Romantic Art," its various meanings, 278;
    Hegel's period of, 277

  Romney, G., the quality of grace in his portraits, 161

  Ruskin, J., on the trees of Raphael, 345;
    on the ideal of Christ, 319;
    on the position of landscape in art, 344;
    on the Italian painters of the fourteenth century, 279

  Ruysdael, Jacob, his painting of breaking water, 204, 206;
    his near-ground work, 203


S

  Sacred Art, offers highest scope for the artist, 63;
    in Greece, 91;
    in Italy, 12

  Sadness, as a quality of beauty, 280

  Saints, representation of, 104

  Sappho, her Ode to Anactoria, and the cause of its beauty, 67;
    translation of the Ode, 301;
    her Hymn to Aphrodite, 302

  Satan, representation of, 178

  Satire, works conveying, unsuited to the painter, 224

  Schopenhauer, on music as a non-imitative art, 292

  Sculpture, its imitative scope, 52;
    ideals in, 135;
    compared with painting, 135;
    importance of simplicity in, 68;
    standard of judgment in, 73;
    illusion of motion in, 249;
    Rodin on the illusion, 351;
    in ancient Greece, 106;
    in Greek and Roman portraiture, 145;
    thirteenth century French, 315

  Sea views, illusion of opening distance in, 204;
    progressive actions in, 206

  Secondary Art, its nature, 85;
    in historical work, 220;
    in actions drawn from the novelist, 221;
    from the written drama, 221;
    from the acted drama, 222;
    humorous pictures, 224;
    in allegorical and symbolical painting, 225 _et seq._

  Shakespeare, his imagination, 23;
    example of his art, 66;
    represents characters above experience, 61

  Short story, the, its essentials, 70;
    compared with the novel, 69 (_see also_ Fiction)

  Signs, of the fine arts, 56;
    separation of the arts according to character of, 53;
    the two classes of, in art, 56;
    must be completely painted, 199;
    Lewes on, 346;
    Lessing on, 346;
    suggestive, belong to the poet and not to the painter, 200

  Simonides, on the relation of poetry to painting, 307

  Simplicity, necessary in the higher forms of the Associated Arts, 71

  Skeleton, as a symbol in art, 186 _et seq._

  Smile, the, transitory, should be avoided in art, 171;
    in Raphael's work, 173;
    in Lionardo's, 172, 341;
    of the Milanese artists generally, 172;
    in portraiture, 173;
    in French portraits, 174;
    in British, 174

  Smoke, use of, in illusions of air suspension, 268

  Sophocles, example of descriptive poetry from, 310

  Spencer, Herbert, on evolution in art, 276

  Sporting pictures, their place in art, 85

  Sprezzatura, origin of, in the seventeenth century, 30 _et seq._;
    correspondence with impressionism, 32

  Stage scenes, pictures of, 222

  Still-life, its place in art, 85, 214;
    beauty in, 214;
    its varieties, 215;
    in decoration, 218;
    custom of the Japanese in, 217

  Stories, pictures illustrating, their place in art, 85, 221;
    painter of, subordinate to the writer, 221

  Sublime, The, Longinus on, 73;
    painters who have achieved, 229

  Supreme Being, final ideal of human form can only apply to, 88

  "Symbolic" period of painting, Hegel's, 277

  Symbolical painting, when secondary art, 227

  Symonds, J. A., on evolution in art, 271;
    on the Venetian artists, 350


T

  Taine, H., on music as a non-imitative art, 294

  Tanagra figures, quality of grace in, 162

  Temperament, influence of, on the work of artists, 16

  Titian, as a portrait painter, 144;
    the dignified pose in his figures, 148;
    the pose a test of his portraiture, 335;
    his impressionist landscape, 288;
    his coloring, 231;
    some doubtful attributions to, 336

  Titles of pictures, may assist in providing illusion of motion, 257;
    may add interest to a work, 352

  Tolstoy, Leo, on the meaning of "art," 275;
    on popular appreciation of art, 307

  Tragedy, only section of drama which the painter may properly use, 221

  Translations of poetry, varying values of, 297

  Trees in art, the slender trees of Raphael, 345;
    of other artists, 345

  Turner, J. M. W., secret of his success, 16

  Twilight scenes, their place in art, 208

  Types, importance of, in nature and art, 55


U

  Ugliness in art, may be used in poetry, but not in painting, 342;
    Rodin on, 317;
    Lessing on, 341;
    Waldstein on, 318

  Uncivilized races, their understanding of beauty, 333


V

  Van Dyck, A., 30;
    his portraiture, 150

  Velasquez, his place in art, 44;
    his simplicity in design, 152;
    his limited imagination, 155;
    his execution, 153;
    compared with the idealists, 43;
    his perfect balance, 43;
    claimed as an impressionist, 41, 290

  Venus, her representation in art, 110;
    Anadyomene, 114 _et seq._;
    reposing, 116;
    at her toilet, 118;
    of Phidias, 111;
    of Praxiteles, 111 _et seq._;
    of Apelles, 113;
    of Raphael, 114;
    of Michelangelo, 117;
    de' Medici, 119;
    of Titian, 115;
    of other artists, 115 _et seq._

  Verestchagin, V., his war pictures, 184

  Vinci, Lionardo da (_see_ Lionardo)

  Virgin, The (_see_ Madonna, The)

  Virtue and Vice, pictures representing, 178

  Vulcan, representation in painting, 132


W

  Waldstein, C., on ugliness in sculpture, 318

  Watts-Dunton, T., his definition of poetry, 296

  Whistler, J. McN., his nocturnes, 349

  Wings, use of, in suspended figures, 262

  Women in portraiture, during the Renaissance, 159;
    by Moro, 159;
    by Van Dyck, 159;
    by the eighteenth century British artists, 161;
    Reynolds preeminent in painting of, 160


Z

  Zeus (_see_ Jupiter)





