Chapter X.

Darwinism Considered from a Vitalistic Stand-Point.



Granting that the assumption of Darwinism rests, as claimed, on the fixed
and inflexible adaptation of means to ends, in the diversified yet
measurably specialized processes of nature, there is no logical deduction
to be drawn therefrom but that which traces the representatives of all the
great types of the animal kingdom to one single source, and that not the
Sovereign Intelligence of the Universe, but a mere "ovule in protoplasm,"
or what may be defined, in its unaggregated form, as an inconceivably
small whirligig, having motion on a central axis, but whether an
independent motion of its own, or one derived from an Infinite
Intelligence, the Darwinian systematizers are not bold enough to aver.
They have too many _a priori_ scruples either to assert the one
proposition or to deny the other. What set this little whirligig in motion
is a mystery that lies beyond the purview of science, so called, and into
the depths of this infinitessimal and most mysterious little chamber they
refuse to go.

They search not for the evidence of an Infinite Intelligence in the
outermost circle of the heavens where the highest is to be found, and
where a bound is set that we may not pass, but shutting their eyes to all
the grander evidences of such an Intelligence, they dive down into the
infinitessimal realm of nature and assume to dig out the sublimer secrets
of the universe there. And this is their grand discovery: That this
infinitessimal whirligig of theirs has not only whirled man into
existence, but the entire circle of the heavens, with the innumerable host
of stars that march therein, and all the boundless systems of worlds that
roll in space. With this subordination of the Infinite to the
infinitessimal, of intelligence to insensate matter, of divine energy, so
to speak, to blind molecular force, they are satisfied; and, like the mole
in the fable, conceive their little molecule to be the only possible
creator of a stupendous universe.

Scrutinize my propositions closely, and see if I am guilty of misstating
theirs. Their new theory is only a slight modification of an old one, or
the old adage, _omne vivum ex ovo_--all life is from an egg. For they
assert that every living thing primordially proceeds from an ovule in
protoplasm, the essential part of the protoplasmic egg, so to speak, being
this little _ovum_ or cellule, from which have issued all possible
organisms in both the vegetable and animal kingdoms. Nor is this theory
essentially confined to organic matter. A scientific coördination of its
several known parts, or alleged functions, extends the operations of this
infinitessimal whirligig to the plastic or uniformly diffused state of all
matter, from which has been evolved, in an infinite duration of past time,
not only life in its highest manifestations, but a universe so
stupendously grand that no amount of human intelligence can grasp the
first conception of it.

Mr. Emerson--our Ralph Waldo--virtually accepts this theory of
development, substituting, however, a stomach for an ovule, and the
reverse of the Darwinian proposition, in what he is pleased to call "the
incessant opposition of nature to everything hurtful." It is not the
"selection of the fittest" but the "rejection of the unfit," by which "a
beneficent necessity (I use his language) is always bringing things
right." "It is in the stomach of plants," he says, "that development
begins, and ends in the circles of the universe." "'Tis a long way," he
admits, "from the gorilla to the gentleman--from the gorilla to Plato,
Newton, Shakespeare--to the sanctities of religion, the refinements of
legislation, the summits of science, art, poetry."

Few persons, I take it, will dispute this proposition. The road is a long
one and beset with all sorts of thorns and briars, such as Mr. Emerson's
philosophy will hardly eradicate from the wayside. Even the most refined
empiricism will find it difficult to stomach his stomachic theory of the
universe, which lands all atomic or corpuscular philosophy in a digestive
sac, such as Jack Falstaff bore about him with its measureless capacity
for potations and Eastcheap fare. It is a road too in which Mr. Emerson's
philosophy will get many sharp raps from an external world of phenomena,
in the futility of both his and the Darwinian hypothesis to explain away
the independent origination of certain species of plants and animals--new
varieties still springing into existence, under favorable conditions, in
obedience to the divine fiat, "Let the earth bring forth."

In laying the foundations of this new science, if science it shall be
called, we must insist that the course of nature is uniform, and that,
however extended our generalizations in any one of her lines of
uniformity, all intermediate, as well as ultimate propositions, must not
only be stated with the utmost scientific accuracy, but the logical
deductions therefrom must also be uniform, or lie in the path of
uniformity. The earliest and latest inductions must either coincide or
approximate the same end. No links must be broken, no chasms bridged, in
the scientific series. There must be a distinct and separate link
connecting each preceding and each succeeding one in the chain. The lowest
known mammal must be found in immediate relationship with his higher
congener or brother, not in any remote cousinship. There must be no
saltatory progress--no leaping over intermediate steps or degrees. The
heights of science are not to be scaled _per saltum_, except as degrees
may sometimes be conferred by our universities.[35]

There are some fish-like animals, say our Darwinian systematizers, like
the Lepidosirens and their congeners, with the characteristics of
amphibians; and hence they infer that by successive deviations and
improvements the lower order has risen into the higher. But out of what
page in the volume of nature, in the countless leaves we have turned back,
has the immediate congener dropped, that we are obliged to look for the
relationship in thirty-fourth cousins? We might as well say that some of
the _Infusoria_ possess the same or similar characteristics, and predicate
relationship between them and the amphibians; for giants sometimes spring
from dwarfs and dwarfs from giants. At all events, our diagnoses must be
freed from these intermediate breaks or failures in the chain of
continuity, or the doctrine of descent must tumble with the imaginary
foundations on which it is built. And bear in mind that the most
enthusiastic Darwinist is forced to admit that there are still rigid
partitions between the lower and higher organisms that have not been
pierced by the light of scientific truth, but they assume that future
discoveries and investigations will solve the difficulty. But science,
inflexible as she is, or ought to be, in her demands, admits of no
assumptions, much less sanctions such exceptions and deviations as we
constantly find in the Darwinian path of continuity. The eye of
imagination can supply nothing to her vision. She is eagle-eyed, and soars
into the bright empyrean--does not dive into quagmires and the slime of
creation after truth.

But let us see how Mr. Darwin bridges one of the very first chasms he
meets with in constructing his chain of generation. He goes back to the
first link, or to what he calls primordial generation. Here the leap is
from inorganic matter to the lowest form of organic life--from inanimate
to animate dust. The chasm is immense, as all will agree. But he bridges
it by falling back on his infinitessimal whirligig--his _primum
mobile_--or on the motions of elements as yet inaccessible, except to the
eye of imagination. For even Plato's monad, or ultimate atom, was not
matter itself, being indivisible, but rather a formal unit or primary
constituent of matter, which, like Mr. Darwin's whirligig in its
unaggregated form, admits of neither a maximum nor a minimum of
comprehension; but rests entirely on imaginary hypothesis. And we may here
add that a system which begins in imaginary hypotheses and ends in
them--as that of bridging the chasmal difference between a gorilla and a
Plato--can be dignified into a science only by a still greater stretch of
the imagination--that of bridging the difference between the Darwinian
zero and his ninety degrees of development in a Darwin himself!

Bear in mind, as we proceed, that the function of an argument in
philosophy, as in logic, is to prove that a certain relation exists
between two concepts or objects of thought, when that relation is not
self-evident. In the Darwinian chain we have, as the first link, organic
life springing from inorganic matter, without the slightest relation
existing between the two, except what may be universally predicated of
matter itself, whether animate or inanimate, organic or inorganic; and
there is no other affirmative premise, expressing their agreement as
extremes, that can possibly admit of an affirmative conclusion. The parts
are so separated in thought that no metaphysical or ideal distinction
exists to coordinate them in classification. We are simply forced back, in
our attempt at classification, upon the intuitions of consciousness, where
reason manifestly ceases to enforce its inductions.

And here the human mind intuitively springs an objection which is at once
aimed at the very citadel of Darwinism. On what rests the validity of
these intuitions except it be that "breath of life," which, as we have
before said, was breathed into man when he became a living soul? If we
follow the divine record, instead of these blind systematizers leading the
blind, we shall have no difficulty in establishing the validity of these
intuitions--the highest potential factors this side of Deity to be found
anywhere in the universe. For if our intuitions are not to be relied
upon--if their objects and perceptions are to be discarded as
unreliable--then there can be no agreement or disagreement between any two
ideas presented, objectively or subjectively, to the human mind. No
processes of mental analysis or ratiocination, like those pursued in the
elementary methods of Euclid, can present the basis of an intellectual
judgment, or lay the foundation of the slightest faith or belief in the
world. To deny the primary perception of truth by intuition is as fatal to
"Evolution" as to the sublimer teachings of the Bible Genesis.

But from the very nature of our being, as well as the primary _datum_ of
consciousness itself, we must rest the validity of these intuitions on
something, and that, something more than a finite intelligence; and since
science, with all her knowledge methodically digested and arranged,
furnishes no clue to the mystery, we are left to the higher sources of
inspiration to reach it. And this inspiration, however it may be derived,
necessarily becomes a part of our intuitions, since it addresses itself to
the strongest possible cravings of the human soul, and is accepted as its
inseparable companion and guest.

Shall we build our faith then on the Divine Word,--on the Word that was in
the beginning with God, and, when incarnate, _was_ God,--or on Mr.
Darwin's little whirligig that originally set everything in motion, and
has only to go on _ad infinitum_ to whirl us out a God, as it has already
whirled us out a Darwinian universe without one. For if this ovulistic
whirligig has bridged the chasmal difference between protoplasm and man,
since the transition from inorganic matter to organic life, the process
has only to be indefinitely extended to bridge the chasm between man and
Deity, or between finite and infinite intelligence. This gives us nature
evolving a God, instead of the doctrine of the old Theogonies, of a God
presiding from all eternity over nature; one "who laid the foundations of
the earth that it should not be removed forever; who stretchest out the
heavens like a curtain; who layeth the beams of his chambers in the
waters; who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire."

These evolutionists manifestly get the cart before the horse in their
category of cosmological events. It is not inert matter organizing itself
into life, nor any mode of physical or chemical action, nor any mere
manifestation of motion or of heat, nor any other conceivable correlation
of natural forces. None of these has enabled us to penetrate the
mysterious _inner-chamber_ of life itself. For reasons obviously connected
with our own welfare, He, from whom alone are "the issues of life," seems
to have ordained that we should fathom the depths of both physical and
chemical force, and beneficently wield and direct them to our own uses.
But this vital force; this something that stands apart from and is
essentially different from all other kinds of force, is of a nature that
baffles all our efforts to approach. The power to grasp it, or even to
penetrate in the slightest degree its mysteries, is delegated to none. All
attempts to lay bare this principle of vitality, or level the barriers
that separate it from physical or chemical action, have utterly failed. We
know no more of its essence now than was known a thousand years ago, and
know no less than will be known a thousand years hence. To become masters
of the mystery, we must enter the impenetrable veil within which the
Infinite Intelligence of the universe presides,--who, we are told,
"sendeth forth his spirit, and we are created, who taketh away our breath,
we die and return to our dust." [36]

We are just as much bewildered in respect to this vital principle in our
classifications of the myriads of little creatures careering over the
field of the microscope, as when we turn to the most marked formations of
genera and species in geological distribution. The great trouble with Mr.
Darwin's _vinculum_ is, that its weakest links are precisely where the
strongest should be found, and _vice versa_. With a candor rarely
displayed by a writer who is spinning a theory, he admits this. The
geological record is not what he would have it to be. Whole chapters are
gone where they are most needed, and nature's lithography seems constantly
at fault. Independent species are now and then springing up where
derivatives should be looked for, while derivatives are everywhere
disappearing in non-derivatives. Many of the middle Tertiary _molusca_,
and a large proportion of the later Tertiary period, are specifically
identical with the living species, of to-day. What has "natural selection"
been doing for this family in the last million years or more? Manifestly
nothing, and less than nothing, for some of the species have dropped out
altogether.

These facts, and hundreds of others like them, are constantly obtruding
themselves upon our attention to show, in harmony with the Bible Genesis,
the immutability of species--the absolute fixity of types--rather than
their variability, as claimed. If nature abhors anything more than a
_vacuum_, it is manifestly any marked transition from fixed types, and she
thunders her edicts against it in the non-fertility of all hybrids. The
doctrine of variation lacks the all-essential element of continuity, and
is oftener at war with the theory of the "selection of the fittest," than
it is with the selection of the "unfit." The leap from Lepidosirens to
Amphibians is no greater than the interval between any two species of
animals or plants yet discovered, either fossil or living. The intervals
are as numerous as the species themselves, and everywhere constitute great
and sudden leaps, or such transitional changes as "natural selection"
could not have effected independently of intervening forms--those that
nowhere exist in nature, and never have existed, if we are to credit
geologic and paleontologic records. There is everywhere similarity of
structure, but not identity; and the nearer we approach to identity of
structure the wider the divergence in similarity of characteristics. A
bird may be taught to talk and sing snatches of music. But no monkey has
ever been able to articulate human sounds, much less give them rhythmical
utterance.

Take the case of the wild pigeon, a subject that especially delights Mr.
Darwin. Most of the deviations are confined to the domesticated breeds,
and none of these rank in strength, hardiness, capability of flight, or
symmetry of structure, with the wild or typical bird. There are
well-defined deviations, but no sensible improvements, except to the eye
of the bird-fancier. The deviations are simply entailed weaknesses, or the
very reverse of what should appear from the "selection of the fittest."
The fact undeniably is, that these variations are almost wholly
abnormal--mere exaggerated characteristics, induced in the first instance,
perhaps, by high cultivation and close in-and-in breeding.

Turn these abnormal varieties loose, let them go back to the aboriginal
stock, and these characteristics will rapidly disappear; that is, they
will ultimately lose themselves or melt away in the original type. Mr.
Darwin admits that the tendency will be to reversion, but he insists,
manifestly without any positive proof therefor, that the greater tendency
is to new centres of attraction, and not necessarily the primitive one.
But this is mere assumption--sheer begging the question on his
part,--since all the oscillations are incontestibly about the original or
type centre.

The same may be said of the typical races of men, like the negro and wild
Indian of our prairies. You may lift them out of their primitive
condition--temporarily suspend, if you please so to put it, their
primordial attraction,--but, left again to themselves, they will go back
to the original type; that is, their offspring will again infest the
jungles and roam their native hunting-grounds. The process here is the
very reverse of the Darwinian theory. Reversion, as a rule, follows the
degeneracy of types, instead of there being any favorable homogeneous
result, springing from a new centre of attraction. The Indian makes a
splendid savage, but a very poor white man. Think of Red Jacket taking the
part of Mercutio in the play or enacting the more valiant _role_ of
Falstaff in King Henry the Fourth. An infusion of white blood does not
help the matter, but rather makes it worse. Generally, the meanest Indian
on the continent is your half-breed, and among the negroes there is no
term so expressive of the contempt of that race, as that applied by them
to a mulatto. The present condition of Mexico affords a striking
exemplification of this law of reversion. The inheritable characteristics
or variations, produced from an infusion of Spanish blood, are rapidly
disappearing--the native blood whipping out the European. The potency is
in the inferior blood, simply because it is the predominating one. The
result has been no homogeneous new race, but a reversion, now manifestly
in progress, to the type centre or aboriginal stock. And the curse
pronounced by Ezekiel upon mongrel tribes--"woe unto the mingled peoples"
may have a significance in this connection worth considering; but it
manifestly falls outside the scope of our present inquiry.

In considering the embryological structure of man, and the homologies he
therein presents to the lower animals, Mr. Darwin thus conclusively (in
his judgment) remarks: "We thus learn that man is descended from a hairy
quadruped, furnished with a tail and pointed ears, probably arboreal in
his habits, and an inhabitant of the Old World."

But Mr. Darwin's pronominal "we," in this connection, admits of
qualification. He can hardly speak for all the scientific world at once.
The philosophical maxim of Sir Isaac Newton--_hypotheses non fingo_--I
build no hypotheses, make no suppositions, but adhere to facts--has a few
followers still left. But what are Mr. Darwin's facts? Has he yet
discovered the caudal man, except as the ever-fertile Mr. Stanley heard of
one in Africa? And where is his monkey that first lost the prehensile
power to climb trees? For bear in mind that it was the loss of this
prehensile power that resulted in the caudal atrophy of our monkey
progenitors, _who became men simply because they were tailless monkeys!_
They had lost their power to climb trees, and accordingly had no longer
any use for tails to let themselves down from the limbs. A "beneficent
necessity" therefore, according to Mr. Emerson, dropped the tail as
something decidedly "unfit." For the simplest tyro in Darwinian philosophy
will see that the loss of the Catarrhine monkey's tail, if it ever
occurred, could not have resulted from the "selection of the fittest." The
deeper Emersonian philosophy of the "rejection of the unfit," affords the
only solution of the difficulty, and then only on the assumption that the
tail is an unfit appendage for the monkey.

With the loss of his tail, in the light of this new genesis, the monkey
necessarily ceased to be arboreal in his habits. He could no longer
subsist on the fruits and nuts of trees, or take refuge therein from his
enemies. He had to go to work and make weapons to defend himself--to
construct tools--make and set traps, live on his wits, and not on his
prehensile power to climb trees. He soon discovered, of course, that the
longest pole knocked the persimmon. This was his first intellectual stride
towards the future Edison. From the simplest sort of Grahamitic
philosopher he passed into the robust, beef-eating Englishman. But this
was not all. As an arboreal gymnast, he was manifestly on his way to more
masterly feats of agility than ever,--those dependent, not on muscular
function, but on the nervous action of the brain and spinal marrow.
Necessity became with him the "mother of invention," and how admirably he
improved under this maternal instructor we are left to infer from the
paramount conclusion of Mr. Darwin, _that the demoralized monkey became
the incipient man_!

But this conclusively accounts for only one of the many anatomical
differences between man and his caudal progenitor. For why should the
loss of his tail have resulted in the changed chemistry of the monkey's
brain? or in the increased involutions of his brain even? The specific
differences between the present and ancestral types are very numerous
and demand separate classification. Their variability runs through every
bone, muscle, tissue, fibre, nerve. Their blood corpuscles are not the
same. The chemistry of their bones essentially differs. The nerves are
differently bundled and differently strung. In intonations of
voice--symmetry of arms, legs, chest--hairlessness of body, and aquatic
and land habits, the frog is a much nearer approach to man than the
monkey, as all caricaturists, delineating aldermanic proportions, will
agree. And Mr. Darwin might have immortalized himself by deriving the
builders of the ancient pile-habitations and other primitive water-rats
and croakers of the Swiss lakes, from this tailless batrachian. For
everybody knows, or thinks he knows, how the frog lost his tail. If he
didn't wag it off, he certainly absorbed its waggishness as a
distinguishing characteristic of the "coming man"--the future Artemas
Wards and Mark Twains of the race. This ancestral origin will also
account for the otherwise unaccountable proclivity of all human
juveniles to play at the game of leap-frog! Besides, it would have
relieved Mr. Darwin from one of the greatest perplexities he has had to
encounter. As he derives man from a hairy quadruped, the absence of hair
on the human body, is a phenomenal fact that gives him great trouble. He
agrees that it does not result from "natural selection," as he says "the
loss of hair is an inconvenience and probably an injury to man." Nor
does he suppose it to result from what he calls "correlated
development." He is more puzzled over this problem of divestiture than
any other, and finds the solution of it only in "sexual selection." That
is, he assumes that among our semi-human progenitors, far back in the
Tertiary or some other period, some female monkeys were less hirsute
than others, and that they naturally preferred males possessing similar
characteristics. These divergencies were thus commenced, and, by
continuous "sexual selection," the infirmity (for such he regards the
loss of hair) was propagated until the race was almost entirely denuded
or bereft of this covering. In the same way he accounts for nearly all
the differentiations of the race, among the various tribes now or
formerly inhabiting the earth. All have sprung from the same semi-human
progenitors--_apes that lost their capacity to subsist as apes, and
hence found it necessary to subsist as men_!

The law of degeneracy has, therefore, had quite as much to do with human
origins as that of progressive development. In fact, it is the paramount
law from a Darwinian stand-point. For the loss of hair and of the
prehensile power to climb trees are both conceded by Mr. Darwin to be
serious defects and drawbacks in the ape family.

But the law of sexual selection, as treated by the evolutionists, is not
scientifically accurate, nor is it true in fact. The loving tendency of
nature is to opposites, not likes. The positive and negative poles are
those that play into each other with most marvellous effect. Each repels
its like and rushes to the embrace of its opposite. Extremes lovingly meet
everywhere. A brunette selects a blonde and a blonde a brunette, as a
general rule in matrimony. A tall man or woman, with rare exceptions,
chooses a short companion for life. Dark eyes delight in those that are
light, and _vice-versa_. Everywhere nature seeks diversity, not
similitude. The gayest and brightest feathered songster craves
companionship in modest and unobtrusive colors. Diversity is the law of
life, as equality, or versimilitude, is that of death. Neither natural
selection, nor sexual selection, runs counter to this law. If Mr. Darwin's
theory were true, that likes selected likes, then the two marked extremes
which should have characterized the race, soon after its emergence from
the semi-human state, should have been giants and pigmies, Gargantuas and
Lilliputs. Otherwise "sexual selection," as treated by its author, plays
no intelligible part in the economy of nature, except to counterbalance
variability, not to propagate it.

But the Darwinian assumption that the primeval man, or his immediate
ape-like progenitor, came through "natural selection," that is, through
the "survival of the fittest," is subject to one or two other objections
which we shall briefly notice. And the first objection is not altogether
a technical one. The term "fittest," as applied to a monkey, has at once
a definite and comprehensive significance to us. It implies the presence
of whatever is most perfect of its kind in the monkey _as_ a monkey, and
not in the monkey _as_ something else than a monkey. They are all
admirably adapted for climbing trees; and it is this adaptation that
secures them safety, or complete immunity, in shelter from their
enemies. To say that nature selects the fittest for them--for any
species of monkey--by converting their forefeet into rudimentary hands,
with a loss of prehension and no corresponding advantages in locomotion,
is to use language without any appreciable significance to us. We can
only say that what is fittest for the monkey is ill-fitted for man, and
the reverse. This is all we can definitely predicate of them, from what
we know of their anatomical structure, and the diversified uses to which
it may be put.

The fact is, as the Bible genesis shows, that every living thing is
perfect of its kind, and whatever is perfect admits of no Darwinian
variations or improvements for the better. And the simple statement of
this undeniable proposition is, we submit, a complete refutation of
Darwinism. When the waters and the earth were commanded to bring forth
abundantly of every living creature and every living thing, "it was so,
and God saw that it was good," that is, everything perfect of its kind,
and in its kind. With this single limitation as to kind, a rattlesnake is
no less perfect than a Plato or a John Howard.

When we consider man's upright position; the firmness and steadiness with
which he plants his foot upon the earth; when we examine the mechanism of
his hand, and the wonderful and almost unlimited range it possesses for
diversified use; when we see how ill-fitted he is for climbing trees, yet
how express and admirable for climbing among the stars, even to the
outermost milky-way, the idea that what is fittest for him is fit for the
chattering monkey, is too absurd to give us pause. And yet how does Mr.
Darwin know that the monkey has been climbing up, all these hundred
thousand or million years, into man, as one of the congenital freaks of
nature, and not man shambling down into the monkey as a reverse
congenital freak. Children have sometimes been born with a singular
resemblance to the ape family, but no ape has ever, to Mr. Darwin's
knowledge, produced issue more manlike than itself. The divergencies run
the wrong way to meet the conditions of the development theory. We have
had nearly five thousand years in which to mark these transitional
changes, and yet the monkey of to-day is identical with that painted on
the walls of ancient Meroe. In all this time he has made no advance in
the genetic relation; and if we turn back the lithographic pages of
nature for a hundred times five thousand years, we shall find no
essential departure from aboriginal types.

But the Darwinian hypothesis admits of a more conclusive answer than we
have yet given. Past time, it will be conceded, is theoretically if not
actually infinite; and in all past time, nature has been tugging away at
Mr. Darwin's problem of the "survival of the fittest." It is no two
hundred and fifty thousand years, nor two hundred and fifty millions, but
an infinite duration of past time that covers the period in which she has
been wrestling with this problem. How successfully has she solved it? In
the Darwinian sense of the term "fittest," she has not so much as stated
her first equation or extracted the root of her first power. She is
manifestly as much puzzled over the problem as Mr. Darwin himself. He
fails to see that the "survival of the fittest," necessarily implies, or
carries with it, the correlative proposition,--the "non-survival of the
unfit." And when such a law has been operative for an infinite duration of
past time, the "unfit," however infinitely distributed at first, should
have disappeared altogether, many thousands, if not millions, of years
ago. If the evolutionists are dealing with vast problems, and assigning to
nature, unlimited factors to express the totality of her unerring
operations, they must be careful to limit the time in which any one of her
given labors is to be accomplished. If she makes any progress at all, an
infinite duration of past time should enable her to complete her work just
as effectually as an infinite duration of time to come.

But by what law of "natural selection," appertaining to a single pair of
old world monkeys, have their offspring advanced to this regal state of
manhood, while all other pairs have remained stationary, or precisely
where they were two hundred and fifty thousand years ago or more? Why
this exceptional divergence in the case of a single pair of monkeys? Why
this anomalous, aberrant, and thoroughly eccentric movement on the part
of nature? We had supposed that her operations were uniform--conformable
to fixed laws of movement. The doctrine of the "survival of the fittest"
implies this. Why then, should nature, in her unerring operations, have
selected the fittest in respect to a single pair of Catarrhine monkeys,
and at the same time rejected the fittest in the case of a million other
pairs? If she had selected only the fittest in respect to this old world
stock of monkeys, the entire Catarrhine family should have disappeared
in the next higher or fitter group--a group nowhere to be found in
geological distribution. The break between man and this Catarrhine
monkey covers quite a series of links in the genetic vinculum;[37] and
yet between the two we find no high form of a low type fitting into a
low form of a high type, as we manifestly should, to account for all the
diversified changes that must have taken place in the interim. And what
is true of the types is measurably true of the classes within the types,
as well as of the orders within the classes. Wide deviations in forms,
as in characteristics, would seem to be the invariable rule; the
blending of type into type, except perhaps in remote relationships, is
nowhere visible.

But if "variation" and "natural selection" have played important parts in
the economy of nature, why may not "specific creation" have played _its_
part also? Positive science can hardly flatter itself with the belief that
it is rolling back the mystery of the universe to a point beyond which
"specific creation" might not have commenced, or the divine fiat been put
forth. To believe in the possibility of a rational synthesis, limited to
sensible experience, or phenomenal facts within our reach, that shall
climb from law to law, or from concrete fact to abstract conception, until
it shall reach the _Ultima Thule_ of all law, is to carry the faith of the
scientist beyond the most transcendental belief of the theologian, and
make him a greater dupe to his illusions than was ever cloistered in a
monastery or affected austerity therein as a balm to the flesh. We may
substitute new dogmatisms for old ones, but we can never postulate a
principle that shall make the general laws of nature any less mysterious
than the partial or exceptional, or that shall in the long run, render
"natural selection" any more comprehensible, or acceptable to the rational
intuition, than "specific creation." For while one class of scientists is
climbing the ladder of synthesis, by assigning a reason for a higher law
that may be predicated of a lower, we shall find the broader and more
analytical mind accepting the higher mystery for the lower, and, by
divesting its faith of all metaphysical incumbrance, landing in the belief
of an all-encompassing law, which shall comprehend the entire assemblage
of known laws and facts in the universe. And the natural drift of the
human mind is ever towards this abstract conception--this one
all-encompassing law of the universe. It steadily speculates in this
direction, and some of the highest triumphs of our age, in physical as
well as metaphysical science, are measurably due to this tendency. The
scientific mind is not confined wholly to experimental research. It is
stimulated to higher contemplations, and is constantly disposed to make
larger and more comprehensive groupings of analogous facts. It is fast
coming to regard light, heat, electricity, magnetism, gravitation,
chemical affinity, molecular force, and even Mr. Darwin's little
whirligig, as only so many manifestations or expressions of one and the
same force in the universe--that ultimate, all-encompassing, divine force
(not to speak unscientifically) that upholds the order of the heavens,
"binds the sweet influences of the Pleiades, brings forth Mazzaroth in his
season, and guides Arcturus with his suns."

It is the boast of the Darwinian systematizers that their development
theory not only harmonizes with, but admirably supplements and out-rounds
the grander speculation of Laplace, termed the "Nebular Hypothesis," which
regards the universe as having originally consisted of uniformly diffused
matter, filling all space, which subsequently became aggregated by
gravitation, much after the manner of Mr. Darwin's little whirligig, into
an infinite number of sun-systems, occupying inconceivably vast areas in
space. Of the correctness of this hypothesis it is unnecessary to speak.
It is to the Darwinian speculation what the infinite is to the
infinitessimal, and we only refer to it to bring out the vastness of the
conception as compared to the latter theory, and to predicate thereon the
more conclusive induction that an Infinite Intelligence directs and
superintends all.

In an area in the Milky-way not exceeding one-tenth of the moon's disc,
Mr. Herschel computes the number of stars at not less than twenty
thousand, with clusters of nebulae lying still beyond. As we know that no
bodies shining by reflected light could be visible at such enormous
distances, we are left to conclude that each of these twinkling points is
a sun, dispensing light and heat to probably as many planets as hold their
courses about the central orb in our own system. From the superior
magnitude of many of the stars, as compared with the sun, we may
reasonably infer that many of these vast sun-systems occupy a much larger
field in space than our own. This would give an area in space of not less
than six thousand millions of miles as the field occupied by each of these
sun-systems. And as the distance between each of these systems and its
nearest neighbor is probably not less than that of our sun from the
nearest star, we have the enormous and inconceivable distance of not less
than nineteen billions of miles separating each one of these twenty
thousand stars or sun-systems, occupying a space in the heavens apparently
no bigger than a man's hand. And yet Infinity, as we apprehend the term,
lies beyond this vast cluster of constellated worlds! Where is Mr.
Darwin's little whirligig in the comparison, or Mr. Emerson's vegetal
stomach, or Mr. Herbert Spencer's "potential factors," to express the
sum-total of all this totality,--this gigantic assemblage of stars
clustered about a single point in the Milky-way? The human mind absolutely
reels--staggers bewildered and amazed--under the load of conceptions
imposed by these few twinkling stars, and is ready to exclaim,--

  "Oh, star-eyed Science, hast thou wandered there,
  To waft us back a message of despair?"

But when we reflect that all this vast aggregation of sun systems, visible
in the telescopic field, is not stationary, but is revolving with
inconceivable rapidity about some unknown and infinitely remote centre of
the universe, how immeasurably vast does the conception become, and how
unutterably puerile and fatuous the thought of _Mr. Darwin's little
whirligig as the author of it all!_ No wonder the inspired Psalmist
exclaims; "The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament showeth
his handiwork." But listen to the Darwinian exclamation: "The heavens
declare the glory of my little whirligig, and the firmament showeth the
immensity of my little ovules." With the veil of faith and inspiration
lifted, the words of the Psalmist swell into the highest cherubic anthem,
while those of Mr. Darwin hardly rise above the squeak of a mole burrowing
beneath the glebe!

And what presumptuous mortal shall say that this infinitely remote centre
of the universe, around which revolves this infinite number of
sun-systems, is not the seat and throne of the Infinite One himself--the
Sovereign Intelligence and Power of the universe, directing and upholding
all? We know that some of the stars are travelling about this central
point of the heavens at a pace exceeding 194,000 miles an hour, or with
nearly three times the rapidity of our earth in its orbit. That there must
be infinite power, not physical, at this unknown centre of the universe,
to hold these myriads of sun-systems in their courses, is a logical
induction as irrefragable as that the sun holds his planets in their
orbits. And if infinite power is predicable upon this central point, why
not infinite intelligence also? Intelligence, we know, controls and
utilizes all power in this world; why not all power in the universe? It
can utilize every drop of water that thunders down Niagara to-day, as it
has already seized upon the lightnings of heaven to make them our
post-boy. This is what finite intelligence--that insignificant factor that
science would eliminate from the universe--can do; then what may not
Infinite Intelligence accomplish?

But the Darwinian systematizers object that science must limit itself to a
coordination of the known relations of things in the universe, or deal
only with phenomenal facts, not dogmatisms; forgetting that they dogmatize
quite as extensively, in constructing their chain of generation, as the
theologians do in adhering to the Bible genesis. No theologian objects to
a rational synthesis of phenomena, limited to sensible experience; but, in
climbing from law to law, he reasonably enough insists, that, when
concrete facts rise into abstract conceptions, the highest round in the
ladder shall not be knocked out for the accommodation of Robert G.
Ingersoll or any other boasted descendant of a gorilla. And he also
insists that when _a priori_ speculation is lost in abstract conceptions,
the highest must necessarily press alone upon the intuitions of
consciousness, where all generalizations cease, and all synthesis is
undeniably at an end. Here, in this mysterious chamber of the soul, we
stand silent and alone, with only dim and shadowy phantoms about us, as if
in the august presence of Deity itself.

But how does scientific speculation propose to stifle these intuitions of
consciousness--reduce them to the least of all potential factors in the
universe? We will take the very latest of these speculations. In
supplementing both the Darwinian theory and the grander speculation of
Laplace, the scientists, so called, tell us that the process of
aggregation, or the turning out of new worlds in the universe, is still
going on; but that the time is coming when all the primeval potency or
energy, originally inhering in diffused matter, will have exhausted itself
in actual energy, and that then all light, life and motion in the
universe, will cease and be at an end. This dissipation of potential
energy is to result, they say, in a played-out universe, as it has already
resulted, they claim, in a played-out moon, if not countless other
heavenly bodies.[38] All the exterior planets, or a majority of them at
least, are to be placed in this category of dismantled worlds, or those in
which all life has hopelessly ceased and become extinct. All has utterly
disappeared, or, to paraphrase one of Pope's couplets,

  "Beast, bird, fish, insect--what no eye can scan,
  Nor glass can reach--from zoophyte to man."

All these dismantled planets, and satellites to planets, are only so many
immense cinders--mere refuse slag--of no conceivable interest to science,
except to predicate the ultimate conclusion--"a played-out universe,
resulting from a played-out potency within the universe." The magnificent
clockwork of the heavens will then have run down, with no Darwinian
whirligig to wind it up again, and the terrible reality of Byron's dream,
which it would seem was not all a dream, be realized in the bright sun
extinguished, the stars darkling the eternal space, rayless and pathless,
and the icy earth swung blind and blackening in the moonless air.

Oh, if this be star-eyed science, give us anything in place of it!
Blear-eyed bigotry in his cloistered den, mumbling unintelligible prayers,
and believing that man is to be saved, not by what he does, but by a
_credo_ only, is far preferable to it. But oh, how unspeakably preferable
the simple faith of the star-led Magi, who

  "Deeming the light that in the east was seen
       An earnest and a prophecy of rest
     To weary wanderers, such as they had been,"

came on that bleak December night, 1880 years ago, to pay their homage to
the Christ-child--the long expected Messiah--the Redeemer of the world!






Footnotes



[1]: It may be proper, however, to state that the tenth and concluding
     chapter was originally written as a lecture, and delivered about a
     year ago in New Haven, Boston, and at other points. A request for its
     publication has induced the author to place it in this volume, with
     the portion referring to the Bible genesis omitted. It will be found
     germane to the general subject.

[2]: "Without this latent presence of the 'I am,' all modes of existence
     in the external world flit before us as colored shadows, with no
     greater depth, root, or fixure, than the image of a rock hath in the
     gliding stream, or the rainbow on the fast-sailing rain
     storm."--_Coleridge's_ "_Comments on Essays_."

[3]: And science that is not purely inductive--i.e. primarily based on
     the inviolability of our intuitions--is no science at all, but the
     sheerest possible speculation.

[4]: This presence of an active living principle in nature, one originally
     assigned as the "_divina particula auræ_" of every living thing, is
     frequently referred to in the higher inspirational moods of our
     poets. Wordsworth exquisitely refers to it in the following lines of
     his "Excursion:"--

       "To every form of being is assigned
       An _active_ principle: howe'er removed
       From sense and observation, it subsists
       In all things, in all nature, in the stars
       Of azure heaven, the unenduring clouds;
       In flower and tree, in every pebbly stone
       That paves the brooks."

[5]: The existence of vital units is conceded by some of the staunchest
     materialists, such as Herbert Spencer, Professor Bastian and others.
     Professor Bastian says: "The countless myriads of living units which
     have been evolved in different ages of the world's history, must, in
     each period, have given rise to innumerable multitudes of what have
     been called 'trees of life.'" He insists, however, that they have
     been "evolved" from something, or by some unknown process. But we
     shall show further on that a "unit" can neither be _evolved_ nor
     _involved_, and that this is as true of vital units as of the
     mathematical or chemical unit. Neither evolution nor involution will
     ever effect the value of a unit.

[6]: According to Aristotle, the great world-_ordainer_ is the constant
     world-_sustainer_.

[7]: The definition which Professor Robinson, in his Lexicon of the New
     Testament, gives of the word σπέρμα, as connected with the "divine
     life," entirely harmonizes with this view of the subject. He says: Trop.
     I John 3, 9, πἃς ό γεγενημένος ἐκ του ϑεου σπέρμα ἀυτον (ϑεὄν) εν ᾶντῶ
     πενεὶ _i.e._ the germ or principle of divine life through which he
     is begotten of god, το πνεὒμα.

[8]: Professor Schmidt, of the University of Strasburg, who insists that
     species are only relatively stable, admits that they remain
     persistent as long as they exist under the same external conditions.
     Time is, therefore, not a factor in the mutation of species. Nor are
     environing conditions factors, except as a failure of conditions
     results in the disappearance of species, as the presence of
     conditions results in their appearance.

[9]: Says M. Ch. Bonnet, in his "La Palingéuésie Philosophique;" "Il est
     de la plus parfaite évidence que la matiere est susceptible d'une
     infinité de mouvemens divers, et de modifications diverses," and this
     is the universal claim of the materialists.

[10]: Professor Burdach (as trad, par Jourdan), in speaking of the
      productive power of nature, says, "Limitée quant á l' étendue de ses
      manifestations, elle continue toujottrs d' agir pour la conservation
      de ce qui a été créé, et, quoiqu' elle ne maintenue les formes
      organiques supérieures que par la seule propagation, il ne répugne
      point au bon sens de penser qu' aujourd' hui encore elle a la
      puissance de produire les formes inférieures avec des eléments
      hétérogénes, comme elle a créé originairement tout ce qui posséde l'
      organisation." This shows that its author believed in the
      possibility of the "superior organic forms," like the mastodon,
      megatherium, etc. from the "heterogenetic elements"--those
      undergoing every conceivable change--as well as the "inferior
      forms." At all events, it is a legitimate induction from
      materialistic premises.

[11]: This point is conclusively made by Professor Burdach, who says (we
      quote from Jourdan); "La tendance interieure á la configuration
      existe avant sa manifestation." And by his _tendance interieure_ he
      must mean some vital or other law, equivalent to an _entia_ in
      matter, which results _in_, not _from_ manifestation.

[12]: Goethe borrowed his idea of an archetypal world from Plato and the
      Eleatic school. They held that the world was originated, and not
      eternal; that it was framed by the Creator after a perfect
      archetype, one eternally existing in the divine mind, if not an
      actual soul-world of which our own is but the reflex.

[13]: In a note to Prof. Bastian's "Beginnings of Life" (vol II. p. 537)
      an important fact is mentioned as obtained from the writings of Dr.
      Schneider, to wit, that _Nematoids_ (microscopical forms) may be
      "obtained at will," almost as readily as mushrooms, by a process
      entirely independent of spores. For instance, small pieces of beef
      were carefully examined to see if they contained any of the ova of
      Nematoids, and, finding none, they were buried in a small quantity
      of earth (also carefully examined for the presence of Nematoids or
      their ova) in a gallipot. "After three weeks," says Prof. B. "this
      earth was found to be absolutely swarming with two kinds of
      Nematoids--quite different from any forms which I had previously,
      seen, although I had been seeking them for more than two years
      previously in all sorts of situations." The reason why he had not
      found them previously, was because the "necessary conditions" for
      their appearance had not been obtained by him, or he had not sought
      for them in their proper environment. They were not produced "at
      will," but were the natural outgrowth of conditions, as much so as
      the spores of fungi, which make their appearance whenever and
      wherever the necessary environing conditions exist. According to Dr.
      Gros, it takes about three weeks for these Nematoid forms to develop
      into a reproductive state.

[14]: The necessity of turning plants and animals into "tramps" is just as
      great in the case of "Evolution" as in that of "specific creation in
      pairs." In both cases, we must insist upon geneological
      consanguinity. For the chances of any two highly specialized forms,
      originally starting on different lines of divergence, and ultimately
      reaching individual identity, both in form and characteristics, is
      an impossible problem in the determination of chances. Consequently,
      Mr. Darwin finds the necessity of accounting for the presence of
      northern forms in the southern hemisphere, and the reverse, just as
      great as in the Linnæan theory, which was fully accepted by Cuvier.

[15]: Burdach, in his "_Traité Physiologie" (Trad. par Jourdan_. 1837)
      says: "Effectivement nous rencontrons des traces de vie dans toute
      existence quelconque." This is as broad a panspermic statement as
      can be made, and is only true of inorganic matter so far as
      vegetable life is concerned, including such infusorial, mycologic,
      and cryptogamic forms as may lie so near to the "force vegetative"
      of Needham as to be indistinguishable from it.

[16]: In the case of volcanic islands, the upheavals were undoubtedly
      accompanied by deposits of mud, sand (ocean detritus), marine
      vegetation, and more or less animal matter, and these organic
      substances were washed down by the rains into the broken valleys and
      plains below, when land vegetation almost immediately made its
      appearance; not because seeds may have drifted thither by any of the
      different agencies that have been mentioned, but because organic
      matter can no more help bringing forth life in some form, when
      conditions favor, than salt water, when exposed to evaporation, can
      help crystallizing into its symmetrically-arranged salts. And the
      same would be true of all the coral islands, bringing up the organic
      matter of the sea to the influence of the light, the rains, and the
      dews. The islands thus formed in the Pacific Ocean begin to exhibit
      vegetable life almost as soon as they make their appearance above
      the reefs, and a line of sea-beach is formed about them.

[17]: These, while presenting the most varied and diverse forms of
      infusorial life, are nevertheless the most constant and abundant
      type. They abound more or less in all organic infusions. Ehrenberg,
      however, holds that they are no more animal than vegetal forms. They
      vary in length from 1/15000 to 1/2000 of an inch, and are
      consequently too minute to be satisfactorily classified in respect
      to all their diversified characteristics.

[18]: The extent of the southern ice-cap may at least be approximately
      reached from explorations already made. Capt. Weddell, in 1823,
      extended his explorations southward to within about 15° of the
      south pole, where he found an open sea. Capt. Ross, in 1842,
      approached to within about 13° of the same pole, without serious
      obstruction. It is true that, in the following year, he encountered
      ice barriers near the line of the antarctic circle, but they were
      floating barriers coming down from Weddell's open sea. Capt.
      Wilkes, in 1840, explored a considerable portion of the Antarctic
      Continent, lying almost entirely within the antarctic circle. Other
      explorations have been made, showing that the southern ice-cap does
      not probably extend, continuously at least, much farther north than
      78° or 80°, or to within some ten or twelve degrees of the south
      pole, independently of the packs of drifting ice in the otherwise
      open seas.

[19]: The truth or falsity of "Evolution" depends entirely on the
      successful solution of this problem, for the chances are
      quintillions to ones that no two identical forms could have
      originated from different centres, or from the same centre on
      divergent lines, and ever reached identically the same results. And
      how any two forms should happen to be sexually paired, on the same
      or different lines of divergence, is one of those inexplicable
      mysteries which must puzzle Herbert Spencer in all his labyrinthian
      searches into "Force-correlation," "Differentiation," "the Dynamic
      Force of Molecules," etc., etc. However successful he may be in
      other directions, he will inevitably fail in this. We must fall back
      on the grand Old Bible genesis for the solution of this difficulty,
      where every living thing was commanded to produce seed, or multiply
      and replenish the waters and the earth with offspring.

[20]: These transcendental or ideal forms may be said to correspond to the
      "spiritual essences" of Plato. They are the eternal, immutable
      principles which are discernible to the eye of the soul, as the
      sensible objects they represent are discernible to the eye of the
      body. Modern metaphysics may deem them mere abstractions, but a
      higher realistic philosophy will treat them as substantive forms, of
      which the objective reality is but the shadow.

[21]: Herbert Spencer may be quoted as authority on this point. He says:
      "There is invariably, and necessarily, a conformity between the
      vital functions of any organism, and the _conditions_ in which it is
      placed ... We find that every animal is limited to a certain range
      of climate; every plant to certain zones of latitude and elevation."
      And the same law holds good as to the marine fauna and flora, each
      specific form being confined to its own sea-depth, or distance north
      or south from the thermal equator.

[22]: Speaking of the ultimate principles or elements of matter, Plato is
      quoted by Humboldt as exclaiming with modest diffidence, "God alone,
      and those whom he loves among men, know what they are." It is only
      those who seek to eliminate God from the universe that speak with
      confident flippancy on the subject of molecular machinery and
      force-correlations.

[23]: As long as the evolutionists cannot agree among themselves as to
      what constitutes the process of evolution, it can hardly be expected
      that the public will accept their speculations as conclusive
      inductions. Professor Bastian, who strongly commits himself to the
      doctrine, thinks the word "evolution" arbitrary and open to many
      objections, while Mr. Herbert Spencer says;--"The antithetical word
      Involution would much more truly express the nature of the process."

[24]: "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of
      God dwelleth in you?" 1 Cor. 3. xvi.

[25]: Dr. Drysdale, in his work on the "Protoplasmic Theory of Life,"
      says: "Matter cannot change its state of motion or rest without the
      influence of some force from without. True spontaneity of movement
      is, therefore, just as impossible to it as to what we call dead
      matter.... So we are compelled to admit the existence of an exciting
      cause in the form of some force from without to give the initial
      impulse in all vital actions." In all life-manifestations, this
      "force from without," must be a pre-existing vital principle
      operating to effect the otherwise impossible change in matter.

[26]: A favorite set-phrase of Professor Bastian in speaking of
      morphological cells or "units," as he sometimes calls them.

[27]: That great and justly celebrated naturalist, Buffon, in speaking of
      the universal origination of the lower forms of animal life by a
      process termed, in his time, "spontaneous generation," says: "There
      are, perhaps, as many living things, both animal and vegetable,
      which are produced by the fortuitous aggregations of 'molécules
      organiques,' as there are others which reproduce themselves by a
      constant succession of generations." It is said that Buffon was for
      some time associated with the Abbé Needham in his experiments in
      vital directions, and was much influenced by them. So that it is by
      no means certain that he did not accept the Abbé's "force
      végétative" in place of his more materialistic views respecting
      "molécules organiques." At all events, his statement that as many
      living things appear in nature independently of reproducing causes
      as by successive generation, is no doubt true.

[28]: M. Tréviranus, who followed Spallanzani and M. Bonnet in these flask
      experimentations, first noticed the important fact that the
      animalculæ appearing in different organic infusions, depended on
      the nature and quality of the infusions themselves, and that the
      changed conditions of the same infusion produced new and independent
      forms of life.

[29]: Leibnitz, as quoted by M. Bonnet, says:--"Que l'Entendement Divin
      étoit la religion éternelle des Essences; parce que tout ce qui
      existe existoit comme de toute éternité comme possible ou en idée
      dans l'entendement de Dieu. J'exprimerai cette vérité sublime en
      d'autres termes: le plan entier d'univers existoit de toute Eternité
      dans l'entendement du Suprême Architecte. Tou tes les parties de
      l'univers et jusqu' an moindre atome étoient deffinés dans ce plan.
      Tous les changemens qui devoient survenir aux différentes pieces de
      ce Tout immense y avoient aussi leurs représentations. Chaque etre y
      étoit figuré par ses characteres propres: et l'acte par lequel la
      Souveraine Puissance a réalisé ce plan, est ce que nous nommons la
      Création."

[30]: Here is a fact given us by Dr. F. Hall, of Wallingford, Conn.: In a
      peat meadow in that town, owned by him, which was at no time subject
      to overflow, a large quantity of peat had been removed at different
      intervals of time, when the excavations naturally filled with water.
      In these excavations there appeared not only the _Cyprinidae_ in
      considerable numbers, but fresh water clams which grew to be as
      large as those in the most favored streams. They made their
      appearance the very first season after the peat was removed, and
      have flourished there ever since. In no other portions of the meadow
      were there any fish or clams ever noticed before, nor was there any
      other source of water-supply than the rain-falls in that locality.

[31]: Professor Beale, in one of his very latest works says: "Of the
      chemical and physical forms of energy something is known, but of
      the relationship of the so called _vital_ energy, nothing has
      been proved. We only know that the influence it exerts is
      altogether different from that which has been traced to physical
      and chemical energy."

[32]: It is admitted, even in the case of _Bacteria_, whose movements are
      the most uniform, that they are sometimes so inert and languid as to
      show no movements at all; while, at other times, they exhibit mere
      Brownian movements or those no more nearly allied to "life" than the
      minute particles of carbon escaping from the flame of a kerosene
      lamp. And among the most distinguished microscopists, it is a
      question whether these infusorial forms, those exhibiting the most
      active oscillations, are really vegetal or animal in origin; in
      other words, whether they are _Fungus-spores_ or _Torula_-cells, or
      whether they may not be some intermediate forms.

[33]: The difficulty of assigning any definitional value to a "primordial
      germ" is due to the vagueness of idea attached to it in the popular
      mind, as well as to the diversified theories and speculations of the
      scientists concerning the origin of life. We can only define it as a
      "vital unit," as the chemist defines his smallest conceivable
      quantity--his "primary least"--of an element, as a "chemical unit."

[34]: Let two comrades be shot at the same instant in battle, the one
      through the heart, and the other through the arm, shattering it
      badly. What is there to prevent the surgeon from taking a piece of
      bone out of the arm of the man shot through the heart and instantly
      killed, and using it to make good the arm of the man still living?
      Apparently nothing but that the dead man's bone will not knit. He
      may not have been dead five minutes, and Professor Beale's bioplasts
      might still be at work spinning matter and weaving tissue for the
      integrity of the displaced bone. Why will it not knit? Simply
      because the vital principle that differentiates matter is gone--can
      no longer act. If the integrity of the bone depended on the action
      of the molecules, and not on the vital principle, there is no reason
      why this experiment should not be a success. For the molecules are
      all there, and their action will not be disturbed for hours after
      the death of the man shot through the heart.

[35]: It is safe to adhere to the Leibnitzian axiom, _Natura non agit
      saltatim_.

[36]: One of the most cultured classes of Christian believers in our day,
      holds that "all life is from the Lord;" that "He is the fountain,
      and we only the streams thence." And this, they claim, is true of
      all life. To "take away our breath," therefore, is to cut off this
      stream perpetually flowing from its invisible source--the fountain
      of all Life. When scientific methods substitute for a first cause a
      mere resultant effect, all primary principles disappear in their
      intermediates.

[37]: Professor Marsh, of Yale College, has predicted that the "missing
      link" will be found in Borneo--evidently not crediting Mr. Stanley's
      statement about its presence in the interior of Africa. But one
      "missing link" is hardly enough; there ought to be an extensive
      family of them to complete Mr. Darwin's plexus. From the lowest
      genetic form to the anthropoid ape is a distance which does not half
      cover the length of this plexus--the immense gap between the monkey
      and the man being decidedly the greater length of chain. And yet the
      first half of the chain is traversed by innumerable forms--millions
      of links, so to speak. How, then, is the greater length of the
      plexus to be covered by a single "missing link?" A long line of
      caudal ancestry must be dug up, therefore, in Borneo, and shipped to
      the Peabody Museum, before this tremendous stretch in the chain of
      animated nature is satisfactorily accounted for. Borneo must be
      exceedingly rich in osteologic remains, even to bridge the chasm
      between its own ourang-outangs and the Dyaks, or aboriginal
      inhabitants, of that island.

[38]: This daring hypothesis of the materialists is so utterly repugnant
      to all our ideas of a perfected Cosmos, that we have no patience
      with those advancing it. It is, at best, speculation run mad, and is
      based on no other assumption than that of the inherent
      imperfectibility of the universe as it came from the hand of God, or
      from the dynamic play of molecules extending throughout vast
      geognostic epochs.

      From a materialistic stand-point this assumption of imperfectibility
      inevitably runs into the _reductio ad absurdum_. For if, in the play
      of the material forces of the universe, an infinite duration of past
      time has effected nothing but mutually disturbing and re-adjusting
      movements and relations among cosmical bodies, then an infinite
      duration of time to come can effect nothing but similarly mutual
      adjustments and re-adjustments in respect to such bodies. With an
      infinity of time, space, matter and motion, everywhere presenting a
      unity of phenomena in the universe, "there can never be anything,"
      according to the great Stagirite, "unconnected or out of place, as
      in a bad tragedy." Conservation must, therefore, be the rule, and
      desinence the impossible exception.

      But these adherents of inherent imperfectibility instance the fact
      of vanished and variable stars, as well as those that have suddenly
      appeared, and, after brief periods of intense brilliancy, as
      suddenly disappeared, to show that there are mighty disturbances in
      the sidereal heavens which entirely negative the idea of
      "conservation" as a geognostic law. But the phenomena of variable
      stars, with all their apparent irregularity of motion and
      fluctuations in luminosity, are now being traced to definite and
      well-determined laws of motion, if not of light, while the theory of
      extinguished and disappearing stars belongs exclusive to the age of
      Tycho Brahe. Where there is one self-luminious body (or sun) in the
      interstellary spaces, there are probably not less than forty
      non-luminous or dark cosmical bodies revolving about their
      respective centres of light and heat, as the attending planets
      revolve about the common centre of gravity in our own system. And
      this is especially true of that vast and fathomless star-stratum,
      called the Milky-way, in which most of these peculiar phenomena
      occur, with the exception of the variable stars only.

      That stars should vary in their intensity of light by the probable
      transits of these dark cosmical bodies across their discs, is no
      matter of wonder or astonishment: on the contrary, it is surprising
      that these sidereal phenomena do not occur with much greater
      frequency. This would inevitably be the case if the planes of
      revolution, in the case of these non-luminous bodies about their
      central orbs, were coincident with the lines of vision from our own
      planet--a circumstance by no means improbable from the vastness of
      the sidereal heavens and the innumerable hosts of stars marching
      therein. Besides, these periodical variations may be accounted for
      in part--especially in the case of double stars--from their apparent
      rather than real change of place in the heavens. For if our
      sun-system is travelling towards a point in the constellation
      Hercules at the rate of 194 thousand miles an hour (the rapidity of
      Arcturus' flight), it is impossible to determine, in the present
      state of astronomical knowledge, whether the apparent change of
      place in any star is real or merely optical. But, in the case of
      double stars, each is travelling (independently of its other
      motions) about the common centre of gravity obtaining in its own
      system, and these relative movements may account for the greater or
      less intensity of light as the two stars, viewed as one, present a
      greater or less area of luminosity in their united surfaces.

      The assumed revolution of one of these stars about the other--thus
      destroying all the known analogies of the universe, as exemplified
      in our own system--may be accounted for in the same way. With
      stupendous planetary systems revolving about each of these
      apparently double stars, they must respectively have a revolution,
      real as well as apparent, about their own centres of gravity--not
      one and the same centre, but different and far distant centres.
      Lying in nearly the same line of vision, with planes of movement at
      right angles with it, they would necessarily present the appearance
      of one star revolving about the other--an _apparent_ motion only.

      And the writer here ventures an explanation of the phenomena of
      _temporary_ stars, or those making their appearance in the heavens,
      flaming up into stars of the first, second and third magnitudes, and
      then disappearing altogether. The most remarkable of these stars, or
      _apparent_ stars, was that of Tycho Brahe in 1572, presenting its
      maximum brilliancy at the very first, but gradually diminishing in
      size until the end of seventeen months, when it disappeared, without
      change of place, from the heavens. This temporary star was visible
      in Cassiopeia, on the verge of the Milky-way, within whose swarm of
      stellar worlds most of these apparent stars have made their
      appearance. Tycho Brahe, in seeking to account for this stellar
      phenomenon, advanced the theory that stars might be "formed and
      molded out of cosmical vapor," or "vapory celestial matter," as the
      elder Herschel put it, "which becomes luminous as it condenses
      (conglomerates) into fixed stars." But any such rapid condensation
      of "vapory matter," in the light of Laplace's "nebular theory," is
      manifestly too absurd for scientific recognition. A more
      satisfactory explanation may be here suggested:--Supposing the
      apparent relative position of any six or seven stars of the sixth
      magnitude in the Milky-way, should be so changed by the combined
      motions of our sun-system and of the stars themselves, as to throw
      them into one and the same line of vision, but so clustered together
      as to show their several star-discs as one, we should unquestionably
      have a star of the first magnitude, which would continue as long as
      this extraordinary stellar conjunction should last. As one after
      another of these stars should fall out of line, by reason of the
      combined motions named, the apparent star would be diminished from
      the first to the second magnitude, and so on until it reached the
      sixth magnitude, when it would pass beyond the reach of unaided
      human vision. But as the star of Tycho Brahe suddenly appeared at
      its fullest brilliancy, it may be objected that this suggested
      theory fails to meet the required conditions.

      As 18,000,000, out of the 20,000,000, of telescopic stars lie in the
      Milky-way, it is not by any means improbable that such a conjunction
      of stars may occur therein as often at least as once or twice in a
      century. We certainly see brilliant patches of closely-crowded
      stars, in great numbers, in this galactic zone, and the fact that
      these temporary stars almost uniformly appear in that zone renders
      the suggestion here made quite as rational, in the way of
      speculation at least, as that of "vapory celestial matter" suddenly
      condensed into a star of the first magnitude, as Sir. William
      Herschel would have us believe was possible, if not probable.

      Besides, it is a definitely ascertained fact that such clusters of
      stars, lying in almost the same line of vision, exist in various
      parts of the heavens, which present to the naked eye the appearance
      of a star of the fourth or fifth magnitude, and probably would, if
      more thickly clustered, present that of a star of the first
      magnitude. But powerful telescopes resolve them into a large number
      of stars, from the thirteenth to the fifteenth magnitude. One such
      cluster in Andromeda's girdle has been resolved into not less than
      fifteen hundred small stars of very low magnitude, and pretty widely
      scattered in the telescopic field. Alexander Von Humboldt, in
      speaking of stars that have thus disappeared, says that "their
      disappearance may be the result of their motion as much as of any
      diminution of their photometric processes (whether on their surfaces
      or in their photospheres), as would render the waves of light too
      weak too excite the organs of sight." And he adds: "What we no
      longer see is not necessarily annihilation," repeating at the same
      time the question of Pliny--"_Stellæ an obirent nascerenturve?_"

      But another, and (to our mind) more satisfactory, explanation of
      these stellar phenomena, may be hazarded in this connection: There
      are, for instance, in the Milky-way, among the more brilliant
      clusters of stars, dark granular spots, of greater or less
      magnitude, in which the most powerful telescopes show no glints or
      traces of stars. They are among Humboldt's smaller "fissures or
      chasms in the heavens," in which he asserts that there is a great
      paucity of stars, or none at all. Now, if one of these thick stellar
      clusters, which show to the naked eye as a single star, should, by
      the combined cosmical movements of our sun-system and the stellar
      group in question, pass into the field of one of these small rents
      or "fissures" in the galactic curtain--that lying in front of the
      stellar cluster--it would immediately show as a star of possibly the
      first magnitude, and would continue to shine as a star of that
      magnitude so long as it remained in the field of the narrow rent or
      fissure. It would shine out suddenly like a star through a rift in
      the clouds of a dark night, and disappear as soon as it had
      traversed, or apparently traversed, the rift in question. This
      galactic curtain, it should be borne in mind, is made up of
      18,000,000 of stars, or sun-systems, and not less than 720,000,000
      dark cosmical bodies revolving about their respective centres of
      gravity. If the "nebular theory" of the universe be true, this is
      unquestionably the exact condition of things in the Milky-way. Of
      the more distant stars in this crowded galaxy, we can only catch,
      even in the telescopic field, mere glints of light as the
      intervening swarms of stellar and planetary worlds thicken in the
      foreground and shut out the more distant view. It is only through
      these rents and fissures in this great galactic curtain that the
      brighter stellar clusters beyond can ever be seen; and these glints
      of far distant light, showing dimly through this curtain, may
      account for the peculiar _milky_ appearance of the galaxy, arising
      from the loss of chromatic power in the full beams themselves. It
      was undoubtedly through one of these rents in the galactic curtain
      that the condensed starry cluster of Tycho Brahe suddenly made its
      appearance in the outer fringes of the Milky-way, and remained
      visible for a period of seventeen months.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Life: Its True Genesis, by R. W. Wright

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIFE: ITS TRUE GENESIS ***

***** This file should be named 9307-0.txt or 9307-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/9/3/0/9307/

Produced by Distributed Proofreaders
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


