CHAPTER XXXV

~Dakshina, and the Pigeon Monastery~


South from this two hundred yojanas, there is a country named Dakshina,
where there is a monastery dedicated to the by-gone Kasyapa Buddha, and
which has been hewn out from a large hill of rock. It consists in all of
five stories;--the lowest, having the form of an elephant, with five
hundred apartments in the rock; the second, having the form of a lion,
with four hundred apartments; the third, having the form of a horse,
with three hundred apartments; the fourth, having the form of an ox,
with two hundred apartments; and the fifth, having the form of a pigeon,
with one hundred apartments. At the very top there is a spring, the
water of which, always in front of the apartments in the rock, goes
round among the rooms, now circling, now curving, till in this way it
arrives at the lowest story, having followed the shape of the structure,
and flows out there at the door. Everywhere in the apartments of the
monks, the rock has been pierced so as to form windows for the admission
of light, so that they are all bright, without any being left in
darkness. At the four corners of the tiers of apartments, the rock has
been hewn so as to form steps for ascending to the top of each. The men
of the present day, being of small size, and going up step by step,
manage to get to the top; but in a former age they did so at one step.
Because of this, the monastery is called Paravata, that being the Indian
name for a pigeon. There are always Arhats residing in it.

The country about is a tract of uncultivated hillocks, without
inhabitants. At a very long distance from the hill there are villages,
where the people all have bad and erroneous views, and do not know the
Sramanas of the Law of Buddha, Brahmanas, or devotees of any of the
other and different schools. The people of that country are constantly
seeing men on the wing, who come and enter this monastery. On one
occasion, when devotees of various countries came to perform their
worship at it, the people of those villages said to them, "Why do you
not fly? The devotees whom we have seen hereabouts all fly"; and the
strangers answered, on the spur of the moment, "Our wings are not yet
fully formed."

The kingdom of Dakshina is out of the way, and perilous to traverse.
There are difficulties in connection with the roads; but those who know
how to manage such difficulties and wish to proceed should bring with
them money and various articles, and give them to the king. He will then
send men to escort them. These will, at different stages, pass them over
to others, who will show them the shortest routes. Fâ-hien, however, was
after all unable to go there; but having received the above accounts
from men of the country, he has narrated them.



CHAPTER XXXVI

~Fâ-Hien's Indian Studies~


From Vârânasî the travellers went back east to Pâtaliputtra. Fâ-hien's
original object had been to search for copies of the Vinaya. In the
various kingdoms of North India, however, he had found one master
transmitting orally the rules to another, but no written copies which he
could transcribe. He had therefore travelled far and come on to Central
India. Here, in the mahâyâna monastery, he found a copy of the Vinaya,
containing the Mahâsânghikâ [1] rules--those which were observed in the
first Great Council, while Buddha was still in the world. The original
copy was handed down in the Jetavana vihâra. As to the other eighteen
schools, each one has the views and decisions of its own masters. Those
agree with this in the general meaning, but they have small and trivial
differences, as when one opens and another shuts. This copy of the
rules, however, is the most complete, with the fullest explanations. [2]

He further got a transcript of the rules in six or seven thousand
gâthas, [3] being the sarvâstivâdâh [4] rules--those which are observed
by the communities of monks in the land of Ts'in; which also have all
been handed down orally from master to master without being committed to
writing. In the community here, moreover, he got the
Samyuktâbhi-dharma-hridaya-sâstra, containing about six or seven
thousand gâthas; he also got a Sûtra of two thousand five hundred
gâthas; one chapter of the Pari-nirvâna-vaipulya Sûtra, of about five
thousand gâthas; and the Mahâsânghikâ Abhidharma.

In consequence of this success in his quest Fâ-hien stayed here for
three years, learning Sanscrit books and the Sanscrit speech, and
writing out, the Vinaya rules. When Tâo-ching arrived in the Central
Kingdom, and saw the rules observed by the Sramanas, and the dignified
demeanor in their societies which he remarked under all occurring
circumstances, he sadly called to mind in what a mutilated and imperfect
condition the rules were among the monkish communities in the land of
Ts'in, and made the following aspiration: "From this time forth till I
come to the state of Buddha, let me not be born in a frontier-land." He
remained accordingly in India, and did not return to the land of Han.
Fâ-hien, however, whose original purpose had been to secure the
introduction of the complete Vinaya rules into the land of Han, returned
there alone.


[Footnote 1: Mahâsânghikâ simply means "the Great Assembly," that is, of
monks.]

[Footnote 2: It was afterwards translated by Fâ-hien into Chinese.]

[Footnote 3: A gâtha is a stanza, generally consisting of a few,
commonly of two, lines somewhat metrically arranged.]

[Footnote 4: "A branch," says Eitel, "of the great vaibhâshika school,
asserting the reality of all visible phenomena, and claiming the
authority of Râhula."]



