BOOK I

THE ODES OF CHOW AND THE SOUTH


~Celebrating the Virtue of King Wan's Bride~


  Hark! from the islet in the stream the voice
  Of the fish-hawks that o'er their nests rejoice!
  From them our thoughts to that young lady go,
  Modest and virtuous, loth herself to show.
  Where could be found to share our prince's state,
  So fair, so virtuous, and so fit a mate?

  See how the duckweed's stalks, or short or long,
  Sway left and right, as moves the current strong!
  So hard it was for him the maid to find!
  By day, by night, our prince with constant mind
  Sought for her long, but all his search was vain.
  Awake, asleep, he ever felt the pain
  Of longing thought, as when on restless bed,
  Tossing about, one turns his fevered head.

  Here long, there short, afloat the duckweed lies;
  But caught at last, we seize the longed-for prize.
  The maiden modest, virtuous, coy, is found;
  Strike every lute, and joyous welcome sound.
  Ours now, the duckweed from the stream we bear,
  And cook to use with other viands rare.
  He has the maiden, modest, virtuous, bright;
  Let bells and drums proclaim our great delight



~Celebrating the Industry of King Wan's Queen~

  Sweet was the scene. The spreading dolichos
  Extended far, down to the valley's depths,
  With leaves luxuriant. The orioles
  Fluttered around, and on the bushy trees
  In throngs collected--whence their pleasant notes
  Resounded far in richest melody.

  The spreading dolichos extended far,
  Covering the valley's sides, down to its depths,
  With leaves luxuriant and dense. I cut
  It down, then boiled, and from the fibres spun
  Of cloth, both fine and coarse, large store,
  To wear, unwearied of such simple dress.

  Now back to my old home, my parents dear
  To see, I go. The matron I have told,
  Who will announcement make. Meanwhile my clothes,
  My private clothes I wash, and rinse my robes.
  Which of them need be rinsed? and which need not?
  My parents dear to visit, back I go.



~In Praise of a Bride~

  Graceful and young the peach-tree stands;
    How rich its flowers, all gleaming bright!
  This bride to her new home repairs;
    Chamber and house she'll order right.

  Graceful and young the peach-tree stands;
    Large crops of fruit it soon will show.
  This bride to her new home repairs;
    Chamber and house her sway shall know.

  Graceful and young the peach-tree stands,
    Its foliage clustering green and full.
  This bride to her new home repairs;
    Her household will attest her rule.



~Celebrating T'ae-Sze's Freedom from Jealousy~

  In the South are the trees whose branches are bent,
  And droop in such fashion that o'er their extent
    All the dolichos' creepers fast cling.
  See our princely lady, from whom we have got
  Rejoicing that's endless! May her happy lot
    And her honors repose ever bring!

  In the South are the trees whose branches are bent,
  And droop in such fashion that o'er their extent
    All the dolichos' creepers are spread.
  See our princely lady, from whom we have got
  Rejoicing that's endless! Of her happy lot
    And her honors the greatness ne'er fade!

  In the South are the trees whose branches are bent,
  And droop in such fashion that o'er their extent
    All the dolichos' creepers entwine.
  See our princely lady, from whom we have got
  Rejoicing that's endless! May her happy lot
    And her honors complete ever shine!



~The Fruitfulness of the Locust~

  Ye locusts, wingèd tribes,
    Gather in concord fine;
  Well your descendants may
    In numerous bright hosts shine!

  Ye locusts, wingèd tribes,
    Your wings in flight resound;
  Well your descendants may
    In endless lines be found!

  Ye locusts, wingèd tribes,
    Together cluster strong;
  Well your descendants may
    In swarms forever throng!



~Lamenting the Absence of a Cherished Friend~

  Though small my basket, all my toil
    Filled it with mouse-ears but in part.
  I set it on the path, and sighed
    For the dear master of my heart.

  My steeds, o'er-tasked, their progress stayed,
    When midway up that rocky height.
  Give me a cup from that gilt vase--
    When shall this longing end in sight?

  To mount that lofty ridge I drove,
    Until my steeds all changed their hue.
  A cup from that rhinoceros's horn
    May help my longing to subdue.

  Striving to reach that flat-topped hill,
    My steeds, worn out, relaxed their strain;
  My driver also sank oppressed:--
    I'll never see my lord again!



~Celebrating the Goodness of the Descendants of King Wan~

  As the feet of the _lin_, which avoid each living thing,
  So our prince's noble sons no harm to men will bring.
                   They are the _lin!_

  As the front of the _lin_, never forward thrust in wrath,
  So our prince's noble grandsons of love tread the path.
                   They are the _lin!_

  As the horn of the _lin_, flesh-tipped, no wound to give,
  So our prince's noble kindred kindly with all live.
                   They are the _lin!_

[NOTE.--The "lin" is the female of "K'e"--a fabulous animal--the
symbol of all goodness and benevolence; having the body of a
deer, the tail of an ox, the hoofs of a horse, one horn, the scales of a
fish, etc. Its feet do not tread on any living thing--not even on live
grass; it does not butt with its forehead; and the end of its horn is
covered with flesh--to show that, while able for war, it wills to have
peace. The "lin" was supposed to appear inaugurating a golden age,
but the poet finds a better auspice of that in the character of Wan's
family and kindred.]



~The Virtuous Manners of the Young Women~

  High and compressed, the Southern trees
    No shelter from the sun afford.
  The girls free ramble by the Han,
    But will not hear enticing word.
  Like the broad Han are they,
    Through which one cannot dive;
  And like the Keang's long stream,
    Wherewith no raft can strive.

  Many the fagots bound and piled;
    The thorns I'd hew still more to make.
  As brides, those girls their new homes seek;
    Their colts to feed I'd undertake.
  Like the broad Han are they,
    Through which one cannot dive;
  And like the Keang's long stream,
    Wherewith no raft can strive.

  Many the fagots bound and piled;
    The Southern-wood I'd cut for more.
  As brides, those girls their new homes seek;
    Food for their colts I'd bring large store.
  Like the broad Han are they,
    Through which one cannot dive;
  And like the Keang's long stream,
    Wherewith no raft can strive.



~Praise of a Rabbit-Catcher~

  Careful he sets his rabbit-nets all round;
 _Chang-chang_ his blows upon the pegs resound.
  Stalwart the man and bold! his bearing all
  Shows he might be his prince's shield and wall.

  Careful he is his rabbit-nets to place
  Where many paths of rabbits' feet bear trace.
  Stalwart the man and bold! 'tis plain to see
  He to his prince companion good would be.

  Careful he is his rabbit-nets to spread,
  Where in the forest's depth the trees give shade.
  Stalwart the man and bold! fit his the part
  Guide to his prince to be, and faithful heart.



~The Song of the Plantain-Gatherers~

  We gather and gather the plantains;
    Come gather them anyhow.
  Yes, gather and gather the plantains,
    And here we have got them now.

  We gather and gather the plantains;
    Now off the ears we must tear.
  Yes, gather and gather the plantains,
    And now the seeds are laid bare.

  We gather and gather the plantains,
    The seeds in our skirts are placed.
  Yes, gather and gather the plantains.
    Ho! safe in the girdled waist!



~The Affection of the Wives on the Joo~

  Along the raised banks of the Joo,
    To hew slim stem and branch I wrought,
  My lord away, my husband true,
    Like hunger-pang my troubled thought!

  Along the raised banks of the Joo,
    Branch and fresh shoot confessed my art.
  I've seen my lord, my husband true,
    And still he folds me in his heart.

  As the toiled bream makes red its tail,
    Toil you, Sir, for the Royal House;
  Amidst its blazing fires, nor quail:--
    Your parents see you pay your vows.




