CHAPTER VIII

~Woo-chang, or Udyâna--Traces of Buddha~


After crossing the river, the travellers immediately came to the kingdom
of Woo-chang, which is indeed a part of North India. The people all use
the language of Central India, "Central India" being what we should call
the "Middle Kingdom." The food and clothes of the common people are the
same as in that Central Kingdom. The Law of Buddha is very flourishing
in Woo-chang. They call the places where the monks stay for a time or
reside permanently Sanghârâmas; and of these there are in all five
hundred, the monks being all students of the hînayâna. When stranger
bhikshus [1] arrive at one of them, their wants are supplied for three
days, after which they are told to find a resting-place for themselves.

There is a tradition that when Buddha came to North India, he came at
once to this country, and that here he left a print of his foot, which
is long or short according to the ideas of the beholder on the subject.
It exists, and the same thing is true about it, at the present day. Here
also are still to be seen the rock on which he dried his clothes, and
the place where he converted the wicked dragon. The rock is fourteen
cubits high, and more than twenty broad, with one side of it smooth.

Hwuy-king, Hwuy-tah, and Tâo-ching went on ahead towards the place of
Buddha's shadow in the country of Nâgara; but Fâ-hien and the others
remained in Woo-chang, and kept the summer retreat. That over, they
descended south, and arrived in the country of Soo-ho-to.


[Footnote 1: Bhikshu is the name for a monk as "living by alms," a
mendicant. All bhikshus call themselves Sramans. Sometimes the two names
are used together by our author.]



CHAPTER IX

~Soo-ho-to--Legends of Buddha~


In that country also Buddhism is flourishing. There is in it the place
where Sakra, [1] Ruler of Devas, in a former age, tried the Bodhisattva,
by producing a hawk in pursuit of a dove, when the Bodhisattva cut off a
piece of his own flesh, and with it ransomed the dove. After Buddha had
attained to perfect wisdom, and in travelling about with his disciples
arrived at this spot, he informed them that this was the place where he
ransomed the dove with a piece of his own flesh. In this way the people
of the country became aware of the fact, and on the spot reared a tope,
adorned with layers of gold and silver plates.


[Footnote 1: Sakra is a common name for the Brahmanic Indra, adopted by
Buddhism into the circle of its own great adherents;--it has been said,
"because of his popularity." He is now the representative of the secular
power, the valiant protector of the Buddhist body, but is looked upon as
inferior to Sâkyamuni, and every Buddhist saint.]



CHAPTER X

~Gandhâra--Legends of Buddha~


The travellers, going downwards from this towards the east, in five days
came to the country of Gandhâra, the place where Dharma-vivardhana, the
son of Asoka, [1] ruled. When Buddha was a Bodhisattva, he gave his eyes
also for another man here; and at the spot they have also reared a large
tope, adorned with layers of gold and silver plates. The people of the
country were mostly students of the hînayâna.


[Footnote 1: Asoka is here mentioned for the first time--the Constantine
of the Buddhist society, and famous for the number of vihâras and topes
which he erected. He was the grandson of Chandragupta, a rude
adventurer, who at one time was a refugee in the camp of Alexander the
Great; and within about twenty years afterwards drove the Greeks out of
India, having defeated Seleucus, the Greek ruler of the Indus provinces.
His grandson was converted to Buddhism by the bold and patient demeanor
of an Arhat whom he had ordered to be buried alive, and became a most
zealous supporter of the new faith.]



CHAPTER XI

~Takshasilâ--Legends--The Four Great Topes~


Seven days' journey from this to the east brought the travellers to the
kingdom of Takshasilâ, which means "the severed head" in the language of
China. Here, when Buddha was a Bodhisattva, he gave away his head to a
man; and from this circumstance the kingdom got its name.

Going on further for two days to the east, they came to the place where
the Bodhisattva threw down his body to feed a starving tigress. In these
two places also large topes have been built, both adorned with layers of
all the precious substances. The kings, ministers, and peoples of the
kingdoms around vie with one another in making offerings at them. The
trains of those who come to scatter flowers and light lamps at them
never cease. The nations of those quarters call those and the other two
mentioned before "the four great topes."



