CHAPTER V

~Great Quinquennial Assembly of Monks~


It happened that the king of the country was then holding the pañcha
parishad; that is, in Chinese, the great quinquennial assembly. When
this is to be held, the king requests the presence of the Sramans from
all quarters of his kingdom. They come as if in clouds; and when they
are all assembled, their place of session is grandly decorated. Silken
streamers and canopies are hung out in it, and water-lilies in gold and
silver are made and fixed up behind the places where the chief of them
are to sit. When clean mats have been spread, and they are all seated,
the king and his ministers present their offerings according to rule and
law. The assembly takes place in the first, second, or third month, for
the most part in the spring.

After the king has held the assembly, he further exhorts the ministers
to make other and special offerings. The doing of this extends over one,
two, three, five, or even seven days; and when all is finished, he takes
his own riding-horse, saddles, bridles, and waits on him himself, while
he makes the noblest and most important minister of the kingdom mount
him. Then, taking fine white woollen cloth, all sorts of precious
things, and articles which the Sramans require, he distributes them
among them, uttering vows at the same time along with all his ministers;
and when this distribution has taken place, he again redeems whatever he
wishes from the monks.

The country, being among the hills and cold, does not produce the other
cereals, and only the wheat gets ripe. After the monks have received
their annual portion of this, the mornings suddenly show the hoar-frost,
and on this account the king always begs the monks to make the wheat
ripen [1] before they receive their portion. There is in the country a
spittoon which belonged to Buddha, made of stone, and in color like his
alms-bowl. There is also a tooth of Buddha, for which the people have
reared a tope, connected with which there are more than a thousand monks
and their disciples, all students of the hînayâna. To the east of these
hills the dress of the common people is of coarse materials, as in our
country of Ts'in, but here also there were among them the differences of
fine woollen cloth and of serge or haircloth. The rules observed by the
Sramans are remarkable, and too numerous to be mentioned in detail. The
country is in the midst of the Onion range. As you go forward from these
mountains, the plants, trees, and fruits are all different from those of
the land of Han, excepting only the bamboo, pomegranate, and sugarcane.


[Footnote 1: Watters calls attention to this as showing that the monks
of K'eeh-ch'â had the credit of possessing weather-controlling powers.]



CHAPTER VI

~North India--Image of Maitreya Bodhisattva~


From this the travellers went westward towards North India, and after
being on the way for a month, they succeeded in getting across and
through the range of the Onion mountains. The snow rests on them both
winter and summer. There are also among them venomous dragons, which,
when provoked, spit forth poisonous winds, and cause showers of snow and
storms of sand and gravel. Not one in ten thousand of those who
encounter these dangers escapes with his life. The people of the country
call the range by the name of "The Snow mountains." When the travellers
had got through them, they were in North India, and immediately on
entering its borders, found themselves in a small kingdom called
T'oleih, where also there were many monks, all students of the hînayâna.

In this kingdom there was formerly an Arhan, [1] who by his supernatural
power took a clever artificer up to the Tushita [2] heaven, to see the
height, complexion, and appearance of Maitreya Bodhisattva, [3] and then
return and make an image of him in wood. First and last, this was done
three times, and then the image was completed, eighty cubits in height,
and eight cubits at the base from knee to knee of the crossed legs. On
fast-days it emits an effulgent light. The kings of the surrounding
countries vie with one another in presenting offerings to it. Here it
is--to be seen now as of old.

[Footnote 1: Lo-han, Arhat, Arahat are all designations of the perfected
Ârya, the disciple who has passed the different stages of the Noble
Path, or eightfold excellent way, who has conquered all passions, and is
not to be reborn again. Arhatship implies possession of certain
supernatural powers, and is not to be succeeded by Buddhaship, but
implies the fact of the saint having already attained Nirvâna.]

[Footnote 2: Tushita is the fourth Devaloka, where all Bodhisattvas are
reborn before finally appearing on earth as Buddha. Life lasts in
Tushita four thousand years, but twenty-four hours there are equal to
four hundred years on earth.]

[Footnote 3: Maitreya was a Bodhisattva, the principal one, indeed, of
Sâkyamuni's retinue, but is not counted among the ordinary disciples,
nor is anything told of his antecedents. It was in the Tushita heaven
that Sâkyamuni met him and appointed him as his successor, to appear as
Buddha after the lapse of five thousand years. Maitreya is therefore the
expected Messiah of the Buddhists, residing at present in Tushita.]



CHAPTER VII

~The Perilous Crossing of the Indus~


The travellers went on to the southwest for fifteen days at the foot of
the mountains, and following the course of their range. The way was
difficult and rugged, running along a bank exceedingly precipitous,
which rose up there, a hill-like wall of rock, ten thousand cubits from
the base. When one approached the edge of it, his eyes became unsteady;
and if he wished to go forward in the same direction, there was no place
on which he could place his foot; and beneath were the waters of the
river called the Indus. In former times men had chiselled paths along
the rocks, and distributed ladders on the face of them, to the number
altogether of seven hundred, at the bottom of which there was a
suspension bridge of ropes, by which the river was crossed, its banks
being there eighty paces apart. The place and arrangements are to be
found in the Records of the Nine Interpreters, but neither Chang K'een
[1] nor Kan Ying [2] had reached the spot.

The monks asked Fâ-hien if it could be known when the Law of Buddha
first went to the east. He replied, "When I asked the people of those
countries about it, they all said that it had been handed down by their
fathers from of old that, after the setting up of the image of Maitreya
Bodhisattva, there were Sramans of India who crossed this river,
carrying with them Sútras and Books of Discipline. Now the image was set
up rather more than three hundred years after the Nirvâna of Buddha,
which may be referred to the reign of king P'ing of the Chow dynasty.
According to this account we may say that the diffusion of our great
doctrines in the East began from the setting up of this image. If it had
not been through that Maitreya, the great spiritual master who is to be
the successor of the Sâkya, who could have caused the 'Three Precious
Ones,' [3] to be proclaimed so far, and the people of those border lands
to know our Law? We know of a truth that the opening of the way for such
a mysterious propagation is not the work of man; and so the dream of the
emperor Ming of Han had its proper cause."


[Footnote 1: Chang K'een, a minister of the emperor Woo of Han (B.C.
140-87), is celebrated as the first Chinese who "pierced the void," and
penetrated to "the regions of the west," corresponding very much to the
present Turkestan. Through him, by B.C. 115, a regular intercourse was
established between China and the thirty-six kingdoms or states of that
quarter.]

[Footnote 2: Less is known of Kan Ying than of Chang K'een. Being sent
in A.D. 88 by his patron Pan Châo on an embassy to the Roman empire, he
only got as far as the Caspian sea, and returned to China. He extended,
however, the knowledge of his countrymen with regard to the western
regions.]

[Footnote 3: "The precious Buddha," "the precious Law," and "the
precious Monkhood"; Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha; the whole being
equivalent to Buddhism.]



