CHAPTER XXIII

~Legends of Râma and its Tope~


East from Buddha's birthplace, and at a distance of five yojanas, there
is a kingdom called Râma. The king of this country, having obtained one
portion of the relics of Buddha's body, returned with it and built over
it a tope, named the Râma tope. By the side of it there was a pool, and
in the pool a dragon, which constantly kept watch over the tope, and
presented offerings at it day and night. When king Asoka came forth
into the world, he wished to destroy the eight topes over the relics,
and to build instead of them eighty-four thousand topes. [1] After he
had thrown down the seven others, he wished next to destroy this tope.
But then the dragon showed itself, and took the king into its palace;
when he had seen all the things provided for offerings, it said to him,
"If you are able with your offerings to exceed these, you can destroy
the tope, and take it all away. I will not contend with you." The king,
however, knew that such appliances for offerings were not to be had
anywhere in the world, and thereupon returned without carrying out his
purpose.

Afterwards, the ground all about became overgrown with vegetation, and
there was nobody to sprinkle and sweep about the tope; but a herd of
elephants came regularly, which brought water with their trunks to water
the ground, and various kinds of flowers and incense, which they
presented at the tope. Once there came from one of the kingdoms a
devotee to worship at the tope. When he encountered the elephants he was
greatly alarmed, and screened himself among the trees; but when he saw
them go through with the offerings in the most proper manner, the
thought filled him with great sadness--that there should be no monastery
here, the inmates of which might serve the tope, but the elephants have
to do the watering and sweeping. Forthwith he gave up the great
prohibitions by which he was bound, and resumed the status of a
Srâmanera. With his own hands he cleared away the grass and trees, put
the place in good order, and made it pure and clean. By the power of his
exhortations, he prevailed on the king of the country to form a
residence for monks; and when that was done, he became head of the
monastery. At the present day there are monks residing in it. This event
is of recent occurrence; but in all the succession from that time till
now, there has always been a Srâmanera head of the establishment.

[Footnote 1: The bones of the human body are supposed to consist of
84,000 atoms, and hence the legend of Asoka's wish to build 84,000
topes, one over each atom of Sakyamuni's skeleton.]



CHAPTER XXIV

~Where Buddha Renounced the World~


East from here four yojanas, there is the place where the heir-apparent
sent back Chandaka, with his white horse; and there also a tope was
erected.

Four yojanas to the east from this, the travellers came to the Charcoal
tope, where there is also a monastery.

Going on twelve yojanas, still to the east, they came to the city of
Kusanagara, on the north of which, between two trees, on the bank of the
Nairañjanâ river, is the place where the World-honored one, with his
head to the north, attained to pan-nirvâna and died. There also are the
places where Subhadra, [1] the last of his converts, attained to Wisdom
and became an Arhat; where in his coffin of gold they made offerings to
the World-honored one for seven days, where the Vajrapâni laid aside his
golden club, and where the eight kings divided the relics of the burnt
body: at all these places were built topes and monasteries, all of which
are now existing.

In the city the inhabitants are few and far between, comprising only the
families belonging to the different societies of monks.

Going from this to the southeast for twelve yojanas, they came to the
place where the Lichchhavis wished to follow Buddha to the place of his
pari-nirvâna, and where, when he would not listen to them and they kept
cleaving to him, unwilling to go away, he made to appear a large and
deep ditch which they could not cross over, and gave them his alms-bowl,
as a pledge of his regard, thus sending them back to their families.
There a stone pillar was erected with an account of this event engraved
upon it.


[Footnote 1: A Brahman of Benâres, said to have been one hundred and
twenty years old, who came to learn from Buddha the very night he died.
Ânanda would have repulsed him; but Buddha ordered him to be introduced;
and then putting aside the ingenious but unimportant question which he
propounded, preached to him the Law. The Brahman was converted and
attained at once to Arhatship.]



CHAPTER XXV

~The Kingdom of Vaisâlî~


East from this city ten yojanas, the travellers came to the kingdom of
Vaisâlî. North of the city so named is a large forest, having in it the
double-galleried vihâra where Buddha dwelt, and the tope over half the
body of Ânanda. Inside the city the woman Âmbapâlî [1] built a vihâra in
honor of Buddha, which is now standing as it was at first. Three li
south of the city, on the west of the road, is the garden which the same
Âmbapâlî presented to Buddha, in which he might reside. When Buddha was
about to attain to his pari-nirvâna, as he was quitting the city by the
west gate, he turned round, and, beholding the city on his right, said
to them, "Here I have taken my last walk." Men subsequently built a tope
at this spot.

Three li northwest of the city there is a tope called, "Bows and weapons
laid down." The reason why it got that name was this: The inferior wife
of a king, whose country lay along the river Ganges, brought forth from
her womb a ball of flesh. The superior wife, jealous of the other, said,
"You have brought forth a thing of evil omen," and immediately it was
put into a box of wood and thrown into the river. Farther down the
stream another king was walking and looking about, when he saw the
wooden box floating in the water. He had it brought to him, opened it,
and found a thousand little boys, upright and complete, and each one
different from the others. He took them and had them brought up. They
grew tall and large, and very daring and strong, crushing all opposition
in every expedition which they undertook. By and by they attacked the
kingdom of their real father, who became in consequence greatly
distressed and sad. His inferior wife asked what it was that made him
so, and he replied, "That king has a thousand sons, daring and strong
beyond compare, and he wishes with them to attack my kingdom; this is
what makes me sad." The wife said, "You need not be sad and sorrowful.
Only make a high gallery on the wall of the city on the east; and when
the thieves come, I shall be able to make them retire." The king did as
she said; and when the enemies came, she said to them from the tower,
"You are my sons; why are you acting so unnaturally and rebelliously?"
They replied, "Who are you that say you are our mother?" "If you do not
believe me," she said, "look, all of you, towards me, and open your
mouths." She then pressed her breasts with her two hands, and each sent
forth five hundred jets of milk, which fell into the mouths of the
thousand sons. The thieves thus knew that she was their mother, and laid
down their bows and weapons. The two kings, the fathers, hereupon fell
into reflection, and both got to be Pratyeka Buddhas. The tope of the
two Pratyeka Buddhas is still existing.

In a subsequent age, when the World-honored one had attained to perfect
Wisdom and become Buddha, he said to his disciples, "This is the place
where I in a former age laid down my bow and weapons." [2] It was thus
that subsequently men got to know the fact, and raised the tope on this
spot, which in this way received its name. The thousand little boys were
the thousand Buddhas of this Bhadra-kalpa. [3]

It was by the side of the "Weapons-laid-down" tope that Buddha, having
given up the idea of living longer, said to Ânanda, "In three months
from this I will attain to pari-nirvâna"; and king Mâra [4] had so
fascinated and stupefied Ânanda, that he was not able to ask Buddha to
remain longer in this world.

Three or four li east from this place there is a tope commemorating the
following occurrence: A hundred years after the pari-nirvâna of Buddha,
some Bhikshus of Vaisâlî went wrong in the matter of the disciplinary
rules in ten particulars, and appealed for their justification to what
they said were the words of Buddha. Hereupon the Arhats and Bhikshus
observant of the rules, to the number in all of seven hundred monks,
examined afresh and collated the collection of disciplinary books [5].
Subsequently men built at this place the tope in question, which is
still existing.


[Footnote 1: Âmbapâlî, Âmrapâlî, or Âmradarikâ, "the guardian of the
Âmra (probably the mango) tree," is famous in Buddhist annals. She was a
courtesan. She had been in many nârakas or hells, was one hundred
thousand times a female beggar, and ten thousand times a prostitute; but
maintaining perfect continence during the period of Kâsyana Buddha,
Sakyamuni's predecessor, she had been born a devî, and finally appeared
in earth under an Âmra tree in Vaisâlî. There again she fell into her
old ways, and had a son by king Bimbisâra; but she was won over by
Buddha to virtue and chastity, renounced the world, and attained to the
state of an Arhat.]

[Footnote 2: Thus Sâkyamuni had been one of the thousand little boys who
floated in the box in the Ganges. How long back the former age was we
cannot tell. I suppose the tope of the two fathers who became Pratyeka
Buddhas had been built like the one commemorating the laying down of
weapons after Buddha had told his disciples of the strange events in the
past.]

[Footnote 3: Bhadra-kalpa, "the Kalpa of worthies or sages." "This,"
says Eitel, "is a designation for a Kalpa of stability, so-called
because one thousand Buddhas appear in the course of it. Our present
period is a Bhadra-kalpa, and four Buddhas have already appeared. It is
to last two hundred and thirty-six millions of years, but over one
hundred and fifty-one millions have already elapsed."]

[Footnote 4: "The king of demons." The name Mara is explained by "the
murderer," "the destroyer of virtue," and similar appellations. "He is,"
says Eitel, "the personification of lust, the god of love, sin, and
death, the arch-enemy of goodness, residing in the heaven Paranirmita
Vasavartin on the top of the Kamadhatu. He assumes different forms,
especially monstrous ones, to tempt or frighten the saints, or sends his
daughters, or inspires wicked men like Devadatta or the Nirgranthas to
do his work. He is often represented with 100 arms, and riding on an
elephant."]

[Footnote 5: Or the Vinaya-pitaka. The meeting referred to was an
important one, and is generally spoken of as the second Great Council of
the Buddhist Church. The first Council was that held at Râjagriha,
shortly after Buddha's death, under the presidency of Kâsyapa--say about
B.C. 410. The second was that spoken of here--say about B.C. 300.]



