CHAPTER I

~From Ch'ang-gan to the Sandy Desert~


Fâ-Hien had been living in Ch'ang-gan. [1] Deploring the mutilated and
imperfect state of the collection of the Books of Discipline, in the
second year of the period Hwang-che, being the Ke-hâe year of the cycle,
[2] he entered into an engagement with Hwuy-king, Tâo-ching, Hwuy-ying,
and Hwuy-wei, that they should go to India and seek for the Disciplinary
Rules.

After starting from Ch'ang-gan, they passed through Lung, [3] and came
to the kingdom of K'een-kwei,[4] where they stopped for the summer
retreat. When that was over, they went forward to the kingdom of
Now-t'an, crossed the mountain of Yang-low, and reached the emporium of
Chang-yih.[5] There they found the country so much disturbed that
travelling on the roads was impossible for them. Its king, however, was
very attentive to them, kept them in his capital, and acted the part of
their dânapati.[6]

Here they met with Che-yen, Hwuy-keen, Sang-shâo, Pâo-yun, and
Sang-king; and in pleasant association with them, as bound on the same
journey with themselves, they passed the summer retreat of that year [7]
together, resuming after it their travelling, and going on to
T'un-hwang, [8] the chief town in the frontier territory of defence
extending for about eighty li from east to west, and about forty from
north to south. Their company, increased as it had been, halted there
for some days more than a month, after which Fâ-hien and his four
friends started first in the suite of an envoy, having separated for a
time from Pâo-yun and his associates.

Le Hâo, the prefect of Tun-hwang, had supplied them with the means of
crossing the desert before them, in which there are many evil demons and
hot winds. Travellers who encounter them perish all to a man. There is
not a bird to be seen in the air above, nor an animal on the ground
below. Though you look all round most earnestly to find where you can
cross, you know not where to make your choice, the only mark and
indication being the dry bones of the dead left upon the sand.


[Footnote 1: Ch'ang-gan is still the name of the principal district (and
its city) in the department of Se-gan, Shen-se. It had been the capital
of the first empire of Han (B.C. 202 A.D. 24), as it subsequently was
that of Suy (A.D. 589-618).]

[Footnote 2: The period Hwang-che embraced from A.D. 399 to 414, being
the greater portion of the reign of Yâo Hing of the After Ts'in, a
powerful prince. He adopted Hwang-che for the style of his reign in 399,
and the cyclical name of that year was Kang-tsze. It is not possible at
this distance of time to explain, if it could be explained, how Fâ-hien
came to say that Ke-hâe was the second year of the period. It seems most
reasonable to suppose that he set out on his pilgrimage in A.D. 399, the
cycle name of which was Ke-hâe. In the "Memoirs of Eminent Monks" it is
said that our author started in the third year of the period Lung-gan of
the Eastern Ts'in, which was A.D. 399.]

[Footnote 3: Lung embraced the western part of Shen-se and the eastern
part of Kan-suh. The name remains in Lung Chow, in the extreme west of
Shen-se.]

[Footnote 4: K'een-kwei was the second king of "the Western Ts'in."
Fâ-hien would find him at his capital, somewhere in the present
department of Lan-chow, Kan-suh.]

[Footnote 5: Chang-yih is still the name of a district in Kan-chow
department, Kan-suh. It is a long way north and west from Lan-chow, and
not far from the Great Wall. Its king at this time was, probably,
Twan-yeh of "the northern Lëang."]

[Footnote 6: Dâna is the name for religious charity, the first of the
six pâramitâs, or means of attaining to nirvâna; and a dânapati is "one
who practises dâna and thereby crosses the sea of misery."]

[Footnote 7: This was the second summer since the pilgrims left
Ch'ang-gan. We are now, therefore, probably, in A.D. 400.]

[Footnote 8: T'un-hwang is still the name of one of the two districts
constituting the department of Gan-se, the most western of the
prefectures of Kan-suh; beyond the termination of the Great Wall.]



CHAPTER II

~On to Shen-shen and thence to Khoten~


After travelling for seventeen days, a distance we may calculate of
about 1500 li, the pilgrims reached the kingdom of Shen-shen, a country
rugged and hilly, with a thin and barren soil. The clothes of the common
people are coarse, and like those worn in our land of Han, [1] some
wearing felt and others coarse serge or cloth of hair; this was the only
difference seen among them. The king professed our Law, and there might
be in the country more than four thousand monks, who were all students
of the hînayâna. [2] The common people of this and other kingdoms in
that region, as well as the Sramans, [3] all practise the rules of
India, only that the latter do so more exactly, and the former more
loosely. So the travellers found it in all the kingdoms through which
they went on their way from this to the west, only that each had its own
peculiar barbarous speech. The monks, however, who had given up the
worldly life and quitted their families, were all students of Indian
books and the Indian language. Here they stayed for about a month, and
then proceeded on their journey, fifteen days' walking to the northwest
bringing them to the country of Woo-e. In this also there were more than
four thousand monks, all students of the hînayâna. They were very strict
in their rules, so that Sramans from the territory of Ts'in were all
unprepared for their regulations. Fâ-hien, through the management of Foo
Kung-sun, _maître d'hotellerie_, was able to remain with his company in
the monastery where they were received for more than two months, and
here they were rejoined by Pâo-yun and his friends. At the end of that
time the people of Woo-e neglected the duties of propriety and
righteousness, and treated the strangers in so niggardly a manner that
Che-yen, Hwuy-keen, and Hwuy-wei went back towards Kâo-ch'ang, hoping to
obtain there the means of continuing their journey. Fâ-hien and the
rest, however, through the liberality of Foo Kung-sun, managed to go
straight forward in a southwest direction. They found the country
uninhabited as they went along. The difficulties which they encountered
in crossing the streams and on their route, and the sufferings which
they endured, were unparalleled in human experience, but in the course
of a month and five days they succeeded in reaching Yu-teen.


[Footnote 1: This is the name which Fâ-hien always uses when he would
speak of China, his native country, as a whole, calling it from the
great dynasty which had ruled it, first and last, for between four and
five centuries. Occasionally, as we shall immediately see, he speaks of
"the territory of Ts'in or Ch'in," but intending thereby only the
kingdom of Ts'in, having its capital in Ch'ang-gan.]

[Footnote 2: Meaning the "small vehicle, or conveyance." There are in
Buddhism the triyâna, or "three different means of salvation, i.e. of
conveyance across the samsâra, or sea of transmigration, to the shores
of nirvâna. Afterwards the term was used to designate the different
phases of development through which the Buddhist dogma passed, known as
the mahâyâna, hînayâna, and madhyamayâna." "The hînayâna is the simplest
vehicle of salvation, corresponding to the first of the three degrees of
saintship." E.H., pp. 151-2, 45, and 117.]

[Footnote 3: "Sraman" may in English take the place of Sramana, the name
for Buddhist monks, as those who have separated themselves from (left)
their families, and quieted their hearts from all intrusion of desire
and lust.]



