CHAPTER XXVIII

~Râjagriha, New and Old--Legends Connected with It~


The travellers went on from this to the southeast for nine yojanas, and
came to a small solitary rocky hill, at the head or end of which was an
apartment of stone, facing the south--the place where Buddha sat, when
Sakra, Ruler of Devas, brought the deva-musician, Pañchasikha, to give
pleasure to him by playing on his lute. Sakra then asked Buddha about
forty-two subjects, tracing the questions out with his finger one by one
on the rock. The prints of his tracing are still there; and here also
there is a monastery.

A yojana southwest from this place brought them to the village of Nâla,
where Sâriputtra was born, and to which also he returned, and attained
here his pari-nirvâna. Over the spot where his body was burned there was
built a tope, which is still in existence.

Another yojana to the west brought them to New Râjagriha--the new city
which was built by king Ajâtasatru. There were two monasteries in it.
Three hundred paces outside the west gate, king Ajâtasatru, having
obtained one portion of the relics of Buddha, built over them a tope,
high, large, grand, and beautiful. Leaving the city by the south gate,
and proceeding south four li, one enters a valley, and comes to a
circular space formed by five hills, which stand all round it, and have
the appearance of the suburban wall of a city. Here was the old city of
king Bimbisâra; from east to west about five or six li, and from north
to south seven or eight. It was here that Sâriputtra and Maudgalyâyana
first saw Upasena [1]; that the Nirgrantha made a pit of fire and
poisoned the rice, and then invited Buddha to eat with him; that king
Ajâtasatru made a black elephant intoxicated with liquor, wishing him to
injure Buddha; and that at the northeast corner of the city in a large
curving space Jîvaka built a vihâra in the garden of Âmbapâlî, and
invited Buddha with his one thousand two hundred and fifty disciples to
it, that he might there make his offerings to support them. These places
are still there as of old, but inside the city all is emptiness and
desolation; no man dwells in it.

[Footnote 1: One of the five first followers of Sakyamuni. He is also
called Asvajit; in Pali Assaji; but Asvajit seems to be a military
title, "Master or trainer of horses." The two more famous disciples met
him, not to lead him, but to be directed by him, to Buddha.]



CHAPTER XXIX

~Fâ-Hien Passes a Night on Gridhra-kûta Hill~


Entering the valley, and keeping along the mountains on the southeast,
after ascending fifteen li, the travellers came to mount Gridhra-kûta.
Three li before you reach the top, there is a cavern in the rocks,
facing the south, in which Buddha sat in meditation. Thirty paces to the
northwest there is another, where Ânanda was sitting in meditation, when
the deva Mâra Pisuna, having assumed the form of a large vulture, took
his place in front of the cavern, and frightened the disciple. Then
Buddha, by his mysterious, supernatural power, made a cleft in the rock,
introduced his hand, and stroked Ânanda's shoulder, so that his fear
immediately passed away. The footprints of the bird and the cleft for
Buddha's hand are still there, and hence comes the name of "The Hill of
the Vulture Cavern."

In front of the cavern there are the places where the four Buddhas sat.
There are caverns also of the Arhats, one where each sat and meditated,
amounting to several hundred in all. At the place where in front of his
rocky apartment Buddha was walking from east to west in meditation, and
Devadatta, from among the beetling cliffs on the north of the mountain,
threw a rock across, and hurt Buddha's toes, the rock is still there.

The hall where Buddha preached his Law has been destroyed, and only the
foundations of the brick walls remain. On this hill the peak is
beautifully green, and rises grandly up; it is the highest of all the
five hills. In the New City Fâ-hien bought incense-sticks, flowers, oil
and lamps, and hired two bhikshus, long resident at the place, to carry
them to the peak. When he himself got to it, he made his offerings with
the flowers and incense, and lighted the lamps when the darkness began
to come on. He felt melancholy, but restrained his tears and said, "Here
Buddha delivered the Sûrângama Sûtra. I, Fâ-hien, was born when I could
not meet with Buddha; and now I only see the footprints which he has
left, and the place where he lived, and nothing more." With this, in
front of the rock cavern, he chanted the Sûrângama Sûtra, remained there
over the night, and then returned towards the New City.



CHAPTER XXX

~Srataparna Cave, or Cave of the First Council~


Out from the old city, after walking over three hundred paces, on the
west of the road, the travellers found the Karanda Bamboo garden, where
the old vihâra is still in existence, with a company of monks, who keep
the ground about it swept and watered.

North of the vihâra two or three li there was the Smasânam, which name
means in Chinese "the field of graves into which the dead are thrown."

As they kept along the mountain on the south, and went west for three
hundred paces, they found a dwelling among the rocks, named the Pippala
cave, in which Buddha regularly sat in meditation after taking his
mid-day meal.

Going on still to the west for five or six li, on the north of the hill,
in the shade, they found the cavern called Srataparna, [1] the place
where, after the nirvâna of Buddha, five hundred Arhats collected the
Sûtras. When they brought the Sûtras forth, three lofty seats had been
prepared and grandly ornamented. Sâriputtra occupied the one on the
left, and Maudgalyâyana that on the right. Of the number of five hundred
one was wanting. Mahâkasyapa was president on the middle seat. Ânanda
was then outside the door, and could not get in. At the place there was
subsequently raised a tope, which is still existing.

Along the sides of the hill, there are also a very great many cells
among the rocks, where the various Arhans sat and meditated. As you
leave the old city on the north, and go down east for three li, there is
the rock dwelling of Devadatta, and at a distance of fifty paces from it
there is a large, square, black rock. Formerly there was a bhikshu, who,
as he walked backwards and forwards upon it, thought with
himself:--"This body is impermanent, a thing of bitterness and vanity,
and which cannot be looked on as pure. I am weary of this body, and
troubled by it as an evil." With this he grasped a knife, and was about
to kill himself. But he thought again:--"The World-honored one laid down
a prohibition against one's killing himself." [2] Further it occurred to
him:--"Yes, he did; but I now only wish to kill three poisonous
thieves." Immediately with the knife he cut his throat. With the first
gash into the flesh he attained the state of a Srotâpanna; when he had
gone half through, he attained to be an Anâgâmin; and when he had cut
right through, he was an Arhat, and attained to pari-nirvâna, and died.


[Footnote 1: A very great place in the annals of Buddhism. The Council
in the Srataparna cave did not come together fortuitously, but appears
to have been convoked by the older members to settle the rules and
doctrines of the order. The cave was prepared for the occasion by king
Ajâtasatru.]

[Footnote 2: Buddha made a law forbidding the monks to commit suicide.
He prohibited any one from discoursing on the miseries of life in such a
manner as to cause desperation.]



