BOOK I

KING HWUY OF LËANG


Part I

Mencius went to see King Hwuy of Lëang. [1] The king said, "Venerable
Sir, since you have not counted it far to come here a distance of a
thousand li, may I presume that you are likewise provided with counsels
to profit my kingdom?" Mencius replied, "Why must your Majesty used that
word 'profit'? What I am likewise provided with are counsels to
benevolence and righteousness; and these are my only topics.

"If your Majesty say, 'What is to be done to profit my kingdom?' the
great officers will say, 'What is to be done to profit our families?'
and the inferior officers and the common people will say, 'What is to be
done to profit our persons?' Superiors and inferiors will try to take
the profit the one from the other, and the kingdom will be endangered.
In the kingdom of ten thousand chariots, the murderer of his ruler will
be the chief of a family of a thousand chariots. In the State of a
thousand chariots, the murderer of his ruler will be the chief of a
family of a hundred chariots. To have a thousand in ten thousand, and a
hundred in a thousand, cannot be regarded as not a large allowance; but
if righteousness be put last and profit first, they will not be
satisfied without snatching all.

"There never was a man trained to benevolence who neglected his parents.
There never was a man trained to righteousness who made his ruler an
after consideration. Let your Majesty likewise make benevolence and
righteousness your only themes--Why must you speak of profit?"

When Mencius, another day, was seeing King Hwuy of Lëang, the King went
and stood with him by a pond, and, looking round on the wild geese and
deer, large and small, said, "Do wise and good princes also take
pleasure in these things?" Mencius replied, "Being wise and good, they
then have pleasure in these things. If they are not wise and good,
though they have these things, they do not find pleasure." It is said in
the 'Book of Poetry':--

  'When he planned the commencement of the Marvellous tower,
  He planned it, and defined it,
  And the people in crowds undertook the work,
  And in no time completed it.
  When he planned the commencement, he said, "Be not in a hurry."
  But the people came as if they were his children.
  The king was in the Marvellous park,
  Where the does were lying down--
  The does so sleek and fat;
  With the white birds glistening.
  The king was by the Marvellous pond;--
  How full was it of fishes leaping about!'

King Wan used the strength of the people to make his tower and pond, and
the people rejoiced to do the work, calling the tower 'the Marvellous
Tower,' and the pond 'the Marvellous Pond,' and being glad that he had
his deer, his fishes and turtles. The ancients caused their people to
have pleasure as well as themselves, and therefore they could enjoy it.

"In the Declaration of T'ang it is said, 'O Sun, when wilt thou expire?
We will die together with thee.' The people wished for Këeh's death,
though they should die with him. Although he had his tower, his pond,
birds and animals, how could he have pleasure alone?"

King Hwuy of Lëang said, "Small as my virtue is, in the government of my
kingdom, I do indeed exert my mind to the utmost. If the year be bad
inside the Ho, I remove as many of the people as I can to the east of
it, and convey grain to the country inside. If the year be bad on the
east of the river, I act on the same plan. On examining the governmental
methods of the neighboring kingdoms, I do not find there is any ruler
who exerts his mind as I do. And yet the people of the neighboring kings
do not decrease, nor do my people increase--how is this?"

Mencius replied, "Your Majesty loves war; allow me to take an
illustration from war. The soldiers move forward at the sound of the
drum; and when the edges of their weapons have been crossed, on one
side, they throw away their buff coats, trail their weapons behind them,
and run. Some run a hundred paces and then stop; some run fifty paces
and stop. What would you think if these, because they had run but fifty
paces, should laugh at those who ran a hundred paces?" The king said,
"They cannot do so. They only did not run a hundred paces; but they also
ran." Mencius said, "Since your Majesty knows this you have no ground to
expect that your people will become more numerous than those of the
neighboring kingdoms.

"If the seasons of husbandry be not interfered with, the grain will be
more than can be eaten. If close nets are not allowed to enter the pools
and ponds, the fish and turtles will be more than can be consumed. If
the axes and bills enter the hill-forests only at the proper times, the
wood will be more than can be used. When the grain and fish and turtles
are more than can be eaten, and there is more wood than can be used,
this enables the people to nourish their living and do all offices for
their dead, without any feeling against any. But this condition, in
which the people nourish their living, and do all offices to their dead
without having any feeling against any, is the first step in the Royal
way.

"Let mulberry trees be planted about the homesteads with their five
acres, and persons of fifty years will be able to wear silk. In keeping
fowls, pigs, dogs, and swine, let not their time of breeding be
neglected, and persons of seventy years will be able to eat flesh. Let
there not be taken away the time that is proper for the cultivation of
the field allotment of a hundred acres, and the family of several mouths
will not suffer from hunger. Let careful attention be paid to the
teaching in the various schools, with repeated inculcation of the filial
and fraternal duties, and gray-haired men will not be seen upon the
roads, carrying burdens on their backs or on their heads. It has never
been that the ruler of a State where these results were seen, persons of
seventy wearing silk and eating flesh, and the black-haired people
suffering neither from hunger nor cold, did not attain to the Royal
dignity.

"Your dogs and swine eat the food of men, and you do not know to store
up of the abundance. There are people dying from famine on the roads,
and you do not know to issue your stores for their relief. When men die,
you say, 'It is not owing to me; it is owing to the year,' In what does
this differ from stabbing a man and killing him, and then saying, 'It
was not I; it was the weapon'? Let your Majesty cease to lay the blame
on the year and instantly the people, all under the sky, will come to
you."

King Hwuy of Lëang said, "I wish quietly to receive your instructions."
Mencius replied, "Is there any difference between killing a man with a
stick and with a sword?" "There is no difference," was the answer.

Mencius continued, "Is there any difference between doing it with a
sword and with governmental measures?" "There is not," was the answer
again.

Mencius then said, "In your stalls there are fat beasts; in your stables
there are fat horses. But your people have the look of hunger, and in
the fields there are those who have died of famine. This is leading on
beasts to devour men. Beasts devour one another, and men hate them for
doing so. When he who is called the parent of the people conducts his
government so as to be chargeable with leading on beasts to devour men,
where is that parental relation to the people? Chung-ne said, 'Was he
not without posterity who first made wooden images to bury with the
dead?' So he said, because that man made the semblances of men and used
them for that purpose; what shall be thought of him who causes his
people to die of hunger?"

King Hwuy of Lëang said, "There was not in the kingdom a stronger State
than Ts'in, as you, venerable Sir, know. But since it descended to me,
on the east we were defeated by Ts'e, and then my eldest son perished;
on the west we lost seven hundred li of territory to Ts'in; and on the
south we have sustained disgrace at the hands of Ts'oo. I have brought
shame on my departed predecessors, and wish on their account to wipe it
away once for all. What course is to be pursued to accomplish this?"

Mencius replied, "With a territory only a hundred li square it has been
possible to obtain the Royal dignity. If your Majesty will indeed
dispense a benevolent government to the people, being sparing in the use
of punishments and fines, and making the taxes and levies of produce
light, so causing that the fields shall be ploughed deep, and the
weeding well attended to, and that the able-bodied, during their days of
leisure, shall cultivate their filial piety, fraternal duty,
faithfulness, and truth, serving thereby, at home, their fathers and
elder brothers, and, abroad, their elders and superiors, you will then
have a people who can be employed with sticks which they have prepared
to oppose the strong buff-coats and sharp weapons of the troops of Ts'in
and Ts'oo.

"The rulers of those States rob their people of their time, so that they
cannot plough and weed their fields in order to support their parents.
Parents suffer from cold and hunger; elder and younger brothers, wives
and children, are separated and scattered abroad. Those rulers drive
their people into pitfalls or into the water; and your Majesty will go
to punish them. In such a case, who will oppose your Majesty? In
accordance with this is the saying, 'The benevolent has no enemy!' I beg
your Majesty not to doubt what I said."

Mencius had an interview with King Sëang[2] of Lëang. When he came out
he said to some persons, "When I looked at him from a distance, he did
not appear like a ruler; when I drew near to him, I saw nothing
venerable about him. Abruptly he asked me, 'How can the kingdom, all
under the sky, be settled?' I replied, 'It will be settled by being
united under one sway,'

"'Who can so unite it?' he asked.

"I replied, 'He who has no pleasure in killing men can so unite it.'

"'Who can give it to him?' he asked.

"I replied, 'All under heaven will give it to him. Does your Majesty
know the way of the growing grain? During the seventh and eighth months,
when drought prevails, the plants become dry. Then the clouds collect
densely in the heavens, and send down torrents of rain, so that the grain
erects itself as if by a shoot. When it does so, who can keep it back?
Now among those who are shepherds of men throughout the kingdom, there
is not one who does not find pleasure in killing men. If there were one
who did not find pleasure in killing men, all the people under the sky
would be looking towards him with outstretched necks. Such being indeed
the case, the people would go to him as water flows downwards with a
rush, which no one can repress."

King Seuen of Ts'e asked, saying, "May I be informed by you of the
transactions of Hwan of Ts'e and Wan of Ts'in?"

Mencius replied, "There were none of the disciples of Chung-ne who spoke
about the affairs of Hwan and Wan, and therefore they have not been
transmitted to these after-ages; your servant has not heard of them. If
you will have me speak, let it be about the principles of attaining to
the Royal sway."

The king said, "Of what kind must his virtue be who can attain to the
Royal sway?" Mencius said, "If he loves and protects the people, it is
impossible to prevent him from attaining it."

The king said, "Is such an one as poor I competent to love and protect
the people?" "Yes," was the reply. "From what do you know that I am
competent to that?" "I have heard," said Mencius, "from Hoo Heih the
following incident:--'The king,' said he, 'was sitting aloft in the
hall, when some people appeared leading a bull past below it. The king
saw it, and asked where the bull was going, and being answered that they
were going to consecrate a bell with its blood, he said, "Let it go, I
cannot bear its frightened appearance--as if it were an innocent person
going to the place of death." They asked in reply whether, if they did
so, they should omit the consecration of the bell, but the king said,
"How can that be omitted? Change it for a sheep."' I do not know whether
this incident occurred."

"It did," said the king, and Mencius replied, "The heart seen in this is
sufficient to carry you to the Royal sway. The people all supposed that
your Majesty grudged the animal, but your servant knows surely that it
was your Majesty's not being able to bear the sight of the creature's
distress which made you do as you did."

The king said, "You are right; and yet there really was an appearance of
what the people imagined. But though Ts'e be narrow and small, how
should I grudge a bull? Indeed it was because I could not bear its
frightened appearance, as if it were an innocent person going to the
place of death, that therefore I changed it for a sheep."

Mencius said, "Let not your Majesty deem it strange that the people
should think you grudged the animal. When you changed a large one for a
small, how should they know the true reason? If you felt pained by its
being led without any guilt to the place of death, what was there to
choose between a bull and a sheep?" The king laughed and said, "What
really was my mind in the matter? I did not grudge the value of the
bull, and yet I changed it for a sheep! There was reason in the people's
saying that I grudged the creature."

Mencius said, "There is no harm in their saying so. It was an artifice
of benevolence. You saw the bull, and had not seen the sheep. So is the
superior man affected towards animals, that, having seen them alive, he
cannot bear to see them die, and, having heard their dying cries, he
cannot bear to eat their flesh. On this account he keeps away from his
stalls and kitchen."

The king was pleased and said, "The Ode says,

  'What other men have in their minds,
  I can measure by reflection,'

This might be spoken of you, my Master. I indeed did the thing, but when
I turned my thoughts inward and sought for it, I could not discover my
own mind. When you, Master, spoke those words, the movements of
compassion began to work in my mind. But how is it that this heart has
in it what is equal to the attainment of the Royal sway?"

Mencius said, "Suppose a man were to make this statement to your
Majesty, 'My strength is sufficient to lift three thousand catties, but
is not sufficient to lift one feather; my eyesight is sharp enough to
examine the point of an autumn hair, but I do not see a wagon-load of
fagots,' would your Majesty allow what he said?" "No," was the king's
remark, and Mencius proceeded, "Now here is kindness sufficient to reach
to animals, and yet no benefits are extended from it to the people--how
is this? is an exception to be made here? The truth is, the feather's
not being lifted is because the strength was not used; the wagon-load of
firewood's not being seen is because the eyesight was not used; and the
people's not being loved and protected is because the kindness is not
used. Therefore your Majesty's not attaining to the Royal sway is
because you do not do it, and not because you are not able to do it."

The king asked, "How may the difference between him who does not do a
thing and him who is not able to do it be graphically set forth?"
Mencius replied, "In such a thing as taking the T'ae mountain under your
arm, and leaping with it over the North Sea, if you say to people, 'I am
not able to do it,' that is a real case of not being able. In such a
matter as breaking off a branch from a tree at the order of a superior,
if you say to people, 'I am not able to do it,' it is not a case of not
being able to do it. And so your Majesty's not attaining to the Royal
sway is not such a case as that of taking the T'ae mountain under your
arm and leaping over the North Sea with it; but it is a case like that
of breaking off a branch from a tree.

"Treat with reverence due to age the elders in your own family, so that
those in the families of others shall be similarly treated; treat with
the kindness due to youth the young in your own family, so that those in
the families of others shall be similarly treated--do this and the
kingdom may be made to go round in your palm. It is said in the 'Book of
Poetry,'

  'His example acted on his wife,
  Extended to his brethren,
  And was felt by all the clans and States;'

Telling us how King Wan simply took this kindly heart, and exercised it
towards those parties. Therefore the carrying out of the feeling of
kindness by a ruler will suffice for the love and protection of all
within the four seas; and if he do not carry it out, he will not be able
to protect his wife and children. The way in which the ancients came
greatly to surpass other men was no other than this, that they carried
out well what they did, so as to affect others. Now your kindness is
sufficient to reach to animals, and yet no benefits are extended from it
to the people. How is this? Is an exception to be made here?

"By weighing we know what things are light, and what heavy. By measuring
we know what things are long, and what short. All things are so dealt
with, and the mind requires specially to be so. I beg your Majesty to
measure it.--Your Majesty collects your equipments of war, endangers
your soldiers and officers and excites the resentment of the various
princes--do these things cause you pleasure in your mind?"

The king said, "No. How should I derive pleasure from these things? My
object in them is to seek for what I greatly desire."

Mencius said, "May I hear from you what it is that your Majesty greatly
desires?" The king laughed, and did not speak. Mencius resumed, "Are you
led to desire it because you have not enough of rich and sweet food for
your mouth? or because you have not enough of light and warm clothing
for your body? or because you have not enough of beautifully colored
objects to satisfy your eyes? or because there are not voices and sounds
enough to fill your ears? or because you have not enough of attendants
and favorites to stand before you and receive your orders? Your
Majesty's various officers are sufficient to supply you with all these
things. How can your Majesty have such a desire on account of them?"
"No," said the king, "my desire is not on account of them." Mencius
observed, "Then what your Majesty greatly desires can be known. You
desire to enlarge your territories, to have Ts'in and Ts'oo coming to
your court, to rule the Middle States, and to attract to you the
barbarous tribes that surround them. But to do what you do in order to
seek for what you desire is like climbing a tree to seek for fish."

"Is it so bad as that?" said the king. "I apprehend it is worse," was
the reply. "If you climb a tree to seek for fish, although you do not
get the fish, you have no subsequent calamity. But if you do what you do
in order to seek for what you desire, doing it even with all your heart,
you will assuredly afterwards meet with calamities." The king said, "May
I hear what they will be?" Mencius replied, "If the people of Tsow were
fighting with the people of Ts'oo, which of them does your Majesty think
would conquer?" "The people of Ts'oo would conquer," was the answer, and
Mencius pursued, "So then, a small State cannot contend with a great,
few cannot contend with many, nor can the weak contend with the strong.
The territory within the seas would embrace nine divisions, each of a
thousand li square. All Ts'e together is one of them. If with one part
you try to subdue the other eight, what is the difference between that
and Tsow's contending with Ts'oo? With the desire which you have, you
must turn back to the proper course for its attainment.

"Now, if your Majesty will institute a government whose action shall all
be benevolent, this will cause all the officers in the kingdom to wish
to stand in your Majesty's court, the farmers all to wish to plough in
your Majesty's fields, the merchants, both travelling and stationary,
all to wish to store their goods in your Majesty's market-places,
travellers and visitors all to wish to travel on your Majesty's roads,
and all under heaven who feel aggrieved by their rulers to wish to come
and complain to your Majesty. When they are so bent, who will be able to
keep them back?"

The king said, "I am stupid and cannot advance to this. But I wish you,
my Master, to assist my intentions. Teach me clearly, and although I am
deficient in intelligence and vigor, I should like to try at least to
institute such a government."

Mencius replied, "They are only men of education, who, without a certain
livelihood, are able to maintain a fixed heart. As to the people, if
they have not a certain livelihood, they will be found not to have a
fixed heart. And if they have not a fixed heart, there is nothing which
they will not do in the way of self-abandonment, of moral deflection, of
depravity, and of wild license. When they have thus been involved in
crime, to follow them up and punish them, is to entrap the people. How
can such a thing as entrapping the people be done under the rule of a
benevolent man?"

"Therefore, an intelligent ruler will regulate the livelihood of the
people, so as to make sure that, above, they shall have sufficient
wherewith to serve their parents, and below, sufficient wherewith to
support their wives and children; that in good years they shall always
be abundantly satisfied, and that in bad years they shall not be in
danger of perishing. After this he may urge them, and they will proceed
to what is good, for in this case the people will follow after that with
readiness.

"But now the livelihood of the people is so regulated, that, above, they
have not sufficient wherewith to serve their parents, and, below, they
have not sufficient wherewith to support their wives and children; even
in good years their lives are always embittered, and in bad years they
are in danger of perishing. In such circumstances their only object is
to escape from death, and they are afraid they will not succeed in doing
so--what leisure have they to cultivate propriety and righteousness?

"If your Majesty wishes to carry out a benevolent government, why not
turn back to what is the essential step to its attainment?

"Let mulberry trees be planted about the homesteads with their five
acres, and persons of fifty years will be able to wear silk. In keeping
fowls, pigs, dogs, and swine, let not their times of breeding be
neglected, and persons of seventy years will be able to eat flesh. Let
there not be taken away the time that is proper for the cultivation of
the field-allotment of a hundred acres, and the family of eight mouths
will not suffer from hunger. Let careful attention be paid to the
teaching in the various schools, with repeated inculcation of the filial
and fraternal duties, and gray-haired men will not be seen upon the
roads, carrying burdens on their backs or on their heads. It has never
been that the ruler of a State, where these results were seen, the old
wearing silk and eating flesh, and the black-haired people suffering
neither from hunger nor cold, did not attain to the Royal dignity."

[NOTE: _Books II, III, and IV are omitted_]


[Footnote 1: The title of this book in Chinese is--"King Hwuy of Lëang;
in chapters and sentences." Like the Books of the Confucian Analects,
those of this work are headed by two or three words at or near the
commencement of them. Each Book is divided into two parts. This
arrangement was made by Chaou K'e, and to him are due also the divisions
into chapters, and sentences, or paragraphs, containing, it may be, many
sentences.]

[Footnote 2: Sëang was the son of King Hwuy. The first year of his reign
is supposed to be B.C. 317. Sëang's name was Hih. As a posthumous
epithet, Sëang has various meanings: "Land-enlarger and Virtuous";
"Successful in Arms." The interview here recorded seems to have taken
place immediately after Hih's accession, and Mencius, it is said, was so
disappointed by it that he soon after left the country.]




THE SHI-KING


[_Metrical translation by James Legge_]



INTRODUCTION


The wisdom of Confucius as a social reformer, as a teacher and guide of
the Chinese people, is shown in many ways. He not only gave them a code
of personal deportment, providing them with rules for the etiquette and
ceremony of life, but he instilled into them that profound spirit of
domestic piety which is one of the strongest features in the Chinese
character. He took measures to secure also the intellectual cultivation
of his followers, and his Five Canons contain all the most ancient works
of Chinese literature, in the departments of poetry, history,
philosophy, and legislation. The Shi-King is a collection of Chinese
poetry made by Confucius himself. This great anthology consists of more
than three hundred pieces, covering the whole range of Chinese lyric
poetry, the oldest of which dates some eighteen centuries before Christ,
while the latest of the selections must have been written at the
beginning of the sixth century before Christ. These poems are of the
highest interest, and even nowadays may be read with delight by
Europeans. The ballad and the hymn are among the earliest forms of
national poetry, and the contents of the Shi-King naturally show
specimens of lyric poetry of this sort. We find there not only hymns,
but also ballads of a really fine and spirited character. Sometimes the
poems celebrate the common pursuits, occupations, and incidents of life.
They rise to the exaltation of the epithalamium, or of the vintage song;
at other times they deal with sentiment and human conduct, being in the
highest degree sententious and epigrammatic. We must give the credit to
Confucius of having saved for us the literature of China, and of having
set his people an example in preserving the monuments of a remote
antiquity. While the literatures of ancient Greece and Rome have largely
perished in the convulsions that followed the breaking up of the Roman
empire in Europe, when the kingdom of China fell into disorder and
decrepitude this one great teacher stepped forward to save the precious
record of historic fact, philosophical thought, and of legislation as
well as poetry, from being swept away by the deluge of revolution.
Confucius showed his wisdom by the high value he set upon the poetry of
his native land, and his name must be set side by side with that of the
astute tyrant of Athens who collected the poems of Homer and preserved
them as a precious heritage to the Greek world. Confucius has given us
his opinion with regard to the poems of the Shi-King. No man, he says,
is worth speaking to who has not mastered the poems of an anthology, the
perusal of which elevates the mind and purifies it from all corrupt
thoughts. Thanks to the work of modern scholarship, English readers can
now verify this dictum for themselves.

E. W.




THE SHI-KING



_PART I--LESSONS FROM THE STATES_


