BOOK XX

Extracts from the Book of History


The Emperor Yau said to Shun, "Ah, upon you, upon your person, lies the
Heaven-appointed order of succession! Faithfully hold to it, without any
deflection; for if within the four seas necessity and want befall the
people, your own revenue will forever come to an end."

Shun also used the same language in handing down the appointment to Yu.

The Emperor T'ang in his prayer, said, "I, the child Li, presume to
avail me of an ox of dusky hue, and presume to manifestly announce to
Thee, O God, the most high and Sovereign Potentate, that to the
transgressor I dare not grant forgiveness, nor yet keep in abeyance Thy
ministers. Judgment rests in Thine heart, O God. Should we ourself
transgress, may the guilt not be visited everywhere upon all. Should the
people all transgress, be the guilt upon ourself!"

Chow possessed great gifts, by which the able and good were richly
endowed.

"Although," said King Wu, "he is surrounded by his near relatives, they
are not to be compared with men of humane spirit. The people are
suffering wrongs, and the remedy rests with me--the one man."

After Wu had given diligent attention to the various weights and
measures, examined the laws and regulations, and restored the degraded
officials, good government everywhere ensued.

He caused ruined States to flourish again, reinstated intercepted heirs,
and promoted to office men who had gone into retirement; and the hearts
of the people throughout the empire drew towards him.

Among matters of prime consideration with him were these--food for the
people, the duty of mourning, and sacrificial offerings to the departed.

He was liberal and large-hearted, and so won all hearts; true, and so
was trusted by the people; energetic, and thus became a man of great
achievements; just in his rule, and all were well content.

Tsz-chang in a conversation with Confucius asked, "What say you is
essential for the proper conduct of government?"

The Master replied, "Let the ruler hold in high estimation the five
excellences, and eschew the four evils; then may he conduct his
government properly."

"And what call you the five excellences?" he was asked.

"They are," he said, "Bounty without extravagance; burdening without
exciting discontent; desire without covetousness; dignity without
haughtiness; show of majesty without fierceness."

"What mean you," asked Tsz-chang, "by bounty without extravagance?"

"Is it not this," he replied--"to make that which is of benefit to the
people still more beneficial? When he selects for them such labors as it
is possible for them to do, and exacts them, who will then complain? So
when his desire is the virtue of humaneness, and he attains it, how
shall he then be covetous? And if--whether he have to do with few or
with many, with small or with great--he do not venture ever to be
careless, is not this also to have dignity without haughtiness? And
if--when properly vested in robe and cap, and showing dignity in his
every look--his appearance be so imposing that the people look up to and
stand in awe of him, is not this moreover to show majesty without
fierceness?"

"What, then, do you call the four evils?" said Tsz-chang.

The answer here was, "Omitting to instruct the people and then
inflicting capital punishment on them--which means cruel tyranny.
Omitting to give them warning and yet looking for perfection in
them--which means oppression. Being slow and late in issuing
requisitions, and exacting strict punctuality in the returns--which
means robbery. And likewise, in intercourse with men, to expend and to
receive in a stingy manner--which is to act the part of a mere
commissioner."

"None can be a superior man," said the Master, "who does not recognize
the decrees of Heaven.

"None can have stability in him without a knowledge of the proprieties.

"None can know a man without knowing his utterances."





THE SAYINGS OF MENICUS

[Translated into English by James Legge_]



INTRODUCTION


A hundred years after the time of Confucius the Chinese nation seemed to
have fallen back into their original condition of lawlessness and
oppression. The King's power and authority was laughed to scorn, the
people were pillaged by the feudal nobility, and famine reigned in many
districts. The foundations of truth and social order seemed to be
overthrown. There were teachers of immorality abroad, who published the
old Epicurean doctrine, "Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die."
This teaching was accompanied by a spirit of cold-blooded egotism which
extinguished every spark of Confucian altruism. Even the pretended
disciples of Confucius confused the precepts of the Master, and by
stripping them of their narrow significance rendered them nugatory. It
was at this point that Mang-tsze, "Mang the philosopher," arose. He was
sturdy in bodily frame, vigorous in mind, profound in political sagacity
and utterly fearless in denouncing the errors of his countrymen. He had
been brought up among the disciples of Confucius, in whose province he
was born B.C. 372, but he was much more active and aggressive, less a
Mystic than a fanatic, in comparison! with his Master. He resolved on
active measures in stemming the tendency of his day. He did indeed
surround himself with a school of disciples, but instead of making a
series of desultory travels, teaching in remote places and along the
high-road, he went to the heart of the evil. He presented himself like a
second John the Baptist at the courts of kings and princes, and there
boldly denounced vice and misrule. It was not difficult for a Chinese
scholar and teacher to find access to the highest of the land. The
Chinese believed in the divine right of learning, just as they believed
in the divine right of kings. Mang employed every weapon of persuasion
in trying to combat heresy and oppression; alternately ridiculing and
reproving: now appealing in a burst of moral enthusiasm, and now
denouncing in terms of cutting sarcasm the abuses which after all he
failed to check. The last prince whom he successfully confronted was the
Marquis of Lu, who turned him carelessly away. He accepted this as the
Divine sentence of his failure, "That I have not found in this marquis,
a ruler who would hearken to me is an intimation of heaven." Henceforth
he lived in retirement until his ninety-seventh year; but from his
apparent failure sprang a practical success. His written teachings are
amongst the most lively and epigrammatic works of Chinese literature,
have done much to keep alive amongst his countrymen the spirit of
Confucianism, and even Western readers may drink wisdom from this spring
of Oriental lore. The following selections from his sayings well exhibit
the spirit of his system of philosophy and morality.

 E.W.




THE SAYINGS OF MENCIUS



