XIII

THE STATE AND THE MEDICAL PROFESSION

[1884]


At intervals during the last quarter of a century committees of the
Houses of the Legislature and specially appointed commissions have
occupied themselves with the affairs of the medical profession. Much
evidence has been taken, much wrangling has gone on over the reports of
these bodies; and sometimes much trouble has been taken to get measures
based upon all this work through Parliament, but very little has been
achieved.

The Bill introduced last session was not more fortunate than several
predecessors. I suppose that it is not right to rejoice in the
misfortunes of anything, even a Bill; but I confess that this event
afforded me lively satisfaction, for I was a member of the Royal
Commission on the report of which the Bill was founded, and I did my
best to oppose and nullify that report.

That the question must be taken up again and finally dealt with by the
Legislature before long cannot be doubted; but in the meanwhile there
is time for reflection, and I think that the non-medical public would
be wise if they paid a little attention to a subject which is really of
considerable importance to them.

The first question which a plain man is disposed to ask himself is, Why
should the State interfere with the profession of medicine any more
than it does, say, with the profession of engineering? Anybody who
pleases may call himself an engineer, and may practice as such. The
State confers no title upon engineers, and does not profess to tell the
public that one man is a qualified engineer and that another is not so.

The answers which are given to the question are various, and most of
them, I think, are bad. A large number of persons seem to be of opinion
that the State is bound no less to take care of the general public,
than to see that it is protected against incompetent persons, against
quacks and medical impostors in general. I do not take that view of the
case. I think it is very much wholesomer for the public to take care of
itself in this as in all other matters; and although I am not such a
fanatic for the liberty of the subject as to plead that interfering
with the way in which a man may choose to be killed is a violation of
that liberty, yet I do think that it is far better to let everybody do
as he likes. Whether that be so or not, I am perfectly certain that, as
a matter of practice, it is absolutely impossible to prohibit the
practice of medicine by people who have no special qualification for
it. Consider the terrible consequences of attempting to prohibit
practice by a very large class of persons who are certainly not
technically qualified--I am far from saying a word as to whether
they are otherwise qualified or not. The number of Ladies
Bountiful--grandmothers, aunts, and mothers-in-law--whose chief delight
lies in the administration of their cherished provision of domestic
medicine, is past computation, and one shudders to think of what might
happen if their energies were turned from this innocuous, if not
beneficent channel, by the strong arm of the law. But the thing is
impracticable.

Another reason for intervention is propounded, I am sorry to say, by
some, though not many, members of the medical profession, and is simply
an expression of that trades unionism which tends to infest professions
no less than trades.

The general practitioner trying to make both ends meet on a poor
practice, whose medical training has cost him a good deal of time and
money, finds that many potential patients, whose small fees would be
welcome as the little that helps, prefer to go and get their shilling's
worth of "doctor's stuff" and advice from the chemist and druggist
round the corner, who has not paid sixpence for his medical training,
because he has never had any.

The general practitioner thinks this is very hard upon him and ought to
be stopped. It is perhaps natural that he should think so, though it
would be very difficult for him to justify his opinion on any ground of
public policy. But the question is really not worth discussion, as it
is obvious that it would be utterly impracticable to stop the practice
"over the counter" even it it were desirable.

Is a man who has a sudden attack of pain in tooth or stomach not to be
permitted to go to the nearest druggist's shop and ask for something
that will relieve him? The notion is preposterous. But if this is to be
legal, the whole principle of the permissibility of counter practice is
granted.

In my judgment the intervention of the State in the affairs of the
medical profession can be justified not upon any pretence of protecting
the public, and still less upon that of protecting the medical
profession, but simply and solely upon the fact that the State employs
medical men for certain purposes, and, as employer, has a right to
define the conditions on which it will accept service. It is for the
interest of the community that no person shall die without there being
some official recognition of the cause of his death. It is a matter of
the highest importance to the community that, in civil and criminal
cases, the law shall be able to have recourse to persons whose evidence
may be taken as that of experts; and it will not be doubted that the
State has a right to dictate the conditions under which it will appoint
persons to the vast number of naval, military, and civil medical
offices held directly or indirectly under the Government. Here, and
here only, it appears to me, lies the justification for the
intervention of the State in medical affairs. It says, or, in my
judgment, should say, to the public, "Practice medicine if you like--go
to be practised upon by anybody;" and to the medical practitioner,
"Have a qualification, or do not have a qualification if people don't
mind it; but if the State is to receive your certificate of death, if
the State is to take your evidence as that of an expert, if the State
is to give you any kind of civil, or military, or naval appointment,
then we can call upon you to comply with our conditions, and to produce
evidence that you are, in our sense of the word, qualified. Without
that we will not place you in that position." As a matter of fact, that
is the relation of the State to the medical profession in this country.
For my part, I think it an extremely healthy relation; and it is one
that I should be very sorry to see altered, except in so far that it
would certainly be better if greater facilities were given for the
swift and sharp punishment of those who profess to have the State
qualification when, in point of fact, they do not possess it. They are
simply cheats and swindlers, like other people who profess to be what
they are not, and should be punished as such.

But supposing we are agreed about the justification of State
intervention in medical affairs, new questions arise as to the manner
in which that intervention should take place and the extent to which it
should go, on which the divergence of opinion is even greater than it
is on the general question of intervention.

It is now, I am sorry to say, something over forty years since I began
my medical studies; and, at that time, the state of affairs was
extremely singular. I should think it hardly possible that it could
have obtained anywhere but in such a country as England, which
cherishes a fine old crusted abuse as much as it does its port wine. At
that time there were twenty-one licensing bodies--that is to say,
bodies whose certificate was received by the State as evidence that the
persons who possessed that certificate were medical experts. How these
bodies came to possess these powers is a very curious chapter in
history, in which it would be out of place to enlarge. They were partly
universities, partly medical guilds and corporations, partly the
Archbishop of Canterbury. Those were the three sources from which the
licence to practice came in that day. There was no central authority,
there was nothing to prevent any one of those licensing authorities
from granting a licence to any one upon any conditions it thought fit.
The examination might be a sham, the curriculum might be a sham, the
certificate might be bought and sold like anything in a shop; or, on
the other hand, the examination might be fairly good and the diploma
correspondingly valuable; but there was not the smallest guarantee,
except the personal character of the people who composed the
administration of each of these licensing bodies, as to what might
happen. It was possible for a young man to come to London and to spend
two years and six months of the time of his compulsory three years
"walking the hospitals" in idleness or worse; he could then, by putting
himself in the hands of a judicious "grinder" for the remaining six
months, pass triumphantly through the ordeal of one hour's _vivâ voce_
examination, which was all that was absolutely necessary, to
enable him to be turned loose upon the public, like death on the pale
horse, "conquering and to conquer," with the full sanction of the law,
as a "qualified practitioner."

It is difficult to imagine, at present, such a state of things, still
more difficult to depict the consequences of it, because they would
appear like a gross and malignant caricature; but it may be said that
there was never a system, or want of system, which was better
calculated to ruin the students who came under it, or to degrade the
profession as a whole. My memory goes back to a time when models from
whom the Bob Sawyer of the _Pickwick Papers_ might have been drawn
were anything but rare.

Shortly before my student days, however, the dawn of a better state of
things in England began to be visible, in consequence of the
establishment of the University of London, and the comparatively very
high standard which it placed before its medical graduates.

I say comparatively high standard, for the requirements of the
University in those days, and even during the twelve years at a later
period, when I was one of the examiners of the medical faculty, were
such as would not now be thought more than respectable, and indeed were
in many respects very imperfect. But, relatively to the means of
learning, the standard was high, and none but the more able and
ambitious of the students dreamed of passing the University.
Nevertheless, the fact that many men of this stamp did succeed in
obtaining their degrees, led others to follow in their steps, and
slowly but surely reacted upon the standard of teaching in the better
medical schools. Then came the Medical Act of 1858. That Act introduced
two immense improvements: one of them was the institution of what is
called the Medical Register, upon which the names of all persons
recognised by the State as medical practitioners are entered: and the
other was the establishment of the Medical Council, which is a kind of
Medical Parliament, composed of representatives of the licensing bodies
and of leading men in the medical profession nominated by the Crown.
The powers given by the Legislature to the Medical Council were found
practically to be very limited, but I think that no fair observer of
the work will doubt that this much attacked body has excited no small
influence in bringing about the great change for the better, which has
been effected in the training of men for the medical profession within
my recollection.

Another source of improvement must be recognised in the Scottish
Universities, and especially in the medical faculty of the University
of Edinburgh. The medical education and examinations of this body were
for many years the best of their kind in these islands, and I doubt if,
at the present moment, the three kingdoms can show a better school of
medicine than that of Edinburgh. The vast number of medical students at
that University is sufficient evidence of the opinion of those most
interested in this subject.

Owing to all those influences, and to the revolution which has taken
place in the course of the last twenty years in our conceptions of the
proper method of teaching physical science, the training of the medical
student in a good school, and the examination test applied by the great
majority of the present licensing bodies, reduced now to nineteen, in
consequence of the retirement of the Archbishop and the fusion of two
of the other licensing bodies, are totally different from what they
were even twenty years ago.

I was perfectly astonished, upon one of my sons commencing his medical
career the other day, when I contrasted the carefully-watched courses
of theoretical and practical instruction, which he is expected to
follow with regularity and industry, and the number and nature of the
examinations which he will have to pass before he can receive his
licence, not only with the monstrous laxity of my own student days, but
even with the state of things which obtained when my term of office as
examiner in the University of London expired some sixteen years ago.

I have no hesitation in expressing the opinion, which is fully borne
out by the evidence taken before the late Royal Commission, that a
large proportion of the existing licensing bodies grant their licence
on conditions which ensure quite as high a standard as it is
practicable or advisable to exact under present circumstances, and that
they show every desire to keep pace with the improvements of the times.
And I think there can be no doubt that the great majority have so much
improved their ways, that their standard is far above that of the
ordinary qualification thirty years ago, and I cannot see what excuse
there would be for meddling with them if it were not for two other
defects which have to be remedied.

Unfortunately there remain two or three black sheep--licensing bodies
which simply trade upon their privilege, and sell the cheapest wares
they can for shame's sake supply to the bidder. Another defect in the
existing system, even where the examination has been so greatly
improved as to be good of its kind, is that there are certain licensing
bodies which give a qualification for an acquaintance with either
medicine or surgery alone, and which more or less ignore obstetrics.
This is a revival of the archaic condition of the profession when
surgical operations were mostly left to the barbers and obstetrics to
the mid-wives, and when the physicians thought themselves, and were
considered by the world, the "superior persons" of the profession. I
remember a story was current in my young days of a great court
physician who was travelling with a friend, like himself, bound on a
visit to a country house. The friend fell down in an apoplectic fit,
and the physician refused to bleed him because it was contrary to
professional etiquette for a physician to perform that operation.
Whether the friend died or whether he got better because he was not
bled I do not remember, but the moral of the story is the same. On the
other hand, a famous surgeon was asked whether he meant to bring up his
son to his own calling, "No," he said, "he is such a fool, I mean to
make a physician of him."

Nowadays, it is happily recognised that medicine is one and
indivisible, and that no one can properly practice one branch who is
not familiar with at any rate the principles of all. Thus the two great
things that are wanted now are, in the first place, some means of
enforcing such a degree of uniformity upon all the examining bodies
that none should present a disgracefully low minimum or pass
examination; and the second point is that some body or other shall have
the power of enforcing upon every candidate for the licence to practice
the study of the three branches, what is called the tripartite
qualification. All the members of the late commission were agreed that
these were the main points to be attended to in any proposals for the
further improvement of medical training and qualification.

But such being the ends in view, our notions as to the best way of
attaining them were singularly divergent; so that it came about that
eleven commissioners made seven reports. There was one main majority
report and six minor reports, which differed more or less from it,
chiefly as to the best method of attaining these two objects.

The majority report recommended the adoption of what is known as the
conjoint scheme. According to this plan the power of granting a licence
to practise is to be taken away from all the existing bodies, whether
they have done well or ill, and to be placed in the hands of a body of
delegates (divisional boards), one for each of the three kingdoms. The
licence to practise is to be conferred by passing the delegate
examination. The licensee may afterwards, if he pleases, go before any
of the existing bodies and indulge in the luxury of another examination
and the payment of another fee in order to obtain a title, which does
not legally place him in any better position than that which he would
occupy without it.

Under these circumstances, of course, the only motive for obtaining the
degree of a University or the licence of a medical corporation would be
the prestige of these bodies. Hence the "black sheep" would certainly
be deserted, while those bodies which have acquired a reputation by
doing their duty would suffer less.

But, as the majority report proposes that the existing bodies should be
compensated for any loss they might suffer out of the fees of the
examiners for the State licence, the curious result would be brought
about that the profession of the future would be taxed, for all time,
for the purpose of handing over to wholly irresponsible bodies a sum,
the amount of which would be large for those who had failed in their
duty and small for those who had done it.

The scheme in fact involved a perpetual endowment of the "black
sheep," calculated on the maximum of their ill-gained profits. [1] I
confess that I found myself unable to assent to a plan which, in
addition to the rewarding the evil doers, proposed to take away the
privileges of a number of examining bodies which confessedly were doing
their duty well, for the sake of getting rid of a few who had failed.
It was too much like the Chinaman's device of burning down his house to
obtain a poor dish of roast pig--uncertain whether in the end he might
not find a mere mass of cinders. What we do know is that the great
majority of the existing licensing bodies have marvellously improved in
the course of the last twenty years, and are improving. What we do not
know is that the complicated scheme of the divisional boards will ever
be got to work at all.

My own belief is that every necessary reform may be effected, without
any interference with vested interests, without any unjust interference
with the prestige of institutions which have been, and still are,
extremely valuable, without any question of compensation arising, and
by an extremely simple operation. It is only necessary in fact to add a
couple of clauses to the Medical Act to this effect: (1) That from and
after such a date no person shall be placed upon the Medical Register
unless he possesses the threefold qualification. (2) That from and
after this date no examination shall be accepted as satisfactory
from any licensing body except such as has been carried on in part
by examiners appointed by the licensing body, and in part by
coadjutor-examiners of equal authority appointed by the Medical Council
or other central authority, and acting under their instructions.

In laying down a rule of this kind the State confiscates nothing, and
meddles with nobody, but simply acts within its undoubted right of
laying down the conditions under which it will confer certain
privileges upon medical practitioners. No one can say that the State
has not the right to do this; no one can say that the State interferes
with any private enterprise or corporate interest unjustly, in laying
down its own conditions for its own service. The plan would have the
further advantage that all those corporate bodies which have obtained
(as many of them have) a great and just prestige by the admirable way
in which they have done their work, would reap their just reward in the
thronging of students, thenceforward as formerly, to obtain their
qualifications; while those who have neglected their duties, who have
in some one or two cases, I am sorry to say, absolutely disgraced
themselves, would sink into oblivion, and come to a happy and natural
euthanasia, in which their misdeeds and themselves would be entirely
forgotten.

Two of my colleagues, Professor Turner and Mr. Bryce, M.P., whose
practical familiarity with examinations gave their opinions a high
value, expressed their substantial approval of this scheme, and I am
unable to see the weight of the objections urged against it. It is
urged that the difficulty and expense of adequately inspecting so many
examinations and of guaranteeing their efficiency would be great, and
the difficulty in the way of a fair adjustment of the representation of
existing interests and of the representation of new interests upon the
general Medical Council would be almost insuperable.

The latter objection is unintelligible to me. I am not aware that any
attempt at such adjustment has been fairly discussed, and until that
has been done it may be well not to talk about insuperable
difficulties. As to the notion that there is any difficulty in getting
the coadjutor-examiners, or that the expense will be overwhelming, we
have the experience of Scotland, in which every University does, at the
present time, appoint its coadjutor-examiners, who do their work just
in the way proposed.

Whether in the way I have proposed, or by the Conjoint Scheme, however,
this is perfectly certain: the two things I refer to have to be done:
you must have the threefold qualification; you must have the limitation
of the minimum qualification also; and any scheme for the improvement
of the relations of the State to medicine which does not profess to do
these two things thoroughly and well, has no chance of finality.

But when these reforms are witnessed, when there is a Medical Council
armed with a more real authority than it at present possesses; when a
license to practice cannot be obtained without the threefold
qualification; and when an even minimum of qualification is exacted for
every licence, is there anything else that remains that any one
seriously interested in the welfare of the medical profession, as I may
most conscientiously declare myself to be, would like to see done? I
think there are three things.

In the first place, even now, when a four years' curriculum is
required, the time allotted for medical education is too brief. A young
man of eighteen beginning to study medicine is probably absolutely
ignorant of the existence of such a thing as anatomy, or physiology, or
indeed of any branch of physical science. He comes into an entirely new
world; he addresses himself to a kind of work of which he has not the
smallest experience. Up to that time his work has been with books; he
rushes suddenly into work with things, which is as different from work
with books as anything can well be. I am quite sure that a very
considerable number of young men spend a very large portion of their
first session in simply learning how to learn subjects which are
entirely new to them. And yet recollect that in this period of four
years they have to acquire a knowledge of all the branches of a great
and responsible practical calling of medicine, surgery, obstetrics,
general pathology, medical jurisprudence, and so forth. Anybody who
knows what these things are, and who knows what is the kind of work
which is necessary to give a man the confidence which will enable him
to stand at the bedside and say to the satisfaction of his own
conscience what shall be done, and what shall not be done, must be
aware that if a man has only four years to do all that in he will not
have much time to spare. But that is not all. As I have said, the young
man comes up, probably ignorant of the existence of science; he has
never heard a word of chemistry, he has never heard a word of physics,
he has not the smallest conception of the outlines of biological
science; and all these things have to be learned as well and crammed
into the time which in itself is barely sufficient to acquire a fair
amount of that knowledge which is requisite for the satisfactory
discharge of his professional duties.

Therefore it is quite clear to me that, somehow or other, the
curriculum must be lightened. It is not that any of the subjects which
I have mentioned need not to be studied, and may be eliminated. The
only alternative therefore is to lengthen the time given to study.
Everybody will agree with me that the practical necessities of life in
this country are such that, for the average medical practitioner at any
rate, it is hopeless to think of extending the period of professional
study beyond the age of twenty-two. So that as the period of study
cannot be extended forwards, the only thing to be done is to extend it
backwards.

The question is how this can be done. My own belief is that if the
Medical Council, instead of insisting upon that examination in general
education which I am sorry to say I believe to be entirely futile, were
to insist upon a knowledge of elementary physics, and chemistry, and
biology, they would be taking one of the greatest steps which at
present can be made for the improvement of medical education. And the
improvement would be this. The great majority of the young men who are
going into the profession have practically completed their general
education--or they might very well have done so--by the age of sixteen
or seventeen. If the interval between this age and that at which they
commence their purely medical studies were employed in obtaining a
practical acquaintance with elementary physics, chemistry, and biology,
in my judgment it would be as good as two years added to the course of
medical study. And for two reasons: in the first place, because the
subject-matter of that which they would learn is germane to their
future studies, and is so much gained; in the second place, because you
might clear out of the course of their professional study a great deal
which at present occupies time and attention; and last, but not
least--probably most--they would then come to their medical studies
prepared for that learning from Nature which is what they have to do in
the course of becoming skilful medical men, and for which at present
they are not in the slightest degree prepared by their previous
education.

The second wish I have to express concerns London especially, and I may
speak of it briefly as a more economical use of the teaching power in
the medical schools. At this present time every great hospital in
London--and there are ten or eleven of them--has its complete medical
school, in which not only are the branches of practical medicine
taught, but also those studies in general science, such as chemistry,
elementary physics, general anatomy, and a variety of other topics
which are what used to be called (and the term was an extremely useful
one) the institutes of medicine. That was all very well half a century
ago; it is all very ill now, simply because those general branches of
science, such as anatomy, physiology, chemistry, physiological
chemistry, physiological physics, and so forth, have now become so
large, and the mode of teaching them is so completely altered, that it
is absolutely impossible for any man to be a thoroughly competent
teacher of them, or for any student to be effectually taught without
the devotion of the whole time of the person who is engaged in
teaching. I undertake to say that it is hopelessly impossible for any
man at the present time to keep abreast with the progress of physiology
unless he gives his whole mind to it; and the bigger the mind is, the
more scope he will find for its employment. Again, teaching has become,
and must become still more, practical, and that also involves a large
expenditure of time. But if a man is to give his whole time to my
business he must live by it, and the resources of the schools do not
permit them to maintain ten or eleven physiological specialists.

If the students in their first one or two years were taught the
institutes of medicine, in two or three central institutions, it would
be perfectly easy to have those subjects taught thoroughly and
effectually by persons who gave their whole mind and attention to the
subject; while at the same time the medical schools at the hospitals
would remain what they ought to be--great institutions in which the
largest possible opportunities are laid open for acquiring practical
acquaintance with the phenomena of disease. So that the preliminary or
earlier half of medical education would take place in the central
institutions, and the final half would be devoted altogether to
practical studies in the hospitals.

I happen to know that this conception has been entertained, not only by
myself, but by a great many of those persons who are most interested in
the improvement of medical study for a considerable number of years. I
do not know whether anything will come of it this half-century or not;
but the thing has to be done. It is not a speculative notion; it lies
patent to everybody who is accustomed to teaching, and knows what the
necessities of teaching are; and I should very much like to see the
first step taken--people making up their minds that it has to be done
somehow or other.

The last point to which I may advert is one which concerns the action
of the profession itself more than anything else. We have arrangements
for teaching, we have arrangements for the testing of qualifications,
we have marvellous aids and appliances for the treatment of disease in
all sorts of ways; but I do not find in London at the present time, in
this little place of four or five million inhabitants which supports so
many things, any organisation or any arrangement for advancing the
science of medicine, considered as a pure science. I am quite aware
that there are medical societies of various kinds; I am not ignorant of
the lectureships at the College of Physicians and the College of
Surgeons; there is the Brown Institute; and there is the Society for
the Advancement of Medicine by Research, but there is no means, so far
as I know, by which any person who has the inborn gifts of the
investigator and discoverer of new truth, and who desires to apply that
to the improvement of medical science, can carry out his intention. In
Paris there is the University of Paris, which gives degrees; but there
are also the Sorbonne and the Collége de France, places in which
professoriates are established for the express purpose of enabling men
who have the power of investigation, the power of advancing knowledge
and thereby reacting on practice, to do that which it is their special
mission to do. I do not know of anything of the kind in London; and if
it should so happen that a Claude Bernard or a Ludwig should turn up in
London, I really have not the slightest notion of what we could do with
him. We could not turn him to account, and I think we should have to
export him to Germany or France. I doubt whether that is a good or a
wise condition of things. I do not think it is a condition of things
which can exist for any great length of time, now that people are every
day becoming more and more awake to the importance of scientific
investigation and to the astounding and unexpected manner in which it
everywhere reacts upon practical pursuits. I should look upon the
establishment of some institution of that kind as a recognition on the
part of the medical profession in general, that if their great and
beneficent work is to be carried on, they must, like other people who
have great and beneficent work to do, contribute to the advancement of
knowledge in the only way in which experience shows that it can be
advanced.

       *       *       *       *       *

Footnotes:

[1]The fees to be paid by candidates for admission to the examinations
of the Divisional Board should be of such an amount as will be
sufficient to cover the cost of the examinations and the other expenses
of the Divisional Board, _and also to provide the sum required to
compensate the medical authorities, or such of them as may be entitled
to compensation, for any pecuniary losses they may hereafter sustain by
reason of the abolition of their privilege of conferring a licence to
practise. Report_ 50, p. xii.




