
THE

PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS

OF

DAVID HUME.


INCLUDING ALL THE ESSAYS, AND EXHIBITING THE

MORE IMPORTANT ALTERATIONS AND CORRECTIONS

IN THE SUCCESSIVE EDITIONS PUBLISHED

BY THE AUTHOR.


IN FOUR VOLUMES.


VOL. I.


EDINBURGH:

PRINTED FOR ADAM BLACK AND WILLIAM TAIT;

AND CHARLES TAIT, 63, FLEET STREET,

LONDON.

MDCCCXXVI.


[Illustration: Allan Ramsey pinx.--Robert Grace Sculp.--David Hume]


ADVERTISEMENT.


The Philosophical Writings of Mr Hume are here for the first time
collected in a uniform edition. The Essays are reprinted from the
Edition of 1777, in two octavo volumes, corrected by the Author for
the press, a short time before his death, and which he desired might
be regarded as containing his philosophical principles. The text of
that Edition has been faithfully adhered to in the present; but as
it has been thought an interesting object of curiosity, to trace the
successive variations of sentiment and taste in a mind like that of
Hume, and to mark the gradual and most observable increase of caution
in his expression of those sentiments, it has been the care of the
present Editor to compare the former Editions, of which a List is
here subjoined, and where any alterations were discovered, not merely
verbal, but illustrative of the philosophical opinions of the author,
to add these as Notes to the passages where they occur.

The Essays contained in the early Editions, but which were omitted
in that of 1777, will be found at the end of the last volume of the
present Collection of his Works, together with the Two Essays, on
Suicide, and the Immortality of the Soul.

In addition to the Author's Life, written by himself, the Account
of the Controversy with M. Rousseau has also been prefixed. It was
originally printed in French, and shortly afterwards in English, in the
year 1766. The English translation was superintended by Mr Hume; and as
it relates to an extraordinary occurrence in the Lives of these eminent
philosophers, has been thought a suitable appendage to the short Memoir
of himself.

EDINBURGH,
JUNE 1825.




EDITIONS OF THE ESSAYS COLLATED AND REFERRED TO.

     Essays, Moral and Political. Edinburgh, Kincaid, 1741.
     12mo. (A)

     Essays, Moral and Political, Vol. II. Edinburgh, Kincaid,
     1742. 12mo. pp. 105. (B)

     Essays, Moral and Political, 2d Edition, corrected.
     Edinburgh, Kincaid, 1742. 12mo. pp. 189. (C)

     Essays, Moral and Political. By D. Hume, Esq. 3d Edition,
     corrected, with additions. London, Millar, 1748. 12mo. (D)

     Three Essays, Moral and Political, never before published,
     which completes the former Edition, in two volumes octavo.
     By D. Hume, Esq. London, Millar, 1748. 12mo. (E)

     Political Discourses. By D. Hume, Esq. Edinburgh, Kincaid,
     1752. Small 8vo. _To this Edition there is sometimes added
     'a List of Scotticisms_.' (F)

     Political Discourses. By D. Hume, Esq. 2d Edition.
     Edinburgh, Kincaid, 1752. 12mo. _Merely a reprint of the
     preceding_. (G)

     Essays and Treatises on several Subjects. By D. Hume, Esq.
     Vol. IV. containing Political Discourses. 3d Edition, with
     Additions and Corrections. London, Millar, 1754. (H)

     Four Dissertations: 1st, Natural History of Religion: 2d,
     of the Passions: 3d, of Tragedy: 4th, of the Standard of
     Taste. By D. Hume, Esq. London, Millar, 1757. 12mo. (I)

     Philosophical Essays concerning Human Understanding. By the
     Author of the Essays Moral and Political. London, Millar,
     1748. 12mo. (K)

     Philosophical Essays concerning Human Understanding. By
     D. Hume, Esq. 2d Edition, with Additions and Corrections.
     London, Millar, 1750. 12mo. (L)

     An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals. By D. Hume,
     Esq. London, Millar, 1751. (M)

     Essays and Treatises on several Subjects. By D. Hume, Esq.
     London, Millar, 1768. 2 vols. 4to. (N)

     Essays and Treatises on several Subjects. By D. Hume, Esq.
     London, Cadell, 1777. 2 vols 8vo. (O)

     _The above List comprehends all the Editions which vary
     materially from each other. Those which have been found on
     examination to be mere reprints, are not included._




    CONTENTS OF VOLUME FIRST.

    Life of the Author
    Letter from Adam Smith, LL.D. to William Strachan Esq.,
      and Latter-will and Testament of Mr Hume
    Account of the Controversy between Hume and Rousseau
    List of Scotticisms

    TREATISE OF HUMAN NATURE.

    INTRODUCTION

    BOOK I.--OF THE UNDERSTANDING.

    PART I.

    OF IDEAS, THEIR ORIGIN, COMPOSITION, CONNEXION, ABSTRACTION, &c.

    Of the Origin of our Ideas
    Division of the Subject
    Of the Ideas of the Memory and Imagination
    Of the Connexion or Association of Ideas
    Of Relations
    Of Modes and Substances
    Of Abstract Ideas

    PART II.

    OF THE IDEAS OF SPACE AND TIME.

    Of the infinite Divisibility of our Ideas of Space and Time
    Of the infinite Divisibility of Space and Time
    Of the other Qualities of our Ideas of Space and Time
    Objections answered
    The same Subject continued
    Of the Idea of Existence, and of external Existence

    PART III.

    OF KNOWLEDGE AND PROBABILITY.
    Of Knowledge
    Of Probability, and of the Idea of Cause and Effect
    Why a Cause is always necessary
    Of the component parts of our Reasonings concerning Cause and
      effect
    Of the Impressions of the Senses and Memory
    Of the Inference from the Impression to the Ideax
    Of the Nature of the Idea or Belief
    Of the Causes of Belief
    Of the Effects of other Relations and other Habits
    Of the Influence of Belief
    Of the Probability of Chances
    Of the Probability of Causes
    Of unphilosophical Probability
    Of the Idea of Necessary Connexion
    Rules by which to judge of Causes and Effectsx
    Of the Reason of Animals

    PART IV.

    OF THE SCEPTICAL AND OTHER SYSTEMS OF PHILOSOPHY.

    Of Scepticism with regard to Reason
    Of Scepticism with regard to the Sensesx
    Of the Ancient Philosophy
    Of the Modern Philosophyx
    Of the Immateriality of the Soul
    Of Personal Identity
    Conclusion of this Book




LIFE OF THE AUTHOR BY HIMSELF.




MY OWN LIFE.


It is difficult for a man to speak long of himself without vanity;
therefore, I shall be short. It may be thought an instance of vanity
that I pretend at all to write my life; but this Narrative shall
contain little more than the History of my Writings; as, indeed, almost
all my life has been spent in literary pursuits and occupations. The
first success of most of my writings was not such as to be an object of
vanity.

I was born the 26th of April 1711, old style, at Edinburgh. I was of a
good family, both by father and mother. My father's family is a branch
of the Earl of Home's or Hume's; and my ancestors had been proprietors
of the estate, which my brother possesses, for several generations. My
mother was daughter of Sir David Falconer, President of the College of
Justice; the title of Lord Halkerton came by succession to her brother.

My family, however, was not rich; and, being myself a younger brother,
my patrimony, according to the mode of my country, was of course very
slender. My father, who passed for a man of parts, died when I was
an infant, leaving me, with an elder brother and a sister, under the
care of our mother, a woman of singular merit, who, though young and
handsome, devoted herself entirely to the rearing and educating of
her children. I passed through the ordinary course of education with
success, and was seized very early with a passion for literature, which
has been the ruling passion of my life, and the great source of my
enjoyments. My studious disposition, my sobriety, and my industry, gave
my family a notion that the law was a proper profession for me; but I
found an unsurmountable aversion to every thing but the pursuits of
philosophy and general learning; and while they fancied I was poring
upon Voet and Vinnius, Cicero and Virgil were the authors which I was
secretly devouring.

My very slender fortune, however, being unsuitable to this plan of
life, and my health being a little broken by my ardent application, I
was tempted, or rather forced, to make a very feeble trial for entering
into a more active scene of life. In 1734, I went to Bristol, with some
recommendations to eminent merchants, but in a few months found that
scene totally unsuitable to me, I went over to France, with a view of
prosecuting my studies in a country retreat; and I there laid that plan
of life, which I have steadily and successfully pursued. I resolved
to make a very rigid frugality supply my deficiency of fortune, to
maintain unimpaired my independency, and to regard every object as
contemptible, except the improvement of my talents in literature.

During my retreat in France, first at Rheims, but chiefly at La Flêche,
in Anjou, I composed my _Treatise of Human Nature_. After passing three
years very agreeably in that country, I came over to London in 1737.
In the end of 1738, I published my Treatise, and immediately went down
to my mother and my brother, who lived at his country-house, and was
employing himself very judiciously and successfully in the improvement
of his fortune.

Never literary attempt was more unfortunate than my Treatise of Human
Nature. It fell _dead-born from the press_, without reaching such
distinction, as even to excite a murmur among the zealots. But being
naturally of a cheerful and sanguine temper, I very soon recovered
the blow, and prosecuted with great ardour my studies in the country.
In 1742, I printed at Edinburgh the first part of my Essays: the work
was favourably received, and soon made me entirely forget my former
disappointment. I continued with my mother and brother in the country,
and in that time recovered the knowledge of the Greek language, which I
had too much neglected in my early youth.

In 1745, I received a letter from the Marquis of Annandale, inviting me
to come and live with him in England; I found also, that the friends
and family of that young nobleman were desirous of putting him under
my care and direction, for the state of his mind and health required
it. I lived with him a twelvemonth. My appointments during that time
made a considerable accession to my small fortune. I then received
an invitation from General St Clair to attend him as a secretary to
his expedition, which was at first meant against Canada, but ended
in an incursion on the coast of France. Next year, to wit, 1747, I
received an invitation from the General to attend him in the same
station in his military embassy to the courts of Vienna and Turin.
I then wore the uniform of an officer, and was introduced at these
courts as _aide-de-camp_ to the General, along with Sir Harry Erskine
and Captain Grant, now General Grant. These two years were almost the
only interruptions which my studies have received during the course
of my life. I passed them agreeably, and in good company; and my
appointments, with my frugality, had made me reach a fortune, which I
called independent, though most of my friends were inclined to smile
when I said so; in short, I was now master of near a thousand pounds.

I had always entertained a notion, that my want of success in
publishing the Treatise of Human Nature, had proceeded more from the
manner than the matter, and that I had been guilty of a very usual
indiscretion, in going to the press too early. I, therefore, cast
the first part of that work anew in the Inquiry concerning Human
Understanding, which was published while I was at Turin. But this piece
was at first little more successful than the Treatise of Human Nature.
On my return from Italy, I had the mortification to find all England
in a ferment, on account of Dr Middleton's Free Inquiry, while my
performance was entirely overlooked and neglected. A new edition, which
had been published at London, of my Essays, Moral and Political, met
not with a much better reception.

Such is the force of natural temper, that these disappointments made
little or no impression on me. I went down in 1749, and lived two years
with my brother at his country-house, for my mother was now dead. I
there composed the second part of my Essays, which I called Political
Discourses, and also my Inquiry concerning the Principles of Morals,
which is another part of my Treatise that I cast anew. Meanwhile, my
bookseller A. Millar informed me, that my former publications (all
but the unfortunate Treatise) were beginning to be the subject of
conversation; that the sale of them was gradually increasing, and that
new editions were demanded. Answers by Reverends, and Right Reverends,
came out two or three in a year; and I found, by Dr Warburton's
railing, that the books were beginning to be esteemed in good company.
However, I had fixed a resolution, which I inflexibly maintained, never
to reply to any body; and not being very irascible in my temper, I have
easily kept myself clear of all literary squabbles. These symptoms of
a rising reputation gave me encouragement, as I was ever more disposed
to see the favourable than unfavourable side of things; a turn of mind
which it is more happy to possess, than to be born to an estate of ten
thousand a year.

In 1751, I removed from the country to the town, the true scene for
a man of letters. In 1752, were published at Edinburgh, where I
then lived, my Political Discourses, the only work of mine that was
successful on the first publication. It was well received abroad
and at home. In the same year was published at London, my Inquiry
concerning the Principles of Morals; which, in my own opinion (who
ought not to judge on that subject), is of all my writings, historical,
philosophical, or literary, incomparably the best. It came unnoticed
and unobserved into the world.

In 1752, the Faculty of Advocates chose me their Librarian, an office
from which I received little or no emolument, but which gave me the
command of a large library. I then formed the plan of writing the
History of England; but being frightened with the notion of continuing
a narrative through a period of 1700 years, I commenced with the
accession of the House of Stuart, an epoch when, I thought, the
misrepresentations of faction began chiefly to take place. I was, I
own, sanguine in my expectations of the success of this work. I thought
that I was the only historian that had at once neglected present
power, interest, and authority, and the cry of popular prejudices; and
as the subject was suited to every capacity, I expected proportional
applause. But miserable was my disappointment: I was assailed by one
cry of reproach, disapprobation, and even detestation; English, Scotch,
and Irish, Whig and Tory, Churchman and Sectary, Free-thinker and
Religionist, Patriot and Courtier, united in their rage against the
man, who had presumed to shed a generous tear for the fate of Charles
I. and the Earl of Strafford; and after the first ebullitions of their
fury were over, what was still more mortifying, the book seemed to sink
into oblivion. Mr Millar told me, that in a twelvemonth he sold only
forty-five copies of it. I scarcely, indeed, heard of one man in the
three kingdoms, considerable for rank or letters, that could endure the
book. I must only except the primate of England, Dr Herring, and the
primate of Ireland, Dr Stone, which seem two odd exceptions. These
dignified prelates separately sent me messages not to be discouraged.

I was however, I confess, discouraged; and had not the war been at that
time breaking out between France and England, I had certainly retired
to some provincial town of the former kingdom, have changed my name,
and never more have returned to my native country. But as this scheme
was not now practicable, and the subsequent volume was considerably
advanced, I resolved to pick up courage, and to persevere.

In this interval, I published at London my Natural History of Religion,
along with some other small pieces. Its public entry was rather
obscure, except only that Dr Hurd wrote a pamphlet against it, with all
the illiberal petulance, arrogance and scurrility, which distinguish
the Warburtonian school. This pamphlet gave me some consolation for the
otherwise indifferent reception of my performance.

In 1756, two years after the fall of the first volume, was published
the second volume of my History, containing the period from the death
of Charles I. till the Revolution. This performance happened to give
less displeasure to the Whigs, and was better received. It not only
rose itself, but helped to buoy up its unfortunate brother.

But though I had been taught, by experience, that the Whig party
were in possession of bestowing all places, both in the state and
in literature, I was so little inclined to yield to their senseless
clamour, that in above a hundred alterations, which farther study,
reading or reflection, engaged me to make in the reigns of the two
first Stuarts, I have made all of them invariably to the Tory side. It
is ridiculous to consider the English constitution before that period
as a regular plan of liberty.

In 1759, I published my History of the House of Tudor. The clamour
against this performance was almost equal to that against the History
of the two first Stuarts. The reign of Elizabeth was particularly
obnoxious. But I was now callous against the impressions of public
folly, and continued very peaceably and contentedly in my retreat
at Edinburgh, to finish, in two volumes, the more early part of the
English History, which I gave to the public in 1761, with tolerable,
and but tolerable success.

But, notwithstanding this variety of winds and seasons, to which my
writings had been exposed, they had still been making such advances,
that the copy-money given me by the booksellers, much exceeded any
thing formerly known in England; I was become not only independent, but
opulent. I retired to my native country of Scotland, determined never
more to set my foot out of it; and retaining the satisfaction of never
having preferred a request to one great man, or even making advances of
friendship to any of them. As I was now turned of fifty, I thought of
passing all the rest of my life in this philosophical manner, when I
received, in 1763, an invitation from the Earl of Hertford, with whom I
was not in the least acquainted, to attend him on his embassy to Paris,
with a near prospect of being appointed secretary to the embassy,
and, in the meanwhile, of performing the functions of that office.
This offer, however inviting, I at first declined, both because I was
reluctant to begin connexions with the great, and because I was afraid
that the civilities and gay company of Paris, would prove disagreeable
to a person of my age and humour: but on his Lordship's repeating the
invitation, I accepted of it, I have every reason, both of pleasure and
interest, to think myself happy in my connexions with that nobleman, as
well as afterwards with his brother, General Conway.

Those who have not seen the strange effects of Modes, will never
imagine the reception I met with at Paris, from men and women of all
ranks and stations. The more I resiled from their excessive civilities,
the more I was loaded with them. There is, however, a real satisfaction
in living at Paris, from the great number of sensible, knowing, and
polite company with which that city abounds above all places in the
universe. I thought once of settling there for life.

I was appointed secretary to the embassy; and, in summer 1765, Lord
Hertford left me, being appointed Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. I was
_chargé d'affaires_ till the arrival of the Duke of Richmond, towards
the end of the year. In the beginning of 1766, I left Paris, and
next summer went to Edinburgh, with the same view as formerly, of
burying myself in a philosophical retreat. I returned to that place,
not richer, but with much more money, and a much larger income,
by means of Lord Hertford's friendship, than I left it; and I was
desirous of trying what superfluity could produce, as I had formerly
made an experiment of a competency. But, in 1767, I received from Mr
Conway an invitation to be Under-secretary; and this invitation, both
the character of the person, and my connexions with Lord Hertford,
prevented me from declining. I returned to Edinburgh in 1769, very
opulent (for I possessed a revenue of 1000_l_. a year), healthy, and,
though somewhat stricken in years, with the prospect of enjoying long
my ease, and of seeing the increase of my reputation.

In spring 1775, I was struck with a disorder in my bowels, which at
first gave me no alarm, but has since, as I apprehend it, become
mortal and incurable. I now reckon upon a Speedy dissolution. I have
suffered very little pain from my disorder; and what is more strange,
have, notwithstanding the great decline of my person, never suffered
a moment's abatement of my spirits; insomuch, that were I to name the
period of my life, which I should most choose to pass over again, I
might be tempted to point to this later period. I possess the same
ardour as ever in study, and the same gaiety in company. I consider,
besides, that a man of sixty-five, by dying, cuts off only a few
years of infirmities; and though I see many symptoms of my literary
reputation's breaking out at last with additional lustre, I knew that
I could have but few years to enjoy it. It is difficult to be more
detached from life than I am at present.

To conclude historically with my own character. I am, or rather was
(for that is the style I must now use in speaking of myself, which
emboldens me the more to speak my sentiments); I was, I say, a man
of mild dispositions, of command of temper, of an open, social,
and cheerful humour, capable of attachment, but little susceptible
of enmity, and of great moderation in all my passions. Even my
love of literary fame, my ruling passion, never soured my temper,
notwithstanding my frequent disappointments. My company was not
unacceptable to the young and careless, as well as to the studious and
literary; and as I took a particular pleasure in the company of modest
women, I had no reason to be displeased with the reception I met with
from them. In a word, though most men any wise eminent, have found
reason to complain of calumny, I never was touched, or even attacked
by her baleful tooth: and though I wantonly exposed myself to the
rage of both civil and religious factions, they seemed to be disarmed
in my behalf of their wonted fury. My friends never had occasion to
vindicate any one circumstance of my character and conduct: not but
that the zealots, we may well suppose, would have been glad to invent
and propagate any story to my disadvantage, but they could never find
any which they thought would wear the face of probability. I cannot say
there is no vanity in making this funeral oration of myself, but I hope
it is not a misplaced one; and this is a matter of fact which is easily
cleared and ascertained.

APRIL 18. 1776.




LETTER FROM ADAM SMITH, LL.D.

TO

WILLIAM STRACHAN, ESQ.


                   _Kirkaldy, Fifeshire, Nov_. 9, 1776.


DEAR SIR,

It is with a real, though a very melancholy pleasure, that I sit down
to give you some account of the behaviour of our late excellent friend,
Mr Hume, during his last illness.

Though, in his own judgment, his disease was mortal and incurable,
yet he allowed himself to be prevailed upon, by the entreaty of his
friends, to try what might be the effects of a long journey. A few
days before he set out, he wrote that account of his own life, which,
together with his other papers, he has left to your care. My account,
therefore, shall begin where his ends.

He set out for London towards the end of April, and at Morpeth met
with Mr John Home and myself, who had both come down from London on
purpose to see him, expecting to have found him at Edinburgh. Mr Home
returned with him, and attended him during the whole of his stay in
England, with that care and attention which might be expected from a
temper so perfectly friendly and affectionate. As I had written to my
mother that she might expect me in Scotland, I was under the necessity
of continuing my journey. His disease seemed to yield to exercise
and change of air, and when he arrived in London, he was apparently
in much better health than when he left Edinburgh. He was advised to
go to Bath to drink the waters, which appeared for some time to have
so good an effect upon him, that even he himself began to entertain,
what he was not apt to do, a better opinion of his own health. His
symptoms, however, soon returned with their usual violence, and from
that moment he gave up all thoughts of recovery, but submitted with the
utmost cheerfulness, and the most perfect complacency and resignation.
Upon his return to Edinburgh, though he found himself much weaker, yet
his cheerfulness never abated, and he continued to divert himself,
as usual, with correcting his own works for a new edition, with
reading books of amusement, with the conversation of his friends; and,
sometimes in the evening, with a party at his favourite game of whist.
His cheerfulness was so great, and his conversation and amusements run
so much in their usual strain, that, notwithstanding all bad symptoms,
many people could not believe he was dying. "I shall tell your friend,
Colonel Edmondstone," said Doctor Dundas to him one day, "that I left
you much better, and in a fair way of recovery." "Doctor," said he, "as
I believe you would not choose to tell any thing but the truth, you
had better tell him, that I am dying as fast as my enemies, if I have
any, could wish, and as easily and cheerfully as my best friends could
desire." Colonel Edmondstone soon afterwards came to see him, and take
leave of him; and on his way home, he could not forbear writing him a
letter bidding him once more an eternal adieu, and applying to him, as
to a dying man, the beautiful French verses in which the Abbé Chaulieu,
in expectation of his own death, laments his approaching separation
from his friend, the Marquis de la Fare. Mr Hume's magnanimity and
firmness were such, that his most affectionate friends knew that they
hazarded nothing in talking or writing to him as to a dying man,
and that so far from being hurt by this frankness, he was rather
pleased and flattered by it. I happened to come into his room while
he was reading this letter, which he had just received, and which he
immediately showed me. I told him, that though I was sensible how very
much he was weakened, and that appearances were in many respects very
bad, yet his cheerfulness was still so great, the spirit of life seemed
still to be so very strong in him, that I could not help entertaining
some faint hopes. He answered, "Your hopes are groundless. An habitual
diarrhoea of more than a year's standing, would be a very bad disease
at any age: at my age it is a mortal one. When I lie down in the
evening, I feel myself weaker than when I rose in the morning; and when
I rise in the morning, weaker than when I lay down in the evening. I
am sensible, besides, that some of my vital parts are affected, so
that I must soon die." "Well," said I, "if it must be so, you have at
least the satisfaction of leaving all your friends, your brother's
family in particular, in great prosperity." He said that he felt that
satisfaction so sensibly, that when he was reading, a few days before,
Lucian's Dialogues of the Dead, among all the excuses which are alleged
to Charon for not entering readily into his boat, he could not find
one that fitted him; he had no house to finish, he had no daughter to
provide for, he had no enemies upon whom he wished to revenge himself.
"I could not well imagine," said he, "what excuse I could make to
Charon in order to obtain a little delay. I have done every thing of
consequence which I ever meant to do; and I could at no time expect
to leave my relations and friends in a better situation than that in
which I am now likely to leave them. I therefore have all reason to die
contented." He then diverted himself with inventing several jocular
excuses, which he supposed he might make to Charon, and with imagining
the very surly answers which it might suit the character of Charon
to return to them. "Upon further consideration," said he, "I thought
I might say to him, Good Charon, I have been correcting my works for
a new edition. Allow me a little time, that I may see how the public
receives the alterations." But Charon would answer, "When you have seen
the effect of these, you will be for making other alterations. There
will be no end of such excuses; so, honest friend, please step into the
boat." But I might still urge, "Have a little patience, good Charon; I
have been endeavouring to open the eyes of the public. If I live a few
years longer, I may have the satisfaction of seeing the downfall of
some of the prevailing systems of superstition." But Charon would then
lose all temper and decency. "You loitering rogue, that will not happen
these many hundred years. Do you fancy I will grant you a lease for so
long a term? Get into the boat this instant, you lazy loitering rogue."

But, though Mr Hume always talked of his approaching dissolution
with great cheerfulness, he never affected to make any parade of his
magnanimity. He never mentioned the subject but when the conversation
naturally led to it, and never dwelt longer upon it than the course of
the conversation happened to require: it was a subject, indeed, which
occurred pretty frequently, in consequence of the inquiries which his
friends, who came to see him, naturally made concerning the state of
his health. The conversation which I mentioned above, and which passed
on Thursday the 8th of August, was the last, except one, that I ever
had with him. He had now become so very weak, that the company of his
most intimate friends fatigued him; for his cheerfulness was still so
great, his complaisance and social disposition were still so entire,
that when any friend was with him, he could not help talking more,
and with greater exertion, than suited the weakness of his body. At
his own desire, therefore, I agreed to leave Edinburgh, where I was
staying partly upon his account, and returned to my mother's house
here, at Kirkaldy, upon condition that he would send for me whenever he
wished to see me; the physician who saw him most frequently, Dr Black,
undertaking, in the mean time, to write me occasionally an account of
the state of his health.

On the 22d of August, the Doctor wrote me the following letter:

"Since my last, Mr Hume has passed his time pretty easily, but is
much weaker. He sits up, goes down stairs once a day, and amuses
himself with reading, but seldom sees anybody. He finds that even the
conversation of his most intimate friends fatigues and oppresses him;
and it is happy that he does not need it, for he is quite free from
anxiety, impatience, or low spirits, and passes his time very well with
the assistance of amusing books."

I received the day after a letter from Mr Hume himself, of which the
following is an extract.


                     "_Edinburgh_, 23_d August_, 1776.

"MY DEAREST FRIEND,

"I am obliged to make use of my nephew's hand in writing to you, as I
do not rise to-day.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I go very fast to decline, and last night had a small fever, which I
hoped might put a quicker period to this tedious illness, but unluckily
it has, in a great measure, gone off. I cannot submit to your coming
over here on my account, as it is possible for me to see you so small a
part of the day, but Doctor Black can better inform you concerning the
degree of strength which may from time to time remain with me. Adieu,"
&c.

Three days after I received the following letter from Doctor Black.

              "_Edinburgh, Monday_, 26_th August_, 1776.

"DEAR SIR,

"Yesterday about four o'clock afternoon, Mr Hume expired. The near
approach of his death became evident in the night between Thursday
and Friday, when his disease became excessive, and soon weakened him
so much, that he could no longer rise out of his bed. He continued to
the last perfectly sensible, and free from much pain or feelings of
distress. He never dropped the smallest expression of impatience; but
when he had occasion to speak to the people about him, always did it
with affection and tenderness. I thought it improper to write to bring
you over, especially as I heard that he had dictated a letter to you
desiring you not to come. When he became very weak, it cost him an
effort to speak, and he died in such a happy composure of mind, that
nothing could exceed it."

Thus died our most excellent, and never to be forgotten friend;
concerning whose philosophical opinions men will, no doubt, judge
variously, every one approving, or condemning them, according as they
happen to coincide or disagree with his own; but concerning whose
character and conduct there can scarce be a difference of opinion.
His temper, indeed, seemed to be more happily balanced, if I may be
allowed such an expression, than that perhaps of any other man I have
ever known. Even in the lowest state of his fortune, his great and
necessary frugality never hindered him from exercising, upon proper
occasions, acts both of charity and generosity. It was a frugality
founded, not upon avarice, but upon the love of independency. The
extreme gentleness of his nature never weakened either the firmness of
his mind, or the steadiness of his resolutions. His constant pleasantry
was the genuine effusion of good nature and good humour, tempered
with delicacy and modesty, and without even the slightest tincture of
malignity, so frequently the disagreeable source of what is called wit
in other men. It never was the meaning of his raillery to mortify;
and therefore, far from offending, it seldom failed to please and
delight, even those who were the objects of it. To his friends, who
were frequently the objects of it, there was not perhaps any one of all
his great and amiable qualities, which contributed more to endear his
conversation. And that gaiety of temper, so agreeable in society, but
which is so often accompanied with frivolous and superficial qualities,
was in him certainly attended with the most severe application, the
most extensive learning, the greatest depth of thought, and a capacity
in every respect the most comprehensive. Upon the whole, I have
always considered him, both in his lifetime and since his death, as
approaching as nearly to the idea of a perfectly wise and virtuous man,
as perhaps the nature of human frailty will permit.

             I ever am, dear Sir,

                   Most affectionately yours,

                                       ADAM SMITH.

[Illustration: Drawn by A. Nasmyth--Engraved by W. Miller--HUME'S
MONUMENT, CALTON HILL.]




THE LATTER-WILL AND TESTAMENT OF DAVID HUME.


I, David Hume, second lawful son of Joseph Home of Ninewells,
advocate, for the love and affection I bear to John Home of Ninewells,
my brother, and for other causes, DO, by these presents, under the
reservations and burdens after-mentioned, GIVE and DISPOSE to the said
John Home, or, if he die before me, to David Home, his second son,
his heirs and assigns whatsomever, all lands, heritages, debts, and
sums of money, as well heritable as moveable, which shall belong to me
at the time of my decease, as also my whole effects in general, real
and personal, with and under the burden of the following legacies,
viz. to my sister Catherine Home, the sum of twelve hundred pounds
sterling, payable the first term of Whitsunday or Martinmas after my
decease, together with all my English books, and the life-rent of my
house in St James's Court, or in case that house be sold at the time
of my decease, twenty pounds a year during the whole course of her
life: To my friend Adam Ferguson, Professor of Moral Philosophy in
the College of Edinburgh, two hundred pounds sterling: To my friend
M. d'Alembert, member of the French Academy, and of the Academy of
Sciences in Paris, two hundred pounds: To my friend Dr Adam Smith, late
Professor of Moral Philosophy in Glasgow, I leave all my manuscripts
without exception, desiring him to publish my _Dialogues on Natural
Religion_, which are comprehended in this present bequest; but to
publish no other papers which he suspects not to have been written
within these five years, but to destroy them all at his leisure: And
I even leave him full power over all my papers, except the Dialogues
above mentioned; and though I can trust to that intimate and sincere
friendship, which has ever subsisted between us, for his faithful
execution of this part of my will, yet, as a small recompense of his
pains in correcting and publishing this work, I leave him two hundred
pounds, to be paid immediately after the publication of it: I also
leave to Mrs Anne and Mrs Janet Hepburn, daughters of Mr James Hepburn
of Keith, one hundred pounds a piece: To my cousin David Campbell, son
of Mr Campbell, minister of Lillysleaf, one hundred pounds: To the
Infirmary of Edinburgh, fifty pounds: To all the servants who shall be
in my family at the time of my decease, one year's wages; and to my
housekeeper, Margaret Irvine, three year's wages: And I also ordain,
that my brother, or nephew, or executor, whoever he be, shall not pay
up to the said Margaret Irvine, without her own consent, any sum of
money which I shall owe her at the time of my decease, whether by bill,
bond, or for wages, but shall retain in his hand, and pay her the legal
interest upon it, till she demand the principal: And in case my brother
above-mentioned shall survive me, I leave to his son David, the sum of
a thousand pounds to assist him in his education: But in case that by
my brother's death before me, the succession of my estate and effects
shall devolve to the aforesaid David, I hereby burden him, over and
above the payment of the aforesaid legacies, with the payment of the
sums following: To his brothers Joseph and John, a thousand pounds
a piece: To his sisters Catherine and Agnes, five hundred pounds a
piece: all which sums, as well as every sum contained in the present
disposition (except that to Dr Smith), to be payable the first term of
Whitsunday and Martinmas, after my decease; and all of them, without
exception, in sterling money. And I do hereby nominate and appoint
the said John Home, my brother, and failing of him by decease, the
said David Home, to be my sole executor and universal legatee, with
and under the burdens above mentioned; reserving always full power and
liberty to me, at any time of my life, even in deathbed, to alter and
innovate these presents, in whole or in part, and to burden the same
with such other legacies as I shall think fit. And I do hereby declare
these presents to be a good, valid, and sufficient evidence, albeit
found in my custody, or in the custody of any other person at the time
of my death, &c. (_in common style_.) Signed 4 January 1776, before
these witnesses, the Right Honourable the Earl of Home, and Mr John
McGowan, Clerk to the Signet.

                                      DAVID HUME.

I also ORDAIN, that if I shall die any where in Scotland, I shall be
buried in a private manner in the Calton churchyard, the south side
of it, and a monument to be built over my body, at an expense not
exceeding a hundred pounds, with an inscription containing only my
name, with the year of my birth and death, leaving it to posterity to
add the rest.

_At Edinburgh_, 15_th April_, 1776. DAVID HUME.

I also leave for rebuilding the bridge of Churnside the sum of a
hundred pounds; but on condition that the managers of the bridge
shall take none of the stones for building the bridge from the quarry
of Ninewells, except from that part of the quarry which has been
already opened. I leave to my nephew Joseph, the sum of fifty pounds to
enable him to make a good sufficient drain and sewer round the house
of Ninewells, but on condition that, if that drain and sewer be not
made, from whatever cause, within a year after my death, the said fifty
pounds shall be paid to the poor of the parish of Churnside: To my
sister, instead of all my English books, I leave her a hundred volumes
at her choice: To David Waite, servant to my brother, I leave the sum
of ten pounds, payable the first term after my death.

DAVID HUME.




AN

ACCOUNT

OF THE CONTROVERSY

BETWEEN

HUME AND ROUSSEAU.


LONDON. M.D.CC.LXVI.




ADVERTISEMENT OF THE FRENCH EDITORS.


The name and writings of Mr Hume have been long since well known
throughout Europe. At the same time, his personal acquaintance
have remarked, in the candour and simplicity of his manners, that
impartiality and ingenuousness of disposition which distinguishes his
character, and is sufficiently indicated in his writings.

He hath exerted those great talents he received from nature, and the
acquisitions he made by study, in the search of truth, and promoting
the good of mankind; never wasting his time, or sacrificing his repose,
in literary or personal disputes. He hath seen his writings frequently
censured with bitterness, by fanaticism, ignorance, and the spirit of
party, without ever giving an answer to his adversaries.

Even those who have attacked his works with the greatest violence, have
always respected his personal character. His love of peace is so well
known, that the criticisms written against his pieces, have been often
brought him by their respective authors, for him to revise and correct
them. At one time, in particular, a performance of this kind was shown
to him, in which he had been treated in a very rude and even injurious
manner; on remarking which to the author, the latter struck out the
exceptionable passages, blushing and wondering at the force of that
_polemic spirit_ which had carried him imperceptibly away beyond the
founds of truth and decency.

It was with great reluctance that a man, possessed of such pacific
dispositions, could be brought to consent to the publication of the
following piece. He was very sensible that the quarrels among men
of letters are a scandal to philosophy; nor was any person in the
world less formed for giving occasion to a scandal, so consolatory to
blockheads. But the circumstances were such as to draw him into it, in
spite of his inclinations.

All the world knows that Mr Rousseau, proscribed in almost every
country where he resided, determined at length to take refuge in
England; and that Mr Hume, affected by his situation, and his
misfortunes, undertook to bring him over, and to provide for him a
peaceful, safe, and convenient asylum. But very few persons are privy
to the zeal, activity, and even delicacy, with which Mr Hume conferred
this act of benevolence. What an affectionate attachment he had
contracted for this new friend, which humanity had given him! with what
address he endeavoured to anticipate his desires, without offending his
pride! in short, with what address he strove to justify, in the eyes of
others, the singularities of Mr Rousseau, and to defend his character
against those who were not disposed to think so favourably of him as he
did himself.

Even at the time when Mr Hume was employed in doing Mr Rousseau the
most essential service, he received from him the most insolent and
abusive letter. The more such a stroke was unexpected, the more it was
cruel and affecting. Mr Hume wrote an account of this extraordinary
adventure to his friends at Paris, and expressed himself in his letters
with all that indignation which so strange a proceeding must excite.
He thought himself under no obligation to keep terms with a man, who,
after having received from him the most certain and constant marks
of friendship, could reproach him, without any reason, as false,
treacherous, and as the most wicked of mankind.

In the mean time, the dispute between these two celebrated personages
did not fail to make a noise. The complaints of Mr Hume soon came to
the knowledge of the public, which at first hardly believed it possible
that Mr Rousseau could be guilty of that excessive ingratitude
laid to his charge. Even Mr Hume's friends were fearful, lest, in
the first effusions of sensibility, he was not carried too far, and
had not mistaken for wilful crimes of the heart, the vagaries of
the imagination, or the deceptions of the understanding. He judged
it necessary, therefore to explain the affair, by writing a precise
narrative of all that passed between him and Mr Rousseau, from
their first connection to their rupture. This narrative he sent to
his friends, some of whom advised him to print it, alleging, that
as Mr Rousseau's accusations were become public, the proofs of his
justification ought to be so too. Mr Hume did not give into these
arguments, choosing rather to run the risk of being unjustly censured,
than to resolve on making himself a public party in an affair so
contrary to his disposition and character. A new incident, however, at
length overcame his reluctance. Mr Rousseau had addressed a letter to
a bookseller at Paris, in which he directly accuses Mr Hume of having
entered into a league with his enemies to betray and defame him; and
in which he boldly defies Mr Hume to print the papers he had in his
hands. This letter was communicated to several persons in Paris, was
translated into English, and the translation printed in the public
papers in London. An accusation and defiance so very public could not
be suffered to pass without reply, while any long silence on the part
of Mr Hume might have been interpreted little in his favour.

Besides, the news of this dispute had spread itself over Europe, and
the opinions entertained of it were various. It had doubtless been
much happier, if the whole affair had been buried in oblivion, and
remained a profound secret; but as it was impossible to prevent the
public interesting itself in the controversy, it became necessary at
least that the truth of the matter should be known. Mr Hume's friends
unitedly represented to him all these reasons, the force of which he
was at length convinced of; and seeing the necessity, consented, though
with reluctance, to the printing of his memorial.

The narrative, and notes, are translated from the English.[1] The
letters of Mr Rousseau, which serve as authentic proofs of the facts
are exact copies of the originals.[2]

This pamphlet contains many strange instances of singularity, that
will appear extraordinary enough to those who will give themselves
the trouble to peruse it. Those who do not choose to take the trouble,
however, may possibly do better, as its contents are of little
importance, except to those who are immediately interested.

On the whole, Mr Hume, in offering to the public the genuine pieces of
his trial, has authorized us to declare, that he will never take up the
pen again on the subject. Mr Rousseau indeed may return to the charge;
he may produce suppositions, misconstructions, inferences, and new
declamations; he may create and realize new phantoms, and envelop them
in the clouds of his rhetoric, he will meet with no more contradiction.
The facts are all laid before the public;[3] and Mr Hume submits his
cause to the determination of every man of sense and probity.




[1] And are now re-translated, for the most part, from the French,
the French editors having taken some liberties, not without Mr Hume's
consent, with the English original.--_English translator_.

[2] in the present edition Mr Hume's letters are printed _verbatim_;
and to Mr Rousseau's the translator hath endeavoured to do justice,
as well with regard to the sense as the expression. Not that he can
flatter himself with having always succeeded in the latter. He has
taken the liberty also to add a note or two, regarding some particular
circumstances which had come to his knowledge.

[3] The original letters of both parties will be lodged in the British
Museum, on account of the above mentioned defiance of Mr Rousseau, and
his subsequent insinuation, that if they should be published, they
would be falsified.




AN

ACCOUNT OF THE CONTROVERSY

BETWEEN

MR HUME AND MR ROUSSEAU.




_August_ 1, 1766.

My connexion with Mr Rousseau began in 1762, when the Parliament of
Paris had issued an arrêt for apprehending him, on account of his
_Emilius_. I was at that time at Edinburgh. A person of great worth
wrote to me from Paris, that Mr Rousseau intended to seek an asylum
in England, and desired I would do him all the good offices in my
power. As I conceived Mr Rousseau had actually put his design in
execution, I wrote to several of my friends in London, recommending
this celebrated exile to their favour. I wrote also immediately to Mr
Rousseau himself; assuring him of my desire to oblige, and readiness
to serve him. At the same time, I invited him to come to Edinburgh,
if the situation would be agreeable, and offered him a retreat in my
own house, so long as he should please to partake of it. There needed
no other motive to excite me to this act of humanity, than the idea
given me of Mr Rousseau's personal character, by the friend who had
recommended him, his well known genius and abilities, and above all,
his misfortunes; the very cause of which was an additional reason to
interest me in his favour. The following is the answer I received.




MR ROUSSEAU TO MR HUME.


_Motiers-Travers_, _Feb_. 19, 1763.

     SIR,

     I did not receive till lately, and at this place, the
     letter you did me the honour to direct to me at London, the
     2d of July last, on the supposition that I was then arrived
     at that capital. I should doubtless have made choice of
     a retreat in your country, and as near as possible to
     yourself, if I had foreseen what a reception I was to meet
     with in my own. No other nation could claim a preference to
     England. And this prepossession, for which I have dearly
     suffered, was at that time too natural not to be very
     excusable; but, to my great astonishment, as well as that
     of the public, I have met with nothing but affronts and
     insults, where I hoped to have found consolation at least,
     if not gratitude. How many reasons have I not to regret
     the want of that asylum and philosophical hospitality
     I should have found with you! My misfortunes, indeed,
     have constantly seemed to lead me in a manner that way.
     The protection and kindness of my Lord Marshall, your
     worthy and illustrious countryman, hath brought Scotland
     home to me, if I may so express myself, in the midst of
     Switzerland; he hath made you so often bear a part in our
     conversation, hath brought me so well acquainted with your
     virtues, which I before was only with your talents, that
     he inspired me with the most tender friendship for you,
     and the most ardent desire of obtaining yours, before I
     even knew you were disposed to grant it. Judge then of the
     pleasure I feel, at finding this inclination reciprocal.
     No, Sir, I should pay your merit but half its due, if
     it were the subject only of my admiration. Your great
     impartiality, together with your amazing penetration and
     genius, would lift you far above the rest of mankind,
     if you were less attached to them by the goodness of
     your heart. My Lord Marshal, in acquainting me that the
     amiableness of your disposition was still greater than the
     sublimity of your genius, rendered a correspondence with
     you every day more desirable, and cherished in me those
     wishes which he inspired, of ending my days near you. Oh,
     Sir, that a better state of health, and more convenient
     circumstances, would but enable me to take such a journey
     in the manner I could like! Could I but hope to see you and
     my Lord Marshal one day settled in your own country, which
     should for ever after be mine, I should be thankful, in
     such a society, for the very misfortunes that led me into
     it, and should account the day of its commencement as the
     first of my life. Would to Heaven I might live to see that
     happy day, though now more to be desired than expected!
     With what transports should I not exclaim, on setting foot
     in that happy country which gave birth to David Hume and
     the Lord Marshal of Scotland!

     Salve, facis mihi debita tellus!
     Hæc domus, hæc patria est.
                                           J.J.R.



This letter is not published from a motive of vanity; as will be seen
presently, when I give the reader a recantation of all the eulogies it
contains; but only to complete the course of our correspondence, and to
show that I have been long since disposed to Mr Rousseau's service.

From this time our correspondence entirely ceased, till about the
middle of last autumn (1765), when it was renewed by the following
accident. A certain lady of Mr Rousseau's acquaintance, being on a
journey to one of the French provinces, bordering on Switzerland, had
taken that opportunity of paying a visit to our solitary philosopher,
in his retreat at Motiers-Travers. To this lady he complained, that
his situation in Neufchâtel was become extremely disagreeable, as well
on account of the superstition of the people, as the resentment of the
clergy; and that he was afraid he should shortly be under the necessity
of seeking an asylum elsewhere; in which case, England appeared to
him, from the nature of its laws and government, to be the only place
to which he could retire with perfect security; adding, that my Lord
Marshal, his former protector, had advised him to put himself under my
protection, (that was the term he was pleased, to make use of), and
that he would accordingly address himself to me, if he thought it would
not be giving me too much trouble.

I was at that time charged with the affairs of England at the court of
France; but as I had the prospect of soon returning to London, I could
not reject a proposal made to me under such circumstances, by a man
so celebrated for his genius and misfortunes. As soon as I was thus
informed, therefore, of the situation and intentions of Mr Rousseau, I
wrote to him, making him an offer of my services; to which he returned
the following answer.



     MR ROUSSEAU TO MR HUME.


_Strasbourg_, _Dec_. 4, 1765.

     SIR,

     Your goodness affects me as much as it does me honour.
     The best reply I can make to your offers is to accept
     them, which I do. I shall set out in five or six days to
     throw myself into your arms. Such is the advice of my Lord
     Marshal, my protector, friend and father; it is the advice
     also of Madam * * * [1] whose good sense and benevolence
     serve equally for my direction and consolation; in fine,
     I may say it is the advice of my own heart, which takes
     a pleasure in being indebted to the most illustrious of
     my contemporaries, to a man whose goodness surpasses his
     glory. I sigh after a solitary and free retirement, wherein
     I might finish my days in peace. If this be procured me by
     means of your benevolent solicitude, I shall then enjoy at
     once the pleasure of the only blessing my heart desires,
     and also that of being indebted for it to you. I am, Sir,
     with all my heart, &c.

     J. J. R.


[1] The person here mentioned desired her name might be suppressed.
_French Editor_.

As the motive to the suppression of the lady's name can hardly be
supposed to extend to this country, the _English translator_ takes the
liberty to mention the name of the Marchioness de Verdelin.


Not that I had deferred till this time my endeavours to be useful to Mr
Rousseau. The following letter was communicated to me by Mr Clairaut,
some weeks before his death.



     MR ROUSSEAU TO MR CLAIRAUT.


_Motiers-Travers_, _March_ 3, 1765.

     SIR,

     The remembrance of your former kindness, induces me to
     be again importunate. It is to desire you will be so
     good, for the second time, to be the censor of one of
     my performances. It is a very paltry rhapsody, which I
     compiled many years ago, under the title of _A Musical
     Dictionary_, and am now obliged to republish it for
     subsistence. Amidst the torrent of misfortunes that
     overwhelm me, I am not in a situation to review the work;
     which, I know, is full of oversights and mistakes. If any
     interest you may take in the lot of the most unfortunate
     of mankind, should induce you to bestow a little more
     attention on his work than on that of another, I should be
     extremely obliged to you, if you would take the trouble to
     correct such errors as you may meet with in the perusal.
     To point them out, without correcting them, would be doing
     nothing, for I am absolutely incapable of paying the
     least attention to such a work; so that if you would but
     condescend to alter, add, retrench, and, in short, use it
     as you would do your own, you would do a great charity, for
     which I should be extremely thankful. Accept, Sir, my most
     humble excuses and salutations.

     J. J. R.


It is with reluctance I say it, but I am compelled to it; I now know of
a certainty that this affectation of extreme poverty and distress was a
mere pretence, a petty kind of imposture which Mr Rousseau successfully
employed to excite the compassion of the public; but I was then very
far from suspecting any such artifice. I must own, I felt on this
occasion an emotion of pity, mixed with indignation, to think a man
of letters of such eminent merit, should be reduced, in spite of the
simplicity of his manner of living, to such extreme indigence; and that
this unhappy state should be rendered more intolerable by sickness,
by the approach of old age, and the implacable rage of persecution.
I knew that many persons imputed the wretchedness of Mr Rousseau to
his excessive pride, which induced him to refuse the assistance of
his friends; but I thought this fault, if it were a fault, was a very
respectable one. Too many men of letters have debased their character
in stooping so low as to solicit the assistance of persons of wealth
or power, unworthy of affording them protection; and I conceived that
a noble pride, even though carried to excess, merited some indulgence
in a man of genius, who, borne up by a sense of his own superiority and
a love of independence, should have braved the storms of fortune and
the insults of mankind. I proposed, therefore, to serve Mr Rousseau
in his own way. I desired Mr Clairaut, accordingly, to give me his
letter, which I showed to several of Mr Rousseau's friends and patrons
in Paris. At the same time I proposed to them a scheme by which he
might be relieved, without suspecting any thing of the matter. This
was to engage the bookseller, who was to publish his _Dictionary_, to
give Mr Rousseau a greater sum for the copy than he had offered, and
to indemnify him by paying him the difference. But this project, which
could not be executed without the assistance of Mr Clairaut, fell to
the ground at the unexpected decease of that learned and respectable
academician.

Retaining, however, still the same idea of Mr Rousseau's excessive
poverty, I constantly retained the same inclination to oblige him;
and when I was informed of his intention to go to England under my
conduct, I formed a scheme much of the same kind with that I could not
execute at Paris. I wrote immediately to my friend, Mr John Stewart of
Buckingham Street, that I had an affair to communicate to him, of so
secret and delicate a nature, that I should not venture even to commit
it to paper, but that he might learn the particulars of Mr Elliot
(now Sir Gilbert Elliot), who would soon return from Paris to London.
The plan was this, and was really communicated by Mr Elliot some time
after to Mr Stewart, who was at the same time enjoined to the greatest
secrecy.

Mr Stewart was to look out for some honest discreet farmer in his
neighbourhood in the country, who might be willing to lodge and board
Mr Rousseau and his gouvernante in a very decent and plentiful manner,
at a pension which Mr Stewart might settle at fifty or sixty pounds a
year; the farmer engaging to keep such agreement a profound secret, and
to receive from Mr Rousseau only twenty or twenty-five pounds a year, I
engaging to supply the difference.

It was not long before Mr Stewart wrote me word he had found a
situation which he conceived might be agreeable; on which I desired he
would get the apartment furnished in a proper and convenient manner at
my expense. But this scheme, in which there could not possibly enter
any motive of vanity on my part, secrecy being a necessary condition of
its execution, did not take place, other designs presenting themselves
more convenient and agreeable. The fact, however, is well known both to
Mr Stewart and Sir Gilbert Elliot.

It will not be improper here to mention another plan concerted with
the same intentions. I had accompanied Mr Rousseau into a very
pleasant part of the county of Surry, where he spent two days at
Colonel Webb's, Mr Rousseau seeming to me highly delighted with the
natural and solitary beauties of the place. Through the means of Mr
Stewart, therefore, I entered into treaty with Colonel Webb for the
purchasing the house, with a little estate adjoining, in order to make
a settlement for Mr Rousseau. If, after what has passed, Mr Rousseau's
testimony be of any validity, I may appeal to himself for the truth of
what I advance. But be this as it will, these facts are well known to
Mr Stewart, to General Clarke, and in part to Colonel Webb.

But to proceed in my narrative. Mr Rousseau came to Paris, provided
with a passport which his friends had obtained for him. I conducted him
to England. For upwards of two months after our arrival, I employed
myself and my friends in looking out for some agreeable situation for
him. We gave way to all his caprices; excused all his singularities;
indulged him in all his humours; in short, neither time nor trouble
was spared to procure him what he desired;[2] and, notwithstanding he
rejected several of the projects which I had laid out for him, yet I
thought myself sufficiently recompensed for my trouble by the gratitude
and even affection with which he appeared to repay my solicitude.

At length his present settlement was proposed and approved. Mr
Davenport, a gentleman of family, fortune and worth, offered him his
house at Wooton, in the county of Derby, where he himself seldom
resides, and at which Mr Rousseau and his housekeeper are boarded at a
very moderate expense.

When Mr Rousseau arrived at Wooton, he wrote me the following letter.


[2] It is probably to this excessive and ill-judged complaisance Mr
Hume may in a great degree impute the disagreeable consequences that
have followed. There is no end in indulging caprice, nor any prudence
in doing it, when it is known to be such. It may be thought humane
to indulge the weak of body or mind, the decrepitude of age, and
imbecility of childhood; but even here it too often proves cruelty to
the very parties indulged. How much more inexcusable, therefore, is it
to cherish the absurdities of whim and singularity in men of genius and
abilities! How is it possible to make a man easy or happy in a world,
to whose customs and maxims he is determined to run retrograde? No.
Capricious men, like forward children, should be left to kick against
the pricks, and vent their spleen unnoticed. To humour, is only to
spoil them.--_English Translator_.




     MR ROUSSEAU TO MR HUME.


     _Wooton_, _March_ 22, 1766.

     You see already, my dear patron, by the date of my letter,
     that I am arrived at the place of my destination; but you
     cannot see all the charms which I find in it. To do this,
     you should be acquainted with the situation, and be able
     to read my heart. You ought, however, to read at least
     those of my sentiments with respect to you, and which you
     have so well deserved. If I live in this agreeable asylum
     as happy as I hope to do, one of the greatest pleasures of
     my life will be, to reflect that I owe it to you. To make
     another happy, is to deserve to be happy one's self. May
     you therefore find in yourself the reward of all you have
     done for me! Had I been alone, I might perhaps have met
     with hospitality; but I should have never relished it so
     highly as I now do in owing it to your friendship. Retain
     still that friendship for me, my dear patron; love me for
     my sake, who am so much indebted to you; love me for your
     own, for the good you have done me. I am sensible of the
     full value of your sincere friendship: it is the object of
     my ardent wishes: I am ready to repay it with all mine,
     and feel something in my heart which may one day convince
     you that it is not without its value. As, for the reasons
     agreed on between us, I shall receive nothing by the post,
     you will be pleased, when you have the goodness to write to
     me, to send your letters to Mr Davenport. The affair of the
     carriage is not yet adjusted, because I know I was imposed
     on. It is a trifling fault, however, which may be only the
     effect of an obliging vanity, unless it should happen to be
     repeated. If you were concerned in it, I would advise you
     to give up, once for all, these little impositions, which
     cannot proceed from any good motive, when converted into
     snares for simplicity. I embrace you, my dear patron, with
     the same cordiality which I hope to find in you.

     J. J. R.

Some few days after, I received from him another letter, of which the
following is a copy.



     MR ROUSSEAU TO MR HUME.


     _Wooton_, _March_ 29, 1766.

     You will see, my dear patron, by the letter Mr Davenport
     will have transmitted you, how agreeably I find myself
     situated in this place. I might perhaps be more at my ease
     if I were less noticed; but the solicitude of so polite an
     host as mine is too obliging to give offence; and as there
     is nothing in life without its inconvenience, that of
     being too good is one of those which is the most tolerable.
     I find a much greater inconvenience in not being able to
     make the servants understand me, and particularly in my not
     understanding them. Luckily Mrs le Vasseur serves me as
     interpreter, and her fingers speak better than my tongue.
     There is one advantage, however, attending my ignorance,
     which is a kind of compensation; it serves to tire and keep
     at a distance impertinent visitors. The minister of the
     parish came to see me yesterday, who, finding that I spoke
     to him only in French, would not speak to me in English, so
     that our interview was almost a silent one. I have taken
     a great fancy to this expedient, and shall make use of it
     with all my neighbours, if I have any. Nay, should I even
     learn to speak English, I would converse with them only in
     French, especially if I were so happy as to find they did
     not understand a word of that language; an artifice this,
     much of the same kind with that which the Negroes pretend
     is practised by the monkeys, who, they say, are capable of
     speech, but cannot be prevailed upon to talk, lest they
     should be set to work.

     It is not true in any sense that I agreed to accept of
     a model from Mr Gosset as a present. On the contrary, I
     asked him the price, which he told me was a guinea and
     half, adding that he intended to present me with it; an
     offer I did not accept. I desire you therefore to pay him
     for it, and Mr Davenport will be so good as repay you the
     money. And if Mr Gosset does not consent to be paid for it,
     it must be returned to him, and purchased by some other
     hand. It is designed for Mr du Peyrou, who desired long
     since to have my portrait, and caused one to be painted
     in miniature, which is not at all like me. You were more
     fortunate in this respect than me; but I am sorry that, by
     your assiduity to serve me, you deprived me of the pleasure
     of discharging the same friendly obligation with regard to
     yourself. Be so good, my dear patron, as to order the model
     to be sent to Messrs Guinand and Hankey, Little St Helen's,
     Bishopsgate Street, in order to be transmitted to Mr du
     Peyrou by the first safe conveyance. It hath been a frost
     ever since I have been here; the snow falls daily; and the
     wind is cutting and severe; notwithstanding all which, I
     had rather lodge in the hollow trunk of an old tree, in
     this country, than in the most superb apartment in London.
     Good day, my dear patron. I embrace you with all my heart.
     J. J. R.


Mr Rousseau and I having agreed not to lay each other under any
restraint by a continued correspondence, the only subject of our future
letters was the obtaining a pension for him from the King of England,
which was then in agitation, and of which affair the following is a
concise and faithful relation.

As we were conversing together one evening at Calais, where we were
detained by contrary winds, I asked Mr Rousseau if he would not accept
of a pension from the King of England, in case his Majesty should be
pleased to grant him one. To this he replied, it was a matter of some
difficulty to resolve on, but that he should be entirely directed
by the advice of my Lord Marshall. Encouraged by this answer, I no
sooner arrived in London than I addressed myself to his Majesty's
Ministers, and particularly to General Conway, Secretary of State, and
General Græme, Secretary and Chamberlain to the Queen. Application was
accordingly made to their Majesties, who, with their usual goodness,
consented, on condition only that the affair should not be made public.
Mr Rousseau and I both wrote to my Lord Marshall; and Mr Rousseau
expressly observed in his letter, that the circumstance of the affair's
being to be kept secret was very agreeable to him. The consent of my
Lord Marshall arrived, as may readily be imagined; soon after which Mr
Rousseau set out for Wooton, while the business remained some time in
suspense, on account of the indisposition of General Conway.

In the mean time, I began to be afraid, from what I had observed of
Mr Rousseau's disposition and character, that his natural restlessness
of mind would prevent the enjoyment of that repose, to which the
hospitality and security he found in England invited him. I saw, with
infinite regret, that he was born for storms and tumults, and that the
disgust which might succeed the peaceful enjoyment of solitude and
tranquillity, would soon render him a burthen to himself and every body
about him.[3] But, as I lived at the distance of an hundred and fifty
miles from the place of his residence, and was constantly employed in
doing him good offices, I did not expect that I myself should be the
victim of this unhappy disposition.


[3] In forming the opinion of Mr Rousseau's disposition, Mr Hume was by
no means singular. The striking features of Mr Rousseau's extraordinary
character having been strongly marked in the criticisms on his several
writings, in the Monthly Review, particularly in the account of his
Letters from the Mountains, in the appendix to the 31st vol. of that
work, where this celebrated genius is described, merely from the
general tenour of his writings and the outlines of his public conduct,
to be exactly such a kind of person as Mr Hume hath discovered him from
intimate and personal acquaintance.--_English translator_.


It is necessary to introduce here a letter, which was written last
winter, at Paris, in the name of the king of Prussia.


     MY DEAR JOHN JAMES,

     You have renounced Geneva, your native soil. You have been
     driven from Switzerland, a country of which you have made
     such boast in your writings. In France you are outlawed:
     come then to me. I admire your talents, and amuse myself
     with your reveries; on which, however, by the way, you
     bestow too much time and attention. It is high time to grow
     prudent and happy; you have made yourself sufficiently
     talked of for singularities little becoming a truly great
     man: show your enemies that you have sometimes common
     sense: this will vex them without hurting you. My dominions
     afford you a peaceable retreat: I am desirous to do you
     good, and will do it, if you can but think it such. But
     if you are determined to refuse my assistance, you may
     expect that I shall say not a word about it to any one.
     If you persist in perplexing your brains to find out new
     misfortunes, choose such as you like best; I am a king,
     and can make you as miserable as you can wish; at the same
     time, I will engage to do that which your enemies never
     will, I will cease to persecute you, when you are no longer
     vain of persecution.

     Your sincere friend, FREDERICK.


This letter was written by Mr Horace Walpole, about three weeks before
I left Paris; but though we lodged in the same hotel, and were often
together, Mr Walpole, out of regard to me, carefully concealed this
piece of pleasantry till after my departure. He then showed it to some
friends, who took copies; and those of course presently multiplied; so
that this little piece had been spread with rapidity all over Europe,
and was in every body's hands when I saw it, for the first time, in
London.

I believe every one will allow, who knows any thing of the liberty of
this country, that such a piece of raillery could not, even by the
utmost influence of kings, lords and commons, by all the authority
ecclesiastical, civil and military, be kept from finding its way to the
press. It was accordingly published in the St James's Chronicle, and a
few days after I was very much surprised to find the following piece in
the same paper.



     MR ROUSSEAU TO THE AUTHOR OF THE ST JAMES'S CHRONICLE.


     _Wooton_, _April_ 7_th_, 1766.

     SIR,

     You have been wanting in that respect which every private
     person owes to crowned heads, in publickly ascribing
     to the King of Prussia, a letter full of baseness and
     extravagance; by which circumstance alone, you might be
     very well assured he could not be the author. You have even
     dared to subscribe his name, as if you had seen him write
     it with his own hand. I inform you, Sir, that this letter
     was fabricated at Paris, and, what rends and afflicts my
     heart, that the impostor hath his accomplices in England.

     In justice to the King of Prussia, to truth, and to myself,
     you ought therefore to print the letter I am now writing,
     and to which I set my name, by way of reparation for a
     fault, which you would undoubtedly reproach yourself for
     if you knew of what atrociousness you have been made the
     instrument. Sir, I make you my sincere salutations.

     J. J. R.


I was sorry to see Mr Rousseau display such an excess of sensibility,
on account of so simple and unavoidable an incident, as the publication
of this pretended letter from the King of Prussia. But I should have
accused myself of a most black and malevolent disposition, if I had
imagined Mr Rousseau could have suspected me to have been the editor of
it, or that he had intentionally directed his resentment against me.
He now informs me, however, that this was really the case. Just eight
days before, I had received a letter, written in the most amicable
terms imaginable.[4] I am, surely, the last man in the world, who, in
common sense, ought to be suspected; yet, without even the pretence
of the smallest proof or probability, I am, of a sudden, the first
man not only suspected, but certainly concluded to be the publisher;
I am, without further inquiry or explication, intentionally insulted
in a public paper; I am, from the dearest friend, converted into a
treacherous and malignant enemy; and all my present and past services
are at one stroke very artfully cancelled. Were it not ridiculous to
employ reasoning on such a subject, and with such a man, I might ask
Mr Rousseau, "Why I am supposed to have any malignity against him?"
My actions, in a hundred instances, had sufficiently demonstrated
the contrary; and it is not usual for favours conferred to beget ill
will in the person who confers them. But supposing I had secretly
entertained an animosity towards him, would I run the risk of a
discovery, by so silly a vengeance, and by sending this piece to the
press, when I knew, from the usual avidity of the news-writers to find
articles of intelligence, that it must necessarily in a few days be
laid hold of?

[4] That of the 29th of March.

But not imagining that I was the object of so black and ridiculous a
suspicion, I pursued my usual train, by serving my friend in the least
doubtful manner. I renewed my applications to General Conway, as soon
as the state of that gentleman's health permitted it: the General
applies again to his Majesty: his Majesty's consent is renewed: the
Marquis of Rockingham, first Commissioner of the Treasury, is also
applied to: the whole affair is happily finished; and full of joy, I
conveyed the intelligence to my friend. On which Mr Conway soon after
received the following letter.



     MR ROUSSEAU TO GENERAL CONWAY.


     _May_ 12_th_, 1766.

     SIR,

     Affected with a most lively sense of the favour his
     Majesty hath honoured me with, and with that of your
     goodness, which procured it me, it affords me the most
     pleasing sensation to reflect, that the best of Kings, and
     the Minister most worthy of his confidence, are pleased
     to interest themselves in my fortune. This, Sir, is an
     advantage of which I am justly tenacious, and which I will
     never deserve to lose. But it is necessary I should speak
     to you with that frankness you admire. After the many
     misfortunes that have befallen me, I thought myself armed
     against all possible events. There have happened to me
     some, however, which I did not foresee, and which indeed an
     ingenuous mind ought not to have foreseen: hence it is that
     they affect me by so much the more severely. The trouble
     in which they involve me, indeed, deprives me of the ease
     and presence of mind necessary to direct my conduct: all
     I can reasonably do, under so distressed a situation,
     is to suspend my resolutions about every affair of such
     importance as is that in agitation. So far from refusing
     the beneficence of the King from pride, as is imputed to
     me, I am proud of acknowledging it, and am only sorry I
     cannot do it more publicly. But when I actually receive
     it, I would be able to give up myself entirely to those
     sentiments which it would naturally inspire, and to have an
     heart replete with gratitude for his Majesty's goodness and
     yours. I am not at all afraid this manner of thinking will
     make any alteration in yours towards me. Deign, therefore,
     Sir, to preserve that goodness for me, till a more happy
     opportunity, when you will be satisfied that I defer taking
     the advantage of it, only to render myself more worthy of
     it. I beg of you, Sir, to accept of my most humble and
     respectful salutations.

     J. J. R.

This letter appeared both to General Conway and me a plain refusal, as
long as the article of secrecy was insisted on; but as I knew that Mr
Rousseau had been acquainted with that condition from the beginning,
I was the less surprised at his silence towards me. I thought that my
friend, conscious of having treated me ill in this affair, was ashamed
to write to me; and having prevailed on General Conway to keep the
matter still open, I wrote a very friendly letter to Mr Rousseau,
exhorting him to return to his former way of thinking, and to accept of
the pension.

As to the deep distress which he mentions to General Conway, and which,
he says, deprives him even of the use of his reason, I was set very
much at ease on that head, by receiving a letter from Mr Davenport, who
told me, that his guest was at that very time extremely happy, easy,
cheerful, and even sociable. I saw plainly, in this event, the usual
infirmity of my friend, who wishes to interest the world in his favour,
by passing for sickly, and persecuted, and distressed, and unfortunate,
beyond all measure, even while he is the most happy and contented. His
pretences of an extreme sensibility had been too frequently repeated,
to have any effect on a man who was so well acquainted with them.

I waited three weeks in vain for an answer: I thought this a little
strange, and I even wrote so to Mr Davenport; but having to do with
a very odd sort of a man, and still accounting for his silence by
supposing him ashamed to write to me, I was resolved not to be
discouraged, nor to lose the opportunity of doing him an essential
service, on account of a vain ceremonial. I accordingly renewed my
applications to the Ministers, and was so happy as to be enabled to
write the following letter to Mr Rousseau, the only one of so old a
date of which I have a copy.



     MR HUME TO MR ROUSSEAU.


     _Lisle-street_, _Leicester-fields_, 19_th June_, 1766.

     As I have not received any answer from you, I conclude,
     that you persevere in the same resolution of refusing all
     marks of his Majesty's goodness, as long as they must
     remain a secret. I have therefore applied to General Conway
     to have this condition removed; and I was so fortunate as
     to obtain his promise that he would speak to the King for
     that purpose. It will only be requisite, said he, that we
     know previously from Mr Rousseau, whether he would accept
     of a pension publicly granted him, that his Majesty may
     not be exposed to a second refusal. He gave me authority
     to write to you on that subject; and I beg to hear your
     resolution as soon as possible. If you give your consent,
     which I earnestly entreat you to do, I know, that I could
     depend on the good offices of the Duke of Richmond, to
     second General Conway's application; so that I have no
     doubt of success. I am, my Dear Sir, Yours, with great
     sincerity,

     D. H.


In five days I received the following answer.

     MR ROUSSEAU TO MR HUME.


     _Wooton_, _June_ 23_d_, 1766.

     I imagined, Sir, that my silence, truly interpreted by your
     own conscience, had said enough; but since you have some
     design in not understanding me, I shall speak. You have
     but ill disguised yourself. I know you, and you are not
     ignorant of it. Before we had any personal connections,
     quarrels, or disputes; while we knew each other only by
     literary reputation, you affectionately made me the offer
     of the good offices of yourself and friends. Affected by
     this generosity, I threw myself into your arms; you brought
     me to England, apparently to procure me an asylum, but in
     fact to bring me to dishonour. You applied to this noble
     work, with a zeal worthy of your heart, and a success
     worthy of your abilities. You needed not have taken so much
     pains: you live and converse with the world; I with myself
     in solitude. The public love to be deceived, and you were
     formed to deceive them. I know one man, however, whom you
     can not deceive; I mean myself. You know with what horror
     my heart rejected the first suspicion of your designs. You
     know I embraced you with tears in my eyes, and told you, if
     you were not the best of men, you must be the blackest of
     mankind. In reflecting on your private conduct, you must
     say to yourself sometimes, you are not the best of men:
     under which conviction, I doubt much if ever you will be
     the happiest.

     I leave your friends and you to carry on your schemes as
     you please; giving up to you, without regret, my reputation
     during life; certain that, sooner or later, justice will be
     done to that of both. As to your good offices in matters
     of interest, which you have made use of as a mask, I thank
     you for them, and shall dispense with profiting by them. I
     ought not to hold a correspondence with you any longer, or
     to accept of it to my advantage in any affair in which you
     are to be the mediator. Adieu, Sir, I wish you the truest
     happiness; but as we ought not to have any thing to say to
     each other for the future, this is the last letter you will
     receive from me.

     J. J. R.

To this I immediately sent the following reply.


     MR HUME TO MR ROUSSEAU.


     _June_ 26_th_, 1766.

     As I am conscious of having ever acted towards you the most
     friendly part, of having always given the most tender, the
     most active proofs of sincere affection; you may judge of
     my extreme surprize on perusing your epistle. Such violent
     accusations, confined altogether to generals, it is as
     impossible to answer, as it is impossible to comprehend
     them. But affairs cannot, must not remain on that footing.
     I shall charitably suppose, that some infamous calumniator
     has belied me to you. But in that case, it is your duty,
     and I am persuaded it will be your inclination, to give me
     an opportunity of detecting him, and of justifying myself;
     which can only be done by your mentioning the particulars
     of which I am accused. You say, that I myself know that
     I have been false to you; but I say it loudly, and will
     say it to the whole world, that I know the contrary, that
     I know my friendship towards you has been unbounded and
     uninterrupted, and that though instances of it have been
     very generally remarked both in France and England, the
     smallest part of it only has as yet come to the knowledge
     of the public. I demand, that you will produce me the man
     who will assert the contrary; and above all, I demand,
     that he will mention any one particular in which I have
     been wanting to you. You owe this to me; you owe it to
     yourself; you owe it to truth, and honour, and justice, and
     to every thing that can be deemed sacred among men. As an
     innocent man; I will not say, as your friend; I will not
     say, as your benefactor; but, I repeat it, as an innocent
     man, I claim the privilege of proving my innocence, and of
     refuting any scandalous lie which may have been invented
     against me. Mr Davenport, to whom I have sent a copy of
     your letter, and who will read this before he delivers it,
     I am confident, will second my demand, and will tell you,
     that nothing possibly can be more equitable. Happily I
     have preserved the letter you wrote me after your arrival
     at Wooton; and you there express in the strongest terms,
     indeed in terms too strong, your satisfaction in my poor
     endeavours to serve you: the little epistolary intercourse
     which afterwards passed between us, has been all employed
     on my side to the most friendly purposes. Tell me, what has
     since given you offence. Tell me of what I am accused. Tell
     me the man who accuses me. Even after you have fulfilled
     all these conditions, to my satisfaction, and to that of Mr
     Davenport, you will have great difficulty to justify the
     employing such outrageous terms towards a man, with whom
     you have been so intimately connected, and whom, on many
     accounts, you ought to have treated with some regard and
     decency.

     Mr Davenport knows the whole transaction about your
     pension, because I thought it necessary that the person who
     had undertaken your settlement, should be fully acquainted
     with your circumstances; lest he should be tempted to
     perform towards you concealed acts of generosity, which, if
     they accidentally came to your knowledge, might give you
     some grounds of offence. I am, Sir,

     D. H.


Mr Davenport's authority procured me, in three weeks, the following
enormous letter; which however has this advantage, that it confirms all
the material circumstances of the foregoing narrative. I have subjoined
a few notes relative to some facts which Mr Rousseau hath not truly
represented, and leave my readers to judge which of us deserves the
greatest confidence.



     MR ROUSSEAU TO MR HUME.


     _Wooton_, _July_ 10, 1766.

     SIR,

     I am indisposed, and little in a situation to write; but
     you require an explanation, and it must be given you: it
     was your own fault you had it not long since; but you did
     not desire it, and I was therefore silent: at present you
     do, and I have sent it. It will be a long one, for which I
     am very sorry; but I have much to say, and would put an end
     to the subject at once.

     As I live retired from the world, I am ignorant of what
     passes in it. I have no party, no associates, no intrigues;
     I am told nothing, and I know only what I feel. But as care
     hath been taken to make me severely feel; that I well know.
     The first concern of those who engage in bad designs is to
     secure themselves from legal proofs of detection: it would
     not be very advisable to seek a remedy against them at law.
     The innate conviction of the heart admits of another kind
     of proof, which influences the sentiments of honest men.
     You well know the basis of mine.

     You ask me, with great confidence, to name your accuser.
     That accuser, Sir, is the only man in the world whose
     testimony I should admit against you; it is yourself. I
     shall give myself up, without fear or reserve, to the
     natural frankness of my disposition; being an enemy to
     every kind of artifice, I shall speak with the same
     freedom as if you were an indifferent person, on whom I
     placed all that confidence which I no longer have in you.
     I will give you a history of the emotions of my heart,
     and of what produced them; while speaking of Mr Hume in
     the third person, I shall make yourself the judge of what
     I ought to think of him. Notwithstanding the length of
     my letter, I shall pursue no other order than that of my
     ideas, beginning with the premises, and ending with the
     demonstration.

     I quitted Switzerland, wearied out by the barbarous
     treatment I had undergone; but which affected only my
     personal security, while my honour was safe. I was going,
     as my heart directed me, to join my Lord Marshal; when I
     received at Strasburg, a most affectionate invitation from
     Mr Hume, to go over with him to England, where he promised
     me the most agreeable reception, and more tranquillity
     than I have met with. I hesitated some time between my old
     friend and my new one; in this I was wrong. I preferred
     the latter, and in this was still more so. But the desire
     of visiting in person a celebrated nation, of which I had
     heard both so much good and so much ill, prevailed. Assured
     I could not lose George Keith, I was flattered with the
     acquisition of David Hume. His great merit, extraordinary
     abilities, and established probity of character, made me
     desirous of annexing his friendship to that with which
     I was honoured by his illustrious countrymen. Besides,
     I gloried not a little in setting an example to men of
     letters, in a sincere union between two men so different in
     their principles.

     Before I had received an invitation from the King of
     Prussia, and my Lord Marshal, undetermined about the place
     of my retreat, I had desired, and obtained by the interest
     of my friends, a passport from the Court of France. I made
     use of this, and went to Paris to join Mr Hume. He saw,
     and perhaps saw too much of, the favourable reception I
     met with from a great Prince, and I will venture to say,
     of the public. I yielded, as it was my duty, though with
     reluctance, to that eclat; concluding how far it must
     excite the envy of my enemies. At the same time, I saw
     with pleasure, the regard which the public entertained for
     Mr Hume, sensibly increasing throughout Paris, on account
     of the good work he had undertaken with respect to me.
     Doubtless he was affected too; but I know not if it was in
     the same manner as I was.

     We set out with one of my friends, who came to England
     almost entirely on my account. When we were landed at
     Dover, transported with the thoughts of having set foot in
     this land of liberty, under the conduct of so celebrated a
     person, I threw my arms round his neck, and pressed him to
     my heart, without speaking a syllable; bathing his cheeks,
     as I kissed them, with tears sufficiently expressive. This
     was not the only, nor the most remarkable instance I have
     given him of the effusions of a heart full of sensibility.
     I know not what he does with the recollection of them, when
     that happens; but I have a notion they must be sometimes
     troublesome to him.

     At our arrival in London, we were mightily caressed and
     entertained: all ranks of people eagerly pressing to
     give me marks of their benevolence and esteem. Mr Hume
     presented me politely to every body; and it was natural
     for me to ascribe to him, as I did, the best part of my
     good reception. My heart was full of him, I spoke in his
     praise to every one, I wrote to the same purpose to all
     my friends; my attachment to him gathering every day new
     strength, while his appeared the most affectionate to me,
     of which he frequently gave me instances that touched me
     extremely. That of causing my portrait to be painted,
     however, was not of the number. This seemed to me to carry
     with it too much the affectation of popularity, and had an
     air of ostentation which by no means pleased me. All this,
     however, might have been easily excusable, had Mr Hume
     been a man apt to throw away his money, or had a gallery
     of pictures with the portraits of his friends. After all,
     I freely confess, that, on this head, I may be in the
     wrong.[5]

     But what appears to me an act of friendship and generosity
     the most undoubted and estimable, in a word, the most
     worthy of Mr Hume, was the care he took to solicit for me,
     of his own accord, a pension from the King, to which most
     assuredly I had no right to aspire. As I was a witness
     to the zeal he exerted in that affair, I was greatly
     affected with it. Nothing could flatter me more than a
     piece of service of that nature; not merely for the sake
     of interest; for, too much attached, perhaps, to what I
     actually possess, I am not capable of desiring what I have
     not, and, as I am able to subsist on my labour, and the
     assistance of my friends, I covet nothing more. But the
     honour of receiving testimonies of the goodness, I will not
     say of so great a monarch, but of so good a father, so good
     a husband, so good a master, so good a friend, and, above
     all, so worthy a man, was sensibly affecting: and when I
     considered farther, that the minister who had obtained
     for me this favour, was a living instance of that probity
     which of all others is the most important to mankind, and
     at the same time hardly ever met with in the only character
     wherein it can be useful, I could not check the emotions of
     my pride, at having for my benefactors three men, who of
     all the world I could most desire to have my friends. Thus,
     so far from refusing the pension offered me, I only made
     one condition necessary for my acceptance; this was the
     consent of a person, whom I could not, without neglecting
     my duty, fail to consult.

     Being honoured with the civilities of all the world, I
     endeavoured to make a proper return. In the mean time,
     my bad state of health, and being accustomed to live in
     the country, made my residence in town very disagreeable.
     Immediately country houses presented themselves in plenty;
     I had my choice of all the counties of England. Mr Hume
     took the trouble to receive these proposals, and to
     represent them to me; accompanying me to two or three in
     the neighbouring counties. I hesitated a good while in my
     choice, and he increased the difficulty of determination.
     At length I fixed on this place, and immediately Mr Hume
     settled the affair; all difficulties vanished, and I
     departed; arriving presently at this solitary, convenient,
     and agreeable habitation, where the owner of the house
     provides every thing, and nothing is wanting. I became
     tranquil, independent; and this seemed to be the wished-for
     moment when all my misfortunes should have an end. On the
     contrary, it was now they began; misfortunes more cruel
     than any I had yet experienced.

     Hitherto I have spoken in the fulness of my heart, and to
     do justice, with the greatest pleasure, to the good offices
     of Mr Hume. Would to Heaven that what remains for me to say
     were of the same nature! It would never give me pain to
     speak what would redound to his honour; nor is it proper to
     set a value on benefits till one is accused of ingratitude,
     which is the case at present. I will venture to make one
     observation, therefore, which renders it necessary. In
     estimating the services of Mr Hume, by the time and the
     pains they took him up, they were of an infinite value,
     and that still more from the good will displayed in their
     performance; but for the actual service they were of to
     me, it was much more in appearance than reality. I did
     not come over to beg my bread in England; I brought the
     means of subsistence with me. I came merely to seek an
     asylum in a country which is open to every stranger without
     distinction. I was, besides, not so totally unknown as
     that, if I had arrived alone, I should have wanted either
     assistance or service. If some persons have sought my
     acquaintance for the sake of Mr Hume, others have sought
     it for my own. Thus, when Mr Davenport, for example, was
     so kind as to offer my present retreat, it was not for the
     sake of Mr Hume, whom he did not know, and whom he saw only
     in order to desire him to make me his obliging proposal;
     so that, when Mr Hume endeavours to alienate from me this
     worthy man, he takes that from me which he did not give
     me.[6] All the good that hath been done me, would have been
     done me nearly the same without him, and perhaps better;
     but the evil would not have been done me at all; for why
     should I have enemies in England? Why are those enemies all
     the friends of Mr Hume? Who could have excited their enmity
     against me? It certainly was not I, who knew nothing of
     them, nor ever saw them in my life. I should not have had a
     single enemy had I come to England alone.[7]

     I have hitherto dwelt upon public and notorious facts,
     which, from their own nature, and my acknowledgment, have
     made the greatest eclat. Those which are to follow are
     particular and secret, at least in their cause; and all
     possible measures have been taken to keep the knowledge of
     them from the public; but as they are well known to the
     person interested, they will not have the less influence
     toward his own conviction.

     A very short time after our arrival in London, I observed
     an absurd change in the minds of the people regarding
     me, which soon became very apparent. Before I arrived in
     England, there was not a nation in Europe in which I
     had a greater reputation, I will venture to say, or was
     held in greater estimation. The public papers were full
     of encomiums on me, and a general outcry prevailed on my
     persecutors.[8] This was the case at my arrival, which
     was published in the newspapers with triumph; England
     prided itself in affording me refuge, and justly gloried
     on that occasion in its laws and government; when all of a
     sudden, without the least assignable cause, the tone was
     changed, and that so speedily and totally, that, of all
     the caprices of the public, never was known any thing more
     surprising. The signal was given in a certain _Magazine_,
     equally full of follies and falsehoods, in which the
     author, being well informed, or pretending to be so, gives
     me out for the son of a musician. From this time[9] I was
     constantly spoken of in print in a very equivocal or
     slighting manner.[10] Every thing that had been published
     concerning my misfortunes was misrepresented, altered, or
     placed in a wrong light, and always as much as possible to
     my disadvantage. So far was any body from speaking of the
     reception I met with at Paris, and which had made but too
     much noise, it was not generally supposed that I durst have
     appeared in that city, even one of Mr Hume's friends being
     very much surprised when I told him I came through it.

     Accustomed as I had been too much to the inconstancy of
     the public, to be affected by this instance of it, I could
     not help being astonished, however, at a change, so very
     sudden and general, that not one of those who had so much
     praised me in my absence, appeared, now I was present, to
     think even of my existence. I thought it something very
     odd that, immediately after the return of Mr Hume, who had
     so much credit in London, with so much influence over the
     booksellers and men of letters, and such great connections
     with them, his presence should produce an effect so
     contrary to what might have been expected; that among so
     many writers of every kind, not one of his friends should
     show himself to be mine; while it was easy to be seen,
     that those who spoke of him were not his enemies, since,
     in noticing his public character, they reported that I had
     come through France under his protection, and by favour of
     a passport which he had obtained of the court; nay, they
     almost went so far as to insinuate, that I came over in
     his retinue, and at his expense. All this was of little
     signification, and was only singular; but what was much
     more so, was, that his friends changed their tone with me
     as much as the public. I shall always take a pleasure in
     saying that they were still equally solicitous to serve
     me, and that they exerted themselves greatly in my favour;
     but so far were they from showing me the same respect,
     particularly the gentleman at whose house we alighted on
     our arrival, that he accompanied all his actions with
     discourse so rude, and sometimes so insulting, that one
     would have thought he had taken an occasion to oblige
     me, merely to have a right to express his contempt.[11]
     His brother, who was at first very polite and obliging,
     altered his behaviour with so little reserve, that he
     would hardly deign to speak a single word to me, even in
     their own house, in return to a civil salutation, or to
     pay any of those civilities which are usually paid in like
     circumstances to strangers. Nothing new had happened,
     however, except the arrival of J. J. Rousseau and David
     Hume: and certainly the cause of these alterations did
     not come from me, unless, indeed, too great a portion
     of simplicity, discretion, and modesty, be the cause of
     offence in England. As to Mr Hume, he was so far from
     assuming such a disgusting tone, that he gave into the
     other extreme. I have always looked upon flatterers with
     an eye of suspicion: and he was so full of all kinds[12]
     of flattery, that he even obliged me, when I could bear
     it no longer,[13] to tell him my sentiments on that head.
     His behaviour was such as to render few words necessary,
     yet I could have wished he had substituted, in the room of
     such gross encomiums, sometimes the language of a friend;
     but I never found any thing in his, which savoured of true
     friendship, not even in his manner of speaking of me to
     others in my presence. One would have thought that, in
     endeavouring to procure me patrons, he strove to deprive
     me of their good will; that he sought rather to have me
     assisted than loved; and I have been sometimes surprised at
     the rude turn he hath given to my behaviour before people
     who might not unreasonably have taken offence at it. I
     shall give an example of what I mean. Mr Pennick of the
     Museum, a friend of my Lord Marshal's, and minister of a
     parish where I was solicited to reside, came to see me. Mr
     Hume made my excuses, while I myself was present, for not
     having paid him a visit. Doctor Matty, said he, invited us
     on Thursday to the Museum, where Mr Rousseau should have
     seen you; but he chose rather to go with Mrs Garrick to
     the play: we could not do both the same day.[14] You will
     confess, Sir, this was a strange method of recommending me
     to Mr Pennick.

     I know not what Mr Hume might say in private of me to his
     acquaintance, but nothing was more extraordinary than
     their behaviour to me, even by his own confession, and
     even often through his own means. Although my purse was
     not empty, and I needed not that of any other person,
     which he very well knew, yet any one would have thought
     I was come over to subsist on the charity of the public,
     and that nothing more was to be done than to give me alms
     in such a manner as to save me a little confusion.[15] I
     must own, this constant and insolent piece of affectation
     was one of those things which made me averse to reside in
     London. This certainly was not the footing on which any
     man should have been introduced in England, had there been
     a design of procuring him ever so little respect. This
     display of charity, however, may admit of a more favourable
     interpretation, and I consent it should. To proceed.

     At Paris was published a fictitious letter from the King
     of Prussia, addressed to me, and replete with the most
     cruel malignity. I learned with surprise that it was one
     Mr Walpole, a a friend of Mr Hume's who was the editor; I
     asked him if it were true; in answer to which question,
     he only asked me, of whom I had the information. A moment
     before he had given me a card for this same Mr Walpole,
     written to engage him to bring over such papers as related
     to me from Paris, and which I wanted to have by a safe hand.

     I was informed that the son of that quack[16] Tronchin,
     my most mortal enemy, was not only the friend of Mr Hume,
     and under his protection, but that they both lodged in the
     same house together; and when Mr Hume found that I knew
     it, he imparted it in confidence; assuring me at the same
     time that the son was by no means like the father. I lodged
     a few nights myself, together with my governante, in the
     same house; and by the air and manner with which we were
     received by the landladies, who are his friends, I judged
     in what manner either Mr Hume, or that man, who, as he
     said, was by no means like his father, must have spoken to
     them both of her and me.[17]

     All these facts put together, added to a certain appearance
     of things on the whole, insensibly gave me an uneasiness
     which I rejected with horror. In the mean time, I found
     the letters I wrote did not come to hand; those I received
     had often been opened; and all went through the hands of
     Mr Hume.[18] If at any time any one escaped him, he could
     not conceal his eagerness to see it. One evening, in
     particular, I remember a very remarkable circumstance of
     this kind that greatly struck me.[19]

     As we were sitting one evening, after supper, silent by
     the fire-side, I caught his eyes intently fixed on mine,
     as indeed happened very often; and that in a manner of
     which it is very difficult to give an idea. At that time
     he gave me a stedfast, piercing look, mixed with a sneer,
     which greatly disturbed me. To get rid of the embarrassment
     I lay under, I endeavoured to look full at him in my
     turn; but, in fixing my eyes against his, I felt the most
     inexpressible terror, and was obliged soon to turn them
     away. The speech and physiognomy of the good David is that
     of an honest man; but where, great God! did this good man
     borrow those eyes he fixes so sternly and unaccountably on
     those of his friends?

     The impression of this look remained with me, and gave me
     much uneasiness. My trouble increased even to a degree of
     fainting; and if I had not been relieved by an effusion
     of tears, I had been suffocated. Presently after this I
     was seized with the most violent remorse; I even despised
     myself; till at length, in a transport which I still
     remember with delight, I sprang on his neck, embraced him
     eagerly; while almost choked with sobbing, and bathed in
     tears, I cried out, in broken accents, _No, no, David
     Hume cannot be treacherous. If he be not the best of men,
     he must be the basest of mankind_. David Hume politely
     returned my embraces, and, gently, tapping me on the back,
     repeated several times, in a good-natured and easy tone,
     _Why, what, my dear Sir! Nay, my dear Sir! Oh, my dear
     Sir!_ He said nothing more. I felt my heart yearn within
     me. We went to bed; and I set out the next day for the
     country.

     Arrived at this agreeable asylum, to which I have travelled
     so far in search of repose, I ought to find it in a
     retired, convenient, and pleasant habitation; the master
     of which, a man of understanding and worth, spares for
     nothing to render it agreeable to me. But what repose can
     be tasted in life, when the heart is agitated? Afflicted
     with the most cruel uncertainty, and ignorant what to think
     of a man whom I ought to love and esteem, I endeavoured to
     get rid of that fatal doubt, in placing confidence in my
     benefactor. For, wherefore, from what unaccountable caprice
     should he display so much apparent zeal for my happiness,
     and at the same time entertain secret designs against my
     honour. Among the several observations that disturbed me,
     each fact was in itself of no great moment; it was their
     concurrence that was surprising; yet I thought, perhaps,
     that Mr Hume, informed of other facts, of which I was
     ignorant, could have given me a satisfactory solution of
     them, had we come to an explanation. The only thing that
     was inexplicable, was, that he refused to come to such
     an explanation; which both his honour and his friendship
     rendered equally necessary. I saw very well there was
     something in the affair which I did not comprehend, and
     which I earnestly wished to know. Before I came to an
     absolute determination, therefore, with regard to him,
     I was desirous of making another effort, and to try to
     recover him, if he had permitted himself to be seduced by
     my enemies, or, in short, to prevail on him to explain
     himself one way or other. Accordingly I wrote him a letter,
     which he ought to have found very natural,[20] if he were
     guilty; but very extraordinary, if he were innocent.
     For what could be more extraordinary than a letter full
     of gratitude for his services, and at the same time, of
     distrust of his sentiments; and in which, placing in a
     manner his actions on one side, and his sentiments on the
     other, instead of speaking of the proofs of friendship
     he had given me, I desired him to love me, for the good
     he had done me![21] I did not take the precaution to
     preserve a copy of this letter; but as he hath done it,
     let him produce it: and whoever shall read it, and see
     therein a man labouring under a secret trouble, which he is
     desirous of expressing, and is afraid to do it, will, I am
     persuaded, be curious to know what kind of éclaircissement
     it produced, especially after the preceding scene. None.
     Absolutely none at all. Mr Hume contented himself, in his
     answer, with only speaking of the obliging offices Mr
     Davenport proposed to do for me. As for the rest, he said
     not a word of the principal subject of my letter, nor of
     the situation of my heart, of whose distress he could not
     be ignorant. I was more struck with this silence, than I
     had been with his phlegm during our last conversation. In
     this I was wrong; this silence was very natural after the
     other, and was no more than I ought to have expected. For
     when one hath ventured to declare to a man's face, _I am
     tempted to believe you a traitor_, and he hath not the
     curiosity to ask you _for what_,[22] it may be depended
     on he will never have any such curiosity as long as he
     lives; and it is easy to judge of him from these slight
     indications.

     After the receipt of his letter, which was long delayed, I
     determined at length to write to him no more. Soon after,
     every thing served to confirm me in the resolution to
     break off all farther correspondence with him. Curious to
     the last degree concerning the minutest circumstance of
     my affairs, he was not content to learn them of me, in
     our frequent conversations; but, as I learned, never let
     slip an opportunity of being alone with my governante,[23]
     to interrogate her even importunately concerning my
     occupations, my resources, my friends, acquaintances, their
     names, situations, place of abode, and all this after
     setting out with telling her he was well acquainted with
     the whole of my connections; nay, with the most jesuitical
     address, he would ask the same questions of us separately.
     One ought undoubtedly to interest one's self in the affairs
     of a friend; but one ought to be satisfied with what he
     thinks proper to let us know of them, particularly when
     people are so frank and ingenuous as I am. Indeed all this
     petty inquisitiveness is very little becoming a philosopher.

     About the same time I received two other letters which had
     been opened. The one from Mr Boswell, the seal of which
     was so loose and disfigured, that Mr Davenport, when he
     received it, remarked the same to Mr Hume's servant. The
     other was from Mr d'Ivernois, in Mr Hume's packet, and
     which had been sealed up again by means of a hot iron,
     which, awkwardly applied, had burnt the paper round the
     impression. On this I wrote to Mr Davenport to desire him
     to take charge of all the letters which might be sent for
     me, and to trust none of them in any body's hands, under
     any pretext whatever. I know not whether Mr Davenport, who
     certainly was far from thinking that precaution was to be
     observed with regard to Mr Hume, showed him my letter or
     not; but this I know, that the latter had all the reason
     in the world to think he had forfeited my confidence, and
     that he proceeded nevertheless in his usual manner, without
     troubling himself about the recovery of it.

     But what was to become of me, when I saw, in the public
     papers, the pretended letter of the King of Prussia which
     I had never before seen, that fictitious letter, printed
     in French and English, given for genuine, even with the
     signature of the King, and in which I knew the pen of Mr
     d'Alembert as certainly as if I had seen him write it?[24]

     In a moment a ray of light discovered to me the secret
     cause of that touching and sudden change, which I had
     observed in the public respecting me; and I saw the plot
     which was put in execution at London, had been laid in
     Paris.

     Mr d'Alembert, another intimate friend of Mr Hume's, had
     been long since my secret enemy, and lay in watch for
     opportunities to injure me without exposing himself. He
     was the only person, among the men of letters, of my old
     acquaintance, who did not come to see me,[25] or send their
     civilities during my last passage through Paris. I knew his
     secret disposition, but I gave myself very little trouble
     about it, contenting myself with advising my friends of it
     occasionally. I remember that being asked about him one day
     by Mr Hume, who afterwards asked my governante the same
     question, I told him that Mr d'Alembert was a cunning,
     artful man. He contradicted me with a warmth that surprised
     me; not then knowing they stood so well with each other,
     and that it was his own cause he defended.

     The perusal of the letter above mentioned alarmed me a
     good deal, when, perceiving that I had been brought over
     to England in consequence of a project which began to be
     put in execution, but of the end of which I was ignorant,
     I felt the danger without knowing what to guard against,
     or on whom to rely. I then recollected four terrifying
     words Mr Hume had made use of, and of which I shall speak
     hereafter. What could be thought of a paper in which my
     misfortunes were imputed to me as a crime, which tended, in
     the midst of my distress, to deprive me of all compassion,
     and, to render its effects still more cruel, pretended
     to have been written by a Prince who had afforded me
     protection? What could I divine would be the consequence
     of such a beginning? The people in England read the public
     papers, and are in no wise prepossessed in favour of
     foreigners. Even a coat, cut in a different fashion from
     their own, is sufficient to excite a prejudice against
     them. What then had not a poor stranger to expect in his
     rural walks, the only pleasures of his life, when the good
     people in the neighbourhood were once thoroughly persuaded
     he was fond of being persecuted and pelted? Doubtless
     they would be ready enough to contribute to his favourite
     amusement. But my concern, my profound and cruel concern,
     the bitterest indeed I ever felt, did not arise from the
     danger to which I was personally exposed. I have braved
     too many others to be much moved with that. The treachery
     of a false friend,[26] to which I had fallen a prey, was
     the circumstance that filled my too susceptible heart with
     deadly sorrow. In the impetuosity of its first emotions, of
     which I never yet was master, and of which my enemies have
     artfully taken the advantage, I wrote several letters full
     of disorder, in which I did not disguise either my anxiety
     or indignation.

     I have, Sir, so many things to mention, that I forget half
     of them by the way. For instance, a certain narrative
     in form of a letter, concerning my manner of living at
     Montmorency, was given by the booksellers to Mr Hume, who
     showed it me. I agreed to its being printed, and Mr Hume
     undertook the care of its edition; but it never appeared.
     Again, I had brought over with me a copy of the letters
     of Mr du Peyron, containing a relation of the treatment I
     had met with at Neufchâtel. I gave them into the hands of
     the same bookseller to have them translated and reprinted.
     Mr Hume charged himself with the care of them; but they
     never appeared.[27] The supposititious letter of the King
     of Prussia, and its translation, had no sooner made their
     appearance, than I immediately apprehended why the other
     pieces had been suppressed,[28] and I wrote as much to
     the booksellers.[29] I wrote several other letters also,
     which probably were handed about London; till at length
     I employed the credit of a man of quality and merit, to
     insert a declaration of the imposture in the public papers.
     In this declaration, I concealed no part of my extreme
     concern, nor did I in the least disguise the cause.

     Hitherto Mr Hume seems to have walked in darkness. You will
     soon see him appear in open day, and act without disguise.
     Nothing more is necessary, in our behaviour towards cunning
     people, than to act ingenuously; sooner or later they will
     infallibly betray themselves.

     When this pretended letter from the Ring of Prussia was
     first published in London, Mr Hume, who certainly knew that
     it was fictitious, as I had told him so, yet said nothing
     of the matter, did not write to me, but was totally silent;
     and did not even think of making any declaration of the
     truth, in favour of his absent friend.[30] It answered his
     purpose better to let the report take its course, as he did.

     Mr Hume having been my conductor into England, he was of
     course in a manner my patron and protector. If it were but
     natural in him to undertake my defence, it was no less
     so that, when I had a public protestation to make, I
     should have addressed myself to him. Having already ceased
     writing to him,[31] however, I had no mind to renew our
     correspondence. I addressed myself therefore to another
     person. The first slap on the face I gave my patron. He
     felt nothing of it.

     In saying the letter was fabricated at Paris, it was of
     very little consequence to me whether it was understood
     particularly of Mr d'Alembert, or of Mr Walpole, whose
     name he borrowed on the occasion. But in adding that, what
     afflicted and tore my heart was, the impostor had got his
     accomplices in England; I expressed myself very clearly
     to their friend, who was in London, and was desirous of
     passing for mine. For certainly he was the only person in
     England, whose hatred could afflict and rend my heart. This
     was the second slap of the face I gave my patron. He did
     not feel, however, yet.

     On the contrary, he maliciously pretended that my
     affliction arose solely from the publication of the
     above letter, in order to make me pass for a man who was
     excessively affected by satire. Whether I am vain or not,
     certain it is I was mortally afflicted; he knew it, and
     yet wrote me not a word. This affectionate friend, who had
     so much at heart the filling of my purse, gave himself no
     trouble to think my heart was bleeding with sorrow.

     Another piece appeared soon after, in the same papers,
     by the author of the former, and still if possible more
     cruel, in which the writer could not disguise his rage
     at the reception I met with at Paris.[32] This however
     did not affect me; it told me nothing new. Mere libels
     may take their course without giving me any emotion;
     and the inconstant public may amuse themselves as long
     as they please with the subject. It is not an affair of
     conspirators, who, bent on the destruction of my honest
     fame, are determined by some means or other to effect it.
     It was necessary to change the battery.

     The affair of the pension was not determined. It was
     not difficult, however, for Mr Hume to obtain, from the
     humanity of the minister, and the generosity of the King,
     the favour of its determination. He was required to inform
     me of it, which he did. This, I must confess, was one of
     the critical moments of my life. How much did it cost me
     to do my duty! My preceding engagements, the necessity
     of showing a due respect for the goodness of the King,
     and for that of his minister, together with the desire of
     displaying how far I was sensible of both; add to these the
     advantage of being made a little more easy in circumstances
     in the decline of life, surrounded as I was by enemies
     and evils; in fine, the embarrassment I was under to find
     a decent excuse for not accepting a benefit already half
     accepted; all these together made the necessity of that
     refusal very difficult and cruel: for necessary it was, or
     I should have been one of the meanest and basest of mankind
     to have voluntarily laid myself under an obligation to a
     man who had betrayed me.

     I did my duty, though not without reluctance. I wrote
     immediately to General Conway, and in the most civil and
     respectful manner possible, without giving an absolute
     refusal, excusing myself from accepting the pension for the
     present.

     Now, Mr Hume had been the only negociator of this affair,
     nay the only person who had spoke of it. Yet I not only
     did not give him any answer, though it was he who wrote to
     me on the subject, but did not even so much as mention him
     in my letter to General Conway. This was the third slap of
     the face I gave my patron, which if he does not feel, it is
     certainly his own fault, he can feel nothing.

     My letter was not clear, nor could it be so to General
     Conway, who did not know the motives of my refusal; but
     it was very plain to Mr Hume, who knew them but too well.
     He pretended nevertheless to be deceived as well with
     regard to the cause of my discontent, as to that of my
     declining the pension; and, in a letter he wrote me on the
     occasion, gave me to understand that the King's goodness
     might be continued towards me, if I should reconsider the
     affair of the pension. In a word, he seemed determined,
     at all events, to remain still my patron, in spite of my
     teeth. You will imagine, Sir, he did not expect my answer;
     and he had none. Much about this time, for I do not know
     exactly the date, nor is such precision necessary, appeared
     a letter, from Mr de Voltaire to me, with an English
     translation, which still improved on the original. The
     noble object of this ingenious performance, was to draw
     on me the hatred and contempt of the people, among whom
     I was come to reside. I made not the least doubt that my
     dear patron was one of the instruments of its publication;
     particularly when I saw that the writer, in endeavouring
     to alienate from me those who might render my life
     agreeable, had omitted the name of him who brought me over.
     He doubtless knew that it was superfluous, and that with
     regard to him, nothing more was necessary to be said. The
     omission of his name, so impoliticly forgot in this letter,
     recalled to my mind what Tacitus says of the picture of
     Brutus, omitted in a funeral solemnity, viz. that every
     body took notice of it, particularly because it was not
     there.

     Mr Hume was not mentioned; but he lives and converses
     with people that are mentioned. It is well known his
     friends are all my enemies; there are abroad such people
     as Tronchin, d'Alembert, and Voltaire;[33] but it is much
     worse in London; for here I have no enemies but what are
     his friends. For why, indeed, should I have any other?
     Why should I have even them?[34] What have I done to Lord
     Littleton,[35] whom I don't even know? What have I done to
     Mr Walpole, whom I know full as little? What do they know
     of me, except that I am unhappy, and a friend to their
     friend Hume? What can he have said to them, for it is only
     through him they know any thing of me? I can very well
     imagine, that, considering the part he has to play, he does
     not unmask himself to every body; for then he would be
     disguised to nobody. I can very well imagine that he does
     not speak of me to General Conway and the Duke of Richmond
     as he does in his private conversations with Mr Walpole,
     and his secret correspondence with Mr d'Alembert. But let
     any one discover the clue that hath been unravelled since
     my arrival in London, and it will easily be seen whether Mr
     Hume does not hold the principal thread.

     At length the moment arrived in which it was thought proper
     to strike the great blow, the effect of which was prepared
     for by a fresh satirical piece put in the papers.[36] Had
     there remained in me the least doubt, it would have been
     impossible to have harboured it after perusing this piece,
     as it contained facts unknown to any body but Mr Hume;
     exaggerated, it is true, in order to render them odious to
     the public.

     It is said in this paper that my door was opened to the
     rich, and shut to the poor. Pray, who knows when my door
     was open or shut, except Mr Hume, with whom I lived, and by
     whom every body was introduced that I saw? I will except
     one great personage, whom I gladly received without knowing
     him, and whom I should still have more gladly received if
     I had known him. It was Mr Hume who told me his name when
     he was gone; on which information, I was really chagrined,
     that, as he deigned to mount up two pair of stairs, he was
     not received in the first floor. As to the poor, I have
     nothing to say about the matter. I was constantly desirous
     of seeing less company; but as I was unwilling to displease
     any one, I suffered myself to be directed in this affair
     altogether by Mr Hume, and endeavoured to receive every
     body he introduced as well as I could, without distinction,
     whether rich or poor. It is said in the same piece that I
     received my relations very coldly, _not to say any thing
     worse_. This general charge relates to my having once
     received, with some indifference, the only relation I have,
     out of Geneva, and that in the presence of Mr Hume.[37] It
     must necessarily be either Mr Hume or this relation who
     furnished that piece of intelligence. Now, my cousin, whom
     I have always known for a friendly relation and a worthy
     man, is incapable of furnishing materials for public
     satires against me. Add to this, that his situation in life
     confining him to the conversation of persons in trade, he
     has no connection with men of letters or paragraph writers,
     and still less with satirists and libellers; so that the
     article could not come from him. At the worst, can I help
     imagining that Mr Hume must have endeavoured to take
     advantage of what he said, and construed it in favour of
     his own purpose? It is not improper to add, that, after my
     rupture with Mr Hume, I wrote an account of it to my cousin.

     In fine, it is said in the same paper that I am apt to
     change my friends. No great subtlety is necessary to
     comprehend what this reflection is preparative to.

     But let us distinguish facts. I have preserved some very
     valuable and solid friends for twenty-five to thirty years.
     I have others whose friendship is of a later date, but no
     less valuable, and which, if I live, I may preserve still
     longer. I have not found, indeed, the same security in
     general among those friendships I have made with men of
     letters. I have for this reason sometimes changed them, and
     shall always change them when they appear suspicious; for I
     am determined never to have friends by way of ceremony; I
     have them only with a view to show them my affection.

     If ever I was fully and clearly convinced of any thing, I
     am so convinced that Mr Hume furnished the materials for
     the above paper.

     But what is still more, I have not only that absolute
     conviction, but it is very clear to me that Mr Hume
     intended I should: For how can it be supposed that a man of
     his subtlety should be so imprudent as to expose himself
     thus, if he had not intended it? What was his design in
     it? Nothing is more clear than this. It was to raise my
     resentment to the highest pitch, that he might strike the
     blow he was preparing to give me with greater eclat. He
     knew he had nothing more to do than put me in a passion,
     and I should be guilty of a number of absurdities. We are
     now arrived at the critical moment which is to show whether
     he reasoned well or ill.

     It is necessary to have all the presence of mind, all
     the phlegm and resolution of Mr Hume, to be able to
     take the part he hath taken, after all that has passed
     between us. In the embarrassment I was under in writing
     to General Conway, I could make use only of obscure
     expressions, to which Mr Hume, in quality of my friend,
     gave what interpretation he pleased. Supposing, therefore,
     for he knew very well to the contrary, that it was the
     circumstance of secrecy which gave me uneasiness, he
     obtained the promise of the General to endeavour to remove
     it; but before any thing was done, it was previously
     necessary to know whether I would accept of the pension
     without that condition, in order not to expose his Majesty
     to a second refusal.

     This was the decisive moment, the end and object of all
     his labours. An answer was required: he would have it. To
     prevent effectually indeed my neglect of it, he sent to Mr
     Davenport a duplicate of his letter to me; and, not content
     with this precaution, wrote me word, in another billet,
     that he could not possibly stay any longer in London to
     serve me. I was giddy with amazement on reading this note.
     Never in my life did I meet with any thing so unaccountable.

     At length he obtained from me the so much desired answer,
     and began presently to triumph. In writing to Mr Davenport,
     he treated me as a monster of brutality and ingratitude.
     But he wanted to do still more. He thinks his measures
     well taken; no proof can be made to appear against him. He
     demands an explanation: he shall have it, and here it is.

     That last stroke was a masterpiece. He himself proves every
     thing, and that beyond reply.

     I will suppose, though by way of impossibility, that my
     complaints against Mr Hume never reached his ears; that he
     knew nothing of them; but was as perfectly ignorant as if
     he had held no cabal with those who are acquainted with
     them, but had resided all the while in China.[38] Yet the
     behaviour passing directly between us; the last striking
     words which I said to him in London; the letter which
     followed replete with fears and anxiety; my persevering
     silence still more expressive than words; my public
     and bitter complaints with regard to the letter of Mr
     d'Alembert; my letter to the Secretary of State, who did
     not write to me, in answer to that which Mr Hume wrote to
     me himself, and in which I did not mention him; and in fine
     my refusal, without deigning to address myself to him, to
     acquiesce in an affair which he had managed in my favour,
     with my own privity, and without any opposition on my part;
     all this must have spoken in a very forcible manner, I will
     not say to any person of the least sensibility, but to
     every man of common sense.

     Strange that, after I had ceased to correspond with him for
     three months, when I had made no answer to any one of his
     letters, however important the subject of it, surrounded
     with both public and private marks of that affliction
     which his infidelity gave me; a man of so enlightened an
     understanding, of so penetrating a genius by nature, and
     so dull by design, should see nothing, hear nothing, feel
     nothing, be moved at nothing; but, without one word of
     complaint, justification, or explanation, continue to give
     me the most pressing marks of his good will to serve me,
     in spite of myself? He wrote to me affectionately, that he
     could not stay any longer in London to do me service, as if
     we had agreed that he should stay there for that purpose!
     This blindness, this insensibility, this perseverance, are
     not in nature; they must be accounted for, therefore, from
     other motives. Let us set this behaviour in a still clearer
     light; for this is the decisive point.

     Mr Hume must necessarily have acted in this affair, either
     as one of the first or last of mankind. There is no medium.
     It remains to determine which of the two it hath been.

     Could Mr Hume, after so many instances of disdain on my
     part, have still the astonishing generosity as to persevere
     sincerely to serve me? He knew it was impossible for me to
     accept his good offices, so long as I entertained for him
     such sentiments as I had conceived. He had himself avoided
     an explanation. So that to serve me without justifying
     himself, would have been to render his services useless;
     this therefore was no generosity. If he supposed that in
     such circumstances I should have accepted his services, he
     must have supposed me to have been an infamous scoundrel.
     It was then in behalf of a man whom he supposed to be a
     scoundrel, that he so warmly solicited a pension from his
     Majesty. Can any thing be supposed more extravagant?

     But let it be supposed that Mr Hume, constantly pursuing
     his plan, should only have said to himself, This is the
     moment for its execution; for, by pressing Rousseau to
     accept the pension, he will be reduced either to accept or
     refuse it. If he accepts it, with the proofs I have in hand
     against him, I shall be able completely to disgrace him:
     if he refuses, after having accepted it, he will have no
     pretext, but must give a reason for such refusal. This is
     what I expect; if he accuses me, he is ruined.

     If, I say, Mr Hume reasoned with himself in this manner,
     he did what was consistent with his plan, and in that
     case very natural; indeed this is the only way in which
     his conduct in this affair can be explained, for upon
     any other supposition it is inexplicable: if this be not
     demonstrable, nothing ever was so. The critical situation
     to which he had now reduced me, re-recalled strongly to my
     mind the four words I mentioned above; and which I heard
     him say and repeat, at a time when I did not comprehend
     their full force. It was the first night after our
     departure from Paris. We slept in the same chamber, when,
     during the night, I heard him several times cry out with
     great vehemence, in the French language, _Je tiens J. J.
     Rousseau._ 'I have you, Rousseau.' I know not whether he
     was awake or asleep.[39]

     The expression was remarkable, coming from a man who is too
     well acquainted with the French language, to be mistaken
     with regard to the force or choice of words. I took these
     words, however, and I could not then take them otherwise
     than in a favourable sense: notwithstanding the tone of
     voice in which they were spoken, was still less favourable
     than the expression. It is indeed impossible for me to
     give any idea of it; but it corresponds exactly with those
     terrible looks I have before mentioned. At every repetition
     of them I was seized with a shuddering, a kind of horror I
     could not resist, though a moment's recollection restored
     me, and made me smile at my terror. The next day all this
     was so perfectly obliterated, that I did not even think of
     it during my stay in London, and its neighbourhood. It was
     not till my arrival in this place, that so many things have
     contributed to recall these words to my mind; and indeed
     recall them every moment.

     These words, the tone of which dwells on my heart, as if
     I had but just heard them; those long and fatal looks so
     frequently cast on me; the patting me on the back, with the
     repetition of _O, my dear Sir_, in answer to my suspicions
     of his being a traitor: all this affects me to such a
     degree, after what preceded, that this recollection, had I
     no other, would be sufficient to prevent any reconciliation
     or return of confidence between us; not a night indeed
     passes over my head, but I think I hear, _Rousseau, I have
     you_, ring in my ears as if he had just pronounced them.

     Yes, Mr Hume, I know you _have me_; but that only by
     mere externals: you have me in the public opinion and
     judgment of mankind. You have my reputation, and perhaps my
     security, to do with as you will. The general prepossession
     is in your favour; it will be very easy for you to make me
     pass for the monster you have begun to represent me; and
     I already see the barbarous exultation of my implacable
     enemies. The public will no longer spare me. Without any
     farther examination, every body is on the side of those who
     have conferred favours; because each is desirous to attract
     the same good offices, by displaying a sensibility of the
     obligation. I foresee readily the consequences of all this,
     particularly in the country to which you have conducted me;
     and where, being without friends, and an utter stranger
     to every body, I lie almost entirely at your mercy. The
     sensible part of mankind, however, will comprehend that I
     must be so far from seeking this affair, that nothing more
     disagreeable or terrible could possibly have happened to me
     in my present situation. They will perceive that nothing
     but my invincible aversion to all kind of falsehood, and
     the possibility of my professing a regard for a person who
     had forfeited it, could have prevented my dissimulation,
     at a time when it was on so many accounts my interest. But
     the sensible part of mankind are few, nor do they make the
     greatest noise in the world.

     Yes, Mr Hume, you _have me_ by all the ties of this life;
     but you have no power over my probity or my fortitude,
     which, being independent either of you or of mankind, I
     will preserve in spite of you. Think not to frighten me
     with the fortune that awaits me. I know the opinions of
     mankind; I am accustomed to their injustice, and have
     learned to care little about it. If you have taken your
     resolution, as I have reason to believe you have, be
     assured mine is taken also. I am feeble indeed in body, but
     never possessed greater strength of mind.

     Mankind may say and do what they will, it is of little
     consequence to me. What is of consequence, however, is,
     that I should end as I have begun; that I should continue
     to preserve my ingenuousness and integrity to the end,
     whatever may happen; and that I should have no cause to
     reproach myself either with meanness in adversity, or
     insolence in prosperity. Whatever disgrace attends, or
     misfortune threatens me, I am ready to meet them. Though I
     am to be pitied, I am much less so than you, and all the
     revenge I shall take on you is, to leave you the tormenting
     consciousness of being obliged, in spite of yourself,
     to have a respect for the unfortunate person you have
     oppressed.

     In closing this letter, I am surprised at my having been
     able to write it. If it were possible to die with grief,
     every line was sufficient to kill me with sorrow. Every
     circumstance of the affair is equally incomprehensible.
     Such conduct as yours hath been, is not in nature: it is
     contradictory to itself, and yet it is demonstrable to me
     that it has been such as I conceive. On each side of me
     there is a bottomless abyss! and I am lost in one or the
     other.

     If you are guilty, I am the most unfortunate of mankind;
     if you are innocent, I am the most culpable.[40] You even
     make me desire to be that contemptible object. Yes, the
     situation to which you see me reduced, prostrate at your
     feet, crying out for mercy, and doing every thing to obtain
     it; publishing aloud my own unworthiness, and paying the
     most explicit homage to your virtues, would be a state of
     joy and cordial effusion, after the grievous state of
     restraint and mortification into which you have plunged me.
     I have but a word more to say. If you are guilty, write
     to me no more; it would be superfluous, for certainly
     you could not deceive me. If you are innocent, justify
     yourself. I know my duty; I love, and shall always love
     it, however difficult and severe. There is no state of
     abjection that a heart, not formed for it, may not recover
     from. Once again, I say, if you are innocent, deign to
     justify yourself; if you are not, adieu for ever.

     J. J. R.



[5] The fact was this. My friend, Mr Ramsay, a painter of eminence,
and a man of merit, proposed to draw Mr Rousseau's picture; and when
he had begun it, told me he intended to make me a present of it. Thus
the design of having Mr Rousseau's picture drawn did not come from
me, nor did it cost me any thing. Mr Rousseau, therefore, is equally
contemptible in paying me a compliment for this pretended gallantry,
in his letter of the 29th March, and in converting it into ridicule
here.--Mr HUME.

[6] Mr Rousseau forms a wrong judgment of me, and ought to know me
better. I have written to Mr Davenport, even since our rupture, to
engage him to continue his kindness to his unhappy guest.--Mr HUME.

[7] How strange are the effects of a disordered imagination! Mr
Rousseau tells us he is ignorant of what passes in the world, and yet
talks of the enemies he has in England. How does he know this? Where
did he see them? He hath received nothing but marks of beneficence and
hospitality. Mr Walpole is the only person who hath thrown out a little
piece of raillery against him; but is not therefore his enemy. If Mr
Rousseau could have seen things exactly as they are, he would have seen
that he had no other friend in England but me, and no other enemy but
himself.--Mr HUME.

[8] That a general outcry should prevail against Mr Rousseau's
persecutors in England, is no wonder. Such an outcry would have
prevailed from sentiments of humanity, had he been a person of much
less note; so that this is no proof of his being esteemed. And as to
the encomiums on him inserted in the public newspapers, the value of
such kind of puffs is well known in England. I have already observed,
that the authors of more respectable works were at no loss what to
think of Mr Rousseau, but had formed a proper judgment of him long
before his arrival in England. The genius which displayed itself in his
writings did by no means blind the eyes of the more sensible part of
mankind to the absurdity and inconsistency of his opinions and conduct.
In exclaiming against Mr Rousseau's fanatical persecutors, they did
not think him the more possessed of the true spirit of martyrdom. The
general opinion indeed was, that he had too much philosophy to be very
devout, and had too much devotion to have much philosophy.--_English
Translator_.

[9] Mr Rousseau knows very little of the public judgment in England,
if he thinks it is to be influenced by any story told in a certain
Magazine. But, as I have before said, it was not from this time that Mr
Rousseau was slightingly spoke of, but long before, and that in a more
consequential manner. Perhaps, indeed, Mr Rousseau ought in justice
to impute great part of those civilities he met with on his arrival,
rather to vanity and curiosity than to respect and esteem.--_English
Translator_.

[10] So then I find I am to answer for every article of every Magazine
and newspaper printed in England. I assure Mr Rousseau I would rather
answer for every robbery committed on the highway; and I am entirely as
innocent of the one as the other.--Mr HUME.

[11] This relates to my friend Mr John Stewart, who entertained Mr
Rousseau at his house, and did him all the good offices in his power.
Mr Rousseau, in complaining of this gentleman's behaviour, forgets that
he wrote Mr Stewart a letter from Wooton, full of acknowledgments, and
just expressions of gratitude. What Mr Rousseau adds, regarding the
brother of Mr Stewart, is neither civil nor true--Mr HUME.

[12] I shall mention only one, that made me smile; this was, his
attention to have, every time I came to see him, a volume of _Eloisa_
upon his table; as if I did not know enough of Mr Hume's taste for
reading, as to be well assured, that of all books in the world, Eloisa
must be one of the most tiresome to him.--Mr ROUSSEAU.

[13] The reader may judge from the two first letters of Mr Rousseau,
which I published with that view, on which side the flatteries
commenced. As for the rest, I loved and esteemed Mr Rousseau, and
took a pleasure in giving him to understand so. I might perhaps be
too lavish in my praises; but I can assure the reader he never once
complained of it.--Mr HUME.

[14] I don't recollect a single circumstance of this history; but what
makes me give very little credit to it, is, that I remember very well
we had settled two different days for the purposes mentioned, that is,
one to go to the Museum, and another to the play.--Mr HUME.

[15] I conceive Mr Rousseau hints here at two or three dinners, that
were sent him from the house of Mr Stewart, when he chose to dine at
his own lodgings; this was not done, however, to save him the expense
of a meal, but because there was no convenient tavern or chop-house in
the neighbourhood. I beg the reader's pardon for descending to such
trivial particulars.--Mr HUME.

[16] We have not been authorized to suppress this affronting term; but
it is too gross and groundless to do any injury to the celebrated and
respectable physician to whose name it is annexed.--_French Editors_.

[17] Thus am I accused of treachery, because I am a friend of Mr
Walpole, who hath thrown out a little raillery on Mr Rousseau, and
because the son of a man whom Mr Rousseau does not like lodges
by accident in the same house; because my landladies, who do not
understand a syllable of French, received Mr Rousseau coldly. As to the
rest, all that I said to Mr Rousseau about the young Tronchin was, that
he had not the same prejudices against him as his father.--Mr HUME.

[18] The story of Mr Rousseau's letters is as follows. He had often
been complaining to me, and with reason, that he was ruined by postage
at Neufchâtel, which commonly cost him about 25 or 26 louis d'ors a
year, and all for letters which were of no significance, being wrote,
some of them by people who took that opportunity of abusing him, and
most of them by persons unknown to him. He was therefore resolved, he
said, in England to receive no letters which came by the post; and
the same resolution he reiterates in his letter to me dated the 22d
of March. When he went to Chiswick, near London, the postman brought
his letters to me. I carried him out a cargo of them. He exclaimed,
desired me to return the letters, and recover the price of postage. I
told him, that, in that case, the clerks of the Post Office were entire
masters of his letters. He said he was indifferent: they might do with
them what they pleased. I added, that he would by that means be cut
off from all correspondence with all his friends. He replied, that he
would give a particular direction to such as he desired to correspond
with. But till his instructions for that purpose could arrive, what
could I do more friendly than to save, at my own expense, his letters
from the curiosity and indiscretion of the clerks of the Post Office?
I am indeed ashamed to find myself obliged to discover such petty
circumstances.---Mr HUME.

[19] It is necessary to explain this circumstance. I had been writing
on Mr Hume's table, during his absence, an answer to a letter I had
just received. He came in, very anxious to know what I had been
writing, and hardly able to contain himself from desiring to read it.
I closed my letter, however, without showing it him; when, as I was
putting it into my pocket, he asked me for it eagerly, saying he would
send it away on the morrow, being post-day. The letter lay on the
table. Lord Newnham came in. Mr Hume went out of the room for a moment,
on which I took the letter up again, saying I should find time to send
it the next day. Lord Newnham offered to get it inclosed in the French
ambassador's packet, which I accepted. Mr Hume re-entered the moment
his Lordship had inclosed it, and was pulling out his seal. Mr Hume
officiously offered his own seal, and that with so much earnestness,
that it could not well be refused. The bell was rung, and Lord Newnham
gave the letter to Mr Hume's servant, to give it to his own, who waited
below with the chariot, in order to have it sent to the ambassador.
Mr Hume's servant was hardly got out of the room, but I said to
myself, I'll lay a wager the master follows. He did not fail to do as
I expected. Not knowing how to leave Lord Newnham alone, I staid some
time before I followed Mr Hume. I said nothing; but he must perceive
that I was uneasy. Thus, although I have received no answer to my
letter, I doubt not of its going to hand; but I confess, I cannot help
suspecting it was read first.--Mr ROUSSEAU.

[20] It appears from what he wrote to me afterwards, that he was
very well satisfied with this letter, and that he thought of it very
well.--Mr ROUSSEAU.

[21] My answer to this is contained in Mr Rousseau's own letter of the
22d of March; wherein he expresses himself with the utmost cordiality,
without any reserve, and without the least appearance of suspicion.--Mr
HUME.

[22] All this hangs upon the fable he had so artfully worked up, as I
before observed.--Mr HUME.

[23] I had only one such opportunity with his governante, which was
on their arrival in London. I must own it never entered into my
head to talk to her upon any other subject than the concerns of Mr
Rousseau.--Mr HUME.

[24] See Mr d'Alembert's declaration on this head, annexed to this
narrative.

[25] Mr Rousseau declares himself to have been fatigued with the visits
he received; ought he therefore to complain that Mr d'Alembert, whom he
did not like, did not importune him with his?--Mr HUME.

[26] This _false friend_ is, undoubtedly, myself. But what is the
treachery? What harm have I done, or could I do to Mr Rousseau? On
the supposition of my entering into a project to ruin him, how could
I think to bring it about by the services I did him? If Mr Rousseau
should gain credit, I must be thought still more weak than wicked.--Mr
HUME.

[27] The booksellers have lately informed me that the edition is
finished, and will shortly be published. This may be; but it is too
late, and what is still worse, it is too opportune for the purpose
intended to be served.--Mr ROUSSEAU.

[28] It is about four months since Mr Becket, the bookseller, told Mr
Rousseau that the publication of these pieces was delayed on account
of the indisposition of the translator. As for any thing else, I never
promised to take any charge at all of the edition, as Mr Becket can
testify.--Mr HUME.

[29] As to Mr Rousseau's suspicions of the cause of the _suppression_,
as he calls it, of the Narrative and Letters above mentioned, the
translator thinks it incumbent on him to affirm, that they were
entirely groundless. It is true, as Mr Becket told Mr Hume, that the
translator of the letters was indisposed about that time. But the
principal cause of the delay was, that he was of his own mere motion,
no less indisposed to those pieces making their appearance in English
at all;(*) and this not out of ill will to Mr Rousseau, or good will to
Mr Hume, neither of which he ever saw, or spoke to, in his life; but
really out of regard to the character and reputation of a man, whose
genius he admired, and whose works he had translated: well knowing
the publication of such squabbles could do Mr Rousseau no good in
the opinion of the more judicious and sensible part of mankind. With
regard to the translation of the narrative of his manner of living
at Montmorency, I never saw it till it was actually printed, when Mr
Becket put it into my hands, and I frankly told him that I thought it
a very unseasonable, puerile affair, and could by no means serve to
advance Mr Rousseau's estimation in the eyes of the public. It was
certainly of great importance to the good people of England, to know
how Mr Rousseau amused himself seven or eight years ago at Montmorency,
that he cooked his own broth, and did not leave it to the management
of his nurse, for fear she should have a better dinner than himself!
Yet this is one of the most remarkable circumstances contained in
that narrative, except indeed that we are told, Mr Rousseau is a
most passionate admirer of virtue, and that his eyes always sparkle
at the bare mention of that word.--O Virtue! how greatly is thy name
prostituted! And how fair, from the teeth outward, are thy nominal
votaries!--_English Translator_.

(*) For, so far were the booksellers from intending to _suppress_ these
pieces, that they actually reprinted the French edition of Peyrou's
Letters, and published it in London.

[30] No body could possibly be mistaken with regard to the letter's
being fictitious; besides it was well known that Mr Walpole was the
author of it--Mr HUME.

[31] Mr Rousseau forgets himself here. It was but a week before that
he wrote me a very friendly letter. See his letter of the 29th of
March.--Mr HUME.

[32] I know nothing of this pretended libel.--Mr HUME.

[33] I have never been so happy as to meet with Mr de Voltaire; he only
did me the honour to write me a letter about three years ago. As to Mr
Tronchin, I never saw him in my life, nor ever had any correspondence
with him. Of Mr d'Alembert's friendship, indeed, I am proud to make a
boast.--Mr HUME.

[34] Why indeed? except that sensible people in England are averse to
affectation and quackery. Those who see and despise these most in Mr
Rousseau, are not, however, his _enemies_; perhaps, if he could be
brought to think so, they are his best and truest friends.--_English
Translator_.

[35] Mr Rousseau, seeing the letter addressed to him in the name of
Voltaire advertised in the public papers, wrote to Mr Davenport,
who was then in London, to desire he would bring it him. I told Mr
Davenport that the printed copy was very faulty, but that I would
ask of Lord Littleton a manuscript copy, which was correct. This is
sufficient to make Mr Rousseau conclude that Lord Littleton is his
mortal enemy, and my intimate friend; and that we are in a conspiracy
against him. He ought rather to have concluded, that the printed copy
could not come from me,--Mr HUME.

The piece above mentioned was shown to the _Translator_ before its
publication, and many absurd liberties taken with the original pointed
out and censured. At which time there did not appear, from the parties
concerned in it, that Mr Hume could have the least hand in, or could
have known any thing of the edition.--_English Translator_.

[36] I have never seen this piece, neither before nor after its
publication; nor has it come to the knowledge of any body to whom I
have spoken of it--Mr HUME.

The _translator_, who has been attentive to every thing that has come
out from, or about Mr Rousseau, knows also nothing of this piece. Why
did not Mr Rousseau mention particularly in what paper, and when it
appeared?--_English Translator_.

[37] I was not present when Mr Rousseau received his cousin. I only
just saw them afterwards together for about a minute on the terrace in
Buckingham Street.--Mr HUME.

[38] How was it possible for me to guess at such chimerical
suspicions? Mr Davenport, the only person of my acquaintance who then
saw Mr Rousseau, assures me that he was perfectly ignorant of them
himself.--Mr HUME.

[39] I cannot answer for every thing I may say in my sleep, and much
less am I conscious whether or not I dream in French. But pray, as Mr
Rousseau did not know whether I was asleep or awake when I pronounced
those terrible words, with such a terrible voice, how is he certain
that he himself was well awake when he heard them?--Mr HUME.

[40] And does it depend on an _if_, after all Mr R's positive
conviction, and absolute demonstrations?--_English Translator_.


I hesitated some time whether I should make any reply to this strange
memorial. At length I determined to write Mr Rousseau the following
letter.


     MR HUME TO MR ROUSSEAU.


     _Lisle-street, Leicester-fields, July_ 22_d_, 1766.

     SIR,

     I shall only answer one article of your long letter: it
     is that which regards the conversation between us the
     evening before your departure. Mr Davenport had imagined a
     good natured artifice, to make you believe that a retour
     chaise had offered for Wooton; and I believe he made an
     advertisement be put in the papers, in order the better to
     deceive you. His purpose was only to save you some expenses
     in the journey, which I thought a laudable project; though
     I had no hand either in contriving or conducting it. You
     entertained, how ever, suspicions of his design, while we
     were sitting alone by my fire-side; and you reproached me
     with concurring in it. I endeavoured to pacify you, and to
     divert the discourse; but to no purpose. You sat sullen,
     and was either silent, or made me very peevish answers. At
     last you rose up, and took a turn or two about the room;
     when all of a sudden, and to my great surprise, you clapped
     yourself on my knee, threw your arms about my neck, kissed
     me with seeming ardour, and bedewed my face with tears.
     You exclaimed, 'My dear friend, can you ever pardon this
     folly! After all the pains you have taken to serve me,
     after the numberless instances of friendship you have given
     me, here I reward you with this ill humour and sullenness.
     But your forgiveness of me will be a new instance of your
     friendship; and I hope you will find at bottom, that my
     heart is not unworthy of it.'

     I was very much affected, I own; and I believe, there
     passed a very tender scene between us. You added, by
     way of compliment, that though I had many better titles
     to recommend me to posterity, yet perhaps my uncommon
     attachment and friendship to a poor unhappy persecuted
     man, would not altogether be overlooked.

     This incident, Sir, was somewhat remarkable; and it is
     impossible that either you or I could so soon have forgot
     it. But you have had the assurance to tell me the story
     twice in a manner so different, or rather so opposite, that
     when I persist, as I do, in this account, it necessarily
     follows, that either you or I am a liar. You imagine,
     perhaps, that because the incident passed privately without
     a witness, the question will lie between the credibility
     of your assertion and of mine. But you shall not have this
     advantage or disadvantage, whichever you are pleased to
     term it. I shall produce against you other proofs, which
     will put the matter beyond controversy.

     First, You are not aware, that I have a letter under your
     hand, which is totally irreconcilable with your account,
     and confirms mine.[41]

     Secondly, I told the story the next day, or the day after,
     to Mr Davenport, with a friendly view of preventing any
     such good natured artifices for the future. He surely
     remembers it.

     Thirdly, As I thought the story much to your honour, I
     told it to several of my friends here. I even wrote it to
     Mde. de Boufflers at Paris. I believe no one will imagine,
     that I was preparing beforehand an apology, in case of a
     rupture with you; which, of all human events, I should then
     have thought the most incredible, especially as we were
     separated almost for ever, and I still continued to render
     you the most essential services.

     Fourthly, The story, as I tell it, is consistent and
     rational: there is not common sense in your account. What!
     because sometimes, when absent in thought, I have a fixed
     look or stare, you suspect me to be a traitor, and you
     have the assurance to tell me of such black and ridiculous
     suspicions! Are not most studious men (and many of them
     more than I) subject to such reveries or fits of absence,
     without being exposed to such suspicions? You do not even
     pretend that, before you left London, you had any other
     solid grounds of suspicion against me.

     I shall enter into no detail with regard to your letter:
     the other articles of it are as much without foundation as
     you yourself know this to be. I shall only add, in general,
     that I enjoyed about a month ago an uncommon pleasure, when
     I reflected, that through many difficulties, and by most
     assiduous care and pains, I had, beyond my most sanguine
     expectations, provided for your repose, honour and fortune.
     But I soon felt a very sensible uneasiness when I found
     that you had wantonly and voluntarily thrown away all these
     advantages, and was become the declared enemy of your
     repose, fortune, and honour: I cannot be surprised after
     this that you are my enemy. Adieu, and for ever. I am, Sir,
     yours,

     D. H.

[41] That of the 22d of March, which is entirely cordial; and proves
that Mr Rousseau had never, till that moment, entertained, or at least
discovered the smallest suspicion against me. There is also in the same
letter, a peevish passage about the hire of a chaise.--Mr HUME.


To all these papers, I need only subjoin the following letter of Mr
Walpole to me, which proves how ignorant and innocent I am of the whole
matter of the King of Prussia's letter.




     MR WALPOLE TO MR HUME.


     _Arlington Street, July_ 26_th_, 1766.

     I cannot be precise as to the time of my writing the King
     of Prussia's letter, but I do assure you, with the utmost
     truth, that it was several days before you left Paris,
     and before Rousseau's arrival there, of which I can give
     you a strong proof; for I not only suppressed the letter
     while you staid there, out of delicacy to you, but it was
     the reason why, out of delicacy to myself, I did not go to
     see him, as you often proposed to me; thinking it wrong to
     go and make a cordial visit to a man, with a letter in my
     pocket to laugh at him. You are at full liberty, dear Sir,
     to make use of what I say in your justification, either
     to Rousseau or any body else. I should be very sorry to
     have you blamed on my account: I have a hearty contempt of
     Rousseau, and am perfectly indifferent what any body thinks
     of the matter. If there is any fault, which I am far from
     thinking, let it lie on me. No parts can hinder my laughing
     at their possessor, if he is a mountebank. If he has a bad
     and most ungrateful heart, as Rousseau has shown in your
     case, into the bargain, he will have my scorn likewise, as
     he will of all good and sensible men. You may trust your
     sentence to such, who are as respectable judges as any that
     have pored over ten thousand more volumes.

     Yours most sincerely,

     H. W.


Thus I have given a narrative, as concise as possible, of this
extraordinary affair, which I am told has very much attracted the
attention of the public, and which contains more unexpected incidents
than any other in which I was ever engaged. The persons to whom I have
shown the original papers which authenticate the whole, have differed
very much in their opinion, as well of the use I ought to make of them
as of Mr Rousseau's present sentiments and state of mind. Some of them
have maintained that he is altogether insincere in his quarrel with
me, and his opinion of my guilt, and that the whole proceeds from that
excessive pride which forms the basis of his character, and which
leads him both to seek the eclat of refusing the King of England's
bounty, and to shake off the intolerable burthen of an obligation to
me, by every sacrifice of honour, truth, and friendship, as well as of
interest. They found their sentiments on the absurdity of that first
supposition on which he grounds his anger, viz. that Mr Walpole's
letter, which he knew had been every where dispersed both in Paris
and London, was given to the press by me; and as this supposition is
contrary to common sense on the one hand, and not supported even by the
pretence of the slightest probability on the other, they conclude, that
it never had any weight even with the person himself who lays hold of
it. They confirm their sentiments by the number of fictions and lies
which he employs to justify his anger; fictions with regard to points
in which it is impossible for him to be mistaken. They also remark his
real cheerfulness and gaiety, amidst the deep melancholy with which
he pretended to be oppressed; not to mention the absurd reasoning
which runs through the whole, and on which it is impossible for any
man to rest his conviction. And though a very important interest is
here abandoned, yet money is not universally the chief object with
mankind: vanity weighs farther with some men, particularly with this
philosopher; and the very ostentation of refusing a pension from the
King of England--an ostentation which, with regard to other Princes,
he has often sought--might be of itself a sufficient motive for his
present conduct.

There are others of my friends who regard this whole affair in a more
compassionate light, and consider Mr Rousseau as an object rather
of pity than of anger. They suppose the same domineering pride and
ingratitude to be the basis of his character; but they are also willing
to believe that his brain has received a sensible shock, and that his
judgment, set afloat, is carried to every side, as it is pushed by the
current of his humours and of his passions. The absurdity of his belief
is no proof of its insincerity. He imagines himself the sole important
being in the universe: he fancies all mankind to be in a combination
against him: his greatest benefactor, as hurting him most, is the chief
object of his animosity: and though he supports all his whimsies by
lies and fictions, this is so frequent a case with wicked men, who are
in that middle state between sober reason and total frenzy, that it
needs give no surprise to any body.

I own that I am much inclined to this latter opinion; though, at
the same time, I question whether, in any period of his life, Mr
Rousseau was ever more in his senses than he is at present. The former
brilliancy of his genius, and his great talents for writing, are no
proof of the contrary. It is an old remark, that great wits are near
allied to madness; and even in those frantic letters which he has wrote
to me, there are evidently strong traces of his wonted genius and
eloquence. He has frequently told me that he was composing his memoirs,
in which justice should be done to his own character, to that of his
friends, and to that of his enemies; and as Mr Davenport informs me,
that, since his retreat into the country, he has been much employed in
writing, I have reason to conclude that he is at present finishing that
undertaking. Nothing could be more unexpected to me than my passing
so suddenly from the class of his friend to that of his enemies; but
this transition being made, I must expect to be treated accordingly;
and I own that this reflection gave me some anxiety.[42] A work of
this nature, both from the celebrity of the person, and the strokes
of eloquence interspersed, would certainly attract the attention of
the world; and it might be published either after my death, or after
that of the author. In the former case, there would be nobody who
could tell the story, or justify my memory. In the latter, my apology,
wrote in opposition to a dead person, would lose a great deal of its
authenticity. For this reason, I have at present collected the whole
story into one Narrative, that I may show it to my friends, and at any
time have it in my power to make whatever use of it they and I should
think proper. I am, and always have been, such a lover of peace, that
nothing but necessity, or very forcible reasons, could have obliged me
to give it to the public.

_'Perdidi beneficium. Numquid quæ consecravimus perdidisse nos dicimus?
Inter consecrata beneficium est; etiam si male respondit, bene
collatum. Non est ille qualem speravimus; simus nos quales fuimus, ei
dissimiles.'_

                          SENECA DE BENEFICIIS, LIB. VII. CAP. 29.


[42] In his letter of the 22d of March, he flatters me indirectly with
the figure I am to make in his Memoirs. In that of the 23d of June, he
threatens me. These are proofs how much he is in earnest.




DECLARATION OF MR D'ALEMBERT, RELATING TO MR WALPOLE'S LETTER.


(_Addressed to the French Editors_.)

It is with the greatest surprise I learn, from Mr Hume, that Mr
Rousseau accuses me of being the author of the ironical letter
addressed to him, in the public papers, under the name of the King of
Prussia. Every body knows, both at Paris and London, that such letter
was written by Mr Walpole; nor does he disown it. He acknowledges only
that he was a little assisted, in regard to the style, by a person he
does not name, and whom perhaps he ought to name. As to my part, on
whom the public suspicions have fallen in this affair, I am not at
all acquainted with Mr Walpole. I don't even believe I ever spoke to
him; having only happened to meet once occasionally on a visit. I have
not only had not the least to do, either directly or indirectly, with
the letter in question, but could mention above a hundred persons,
among the friends as well as enemies of Mr Rousseau, who have heard me
greatly disapprove of it; because, as I said, we ought not to ridicule
the unfortunate, especially when they do us no harm. Besides, my
respect for the King of Prussia, and the acknowledgments I owe him,
might, I should have thought, have persuaded Mr Rousseau that I should
not have taken such a liberty with the name of that Prince, though in
pleasantry.

To this I shall add, that I never was an enemy to Mr Rousseau, either
open or secret, as he pretends; and I defy him to produce the least
proof of my having endeavoured to injure him in any shape whatever. I
can prove to the contrary, by the most respectable witnesses, that I
have always endeavoured to oblige him, whenever it lay in my power.

As to my pretended _secret correspondence_ with Mr Hume, it is very
certain that we did not begin to write to each other till about five
or six months after his departure, on occasion of the quarrel arisen
between him and Mr Rousseau, and into which the latter thought proper
unnecessarily to introduce me.

I thought this declaration necessary for my own sake, as well as for
the sake of truth, and in regard to the situation of Mr Rousseau. I
sincerely lament his having so little confidence in the probity of
mankind, and particularly in that of Mr Hume.

D'ALEMBERT.




SCOTTICISMS.


_Will_, in the first person, as _I will walk_, _we will walk_,
expresses the intention or resolution of the person, along with the
future event: In the second and third person, as, _you will_, _he
will_, _they will_, it expresses the future action or event, without
comprehending or excluding the volition.

_Shall_, in the first person, whether singular or plural, expresses
the future action or event, without excluding or comprehending the
intention or resolution: But in the _second_ or _third_ person, it
marks a necessity, and commonly a necessity proceeding from the person
who speaks; as, _he shall walk_, _you shall repent it_.

These variations seem to have proceeded from a politeness in the
_English_, who, in speaking to others, or of others, made use of the
term _will_, which implies volition, even where the event may be the
subject of necessity and constraint. And in speaking of themselves,
made use of the term _shall_, which implies constraint, even though the
event may be the object of choice.

_Wou'd_ and _shou'd_ are conjunctive moods, subject to the same rule;
only, we may observe, that in a sentence, where there is a condition
exprest, and a consequence of that condition, the former always
requires _shou'd_, and the latter _wou'd_, in the second and third
persons; as, _if he shou'd fall, he wou'd break his leg_, &c.

_These_ is the plural of _this_; _those of that_. The former,
therefore, expresses what is near: the latter, what is more remote. As,
in these lines of the Duke of Buckingham,

     "Philosophers and poets vainly strove,
      In every age, the lumpish mass to move.
      But THOSE were pedants if compared with THESE,
      Who knew not only to instruct, but please."

Where a relative is to follow, and the subject has not been mentioned
immediately before, _those_ is always required. _Those observations
which he made_. _Those kingdoms which Alexander conquered_.

In the verbs, which end in _t_, or _te_, we frequently omit _ed_ in
the preterperfect and in the participle; as, _he operate_, _it was
cultivate_. _Milton_ says, _in thought more elevate_; but he is the
only author who uses that expression.

_Notice_ shou'd not be used as a verb. The proper phrase is _take
notice_. Yet I find Lord Shaftesbury uses _notic'd_, the participle:
And _unnotic'd_ is very common.

_Hinder to do_, is _Scotch_. The _English_ phrase is, _hinder from
doing_. Yet _Milton_ says, _Hindered not Satan to pervert the mind_.
Book IX.



        SCOTCH.                                  ENGLISH.

    Conform to                               Conformable to
    Friends and acquaintances                Friends and Acquitance
    Maltreat                                 Abuse
    Advert to                                Attend to
    Proven, improven, approven               Prov'd, improv'd, approv'd
    Pled                                     Pleaded
    Incarcerate                              Imprison
    Tear to pieces                           Tear in pieces
    Drunk, run                               Drank, ran
    Fresh weather                            Open weather
    Tender                                   Sickly
    In the long run                          At long run
    Notwithstanding of that                  Notwithstanding that
    Contented himself to do                  Contented himself with doing
    'Tis a question if                       'Tis a question whether
    Discretion                               Civility
    With child to a man                      With child by a man
    Out of hand                              Presently
    Simply impossible                        Absolutely impossible
    A park                                   An enclosure
    In time coming                           In time to come
    Nothing else                             No other thing
    Mind it                                  Remember it
    Denuded                                  Divested
    Severals                                 Several
    Some better                              Something better
    Anent                                    With regard to
    Allenarly                                Solely
    Alongst. Yet the _English_
    say both amid, amidst, among,            Along
    and amongst
    Evenly                                   Even
    As I shall answer                        I protest or declare
    Cause him do it. Yet 'tis
    good _English_ to say, make         Cause him to do it
    him do it
    Marry upon                               Marry to
    Learn                                    Teach
    There, where                             Thither, whither
    Effectuate. This word in _English_  Effect
    means to effect with
    pains and difficulty.
    A wright. Yet 'tis good _English_   A Carpenter
    to say, a wheelwright
    Defunct                                  Deceast
    Evite                                    Avoid
    Part with child                          Miscarry
    Notour                                   Notorious
    To want it                               To be without a thing, even
                                               though it be not desirable
    To be difficulted                        To be puzzled
    Rebuted                                  Discouraged by repulses
    For ordinary                             Usually
    Think shame                              Asham'd
    In favours of                            In favour of
    Dubiety                                  Doubtfulness
    Prejudge                                 Hurt
    Compete                                  Enter into competition
    Heritable                                Hereditary
    To remeed                                To remedy
    Bankier                                  Banker
    Adduce a proof                           Produce a proof
    Superplus                                Surplus
    Forfaulture                              Forfeiture
    In no event                              In no case
    Common soldiers                          Private men
    Big with a man                           Great with a man
    Bygone                                   Past
    Debitor                                  Debtor
    Exeemed                                  Exempted
    Yesternight                              Last night
    Big coat                                 Great coat
    A chimney                                A grate
    Annualrent                               Interest
    Tenible argument                         Good argument
    Amissing                                 Missing
    To condescend upon                       To specify
    To discharge                             To forbid
    To extinguish an obligation              To cancel an obligation
    To depone                                To depose
    A compliment                             A present
    To inquire at a man                      To inquire of a man
    To be angry at a man                     To be angry with a man
    To send an errand                        To send off an errand
    To furnish goods to him                  To furnish him with goods
    To open up                               To open, or lay open
    _Thucydide, Herodot, Sueton,_       _Thucydides, Herodotus, Suetonius_
    Butter and bread                         Bread and Butter
    Pepper and vinegar                       Vinegar and pepper
    Paper, pen and ink                       Pen, ink and paper
    Readily                                  Probably
    On a sudden                              Of a sudden
    As ever I saw                            As I ever saw
    For my share                             For my part
    Misgive                                  Fail
    Rather chuse to buy as sell              Rather chuse to buy than sell
    Deduce                                   Deduct
    Look't over the window                   Look't out at the window
    A pretty enough girl                     A pretty girl enough
    'Tis a week since he left this           'Tis a week since he left this
                                                place
    Come in to the fire                      Come near the fire
    To take off a new coat                   To make up a new suit
    Alwise                                   Always
    Cut out his hair                         Cut off his hair
    Cry him                                  Call him
    To crave                                 To dun, to ask payment
    To get a stomach                         To get an appetite
    Vacance                                  Vacation




A TREATISE OF HUMAN NATURE.


BEING AN ATTEMPT TO INTRODUCE THE

EXPERIMENTAL METHOD OF

REASONING INTO

MORAL SUBJECTS.

RARA TEMPORUM FELICITAS, UBI SENTIRE, QUÆ VELIS;

ET QUÆ SENTIAS, DICERE LICET.

TACITUS.




