Chapter IV


1. The palm-branch and the willow (were used) for six days and for seven.
The hymn, and the rejoicings, for eight days. The booth and the pouring
out of water for seven days; and the musical pipes for five and for six
days.

2. The palm-branch (was used) for seven days. “How?” “When the first day
of the feast fell on a Sabbath, the palm-branch (was used) for seven days.
Otherwise all the days were six.”

3. The willow (was used) for seven days. “How?” “When the seventh day of
the willow happened to fall on a Sabbath, the willow (was used) for seven
days. Otherwise all the days were six.”

4. “How was the command for the palm-branch when the first day of the
feast fell on a Sabbath?” “They used to bring their palm-branches to the
mountain of the House, and the inspectors received them, and arranged them
on a bench. But the elders placed theirs in a chamber. And the people were
taught to say, ‘Whoever takes my palm-branch in his hand, be it his as a
gift.’ On the morrow they came early, and the inspectors spread them
before them. And they used to snatch them and hurt each other. When the
Sanhedrin saw that persons were endangered, it was decreed that every man
should take them home.”

5. “How was the command for the willow?” “There was a place below
Jerusalem called Moza;(263) thither the people went down and gathered
drooping willow-branches. And they came and erected them at the side of
the altar, with their tops bending over the altar. They blew the trumpet,
and sounded an alarm, and blew a blast. Every day they made one circuit
round the altar, and said, ‘Save now, I beseech Thee, O Lord! O Lord, I
beseech Thee, send now prosperity.’ ” Rabbi Judah said, “I and HE save
now, I beseech thee.”(264) On the day itself(265) they made seven circuits
round the altar. “As they withdrew what did they say?” “Beauty is thine, O
Altar!” “Beauty is thine, O Altar!” R. Eleazar said, “To the LORD and to
thee, O Altar!” “To the LORD, and to thee, O Altar!”

6. As they did on the week-days, so they did on the Sabbath, save that
they gathered the willow-boughs on the Sabbath-eve, and put them into
vases of gold, that they might not fade. R. Joshua, son of Beroka, says,
“they brought date-branches, and thrashed them on the ground at the sides
of the altar” (others say “on the altar”). And the day itself was called
“the day for thrashing the branches.”

7. Immediately the children threw down their palm-branches, and ate their
citrons.

8. The hymn and rejoicings were for eight days. “How?” “It is taught, that
a man is bound to the hymn, and the rejoicings in honor of the last day of
the feast, even as on its other days.” “How is the booth for seven days?”
“When a man has completed his eating, he is not to pull down his booth;
but after the evening sacrifice he may remove his furniture in honor of
the last day of the feast.”

9. “How was the pouring out of the water?” “A golden pitcher holding three
logs(266) was filled from Siloam. When they came (with it) to the
water-gate they blew the trumpet, an alarm, and a blast. The priest then
went up the ascent to the altar, and turned to his left. Two silver basins
were there.” R. Judah says, “they were of lime, but their look was dark
from the wine.” And they were bored with two narrow nostrils, one wider,
the other narrower, that both might get empty at once. “The one to the
west was for the water; the other to the east was for the wine; but if the
water was poured into the wine basin, or the wine into the water basin, it
was allowed.” R. Judah said, “they poured out one log on each of the eight
days.” To him, who poured out, they said, “lift your hand;” for once it
happened, that one poured over his feet,(267) and all the people pelted
him to death with their citrons.

10. As they did on the week-days, so they did on the Sabbath; save that on
the Sabbath eve an unconsecrated golden cask was filled from Siloam, and
placed in a chamber. If it were spilt or uncovered, it was refilled from
the laver, as water and wine which had been uncovered were disallowed on
the altar.



Chapter V


1. The musical pipes were (played) for five and (sometimes) six days. That
is to say, the pipes of the water-drawing, which supersedes neither the
Sabbath day nor the feast. The (Sages) said, “he who has not seen the
joy(268) of the water-drawing, has never seen joy in his life.”

2. With the departure of the first day of the feast, they went down into
the women’s court, and made great preparations.(269) Four golden
candlesticks were there, and four golden basins on their tops, and four
ladders to each candlestick, and four lads from the young priests, and in
their hands were jars of oil containing 120 logs, with which they
replenished each basin.

3. The cast-off breeches and belts of the priests were torn to wicks,
which they lighted. And there was not a court in Jerusalem that was not
lit up by the lights of the water-drawing.

4. Pious and experienced men danced with lighted torches in their hands,
singing hymns and lauds before them. And the Levites accompanied them with
harps, psalteries, cymbals, trumpets, and numberless musical instruments.
On the fifteen steps which went down from the court of Israel into the
women’s court, corresponding with the fifteen songs of degrees,(270) stood
the Levites with their musical instruments, and sang. And at the upper
gate, which went down from the court of Israel to the court of the women,
stood two priests with trumpets in their hands. When the cock crew, they
blew a blast, an alarm, and a blast.(271) When they reached the tenth
step, they blew a blast, an alarm, and a blast. And when they got into the
court, they blew a blast, an alarm, and a blast. They went on blowing as
they went, until they reached the gate, that leads out to the east. When
they reached the gate, that leads out to the east, they turned their faces
westward,(272) and said,


    “Our fathers, who were in this place,
    Turned their backs upon the Temple;
    And their faces toward the east,
    And worshipped the sun eastward.”(273)


R. Judah says, they repeated again and again,


    “But we unto the LORD;
    To the LORD are our eyes.”(274)


5. In the sanctuary they did not blow the trumpet less than twenty-one
times, nor oftener than forty-eight times. Every day they blew the trumpet
twenty-one times, thrice at opening the gates, nine times at the daily
offering of the morning, and nine times at the daily offering of the
evening. When there were additional offerings they blew nine times more.
On the eve of the Sabbath they again blew six times; thrice to interdict
the people from work, and thrice to separate the holy from the ordinary
day. But on the eve of the Sabbath during the feast they blew forty-eight
times: thrice at the opening of the gates, thrice at the upper gate,
thrice at the lower gate, thrice at the water-drawing, thrice over the
altar, nine times at the daily offering of the morning, nine times at the
daily offering of the evening, nine times at the additional offerings,
thrice to interdict the people from work, and thrice to separate the holy
from the ordinary day.

6. On the first day of the feast there were thirteen bullocks, two rams,
and one goat. There then remained fourteen lambs for eight courses of
priests.(275) On the first day six courses offered two lambs each, and the
other (two) courses one lamb each. On the second day five courses offered
two lambs each, and the remaining (four) courses one lamb each. On the
third day four courses offered two lambs each, and the remaining six one
lamb each. On the fourth day three courses offered two lambs each, and the
remaining eight one lamb each. On the fifth day two courses offered two
lambs each, and the remaining ten one lamb each. On the sixth day one
course offered two lambs, and the remaining twelve one lamb each. On the
seventh day they were all equal. On the eighth day they cast lots, as on
other feasts. They said, “that the order which offered bullocks to-day,
was not permitted to offer bullocks to-morrow.” But they changed in
rotation.

7. Three times in the year all the courses shared alike in the offerings
of the great feasts, and in the distribution of the showbread. In the
Solemn Assembly(276) they say to each priest, “Here is unleavened bread
for thee, and here is leavened for thee.” The course in regular succession
offered the daily sacrifices, vows, and free-will offerings, and all the
other sacrifices and services of the congregation. If a feast be next to
the Sabbath, either before or after it, all the courses shared alike in
the distribution of the showbread.

8. “But if a day intervene between the two?” “The course in regular
succession took ten loaves, and the loiterers(277) took two.” At other
times of the year, the course entering on duty took six loaves, and the
course going off duty took six. R. Judah says, “the course entering took
seven, and that going off took five.” Those entering shared them on the
north side (of the temple court), and those going out on the south side.
The course Bilgah always shared theirs on the south side. But their
slaughter-ring was fastened down, and the window of their closet was shut
up.(278)




The New Year


    Four New Years—Judgments—New
    Moon—Witnesses—Evidence—Samaritans—Spreading the News—Beth
    Yangzek—Examining Witnesses—Rabban Gamaliel’s Plan of the Phases
    of the Moon—Rabbi Joshua—Sanhedrin—Cornets and
    Trumpets—Intention—The Serpent of Brass—Jerusalem and
    Jamnia—Blessings—Texts of Scripture—How the Trumpets are to be
    Blown.



