Chapter I


1. Three days before the feasts of the idolaters it is forbidden to deal
with them, to lend articles to them, or to take a loan of articles from
them; to make a loan of money to them, or to borrow money from them; to
repay them, or to take payment from them. Rabbi Judah said, “it is allowed
to take payment from them, since it is unsatisfactory to the idolater.”
The (Sages) answered him, “though it is unpleasant to him now, he rejoices
afterward.”

2. R. Ishmael said, “three days before and three days after their feasts
it is forbidden.” But the Sages say, “before their feasts it is forbidden,
after their feasts it is allowed.”

3. “And these are the feasts of the idolaters—the Kalends, and the
Saturnalia, and the Quartesima, and the coronation day of their kings, and
the day of their birth, and the day of their death.” The words of R.
Meier. But the Sages say, “every death anniversary in which there is
burning of incense,(439) there is in it the worship of idols. But if there
be no burning of incense there is no worship of idols.” “The day of
shaving his beard and cutting his hair, the day of his disembarking from
the sea, and the day of his release from prison, and the day when the
heathen makes a feast for his son?” “It is not forbidden to deal with them
save on this day of his feast, and with this man who keeps the feast
only.”

4. “The city in which there exists idolatry outside the city?” “It is
allowed to deal with the idolaters.” “If the idolatry be outside?” “Inside
it is allowed.” “How is it with going there?” “When the road directly
leads to the place itself, it is forbidden; but if it be possible to go by
it to another place, it is allowed.”

5. “If in the city in which there exists idolatry there be shops, some
decorated with idolatrous crowns, and some without decoration?” This was
the case in Bethshan; and the Sages say, “the decorated ones are forbidden
for dealing, and those not decorated are allowed.”

6. These things are forbidden to be sold to idolaters—fir-cones, and the
best figs, with their clusters, and incense, and the white cock. R. Judah
said, “it is allowable to sell a white cock among many others. But when a
man has only one, he must cut its claw before he sell it, since the
heathen do not offer that which is blemished in idol worship.” And all
other things for ordinary uses are allowed—but if they be declared to be
for idolatry, they are forbidden. R. Meier said, “even the fine dates, and
the date sap,(440) and the Jericho dates, are forbidden for sale to
idolaters.”

7. Where they are accustomed to sell small cattle to idolaters, they may
sell them. Where they are unaccustomed to sell them, they must not sell
them. And everywhere they must not sell to them the large cattle, calves,
ass foals, unblemished or blemished. R. Judah allowed the broken-boned;
and Benbethira allowed even horses.

8. Men must not sell to them bears or lions, or anything in which there is
peril to the multitude. They must not build with them royal halls,(441)
judgment-seats, and stadiums,(442) and bemas.(443) But men may build with
them altars and baths. When they reach to the arching in which they place
their idol, it is forbidden to build farther.

9. And Israelites must not make decorations for idols, necklaces, and
nose-rings, and rings. R. Eleazar said, “for pay it is allowed.” Men must
not sell to them what is fastened to the ground. But one may sell it after
it is cut down. R. Judah said, “one may sell it to a heathen on condition
that he cuts it down.”

10. “Men must not let to them buildings(444) in the Land of Israel, and it
is needless to say fields. But in Syria they may let to them buildings,
but not fields. But out of the Land they may sell to them buildings, and
may rent to them fields.” The words of R. Meier. R. José said, “in the
Land of Israel men may let to them buildings, but not fields. But in Syria
they may sell buildings and rent fields to them, and out of the Land they
may sell both.” However, where they said to let, they did not say a
dwelling-house; since a heathen can bring inside of it an idol, as it is
said, “Thou shalt not bring in abomination into thy house.”(445) And
everywhere a man must not hire to a heathen his bath, because it is called
by his name.



Chapter II


1. Israelites must not put cattle in the stables of idolaters, because of
their evil habits. And a woman must not be alone with them, because of
their evil habits. And no man should be alone with them, because they are
apt to shed blood.

2. A daughter of Israel must not attend an idolatrous woman, because she
helps the birth of a child for idolatry. But an idolatress may attend a
daughter of Israel. A daughter of Israel must not suckle a child of an
idolatress; but an idolatress may suckle a child of a daughter of Israel,
under her observation.

3. “Israelites may take from them medicine to cure property; but not to
cure persons. And they are not to be shaved by them anywhere.” The words
of R. Meier. But the Sages say, “under public observation it is allowed,
but not entirely alone.”

4. These things of the idolaters are forbidden, and every use of them is
strictly forbidden; wine, and vinegar of the heathen which was at first
wine, and Hadrian’s mixture(446) with its fragments, and hides of animals
with their hearts(447) (torn out). Rabbi Simon, the son of Gamaliel, said,
“when the rent is round, it is forbidden, when lengthwise, it is allowed.”
“The flesh brought in for idolatry is allowed; but that which is brought
out is forbidden, because it is the sacrifice for the dead.” The words of
R. Akiba. It is forbidden to do business with those who go to worship the
Penates; but with those who return from them it is allowed. “The
skin-bottles of the idolaters and their jugs into which Jewish wine is
poured, are forbidden, and every use of them is strictly forbidden.” The
words of R. Meier. But the Sages say, “every use of them is not
forbidden.” “Grape-stones and grape-skins of the idolaters are forbidden,
and every use of them is strictly forbidden.” The words of R. Meier. But
the Sages say, “when moist, they are forbidden; but when dry, they are
allowed.” “Fish-brine and the cheese from Bethuniki,(448) a village of the
idolaters, are forbidden, and every use of them strictly forbidden.” The
words of R. Meier. But the Sages say, “every use of them is not
forbidden.” R. Judah related, that R. Ishmael asked R. Joshua, as they
were journeying along the road—he said to him, “why do they forbid the
cheese of idolaters?” He replied to him, “because they cause it to ferment
with the stomach of a carcass.” R. Ishmael said to him, “and is not the
stomach of a burnt-offering of more importance than the stomach of a
carcass,” and it was said, “the priest who was so minded supped the milk
that was in it,” but the Sages did not agree with him, and they said, “the
priests do not use it, and they are not guilty.” He changed the
conversation, and said to him, “because they ferment it with the stomach
of a calf (devoted) to idolatry.” He said to him, “if so, why do they not
forbid it for every use?” He turned to another subject, and said to him,
“brother Ishmael, how do you read, ‘For thy love is better than
wine,’(449) or ‘For thy love is good’?” He replied to him, “For thy love
is good.” He said to him, “it is not so, since the next verse explains it,
‘Because of the savor of thy good ointments.’ ”

5. These things of the idolaters are forbidden, but every use of them is
not strictly forbidden; milk which a heathen milked, and an Israelite did
not see it. “Their bread and oil?” “Rabbi and his colleagues allowed oil.”
But the cookery, and the gravy into which they are wont to put wine and
vinegar, and shred thunny fish, and the sauce in which the fish chalbith
is not swimming, and the herring, and the essence of assafœtida, and
spiced salt, are forbidden; but every use of them is not strictly
forbidden.

6. These things are allowed for eating—milk which an idolater milked, and
an Israelite saw, and honey and honeycomb, even if they are dropping, as
they do not contain the effect of liquor,(450) and gravy into which they
are not wont to put wine and vinegar, and shred thunny fish, and sauce in
which there is the fish chalbith, and the leaf of the assafœtida, and
olives crushed into round cakes. R. José said, “the kernels detached from
the olives are forbidden.” The locusts which they bring from their
baskets(451) are forbidden; but those brought from their magazines are
allowed. And even so is the decision for their heave-offerings.



