Chapter II


1. The whole time that it is allowed to eat leaven, men may feed beasts
with it, and wild animals and fowls, and they may sell it to a stranger.
And they are allowed to enjoy it in every way. When that season has passed
over its enjoyment is disallowed, and they must not heat with it an oven
or a stove. Rabbi Judah said, “there is no riddance of leaven but by
burning.” But the Sages say, “also by powdering and scattering it to the
wind, or casting it into the sea.”

2. “The leaven of a stranger, over which the passover has passed?” “Its
enjoyment is allowed.” “But of an Israelite?” “Its enjoyment is
disallowed,” as is said,(129) “And there shall no leavened bread be seen
with thee.”

3. “The stranger who has lent money to an Israelite on his leaven?” “After
passover its enjoyment is allowed.” “And an Israelite who lent money to
the stranger on his leaven?” “Its enjoyment after passover is disallowed.”
“Leaven over which a building fell?” “It is as though it was cleared
away.” Rabban Simon, son of Gamaliel, said, “all after which the dog
cannot snuff.”

4. “He who has eaten a leavened heave-offering during the passover in
error?” “He must pay its value and a fifth more.” “In presumption?” “He is
free from the payment, and from its value even for fuel.”(130)

5. These are the things by which one can discharge his obligation to eat
unleavened bread during the passover; with cakes made of wheat, and
barley, and rye, and oats, and spelt; and they discharge their obligation
in that of which the tithing was doubtful, and in the first tithe after
the heave-offering was separated from it, and in second tithes and holy
things after their redemption. And the priests discharge their obligation
with cakes of dough-offering and heave-offering, but not with that which
owes first tithes, or before the heave-offering was separated from it, nor
with that which owes second tithes or holy things before their redemption.
“The loaves of the praise-offering and the cakes of the Nazarite?” “If
made for themselves, they do not discharge the obligation: if made for
sale in the market, they discharge the obligation.”

6. And these are the herbs with which one discharges his obligation to eat
bitter herbs in the passover: lettuce, endives, horse-radish, liquorice,
and coriander. The obligation can be discharged whether they be moist or
dry, but not if they be pickled, or much boiled, or even a little boiled.
And they may be united to form the size of an olive. And the obligation
may be discharged with their roots; and also if their tithes be in doubt;
and with their first tithing, when the heave-offering has been taken from
them; and with their second tithe, and with holy things which are
redeemed.

7. Persons must not moisten bran during the passover for chickens, but
they may scald it. A woman must not moisten bran in her hand when she goes
to the bath. But she may rub it dry on her flesh. A man should not chew
wheat and leave it on a wound during Passover, because it becomes
leavened.

8. People must not put flour into the charoseth(131) or into the mustard.
“But if one puts it?” “He must eat it off-hand.” But Rabbi Meier forbids
it. They must not boil the passover offering in liquids nor in fruit
juice. But one may smear it (after it is roasted), or dip it into them.
Water used by the baker must be poured away because it becomes leavened.



Chapter III


1. These cause transgression during passover: the Babylonian cuthack,(132)
and the Median beer, and the Edomite vinegar, and the Egyptian
zithum,(133) and the purifying dough of the dyer,(134) and the clarifying
grain of the cooks, and the paste of the bookbinders. Rabbi Eleazar said,
“even the cosmetics of women.” This is the rule. All kinds of grain
whatever may cause transgression during the passover. These are negative
commands, and they are not visited by cutting off.

2. “Dough in a split of a kneading trough?” “If there be the size of an
olive in a single place one is bound to clear it out.” Less than this is
worthless from its minuteness. And so is it with the question of
uncleanness. Particularity causes division. “But if one wish it to
remain?” “It is reckoned as the trough.” “Dough dried up?”(135) “If it be
like that which can become leavened it is forbidden.”

3. “How do persons separate the dough-offering when it becomes unclean on
a holiday?” Rabbi Eleazar said, “you cannot call it a dough-offering till
it be baked.” Rabbi Judah, the son of Bethira, said, “you must put it in
cold water.” Said R. Joshua, “it is not leaven so as to transgress the
negative command ‘It shall not be seen nor found,’(136) but it must be
separated and left till the evening. But if it become leavened it is
leavened.”

4. Rabban Gamaliel said, “three women may knead at once, and bake in one
oven, each after the other.” But the Sages say, “three women may be busied
with the dough, one kneads, and one prepares, and one bakes.” Rabbi Akiba
said, “all women, and all wood, and all ovens, are not alike.” This is the
rule. “If it ferment it must be smoothed down with cold water.”

5. Dough which begins to leaven must be burned, but he who eats it is
free. When it begins to crack it must be burned, and he who eats it must
be cut off. “What is leavening?” “Like the horns of locusts.” “Cracking?”
“When the cracks intermingle.” The words of R. Judah. But the Sages say,
“if either of them be eaten, the eater must be cut off.” “And what is
leavening?” “All which changed its appearance, as when a man’s hairs stand
on end through fright.”

6. “If the fourteenth day of Nisan happened on the Sabbath?” “They must
clear off all the leaven before the Sabbath begins.” The words of R.
Meier. But the Sages say, “in the proper season.” Rabbi Eleazar, the son
of Zaduk, said, “the heave-offering before the Sabbath, and ordinary
things in the proper season.”

7. “If one went to kill his passover, or circumcise his son, or to eat the
marriage-feast in the house of his father-in-law, and he remembered that
there was leaven in his house?” “If he can he must return and clear it
out, and return to his duties. He must return and clear it away. But if
not, he can esteem it as nothing in his heart.” “(If one went) to save a
person from the militia, or from a river, or from robbers, or from
burning, or from the fall of buildings?” “He may esteem it as nothing in
his heart.” “But if he is reposing at his ease?” “He must return
off-hand.”

8. And so also when one went forth from Jerusalem and remembered that he
had holy flesh in his hand. If he passed Zophim(137) he must burn it on
the spot. But if not he must return and burn it in front of the temple
with the wood of the altar. “And for how much flesh or leaven must men
return?” Rabbi Meier said, “both of them the size of an egg.” Rabbi Judah
said, “both the size of an olive.” But the Sages say, “Holy flesh the size
of an olive, and leaven the size of an egg.”



