Chapter XII: Concerning the Hair of Microprosopus


From the skull of the Head (of Microprosopus) depend all those chiefs and
leaders (otherwise, all those thousands and tens of thousands), and also
from the locks of the hair.

Which are black, and mutually bound together, and which mutually cohere.

But they adhere unto the Supernal Light from the Father, AB, _Ab_, which
surroundeth His Head (_i.e._, that of Microprosopus); and unto the Brain,
which is illuminated from the Father.

Thencefrom, even from the light which surroundeth His Head (_i.e._, that
of Microprosopus) from the Mother, Aima, and from the second Brain,
proceed long locks upon locks (of hair).

And all adhere unto and are bound together with those locks(854) which
have their connection with the Father.

And because (these locks are) mutually intermingled with each other, and
mutually intertwined with each other, hence all the Brains are connected
with the Supernal Brain (of Macroprosopus).

And hence all the regions which proceed from the Three Cavities of the
Skull are mingled mutually together, as well pure as impure, and all those
accents and mysteries are as well hidden as manifest.

And since all the Brains have a secret connection with the ears of
Tetragrammaton, in the same way as they shine in the crown of the Head,
and enter into the hollow places of the Skull.

Hence all these locks hang over and cover the sides of the ears, as we
have elsewhere said.

And therefore is it written, 2 Kings xix. 16, “Incline, O Tetragrammaton,
Thine ear, and hear!”

Hence is the meaning of this passage, which is elsewhere given, “If any
man wisheth the King to incline His ear unto him, let him raise(855) the
head of the King and remove the hair from above the ears; then shall the
King hear him in all things whatsoever he desireth.”

In the parting of the hair a certain path is connected with the (same)
path of the Ancient of Days, and therefrom are distributed all the paths
of the precepts of the Law.

And over these (locks of hair) are set all the Lords of Lamentation and
Wailing; and they depend from the single locks.

And these spread a net for sinners, so that they may not comprehend those
paths.

This is that which is said, Prov. iv. 18, “The path of the wicked is as
darkness.”

And these all depend from the rigid locks; hence also these are entirely
rigid, as we have before said.

In the softer (locks) adhere the Lords of Equilibrium, as it is written,
Ps. xxv. 10, “All the paths of Tetragrammaton are CHSD, _Chesed_, and
AMTH, _Emeth_, Mercy and Truth.”

And thus when these developments of the Brain emanate from the Concealed
Brain, hencefrom each singly deriveth its own nature.

From the one Brain the Lords of Equilibrium proceed through those softer
locks, as it is written, Ps. xxv. 10, “All the paths of Tetragrammaton are
Chesed and Emeth.”

From the second Brain the Lords of Lamentation and Wailing proceed through
those rigid locks and depend (from them). Concerning whom it is written,
Prov. iv. 19, “The path of the wicked is as darkness; they know not
wherein they stumble.”

What is this passage intended to imply? Assuredly the sense of these
words: “they know not,” is this: “They do not know, and they do not wish
to know.”

“Wherein they stumble.” Do not read “BMH, _Bameh_, wherein,” but “BAIMA,
_Be-Aima_, in Aima, the Mother,” they stumble; that is, through those who
are attributed unto the side of the Mother.

What is the side of the Mother? Severe Rigor, whereunto are attributed the
Lords of Lamentation and Wailing.

From the third Brain the Lords of Lords proceed through those locks
arranged in the middle condition (_i.e._, partly hard and partly soft),
and depend (therefrom); and they are called the Luminous and the
Non-Luminous Countenances.

And concerning these it is written, Prov. iv. 26, “Ponder the path of thy
feet.”

And all these are found in those locks of the hair of the Head.




Chapter XIII: Concerning the Forehead of Microprosopus


The forehead of the Skull (of Microprosopus) is the forehead for visiting
sinners (otherwise, for rooting out sinners).

And when that forehead is uncovered there are excited the Lords of
Judgments against those who are shameless in their deeds.

This forehead hath a rosy redness. But at that time when the forehead of
the Ancient One is uncovered over against this forehead, the latter
appeareth white as snow.

And that time is called the Time of Grace for all.

In the “Book of the Teaching of the School of Rav Yeyeva the Elder” it is
said: The forehead is according as the forehead(856) of the Ancient One.
Otherwise, the letter _Cheth_, CH, is placed between the other two
letters, according to this passage, Num. xxiv. 17, “VMCHTZ, _Ve-Machetz_,
and shall smite the corners of Moab?”

And we have elsewhere said that it is also called NTZCH, _Netzach_, the
neighboring letters (M and N, neighboring letters in the alphabet, that
is, and allied in sense, for _Mem_ = Water, and _Nun_ = Fish, that which
lives in the water) being counter-changed. (_Netzach_ = Victory, and is
the seventh Sephira.)

But many are the NTZCHIM, _Netzachim_, Victories;(857) so that another
(development of) Netzach may be elevated into another path, and other
Netzachim may be given which are extended throughout the whole body (of
Microprosopus).

But on the day of the Sabbath, at the time of the afternoon prayers, the
forehead of the Most Holy Ancient One is uncovered, so that the judgments
may not be aroused.

And all the judgments are subjected; and although they be there, yet are
they not called forth. (Otherwise, and they are appeased.)

From this forehead depend twenty-four tribunals, for all those who are
shameless in their deeds.

And it is written, Ps. lxxiii. 11: “And they have said, ‘How can El know?
and is there knowledge in the Most High?’ ”

But truly (the tribunals) are only twenty; wherefore are four added?
Assuredly, in respect of the punishments of the inferior tribunals which
depend from the Supernals.

Therefore there remain twenty.(858) And therefore unto none do they
adjudge capital punishment until he shall have fulfilled and reached the
age of twenty years, in respect of these twenty tribunals.

But in our doctrine regarding our Arcana have we taught that the books
which are contained in the Law refer back unto these twenty-four.




