Chapter VII


1. The Sages stated an important rule: “In the Sabbatical year, everything
eaten by man and eaten by beast, and a kind of dye-stuff, and whatever
cannot remain in the ground, to them the laws of the Sabbatical year
apply, and to their value the laws of the Sabbatical year apply. They are
to be cleared off from being private property, and their price is to be
cleared off from being private property.”(66) “And which are these?” “The
leaves of the deceitful scallion, and the leaves of mint, succory, and
cresses, and the leek, and the milk-flower.”(67) “And what is eaten by
beasts?” “Thorns and thistles and a kind of dye-stuff, sprouts of indigo
and madder. To them the laws of the Sabbatical year apply, and to their
price the laws of the Sabbatical year apply. They are to be cleared off
from being private property, and their price is to be cleared off from
being private property.”

2. And again, the Sages stated another rule: “All which is not eaten by
man nor eaten by beasts, and a kind of dye-stuff, and whatever remains in
the ground, to them the laws of the Sabbatical year apply, and to their
price the laws of the Sabbatical year apply, but they are not to be
cleared off from being private property, nor is their price to be cleared
off from being private property.” “And which are these?” “The root of the
deceitful scallion, and the root of the mint, and scorpion grass,(68) and
the bulbs of the milk-flower, and the spikenard, and a kind of dye-stuff,
the dye-plant, and the wormwood,—to them the laws of the Sabbatical year
apply, and to their price the laws of the Sabbatical year apply. They are
not to be cleared off from being private property, nor is their price to
be cleared off from being private property.” Rabbi Maier said, “their
prices are to be cleared off from being private property till New Year’s
Day.” The Sages said to him, “if they are not to be cleared off from being
private property, it is immaterial about their prices.”

3. “The peelings and flower of the pomegranate, the shells and kernels of
nuts?” “To them the laws of the Sabbatical year apply, and to their prices
the laws of the Sabbatical year apply.” The dyer may dye for himself, but
he must not dye for pay, because men must not trade in fruits of the
Sabbatical year, nor in the first-born, nor in heave-offerings, nor in
carcasses, nor in that which is torn, nor in abominations, nor in creeping
things. And one must not buy greens of the field and sell them in the
market. But one may gather them, and his son may sell them on his account.
He may, however, buy for himself, and he is allowed to sell what is
superfluous.

“He bought a first-born animal for a feast for his son, or for a holiday,
and has no need of it?” “He is allowed to sell it.”

4. “Hunters of wild animals—birds and fishes—who chanced to find sorts
that are unclean?” “It is allowed to sell them.” R. Judah said, “if a man
become possessed of them in his ordinary way, he may buy and sell them,
excepting that such shall not be his practice.” But the Sages “disallow
them.”

5. “The shoots of vines and of the locust-trees?” “To them the laws of the
Sabbatical year apply, and to their prices the laws of the Sabbatical year
apply.” They are to be cleared off from being private property, and their
prices are to be cleared off from being private property. “The shoots of
the oak, and the nuts,(69) and the blackberries?” “To them the laws of the
Sabbatical year apply, and to their prices the laws of the Sabbatical year
apply.” “They are not to be cleared off from being private property, and
their prices are not to be cleared off from being private property. But
their leaves must be cleared away to become public property, as they fall
down from their stems.”(70)

6. “The rose and the carnation and the balsam and the chestnut?” “To them
the laws of the Sabbatical year apply, and to their prices the laws of the
Sabbatical year apply.” R. Simon said, “there is no Sabbatical year for
the balsam, because it has no fruit.”

7. “A new Sabbatical rose which one steeped in old oil?” “One may pick out
the rose.” “But an old rose in new oil?” “One is bound to clear it off
from being private property.” “New locust fruit which one steeped in old
wine, and old (fruit) in new (wine)?” “Men are bound to clear them off
from being private property.” This is the rule: everything which produces
taste one is bound to clear off from being private property, sorts that
are different and sorts that are the same, however little they be. The
laws of the Sabbatical year disallow however little of its own sort, and
in different sorts that which produces taste.(71)



Chapter VIII


1. The Sages stated an important rule for the Sabbatical year: “Of all
that is only fit for man’s food a plaster may not be made for man, and it
is needless to say for beast. And of all that is not fit for man’s food a
plaster may be made for man, but not for beast.” And all that is not fit
either for man’s food or beast’s food, if one consider it as food for man
or food for beasts, the Sages impose on it the inconveniences of the laws
relating to man and the inconveniences of the laws relating to beast. If
one, however, consider it as wood, it is reckoned as wood; for example,
the savory and the hyssop and the laurel.

2. Produce of the Sabbatical year is given for food, for drink, and for
anointing, to eat the thing which it is usual to eat, and to anoint with
what it is usual to anoint with. One may not anoint with wine or vinegar.
But one may anoint with oil. And so is it likewise with the heave-offering
and second tithe. The laws of the Sabbatical year are more convenient for
them, because it is permitted to light a candle made from them.

3. Men must not sell the fruits of the Sabbatical year, neither by
measure, nor by weight, nor by count. Neither may they sell figs by
counting, nor greens by weight. The school of Shammai say, “nor in
bunches.” But the school of Hillel say, “that which it is usual to make in
bunches in the house men may make in bunches in the market; for example,
cresses and the milk-flower.”

4. If one said to a laborer, “Here! take this aisar(72) and gather greens
for me to-day?” “His hire is allowed.” “Gather me for it greens to-day?”
“His hire is forbidden.” If one take from the baker a cake for a
pundion(73) (saying), “when I will gather greens of the field I will bring
them to you?” “It is allowed.” “If one take bread from the baker in
silence?” “He must not pay him from money of the Sabbatical year, because
men must not pay a debt with money of the Sabbatical year.”

5. Men must not give money of the Sabbatical year to a well-digger, nor to
a bath-keeper, nor to a barber, nor to a skipper, but one may give it to a
well-digger for drink, and to all persons one may give a gratuitous
present.

6. Men may not dry figs of the Sabbatical year in the usual place, but one
may dry them in a waste place. They must not tread grapes in a wine-press,
but they may tread them in a kneading-trough. And they must not put olives
into the oil-press with the stone over them, but they may pound them and
put them into a small press. Rabbi Simon said, “one may also grind them in
the house of the oil-press and put them into the small press.”

7. Men must not boil greens of the Sabbatical year in oil of the
heave-offering, lest they take it for uses that are forbidden. R. Simon
“allowed it.” And the very last thing (in a series of exchanges) partakes
of the laws of the Sabbatical year; but the fruit itself (first exchanged)
is forbidden.

8. Men must not buy servants, ground, or an unclean beast, with money of
the Sabbatical year; but if they buy them, they must eat(74) as much as
their value. They must not bring for an offering the two pigeons of one
with an issue, or the two pigeons after childbirth bought with money of
the Sabbatical year. And if they bring them, they must eat(75) as much as
their value. They must not anoint vessels with oil of the Sabbatical year.
But if they anoint them, they must eat(76) as much as their value.

9. “A skin which one anointed with oil of the Sabbatical year?” Rabbi
Eleazar said, “it must be burned.” But the Sages say, “one must eat(77) as
much as its value.” The Sages said before Rabbi Akiba it was a saying of
Rabbi Eleazar, “a skin smeared with oil of the Sabbatical year must be
burned.” He said to them, “Hush! I cannot tell you what Rabbi Eleazar said
about it.”

10. And again, the Sages said in his presence, it was a saying of Rabbi
Eleazar,(78) “he who eats the bread of Samaritans is as one who eats
swine-flesh.” He said to them, “Hush! I cannot tell you what Rabbi Eleazar
said about it.”

11. “A bath which was heated with stubble or straw of the Sabbatical
year?” “It is allowed to wash in it.” “But if one confer honor (on the
bath)?” “He should not wash in it.”



