Chapter XX: Concerning the Body of Microprosopus


The masculine power is extended through Däath; and the Assemblies and
Conclaves are filled.

It commenceth from the beginning of the skull, and it is extended
throughout the whole body, through the breast, and through the arms, and
through all the other parts.




Chapter XXI: Concerning the Bride of Microprosopus


Unto His back adhereth closely a Ray of most vehement Splendor, and it
flameth forth and formeth a certain skull, concealed on every side.

And thus descendeth the Light of the two brains, and is figured forth
therein.

And She (the Bride) adhereth unto the side of the Male; wherefore also She
is called, Cant. v. 2, “My dove, my perfect one.” Read not, “THMTHI,
_Thamathi_, My perfect one”; but “THAVMTHI, _Theomathi_, My twin sister,”
more applicably.

The hairs of the Woman contain colors upon colors, as it is written, Cant.
vii. 5, “The hair of Thy head like purple.”

But herewith is Geburah, Severity, connected in the five Severities
(_i.e._, which are symbolized in the numerical value, 5, of the letter H
final of IHVH, which is the Bride), and the Woman is extended on Her side,
and is applied unto the side of the Male.

Until She is separated from His side, and cometh unto Him so that She may
be conjoined with Him, face to face.

And when They are conjoined together, They appear to be only one body.

Hence we learn that the Masculine, taken alone appeareth to be only half
the body, so that all the mercies are half; and thus also is it with the
Feminine.

But when They are joined together, the (two together) appear to form only
one whole body. And it is so.

So also here. When the Male is joined with the Female, They both
constitute one complete body, and all the Universe is in a state of
happiness, because all things receive blessing from Their perfect body.
And this is an Arcanum.

And therefore it is said, Gen. ii. 3, “Tetragrammaton blessed the seventh
day and hallowed it.” For then all things are found (to exist) in the one
perfect Body, for MTRVNITHA, _Matronitha_, the Mother (_i.e._, the
Inferior Mother) is joined unto the King, and is found to form the one
Body with Him.

And therefore are there found to be blessings upon this day.

And hence that which is not both Male and Female together is called half a
body. Now, no blessing can rest upon a mutilated and defective being, but
only upon a perfect place and upon a perfect being, and not at all in an
incomplete being.(877)

And a semi-complete being cannot live forever, neither can it receive
blessing forever.

The Beauty of the Female is completed by the Beauty of the Male. And now
have we established these facts (concerning the perfect equality of Male
and Female), and they are made known unto the Companions.

With this Woman (the inferior H) are connected all those things which are
below; from Her do they receive their nourishment, and from Her do they
receive blessing; and She is called the Mother of them all.

It is written, Prov. vii. 4, “Say unto Chokmah, Thou art my sister.”(878)
For there is given one Chokmah (Male), and there is also given another
Chokmah (Female).

And this Woman is called the Lesser Chokmah in respect of the other.

And therefore is it written, Cant. viii. 8, “We have a little sister and
she hath no breasts.”

For in this exile (_i.e._, separated from the King) She appeareth unto us
to be “our little sister.” At first, indeed, she is small, but she
becometh great and greater, until she becometh the Spouse whom the King
taketh unto Himself.

As it is written, Cant. viii. 10, “I am a wall, and my breasts are like
towers.”

“And my breasts,” etc., since they are full with the nourishment of all
things;(879) “like towers,” because they are the great rivers which flow
forth from Aima the Supernal.





HEBREW MELODIES


                      Translated by Mrs. Henry Lucas




Ode To Zion


    Art thou not, Zion, fain
    To send forth greetings from thy sacred rock
    Unto thy captive train,
    Who greet thee as the remnants of thy flock?
    Take thou on every side—
    East, west, and south, and north—their greetings multiplied.
    Sadly he greets thee still,
    The prisoner of hope, who, day and night,
    Sheds ceaseless tears, like dew on Hermon’s hill—
    Would that they fell upon thy mountain’s height!

    Harsh is my voice when I bewail thy woes,
    But when in fancy’s dream
    I see thy freedom, forth its cadence flows
    Sweet as the harps that hung by Babel’s stream.
    My heart is sore distressed
    For Bethel ever blessed,
    For Peniel, and each ancient, sacred place.
    The holy presence there
    To thee is present where
    Thy Maker opes thy gates, the gates of heaven to face.

    The glory of the Lord will ever be
    Thy sole and perfect light;
    No need hast thou, then, to illumine thee,
    Of sun by day, or moon and stars by night.
    I would that, where God’s Spirit was of yore
    Poured out unto thy holy ones, I might
    There too my soul outpour!
    The house of kings and throne of God wert thou,
    How comes it then that now
    Slaves fill the throne where sat thy kings before?

    Oh! who will lead me on
    To seek the posts where, in far-distant years,
    The angels in their glory dawned upon
    Thy messengers and seers?
    Oh! who will give me wings
    That I may fly away,
    And there, at rest from all my wanderings,
    The ruins of my heart among thy ruins lay?
    I’ll bend my face unto thy soil, and hold
    Thy stones as precious gold.
    And when in Hebron I have stood beside
    My fathers’ tombs, then will I pass in turn
    Thy plains and forest wide,
    Until I stand on Gilead and discern
    Mount Hor and Mount Abarim, ’neath whose crest
    Thy luminaries twain, thy guides and beacons rest.

    Thy air is life unto my soul, thy grains
    Of dust are myrrh, thy streams with honey flow;
    Naked and barefoot, to thy ruined fanes
    How gladly would I go;
    To where the ark was treasured, and in dim
    Recesses dwelt the holy cherubim.

    I rend the beauty of my locks, and cry
    In bitter wrath against the cruel fate
    That bids thy holy Nazarites to lie
    In earth contaminate.
    How can I make or meat or drink my care,
    How can mine eyes enjoy
    The light of day, when I see ravens tear
    Thy eagles’ flesh, and dogs thy lions’ whelps destroy?
    Away! thou cup of sorrow’s poisoned gall!
    Scarce can my soul thy bitterness sustain.
    When I Ahola unto mind recall,
    I taste thy venom; and when once again
    Upon Aholiba I muse, thy dregs I drain.

    Perfect in beauty, Zion! how in thee
    Do love and grace unite!
    The souls of thy companions tenderly
    Turn unto thee; thy joy was their delight,
    And, weeping, they lament thy ruin now.
    In distant exile, for thy sacred height
    They long, and toward thy gates in prayer they bow.
    Thy flocks are scattered o’er the barren waste,
    Yet do they not forget thy sheltering fold,
    Unto thy garments’ fringe they cling, and haste
    The branches of thy palms to seize and hold.
    Shinar and Pathros! come they near to thee?
    Naught are they by thy Light and Right divine.
    To what can be compared the majesty
    Of thy anointed line?
    To what the singers, seers, and Levites thine?
    The rule of idols fails and is cast down,
    Thy power eternal is, from age to age thy crown.

    The Lord desires thee for his dwelling-place
    Eternally; and blest
    Is he whom God has chosen for the grace
    Within thy courts to rest.
    Happy is he that watches, drawing near,
    Until he sees thy glorious lights arise,
    And over whom thy dawn breaks full and clear
    Set in the orient skies.
    But happiest he, who, with exultant eyes,
    The bliss of thy redeemed ones shall behold,
    And see thy youth renewed as in the days of old.

    JEHUDA HALEVI.




God, Whom Shall I Compare To Thee?


    God! whom shall I compare to Thee,
    When Thou to none canst likened be?
    Under what image shall I dare
    To picture Thee, when ev’rywhere
    All Nature’s forms Thine impress bear?

    Greater, O Lord! Thy glories are
    Than all the heavenly chariot far.
    Whose mind can grasp Thy world’s design?
    Whose word can fitly Thee define?
    Whose tongue set forth Thy powers divine?

    Can heart approach, can eye behold
    Thee in Thy righteousness untold?
    Whom didst Thou to Thy counsel call,
    When there was none to speak withal
    Since Thou wast first and Lord of all?

    Thy world eternal witness bears
    That none its Maker’s glory shares.
    Thy wisdom is made manifest
    In all things formed by Thy behest,
    All with Thy seal’s clear mark imprest.

    Before the pillars of the sky
    Were raised, before the mountains high
    Were wrought, ere hills and dales were known,
    Thou in Thy majesty alone
    Didst sit, O God! upon Thy throne!

    Hearts, seeking Thee, from search refrain,
    And weary tongues their praise restrain.
    Thyself unbound by time and place,
    Thou dost pervade, support, embrace
    The world and all created space.

    The sages’ minds bewildered grow,
    The lightning speed of thought is slow.
    “Awful in praises” art Thou named;
    Thou fillest, strong in strength proclaimed,
    This universe Thy hand has framed.

    Deep, deep beyond all fathoming,
    Far, far beyond all measuring,
    We can but seek Thy deeds alone;
    When bow Thy saints before Thy throne
    Then is Thy faithfulness made known.

    Thy righteousness we can discern,
    Thy holy law proclaim and learn.
    Is not Thy presence near alway
    To them who penitently pray,
    But far from those who sinning stray?

    Pure souls behold Thee, and no need
    Have they of light: they hear and heed
    Thee with the mind’s keen ear, although
    The ear of flesh be dull and slow.
    Their voices answer to and fro.

    Thy holiness forever they proclaim:
    The Lord of Hosts! thrice holy is His name!

    JEHUDA HALEVI.




Servant Of God


    Oh! would that I might be
    A servant unto Thee,
    Thou God by all adored:
    Then, though by friends out-cast,
    Thy hand would hold me fast,
    And draw me near to Thee, my King and Lord!

    Spirit and flesh are Thine,
    O Heavenly Shepherd mine!
    My hopes, my thoughts, my fears, Thou seest all,
    Thou measurest my path, my steps dost know.
    When Thou upholdest, who can make me fall?
    When Thou restrainest, who can bid me go?
    Oh! would that I might be
    A servant unto Thee,
    Thou God, by all adored.
    Then, though by friends out-cast,
    Thy hand would hold me fast,
    And draw me near to Thee, my King and Lord!

    Fain would my heart come nigh
    To Thee, O God! on high,
    But evil thoughts have led me far astray
    From the pure path of righteous government.

    Guide Thou me back into Thy holy way,
    And count me not as one impenitent.
    Oh! would that I might be
    A servant unto Thee,
    Thou God, by all adored.
    Then, though by friends out-cast,
    Thy hand would hold me fast,
    And draw me near to Thee, my King and Lord!

    If in my youth I still
    Fail to perform Thy will,
    What can I hope when age shall chill my breast?
    Heal me, O Lord! with Thee is healing found—
    Cast me not off, by weight of years opprest,
    Forsake me not when age my strength has bound.
    Oh! would that I might be
    A servant unto Thee,
    Thou God, by all adored.
    Then, though by friends out-cast,
    Thy hand would hold me fast,
    And draw me near to Thee, my King and Lord!

    Contrite and full of dread,
    I mourn each moment fled
    Midst idle follies roaming desolate;
    I sink beneath transgressions manifold,
    That from Thy presence keep me separate;
    Nor can sin-darkened eyes Thy light behold.
    Oh! would that I might be
    A servant unto Thee,
    Thou God, by all adored.
    Then, though by friends out-cast,
    Thy hand would hold me fast,
    And draw me near to Thee, my King and Lord!

    So lead me that I may
    Thy sovereign will obey.
    Make pure my heart to seek Thy truth divine;
    When burns my wound, be Thou with healing near!
    Answer me, Lord! for sore distress is mine,
    And say unto Thy servant, I am here!

    Oh! would that I might be
    A servant unto Thee,
    Thou God, by all adored!
    Then, though by friends out-cast,
    Thy hand would hold me fast,
    And draw me near to Thee, my King and Lord!

    JEHUDA HALEVI.




My King


    Ere time began, ere age to age had thrilled,
    I waited in His storehouse, as He willed;
    He gave me being, but, my years fulfilled,
      I shall be summoned back before the King.

    He called the hidden to the light of day,
    To right and left, each side the fountain lay,
    From out the stream and down the steps, the way
      That led me to the garden of the King.

    Thou gavest me a light my path to guide,
    To prove my heart’s recesses still untried;
    And as I went, Thy voice in warning cried:
      “Child! fear thou Him Who is Thy God and King!”

    True weight and measure learned my heart from Thee;
    If blessings follow, then what joy for me!
    If naught but sin, all mine the shame must be,
      For that was not determined by the King.

    I hasten, trembling, to confess the whole
    Of my transgressions, ere I reach the goal
    Where mine own words must witness ’gainst my soul,
      And who dares doubt the writing of the King?

    Erring, I wandered in the wilderness,
    In passion’s grave nigh sinking powerless:
    Now deeply I repent, in sore distress,
      That I kept not the statutes of the King!

    With worldly longings was my bosom fraught,
    Earth’s idle toys and follies all I sought;
    Ah! when He judges joys so dearly bought,
      How greatly shall I fear my Lord and King!

    Now conscience-stricken, humbled to the dust,
    Doubting himself, in Thee alone his trust,
    He shrinks in terror back, for God is just—
      How can a sinner hope to reach the King?

    Oh! be Thy mercy in the balance laid,
    To hold Thy servant’s sins more lightly weighed,
    When, his confession penitently made,
      He answers for his guilt before the King.

    Thine is the love, O God! and Thine the grace,
    That folds the sinner in its mild embrace;
    Thine the forgiveness bridging o’er the space
      ’Twixt man’s works and the task set by the King.

    Unheeding all my sins, I cling to Thee!
    I know that mercy will Thy footstool be:
    Before I call, oh! do Thou answer me,
      For nothing dare I claim of Thee, my King!

    O Thou Who makest guilt to disappear,
    My help, my hope, my rock, I will not fear;
    Though Thou the body hold in dungeon drear,
      The soul has found the palace of the King.

    MOSES B. NACHMAN.




To The Soul


    O thou, who springest gloriously
      From thy Creator’s fountain blest,
      Arise, depart, for this is not thy rest!
    The way is long, thou must prepared be,
      Thy Maker bids thee seek thy goal—
      Return then to thy rest, my soul,
    For bountifully has God dealt with thee.

    Behold! I am a stranger here,
      My days like fleeting shadows seem.
      When wilt thou, if not now, thy life redeem?
    And when thou seek’st thy Maker have no fear,
      For if thou have but purified
      Thy heart from stain of sin and pride,
    Thy righteous deeds to Him shall draw thee near.

    O thou in strength who treadest, learn
      To know thyself, cast dreams away!
      The goal is distant far, and short the day.
    What canst thou plead th’ Almighty’s grace to earn?
      Would thou the glory of the Lord
      Behold, O soul? With prompt accord
    Then to thy Father’s house return, return!

    JEHUDA HALEVI.




Sabbath Hymn


    Come forth, my friend, the bride to meet,
    Come, O my friend, the Sabbath greet!

    “Observe ye” and “remember” still
    The Sabbath—thus His holy will
    God in one utterance did proclaim.
    The Lord is one, and one His name
    To His renown and praise and fame.
        Come forth, my friend, the bride to meet,
        Come, O my friend, the Sabbath greet!

    Greet we the Sabbath at our door,
    Well-spring of blessing evermore,
    With everlasting gladness fraught,
    Of old ordained, divinely taught,
    Last in creation, first in thought.
        Come forth, my friend, the bride to meet,
        Come, O my friend, the Sabbath greet!

    Arouse thyself, awake and shine,
    For, lo! it comes, the light divine.
    Give forth a song, for over thee
    The glory of the Lord shall be
    Revealed in beauty speedily.
        Come forth, my friend, the bride to meet,
        Come, O my friend, the Sabbath greet!

    Crown of thy husband, come in peace,
    Come, bidding toil and trouble cease.
    With joy and cheerfulness abide
    Among thy people true and tried,
    Thy faithful people—come, O bride!
        Come forth, my friend, the bride to meet,
        Come, O my friend, the Sabbath greet!

    SHELOMO HALEVI.




O Sleeper! Wake, Arise!


    O sleeper! wake, arise!
      Delusive follies shun,
    Keep from the ways of men and raise thine eyes
      To the exalted One.
    Hasten as haste the starry orbs of gold
      To serve the Rock of old.
    O sleeper! rise and call upon thy God!

    Behold the firmament
      His hands have wrought on high,
    See how His mighty arms uphold the tent
      Of His ethereal sky,
    And mark the host of stars that heaven reveals—
    His graven rings and seals.
    Tremble before His majesty and hope
      For His salvation still,
    Lest, when for thee the gates of fortune ope,
      False pride thy spirit fill.
    O sleeper! rise and call upon thy God!

    Go seek at night abroad
      Their footsteps, who erewhile
    Were saints on earth, whose lips with hymns o’erflowed,
      Whose hearts were free from guilt.
    Their nights were spent in ceaseless prayer and praise,
      In pious fast their days.
    Their souls were paths to God, and by His throne
      Their place is set anigh.
    Their road through life was but a stepping-stone
      Unto the Lord on high.
    O sleeper! rise and call upon thy God!

    Weep for thy sins, and pause
      In wrongful deeds, to implore
    God’s pardoning grace, nor fret thyself because
      Of evildoers more.
    Cleave to the right, and of thy substance bring
      To honor Him, thy King.
    When saviours then Mount Zion joyfully
      Ascend with eager feet,
    And nations shout for gladness, thou wilt be
      Prepared thy God to meet.
    O sleeper! rise and call upon thy God!

    Whence does man’s wisdom flow—
      Man, who of dust is wrought,
    Whose poor pre-eminence on earth does show
      Over the beast as naught?
    Only those gazing with the inward eye
      Behold God’s majesty:
    They have the well-spring of their being found,
      More precious far than wine.
    Thou also thus, though by earth’s fetters bound,
      Mayst find thy Rock divine.
    O sleeper! rise and call upon thy God!

    The Lord is Lord of all,
      His hands hold life and death,
    He bids the lowly rise, the lofty fall,
      The world obeys His breath.
    Keep judgment, then, and live and cast aside
      False and rebellious pride,
    That asketh when and where, and all below
      And all above would know;
    But be thou perfect with the Lord thy God!
    O sleeper! rise and call upon thy God!

    JEHUDA HALEVI.




The Land Of Peace


    Whose works, O Lord, like Thine can be,
      Who ’neath Thy throne of grace,
    For those pure souls from earth set free,
      Hast made a dwelling-place?

    There are the sinless spirits bound
      Up in the bond of life,
    The weary there new strength have found,
      The weak have rest from strife.

    Sweet peace and calm their spirits bless,
      Who reach that heavenly home,
    And never-ending pleasantness—
      Such is the world to come.

    There glorious visions manifold
      Those happy ones delight,
    And in God’s presence they behold
      Themselves and Him aright.

    In the King’s palace they abide,
      And at His table eat,
    With kingly dainties satisfied,
      Spiritual food most sweet.

    This is the rest forever sure,
      This is the heritage,
    Whose goodness and whose bliss endure
      Unchanged from age to age.

    This is the land the spirit knows
      That everlastingly
    With milk and honey overflows—
      And such its fruit shall be.

    SOLOMON IBN GEBIROL.




The Heart’s Desire


    Lord! unto Thee are ever manifest
    My inmost heart’s desires, though unexprest
    In spoken words. Thy mercy I implore
    Even for a moment—then to die were blest.

    Oh! if I might but win that grace divine,
    Into Thy hand, O Lord, I would resign
    My spirit then, and lay me down in peace
    To my repose, and sweetest sleep were mine.

    Afar from Thee in midst of life I die,
    And life in death I find, when Thou art nigh.
    Alas! I know not how to seek Thy face,
    Nor how to serve and worship Thee, Most High.

    Oh! lead me in Thy path, and turn again
    My heart’s captivity, and break in twain
    The yoke of folly: teach me to afflict
    My soul, the while I yet life’s strength retain.

    Despise not Thou my lowly penitence,
    Ere comes the day, when, deadened every sense,
    My limbs too feeble grown to bear my weight,
    A burden to myself, I journey hence.

    When to the all-consuming moth a prey,
    My wasted form sinks slowly to decay,
    And I shall seek the place my fathers sought,
    And find my rest there where at rest are they.

    I am on earth a sojourner, a guest,
    And my inheritance is in her breast,
    My youth has sought as yet its own desires,
    When will my soul’s true welfare be my quest?

    The world is too much with me, and its din
    Prevents my search eternal peace to win.
    How can I serve my Maker when my heart
    Is passion’s captive, is a slave to sin?

    But should I strive to scale ambition’s height,
    Who with the worm may sleep ere fall of night?
    Or can I joy in happiness to-day
    Who know not what may chance by morning’s light?

    My days and nights will soon, with restless speed,
    Consume life’s remnant yet to me decreed;
    Then half my body shall the winds disperse,
    Half will return to dust, as dust indeed.

    What more can I allege? From youth to age
    Passion pursues me still at every stage.
    If Thou art not my portion, what is mine?
    Lacking Thy favor, what my heritage?

    Bare of good deeds, scorched by temptation’s fire,
    Yet to Thy mercy dares my soul aspire;
    But wherefore speech prolong, since unto Thee,
    O Lord, is manifest my heart’s desire?

    JEHUDA HALEVI.




O Soul, With Storms Beset!


        O soul, with storms beset!
        Thy griefs and cares forget.
        Why dread earth’s transient woe,
    When soon thy body in the grave unseen
        Shall be laid low,
    And all will be forgotten then, as though
        It had not been?

        Wherefore, my soul, be still!
        Adore God’s holy will,
        Fear death’s supreme decree.
    Thus mayst thou save thyself, and win high aid
        To profit thee,
    When thou, returning to thy Lord, shalt see
        Thy deeds repaid.

        Why muse, O troubled soul,
        O’er life’s poor earthly goal?
        When thou hast fled, the clay
    Lies mute, nor bear’st thou aught of wealth, or might
        With thee that day,
    But, like a bird, unto thy nest away,
        Thou wilt take flight.

        Why for a land lament
        In which a lifetime spent
        Is as a hurried breath?
    Where splendor turns to gloom, and honors show
        A faded wreath,
    Where health and healing soon must sink beneath
        The fatal bow?

        What seemeth good and fair
        Is often falsehood there.
        Gold melts like shifting sands,
    Thy hoarded riches pass to other men
        And strangers’ hands,
    And what will all thy treasured wealth and lands
        Avail thee then?

        Life is a vine, whose crown
        The reaper Death cuts down.
        His ever-watchful eyes
    Mark every step until night’s shadows fall,
        And swiftly flies
    The passing day, and ah! how distant lies
        The goal of all.

        Therefore, rebellious soul,
        Thy base desires control;
        With scantly given bread
    Content thyself, nor let thy memory stray
        To splendors fled,
    But call to mind affliction’s weight, and dread
        The judgment-day.

        Prostrate and humbled go,
        Like to the dove laid low,
        Remember evermore
    The peace of heaven, the Lord’s eternal rest.
        When burdened sore
    With sorrow’s load, at every step implore
        His succor blest.

        Before God’s mercy-seat
        His pardoning love entreat.
        Make pure thy thoughts from sin,
    And bring a contrite heart as sacrifice
        His grace to win—
    Then will His angels come and lead thee in
        To Paradise.

    SOLOMON IBN GEBIROL.




Sanctification


    The sixfold wingèd angels cry
    To Him, Who hates iniquity:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy art Thou!

    The mighty ones of earth do call
    To Him, Who has created all:
      Blessed art Thou, O Lord!
          Blessed art Thou!

    They, who in radiance shine, proclaim
    Of Him, Who wrought them out of flame:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy art Thou!

    Those doubly tried by flood and fire
    United chant in frequent choir:
      Blessed art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy and blest!

    Pure spheres celestial echoing round,
    With voice of sweetest song resound:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy art Thou!

    All those redeemèd not by gold,
    Repeat in faith and joy untold:
      Blessed art Thou, O Lord!
          Blessed art Thou!

    They who pass swiftly to and fro
    Make answer, as they come and go:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy art Thou!

    Who seek His law, and testify
    That there is none beside Him, cry:
      Blessed art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy and blest!

    The hosts of radiant seraphs call
    To Him, most glorious of them all:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy art Thou!

    The sons of mighty men declare
    His majesty beyond compare:
      Blessed art Thou, O Lord!
          Blessed art Thou!

    All they who glorify His name,
    With every morn anew proclaim:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy art Thou!

    Israel, His people, ceaselessly
    Cry as they bend and bow the knee:
      Blessed art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy and blest.

    Those shining as a crystal spring,
    Chant in the presence of their King:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy art Thou!

    The stranger’s children evermore
    The mighty Lord of lords adore.
      Blessed art Thou, O Lord!
          Blessed art Thou!

    Those who of fire are fashioned, crowd
    On crowd unnumbered, chant aloud:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy art Thou!

    They cry, whom He has freed from thrall,
    And His inheritance does call:
      Blessed art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy and blest.

    Pure visions, bathed in endless light,
    Declare ’midst radiance infinite:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy art Thou!

    Who to the covenant adhere,
    The remnant saved, cry loud and clear:
      Blessed art Thou, O Lord!
          Blessed art Thou!

    ’Neath folded wings, in cadence meet,
    The glorious ones each hour repeat:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy art Thou!

    She, who among the nations dwells,
    Chosen, apart, His glory tells:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy and blest!

    The high exalted ones make known
    Of Him, Who fills the heavenly throne:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy art Thou!

    They who their God each day proclaim
    “Awful in deeds,” exalt His name:
      Blessed art Thou, O Lord!
          Blessed art Thou!

    Those who are awe-inspiring say
    Of Him more awful far than they:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy art Thou!

    To all creation’s King of kings,
    From earth, from heaven, responsive rings:
      Holy art Thou, O Lord!
          Holy and blest!

    JOSEPH IBN ABITUR.




Hymn Of Praise


    O God of earth and heaven,
      Spirit and flesh are Thine!
    Thou hast in wisdom given
      Man’s inward light divine,
    And unto him Thy grace accords
      The gift of spoken words.
    The world was fashioned by Thy will,
    Nor didst Thou toil at it, for still
    Thy breath did Thy design fulfil.

    My times are in Thy hand,
      Thou knowest what is best,
    And where I fear to stand
      Thy strength brings succor blest.
    Thy loving-kindness, as within
      A mantle, hides my sin.
    Thy mercies are my sure defence,
    And for Thy bounteous providence
    Thou dost demand no recompense.

    For all the sons of men
      Thou hast a book prepared,
    Where, without hand or pen,
      Their deeds are all declared:
    Yet for the pure in heart shall be
      A pardon found with Thee.
    The life and soul Thou didst create
    Thou hast redeemed from evil strait,
    Thou hast not left me desolate.

    The heavens Thou badest be,
      Thy bright, celestial throne,
    Are witnesses to Thee,
      O Thou the Lord alone.
    One, indivisible, Thy name
      Upholds creation’s frame.
    Thou madest all—the depth, the height,
    Thou rulest all in power and might,
    Supreme, eternal, infinite!

    ABRAHAM IBN EZRA.




Passover Hymn


    When as a wall the sea
      In heaps uplifted lay,
    A new song unto Thee
      Sang the redeemed that day.

    Thou didst in his deceit
      O’erwhelm the Egyptian’s feet,
    While Israel’s footsteps fleet
      How beautiful were they!

    Jeshurun! all who see
      Thy glory cry to thee:
    “Who like thy God can be?”
      Thus even our foes did say.

    Oh! let thy banner soar
      The scattered remnant o’er,
    And gather them once more
      Like corn on harvest-day.

    Who bear through all their line
      Thy covenant’s holy sign,
    And to Thy name divine
      Are sanctified alway.

    Let all the world behold
      Their token, prized of old,
    Who on their garment’s fold
      The thread of blue display.

    Be then the truth made known
      For whom, and whom alone,
    The twisted fringe is shown,
      The covenant kept this day.

    Oh! let them, sanctified,
      Once more with Thee abide,
    Their sun shine far and wide,
      And chase the clouds away.

    The well-beloved declare
      Thy praise in song and prayer:
    “Who can with Thee compare,
      O Lord of Hosts?” they say.

    When as a wall the sea
      In heaps uplifted lay,
    A new song unto Thee
      Sang the redeemed that day.

    JEHUDA HALEVI.




Morning Prayer


    O Lord! my life was known to Thee
    Ere Thou hadst caused me yet to be,
    Thy Spirit ever dwells in me.

    Could I, cast down by Thee, have gained
    A standing place, or, if restrained
    By Thee, go forth with feet unchained?

    Hear me, Almighty, while I pray,
    My thoughts are in Thy hand alway,
    Be to my helplessness a stay!

    Oh! may this hour Thy favor yield,
    And may I tread life’s battle-field
    Encompassed by Thy mercy’s shield.

    Wake me at dawn Thy name to bless,
    And in Thy sanctuary’s recess
    To praise and laud Thy holiness.

    JEHUDA HALEVI.




Judgment And Mercy


    By the faithful of His children in their conclaves
      Shall His name be sanctified,
    Awe-inspiring are the praises of His angels,
    And the voices in His temple spread His glory
              Far and wide.

    Those who keep His law shall yet again be gathered
      To the stronghold of His might,
    Those who fear Him commune, praying, with each other—
    He will hear and in the book of their memorial
              He will write.

    Let your deeds be fair and righteous—then unbroken
      He the covenant will hold.
    He who maketh bright the heavens, He will heed you
    And will count your prayers more precious than the off’rings
              Brought of old.

    May the tribes of those who worship and proclaim Him
      Be uplifted as of yore,
    When He pruneth, may He cut the straggling branches,
    For to Him belong the sov’reignty and kingdom
              Evermore.

    May He lead us once again unto the mountain
      Of His sanctuary’s shrine,
    There to glorify Him ever in His temple,
    For our God will not forget His word, the holy
              And divine.

    At His name shall heaven and earth break forth in praises
      With a joy that shall not cease,
    And the woods shall shout and clap their hands in gladness,
    For the Lord our God has visited His people,
              Bringing peace.

    From each band of angels mighty in their splendor,
      From each shining, circling star,
    Hymns and praises evermore declare His glory,
    Saying, “Praise Him with the sound of joyful trumpets,
              The Shophar!”

    All the creatures of the universe together,
      Heaven above and earth below,
    Shall proclaim, “The Lord in all His works is mighty,
    He is king o’er all the earth, and His salvation
              All shall know.”

    ANON.




Grace After Meals


    Our Rock with loving care,
      According to His word,
    Bids all His bounty share,
      Then let us bless the Lord.

    His flock our Shepherd feeds
    With graciousness divine,
    He satisfies our needs
    With gifts of bread and wine.
    Therefore with one accord
    We will His name adore,
    Proclaiming evermore
    None holy as the Lord.
          Our Rock, etc.

    The land desired so long,
    Our fathers’ heritage,
    Inspires our grateful song
    To God from age to age;
    His bounteous gifts afford
    Us sustenance each day,
    His mercy is our stay,
    For faithful is the Lord.
          Our Rock, etc.

    Oh! be Thy mercy moved,
    Our Rock, to dwell with us,
    With Zion, Thy beloved,
    Our temple glorious.
    May we, redeemed, restored,
    Be led there every one,
    By David’s holy son,
    The anointed of the Lord.
          Our Rock, etc.

    Thy city fill once more,
    Thy temple-walls upraise,
    There will we Thee adore
    With joyful songs of praise,
    Thee, merciful, adored,
    We bless and sanctify,
    With wine-cups filled up high,
    By blessings of the Lord.
          Our Rock, etc.

    ANON.




Lord Of The Universe


    Lord of the universe, Who reigned
      Ere earth and heaven’s fashioning,
    When to create the world He deigned,
      Then was His name proclaimed King.

    And at the end of days shall He,
      The Dreaded One, still reign alone,
    Who was, Who is, and still will be
      Unchanged upon His glorious throne.

    And He is one, His powers transcend,
      Supreme, unfathomed, depth and height,
    Without beginning, without end,
      His are dominion, power, and might.

    My God and my Redeemer He,
      My rock in sorrow’s darkest day,
    A help and refuge unto me,
      My cup’s full portion, when I pray.

    My soul into His hand divine
      Do I commend: I will not fear,
    My body with it I resign,
      I dread no evil: God is near.

    ANON.




Hymn For The Conclusion Of The Sabbath


    May He Who sets the holy and profane
    Apart, blot out our sins before His sight,
    And make our numbers as the sand again,
      And as the stars of night.

    The day declineth like the palm-tree’s shade,
    I call on God, Who leadeth me aright,
    The morning cometh—thus the watchman said—
      Although it now be night.

    Thy righteousness is like Mount Tabor vast,
    Oh! let my sins be wholly put to flight,
    Be they as yesterday, forever past,
      And as a watch at night.

    The peaceful season of my prayers is o’er,
    Would that again had rest my soul contrite,
    Weary am I of groaning evermore,
      I melt in tears each night.

    Hear Thou my voice: be it not vainly sped,
    Open to me the gates of lofty height,
    For with the evening dew is filled my head,
      My locks with drops of night.

    Oh! grant me Thy redemption, while I pray,
    Be Thou entreated, Lord of power and might,
    In twilight, in the evening of the day,
      Yea, in the gloom of night.

    Save me, O Lord my God! I call on Thee:
    Make me to know the path of life aright,
    From sore and wasting sickness snatch Thou me,
      Lead me from day to night.

    We are like clay within Thy hand, O Lord!
    Forgive us all our sins, both grave and light,
    And day shall unto day pour forth the word
      And night declare to night.

    May He Who sets the holy and profane
    Apart, blot out our sins before His sight,
    And make our numbers as the sand again,
      And as the stars of night.

    ANON.




God And Man


    O Lord! I will declare
    Thy holy name, Thy glories past compare:
    My tongue shall not conceal, O Lord!
    Thy righteousness made known to me:
    I heard and I believed Thy word,
    I will not ask presumptuously.
    For should the vase of clay
    “What doest thou?” unto its maker say?
    Him have I sought and known,
    A rock of strength, a tower of might,
    Resplendent as the glorious light,
    Without or veil or covering, radiant shown:
    Exalted, magnified,
              Extolled and glorified.

    The heavens from hour to hour
    Declare Thy wondrous works, proclaim Thy power
    Sunrise and sunset, still the same,
    Prostrate in awe eternally.
    The angels pass through flood and flame
    As unto Thee they testify;
    Thy praise they celebrate,
    O Thou, the fruit of lips who dost create.
    For Thou uphold’st alone,
    Unwearied and invisible,
    The depths, the heights, where move and dwell
    The living creatures and the heavenly throne:
    Exalted, magnified,
              Extolled and glorified.

    Who has the glory praised
    Fitly of Him, Whose word the heavens upraised?
    The Eternal One, Who dwells concealed
    In His exalted heights, but yet
    In Zion’s temple, full revealed,
    Did erst His glorious presence set,
    And He showed visions then
    To cause His image to be seen of men;
    Yet past all measuring
    His wisdom is, past depth and height
    He flashes on His prophet’s sight
    In visions only as the heavenly king:
    Exalted, magnified,
              Extolled and glorified.

    His power, exceeding great,
    Is without end: who can His praise narrate?
    Happy the man, who testifies
    Unto His greatness manifold,
    Whose faith in God unshaken lies,
    In God, whose arms the world uphold,
    Who, fearing God, can trust
    In Him, acknowledging His deeds are just,
    That for himself has He
    Made all His works, His creatures all,
    And that His awful day will call
    All men, the judgment of their deeds to see:
    Exalted, magnified,
              Extolled and glorified.

    Do thou then heed and learn,
    Prepare thyself thy nature to discern.
    See whence thou comest, what thou art,
    And who created thee and taught
    Thee knowledge, and in every part
    Of thee the power of motion wrought.
    Mark then God’s might untold,
    And rouse thyself His wonders to behold.
    But to Himself concealed
    Dare not to stretch thy hand, for then
    Thou seekest, with presumptuous ken,
    The first and last, the hidden and revealed:
    Exalted, magnified,
              Extolled and glorified.

    JEHUDA HALEVI.




Hymn For Tabernacles


    Thy praise, O Lord! will I proclaim
    In hymns unto Thy glorious name.
    O thou Redeemer, Lord and King,
    Redemption to Thy faithful bring!
    Before Thine altar they rejoice
    With branch of palm and myrtle stem,
    To Thee they raise the prayful voice—
    Have mercy, save and prosper them.

    Mayst Thou, in mercy manifold,
    Dear unto Thee Thy people hold,
    When at Thy gate they bend the knee,
    And worship and acknowledge Thee.
    Do Thou their heart’s desire fulfil,
    Rejoice with them in love this day,
    Forgive their sins and thoughts of ill,
    And their transgressions cast away.

    They overflow with prayer and praise
    To Him, Who knows the future days.
    Have mercy Thou, and hear the prayer
    Of those who palms and myrtles bear.
    Thee day and night they sanctify,
    And in perpetual song adore;
    Like to the heavenly hosts they cry:
    “Blessed art Thou for evermore.”

    ELEAZAR B. JACOB KALIR.




Hymn For Pentecost


    When Thou didst descend upon Sinai’s mountain,
    It trembled and shook ’neath Thy mighty hand,
    And the rocks were moved by Thy power and splendor;
    How then can my spirit before Thee stand
    On the day when darkness o’erspread the heavens,
    And the sun was hidden at Thy command?
    The angels of God for Thy great name’s worship,
    Are ranged before Thee, a shining band,
    And the children of men are waiting ever
    Thy mercies unnumbered as grains of sand;
    The law they received from the mouth of Thy glory,
    They learn and consider and understand.
    Oh! accept Thou their song and rejoice in their gladness,
    Who proclaim Thy glory in every land.

    JEHUDA HALEVI.




Hymn Of Glory


    Sweet hymns and songs will I indite
    To sing of Thee by day and night,
    Of Thee, Who art my soul’s delight.

    How doth my soul within me yearn
    Beneath Thy shadow to return,
    Thy secret mysteries to learn.

    And even while yet Thy glory fires
    My words, and hymns of praise inspires,
    Thy love it is my heart desires.

    Therefore I will of Thee relate
    All glorious things, and celebrate
    In songs of love Thy name most great.

    Thy glory shall my discourse be,
    In images I picture Thee,
    Although Thyself I cannot see.

    In mystic utterances alone,
    By prophet and by seer made known,
    Hast Thou Thy radiant glory shown.

    Thy might and greatness they portrayed,
    According to the power displayed
    In all the works Thy hand has made.

    In images of Thee they told
    Of Thy great wonders wrought of old,
    Thy essence they could not behold.

    In signs and visions seen of yore
    They pictured Thee in ancient lore,
    But Thou art One for evermore.

    They saw in Thee both youth and age,
    The man of war, the hoary sage,
    But ever Israel’s heritage.

    O Thou Whose word is truth alway
    Thy people seek Thy face this day,
    Oh! be Thou near them when they pray.

    May these, my songs and musings, be
    Acceptable, O Lord, to Thee,
    And do Thou hear them graciously.

    Oh! let my praises, heavenward sped,
    Be as a crown unto Thy head,
    My prayer as incense offered.

    Oh! may my words of blessing rise
    To Thee, Who, throned above the skies,
    Art just and mighty, great and wise.

    And when Thy glory I declare,
    Do Thou incline Thee to my prayer,
    As though sweet spice my offering were.

    My meditation day and night
    May it be pleasant in Thy sight,
    For Thou art all my soul’s delight.




Hymn Of Unity For The Seven Days Of The Week(880)


    I

    Eternal King, the heavens and earth are Thine,
    Thine are the seas and every living thing.
    Thy hand upholds creation’s vast design,
              Eternal King!

    The mighty waters with Thy glory ring,
    Unnumbered lands to chant Thy praise combine,
    And Kings of earth to Thee their worship bring.

    Thy people Israel, for Thy love benign,
    Blesses Thy name and joys Thy praise to sing.
    Thou art the God of truth, the one, divine,
              Eternal King!

    II

    I worship Thee for all Thy boundless store
    Of righteousness and mercy shown to me,
    And for Thy holy book of sacred lore
              I worship Thee.

    To Thee alone our fathers bent the knee,
    And Thee alone do we this day adore,
    Bearing our witness to Thy unity.

    Thou art our God, Thy favor we implore,
    Thou art our shepherd, and Thy flock are we.
    Therefore I bless Thy name and evermore
              I worship Thee.

    III

    I know it well: Thou art all-good, all-wise.
    Thou slayest, but Thy touch death’s power can quell;
    Thou woundest, but Thy hand the balm supplies:
              I know it well.

    Nor sin nor grief can in Thy presence dwell,
    Slumber and sleep come not unto Thine eyes,
    Great God, eternal and unchangeable!

    The soul of all mankind before Thee lies;
    Thou searchest all their hearts, their thoughts canst tell;
    Thou hearest graciously their prayerful cries:
              I know it well.

    IV

    We will extol the Lord of lords, whose name
    Is evermore and everywhere adored.
    In songs and hymns our lips His praise shall frame,
              We will extol the Lord!

    He is the hope of Israel, His word
    A lamp unto our feet, a guiding flame
    To those who trust in Him with full accord.

    He is through countless ages still the same,
    The shield of our salvation and our sword,
    And generations, each to each, proclaim:
              We will extol the Lord!

    V

    Who shall narrate Thy wonders wrought of old?
    The utterance of the lips Thou didst create,
    But all Thy majesty and power untold
              Who shall narrate?

    Thy ways on earth in song we celebrate.
    Though none may Thy similitude behold,
    Yet know we by Thy works that Thou are great.

    Thousands of angels, by Thy word controlled,
    To do Thy bidding Thy commands await:
    Yet of them all, Thy wonders manifold
              Who shall narrate?

    VI

    Alone didst Thou, O Lord, the heaven’s wide tent
    Uprear, and bid the earth beneath be shown;
    Thy word the oceans in their boundaries pent
              Alone.

    No aid or counsel hadst Thou save Thine own
    When Thou with lights didst hang the firmament
    And call the hosts celestial round Thy throne.

    Thy works, in universal cadence blent,
    Give praise to Thee, and make Thy glory known.
    Thou madest all, great God beneficent,
              Alone!

    VII

    Of old Thou didst the Sabbath bless and praise,
    Because thereon Thou didst Thy work behold
    Completed in the sun’s new-kindled rays
              Of old.

    Bless Thou, this day, with mercies manifold
    Thy people, that in love and awe obeys
    Thy word, and chants Thy righteousness untold.

    Lord, we desire to do Thy will always!
    Make pure our hearts like thrice-refinèd gold,
    And these, our prayers, accept as in the days
              Of old.

    ANON.




Penitential Prayer


    Forth flies my soul, upborne by hope untiring,
    The land of rest, the spring of life desiring,
    Unto the heavenly dwelling-place aspiring,
      To seek its peace by day and night.

    My spirit does God’s majesty adore,
    And without wings shall to His presence soar,
    There to behold His glory evermore,
      At dawn, at noonday, and at night.

    On all His works mine eye in wonder gazes,
    And heavenward an eager look upraises;
    Day unto day proclaims its Maker’s praises,
      And night declares them unto night.

    Thy loving-kindness is my lifelong guide,
    But often from Thy path I’ve turned aside.
    O Lord, how hast Thou searched my heart and tried
      My inmost thoughts at dead of night!

    Sleepless upon my bed the hours I number,
    And, rising, seek the house of God, while slumber
    Lies heavy on men’s eyes, and dreams encumber
      Their souls in visions of the night.

    In sin and folly passed my early years,
    Wherefore I am ashamed, and life’s arrears
    Now strive to pay, the while my bitter tears
      Have been my food by day and night.

    Pent in the body’s cage, pure child of heaven,
    Bethink thee, life but as a bridge is given.
    Awake, arise, to praise God gladly, even
      In the first hours of the night.

    Haste then, pure heart, to break sin’s deadly sway,
    And seek the path of righteousness alway;
    For all our years are but as yesterday—
      Soon past, and as a watch at night.

    Short is man’s life, and full of care and sorrow,
    This way and that he turns some ease to borrow,
    Like to a flower he blooms, and on the morrow
      Is gone—a vision of the night.

    How does the weight of sin my soul oppress!
    Because God’s law too often I transgress;
    I mourn and sigh: with tears of bitterness
      My bed I water all the night.

    I rise at dawn and still the salt stream flows,
    My heart’s blood would I shed to find repose;
    But when my soul is downcast with my woes,
      I will recall my prayer at night.

    My youth wanes like a shadow that is cast,
    Swifter than eagles’ wings my years fly fast,
    And I remember not my gladness past,
      Either by day or yet by night.

    Proclaim we then a fast, a holy day,
    Make pure our hearts from sin, God’s will obey,
    And unto Him, with humble spirits, pray
      Unceasingly, by day and night.

    May we yet hear His words: “Thou art my own,
    My grace is thine, the shelter of My throne,
    For I am thy Redeemer, I alone!
      Endure but patiently this night.”

    MOSES IBN EZRA.




The Living God We Praise


    The living God we praise, exalt, adore!
    He was, He is, He will be evermore.

    No unity like unto His can be,
    Eternal, inconceivable, is He.

    No form or shape has th’ Incorporeal One,
    Most holy beyond all comparison.

    He was, ere aught was made in heaven or earth,
    But His existence has no date or birth.

    Lord of the Universe is He proclaimed,
    Teaching His power to all His hand has framed.

    He gave His gift of prophecy to those
    In whom He gloried, whom He loved and chose.

    No prophet ever yet has filled the place
    Of Moses, who beheld God face to face.

    Through him (the faithful in his house) the Lord
    The law of truth to Israel did accord.

    This law God will not alter, will not change
    For any other through time’s utmost range.

    He knows and heeds the secret thoughts of man,
    He saw the end of all ere aught began.

    With love and grace doth He the righteous bless,
    He metes out evil unto wickedness.

    He at the last will His anointed send,
    Those to redeem, who hope and wait the end.

    God will the dead to life again restore,
    Praised be His glorious name for evermore.

    ANON.






FOOTNOTES


    1 Exod. xxiv. 12.

    2 So named from its situation at the mouth (“Pum”) of the Bedaitha, a
      canal between the Tigris and the Euphrates.

    3 The Cherem was most fearful. The excommunicate was cursed with the
      curse of Joshua against Jericho, and the curse of Elisha against
      those that mocked him, and the curse of fiends of deadly power: “Let
      nothing good come out of him, let his end be sudden, let all
      creatures become his enemy, let the whirlwind crush him, the fever
      and every other malady, and the edge of the sword smite him; let his
      death be unforeseen and drive him into outer darkness,” etc. There
      were three degrees of excommunication. The first was “the casting
      out of the synagogue.” The second “the delivering over to Satan.”
      And the third was the anathema proclaimed by priests with the
      sounding of trumpets.

    4 Some think he died twelve years B.C.

    5 The Jews say that the Holy Spirit spake to the Israelites during the
      Tabernacle by Urim and Thummim, and under the first Temple by the
      Prophets, and under the second by Bath Kol. The Bath Kol, which
      signifies “daughter voice” or “daughter of a voice,” was a kind of
      divine intimation, which was as inferior to the oracular voice
      proceeding from the Mercy Seat as a daughter is supposed to be
      inferior to her mother. It was said to be preceded by a clap of
      thunder. This, however, was not always the case. The Talmud relates
      that “Rabbis Jochanan and Simeon ben Lachish wished to see the face
      of Rabbi Samuel, a Babylon Rabbi. ‘Let us follow,’ said they, ‘the
      hearing of Bath Kol.’ They journeyed near a school, and as they were
      passing it they heard a boy reading from the book of Samuel the
      words, ‘And Samuel died.’ Observing this, they concluded that their
      friend was dead. And it so happened that news was soon brought to
      them that Rabbi Samuel of Babylon had died.” The Bath Kol seems to
      have been a sort of divination practised with the words of
      Scripture, like the Sortes Virgilianæ among the heathen.

    6 The Rabbis make two changes in this verse—they change “kings” into
      “angels,” and “fled” into “led.”

    7 The expression “they” is often used in the phraseology of the Talmud
      to denote either certain officials or else the sages and men of
      authority. The exact reference can only be gathered from the
      context. So again with the use of “he.” In such cases the expression
      “he” generally refers to the decision on a particular occasion.

    8 “Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord,” etc. (Deut. vi. 4-9,
      xi. 13-21; Num. xv. 37-41). Evening prayer might be said after 12.30
      P.M. (Acts x. 9.) It is abundantly evident from the Zohar that the
      ancient Jews understood that in the Shemah there was a confession of
      the doctrine of the Trinity in unity—three Persons in One God.
      “Hear, O Israel: Jehovah our God is one Jehovah. By the first name
      in this sentence, Jehovah, is signified God the Father, the Head of
      all things. By the next words, our God, is signified God the Son,
      the fountain of all knowledge; and by the second Jehovah, is
      signified God the Holy Ghost, proceeding of them both; to all which
      is added the word One, to signify that these three are Indivisible.
      But this mystery shall not be revealed until the coming of Messiah.”
      The Zohar gives also an imperfect illustration of this great Truth,
      by saying that the Trinity in unity is like “the human voice, which
      is composed of three elements—warmth, air, and vapor.”

    9 Priests who were legally unclean. (Lev. xxii. 7.)

   10 The Mishna begins the night at 6 P.M., and divides it into three
      watches of four hours each.

   11 The Mishna begins the day at 6 A.M. The third hour is 9 A.M.

   12 Deut. vi. 7.

   13 Ibid.

   14 A long blessing begins and ends with “Blessed art Thou, O Lord”; a
      short blessing only ends with these words.

   15 Deut. xvi. 3.

   16 Deut. xi. 13-21.

   17 Num. xv. 37-41.

   18 Because in Jer. x. 10 it is written, “But the Lord is the true God,”
      etc.

   19 Deut. xi. 19.

   20 Because it says, “that ye may look upon it,” _i.e._, the fringe.
      Num. xv. 39.

   21 When the expressions “free” or “not free” are used, they refer to
      the decisions of the Levitical Law. So also is it with the
      expressions “clean” or “unclean.”

_   22 I.e._, the eighteen blessings called “Amidah.”

   23 Phylacteries consist of texts of Scripture (Exod. xiii. 2-10, 11-17;
      Deut. vi. 4-9, 13-22) written on parchment and inclosed in a leather
      box. They are bound by thongs round the left arm and forehead.

   24 Lev. xv. 16.

   25 Or transgression.

   26 Called Musaph.

   27 Prayer called “Habdelah.”

   28 Called “Chonen hada’ath.”

   29 As if there were two gods.

   30 Mentioned Deut. viii. 8. The Jews make a distinction between
      Biccurim, the fruits of the soil in their natural state, and
      Therumoth, the fruits in a prepared state, such as oil, flour, and
      wine. The first fruits were always brought to Jerusalem with great
      pomp and display. The Talmud says that all the cities which were of
      the same course of priests gathered together into one of the cities
      which was a priestly station, and they lodged in the streets. In the
      morning he who was chief among them said, “Arise, let us go up to
      Zion to the House of the Lord our God.” An ox went before them with
      gilded horns, and an olive crown was on his head. This ox was
      intended for a peace offering to be eaten by the priests in the
      court of the sanctuary. The pipe played before the procession until
      it approached Jerusalem. When they drew near to the holy city, the
      first fruits were “crowned” and exposed to view with great
      ostentation. Then the chief men and the high officers and the
      treasurers of the temple came out to meet them and receive them with
      honor. And all the workmen in Jerusalem rose up in their shops, and
      thus they saluted them: “O our brethren, inhabitants of such a city,
      ye are welcome.” The pipe played before them till they came to the
      Temple Mount. Everyone, even King Agrippa himself, took his basket
      upon his shoulder, and went forward till he came to the court. Then
      the Levites sang, “I will exalt thee, O Lord, because thou hast
      lifted me up, and hast not made my foes to rejoice over me.” (Ps.
      xxx. 1). While the basket is still on his shoulder, he says, “I
      profess this day to the Lord my God.” And when he repeats the
      passage, “A Syrian ready to perish was my father” (Deut. xxvi. 3-5),
      he casts the basket down from his shoulder, and keeps silent while
      the priest waves it hither and thither at the southwest corner of
      the altar. The whole passage of Scripture being then recited as far
      as the tenth verse, he places the basket before the altar—he
      worships—and goes out. The baskets of the rich were of gold or
      silver. The baskets of the poor were of peeled willow. These latter,
      together with their contents, were presented to the priests in
      service. The more valuable baskets were returned to their owners.
      They used to hang turtle doves and young pigeons round their
      baskets, which were adorned with flowers. These were sacrificed for
      burnt offerings. The parties who brought the first fruits were
      obliged to lodge in Jerusalem all the night after they brought them,
      and the next morning they were allowed to return home. The first
      fruits were forbidden to be offered before the feast of Pentecost,
      and after the feast of Dedication.

   31 Ps. lxviii. 26.

   32 Lest it be a blessing used on Mount Gerizim.

   33 Deut. vi. 5.

   34 Ruth ii. 4.

   35 Judges vi. 12.

   36 Prov. xxiii. 22.

   37 Psalm cxix. 126.

   38 It has been a subject of dispute when the Sabbatical year
      began—whether in Nisan or Tishri. The weight of evidence is,
      however, in favor of the civil New Year’s Day, which fell in Tishri
      (September).

   39 An Italian mina perhaps; a denarius. If so, the heap would be worth
      about £1 17s. 6d.

   40 Exod. xxxiv. 21.

   41 Lev. xxiii. 10. The omer or “wave sheaf” at the Passover, and the
      two wave loaves, at Pentecost, were to be made from grain grown in
      the field during the Sabbatical year. It was also allowed to till
      sufficient land to pay taxes.

   42 Lev. xix. 23-25.

   43 Grain or corn field.

   44 With a pointed instrument covered with oil.

   45 Linseed.

   46 Rain-field means a field irrigated with rain water.

   47 Some suppose the meaning to be, the permission to sprinkle with
      water a “white” or corn field in which the gourds are growing.

   48 The word translated “fertility” means literally “sweetness.” Some
      apply these words to the dung out of which the moisture has “dried
      out,” and it is then only reckoned as earth. Others apply them to
      the ground which has lost its fertility (sweetness) for want of rain
      (Job xxi. 33). The meaning is that no advantage must be gained from
      it in the approaching Sabbatical year.

   49 About thirty-six and one-half gallons.

_   50 I.e._, Stones lying on the top of other stones.

   51 The removal of stones “touching” the earth might loosen it, and
      become a kind of cultivation.

_   52 I.e._, From the outside of the boundary wall, as in like manner his
      ears of corn might be plucked. An answer to envious remarks that he
      was preparing for cultivation (Jer. Tal.).

   53 Twice ploughed implies the payment of tribute when the land was
      under foreign rule. Its cultivation was allowed for this purpose
      during the Sabbatical year. So long as a foe could be resisted, it
      was not cultivated (1 Mac. vi. 49).

   54 Jer. xxix. 7.

   55 A log held the contents of six eggshells.

   56 A seah held about the third of a bushel.

   57 Literally, “daughters of the pit.” “Adam’s apples,” (Jer. Tal.).
      Supposed to be the fruit which tempted Eve. The decision in the text
      assumes that the trees began to bud in the Sabbatical year, and that
      the fruit would not be ripe for three years.

   58 Twelve cabs.

   59 To prevent their growth.

   60 “Puah, for dyeing red”(?).

   61 This permission has reference to certain laws with regard to legal
      cleanness.

   62 Achzib; Ecdippa, near Acca.

   63 Some consider this to be the Abana: others read Amnum, and try to
      identify it with Mount Hor.

   64 Rabbi Judah the Holy, called only Rabbi by way of eminence.

_   65 I.e._, Defiled oil of the heave-offering, etc.

_   66 I.e._, They become common property, and are to be depastured by
      cattle (Lev. xxv. 7).

   67 Perhaps “the star of Bethlehem.”

   68 A spiral grass growing on the palm tree(?).

   69 Arabic, Fûstûk. Pistachio nuts.

   70 See Chap. ix. 6.

   71 This refers to the examples already given of a rose in oil, or
      locust fruit in wine.

   72 Aisar, a coin worth 3-1/10 farthings.

   73 Pundion, a coin worth 1-1/2d.

   74 Of the fruits of the Sabbatical year.

   75 Of the fruits of the Sabbatical year.

   76 Of the fruits of the Sabbatical year.

   77 Of the fruits of the Sabbatical year.

   78 There are various Rabbis of this name, spelled in different ways,
      mentioned in the Talmud.

   79 The king’s mountain is perhaps Mount Ephraim, or the mountain range
      over the plain of Sharon. It is also suggested that it might have
      been the mountains round Kirjathjearim (Abu Goosh?). It contained
      Cephar Bish, Cephar Sheclaim, Cephar Dikraia, etc.

   80 Others read “and the decision is as his word.”

   81 The second or the “latter” rain (Joel ii. 23), called Malkosh, falls
      in spring chiefly during the months of March and April.

   82 Lev. xxiii. 22; Deut. xxiv. 19.

   83 Deut. xv. 1.

   84 This decision supposes the case of the month Elul having thirty
      days, and the last day to be in the Sabbatical year; consequently it
      would not be one of the two feast days of the new year, which it
      should have been if the month had been the usual lunar month.

   85 “The defence,” called Pruzbul, was a legal document constituted to
      encourage loans to the poor, and to protect the interests of the
      lender.

   86 Deut. xv. 9.

   87 Deut. xv. 2.

   88 Deut. xix. 4.

_   89 I.e._, They are well pleased with him.

   90 Money owing to Jewish proselytes was generally repaid, but it was
      not obligatory to pay it to their heirs, as the persons from whom
      the proselytes came were no longer in a religious sense their next
      of kin.

   91 From private to public property.

   92 Of death.

   93 On Friday evening.

   94 Deut. vi. 4.

   95 On Friday evening.

   96 Though by their weight they continue to press out oil or wine on the
      Sabbath.

   97 When the eve of the passover and the eve of the Sabbath coincided.

   98 In the temple. See tract on Measurements, c. 1.

   99 Num. xix. 18.

  100 Num. xv. 20.

_  101 I.e._, Have you so joined houses that are apart that they may be
      counted as one on the Sabbath for carrying articles, etc. It is done
      by persons blessing a piece of dough which is common property.

  102 When three stars are seen, it is dark.

  103 As that would involve “labor.”

  104 The point to be decided is the difference between what is necessary
      and what is a burden.

  105 Others think “Lybian” asses.

  106 Through fear of linen and woollen being mixed. Deut. xxii. 11.

  107 Ladder-shaped piece of wood to prevent it rubbing its throat if it
      have a sore.

  108 Wood discovered by one John, which when put into sheep’s nostrils,
      caused them to sneeze and the maggots to fall off.

  109 To prevent her being sucked by reptiles.

  110 The Gemara says, the cow was his neighbor’s, but as he did not
      object, the blame was laid on him.

  111 Once a number of Jews took refuge in a cave, and hearing some
      persons pass, whom they supposed to be enemies, they fell on each
      other with their hobnailed sandals, and beat each other to death.

  112 Isaiah xi. 4; Micah iv. 3.

  113 These anklets were a kind of chain used to prevent members of
      certain families in Jerusalem taking too wide strides in walking.

  114 To cure toothache.

  115 Others translate “masks.”

  116 To cure ear-ache.

  117 To cure one who did not sleep enough they used a tooth of a dead
      fox. For one who slept too much, they used a tooth of a living fox.

  118 To cure ague.

  119 Lev. xviii. 3.

  120 Works are divided into principal and secondary, or in Rabbinic
      language fathers and children. And if a man does one principal work
      and twenty secondary works, they regarded them as one sin, and
      consequently deserving one punishment.

_  121 I.e._, one part wine and three parts water.

_  122 E.g._, foul water.

  123 Henna dust for women’s eyes.

  124 Isaiah xxx. 14.

  125 Isaiah xxx. 14.

  126 Nisan nearly corresponds with the month of March.

_  127 I.e._, 11 o’clock A.M. To obtain our computation of time, six must
      be added to the hours mentioned in the Mishna.

  128 When uncleanness is mentioned, it is to be understood of legal
      uncleanness.

  129 Exod. xiii. 7.

_  130 I.e._, he is to be put to death forthwith.

  131 Fruit-sauce; a mixture of dates, raisins, and other fruits, to
      recall the memory of the mortar from which the bricks in Egypt were
      made.

  132 Fragments of chickens and dough left to ferment.

  133 A compound of barley, wild saffron, and salt, one-third of each.

  134 A dough or unripe grain lid put over the liquid to absorb the dregs
      from the foam of fermentation.

  135 Literally, “deaf”; that is, dough which does not rise, or that
      sounds dull when it is struck.

  136 Exod. xi. 19.

  137 An eminence from which there was a clear view of the temple.

  138 The burden means that the man is forbidden to work.

  139 See treatise on the Sabbatical year, ix. 5, etc.

  140 Lest the Gentiles should set them to work on the Sabbath.

  141 Part of July and August. The ninth of Ab is the anniversary of the
      threefold destruction of the Temple.

  142 Deut. vi. 4.

  143 Lev. xxiii. 15.

  144 Lev. xix. 9, 10.

  145 Because the poor might eat them untithed, thinking they were Peah.

  146 To show his abhorrence of his father’s idolatry.

  147 2 Kings xviii. 4.

  148 Lest the people should substitute medicine for God.

  149 2 Kings xviii. 16.

  150 2 Chron. xxxii. 4.

_  151 I.e._, 2.30 P.M.

  152 Exod. xii. 6.

  153 To prevent its coagulating.

  154 Exod. xxiii. 18.

  155 Josephus mentions the number of lambs slain at a particular passover
      to have been numbered by the high priest, and they were found to
      have been 256,500. Allowing not less than ten persons to the eating
      of each lamb, he computes those present at the feast to have been
      2,700,200 persons.—Josephus’ “Wars,” vi. 9, 3.

  156 Exod. xii. 6.

  157 Psalms cxiii.-cxviii.

  158 They washed the court indirectly by stopping a canal of water which
      overflowed the court; they afterward opened it, when all flowed off
      again.

  159 Taken from the intermingled blood of the many offerings.

  160 See “Measurements,” ii. 3.

  161 The following subtle discussion arises out of the distinction
      between “work” forbidden by the law of God and “resting from work”
      enjoined by tradition.

  162 The sprinkling of a person unclean from touching a dead body when
      the passover fell on a Sabbath.

  163 This refers to the second chagigah—the feast-offering of individuals
      on the 15th of Nisan. It is called by the general name passover,
      John xviii. 28. Want of acquaintance with this subject has led some
      commentators to suppose that there is a discrepancy between the
      account of the last passover of our Lord as related in the
      Synoptical Gospels, and as recorded by St. John.

  164 Jer. Tal. reads “sell.”

  165 Lev. xxiii. 11.

  166 Lev. xxiii. 17.

  167 Exod. xxv. 30.

  168 Lev. xxiii. 19.

  169 Num. xxviii. 15.

  170 Exod. xxviii. 36-38.

  171 1 Chron. xxix. 19.

  172 It remained uneaten overnight, and therefore must be burned, in
      accordance with Exod. xii. 10.

  173 From the need of a boiler it appears that the wine used at the
      passover was mixed with hot water. The wine itself was always red.

  174 If one observed the issue three times on the same day, he could not
      be considered clean before he brought a sacrifice.

  175 In which there is a dead body.

  176 The mourner might be too sorrowful to eat, the sick too ill to eat,
      and the prisoner might be detained in prison, etc.

  177 Numbers ix. 10.

  178 About fifteen miles from Jerusalem. Modiim or Modin was the city of
      the Maccabees.

  179 Psalms cxiii.-cxviii.

  180 Exod. xii. 3.

  181 The substitute refers to one animal changed for another, which had
      been intended for the passover-offering.

  182 The following rules are founded on two principles; firstly, that
      every lamb must have its own numbered company of eaters; and
      secondly, that no person could be numbered with two companies.

  183 It was after the first cup of wine was drunk that our Lord washed
      the disciples’ feet (John xiii. 5; Luke xxii. 17).

  184 Deut. xxvi. 5-11.

  185 Exod. xiii. 8.

  186 Psalm cxiii. 9.

  187 Psalm cxiv. 8.

  188 The third cup was called the “cup of blessing” (1 Cor. x. 16). It
      was the one used by our Lord for the institution of the holy
      sacrament.

  189 Psalm cxxxvi.

  190 They may have been overcome with wine (1 Cor. xi. 21).

  191 This is explained in the treatise “Hands.”

  192 Where the counsellors sat.

  193 Called Sagan (suffragan) (2 Kings xxv. 18; Jer. lii. 24).

  194 Lev. xvi. 6.

  195 As might occur from the frequent changes during the second Temple.

  196 That he would incense “within” the vail (Lev. xvi. 12, 13), in
      opposition to the Sadducees, who maintained that the incense should
      be burned “without.”

  197 That such an oath was necessary.

  198 Or the “index” finger; other trans. the “middle” finger.

  199 Or change thyself.

  200 Singing to him “Unless the Lord build the house, they labor but in
      vain that build it,” etc. (Psalm cxxvii.).

  201 The Jews think that the day of atonement was the day on which Adam
      sinned, on which Abraham was circumcised, and on which Moses offered
      atonement for the sin of the golden calf.

_  202 I.e._, cast lots, which was done by placing the priests in a row,
      and bidding them to hold up their fingers. After fixing on a certain
      number, the cap of one of them was taken off. With this priest the
      reckoning began, and proceeded till the prearranged number fell on
      some one of them; and his was the lot. Particular care was taken to
      count the fingers which were held up, and not to number their
      persons, as this was considered unlawful. (1 Chron. xxi. 1.)

  203 The third lot for burning incense was the most important. It was
      always done by a fresh man, so that a priest might burn incense only
      once during his lifetime. (Luke i. 9; Rev. viii. 3, 4.)

  204 Or, as you wish.

  205 The Gemara says it was so called because Parva, a magician, built
      this room and digged through from it to see the service of the High
      Priest on the day of atonement; or else because it was used for
      storing “bullock-hides.”

  206 Literally, between the evenings.

  207 The mina of the sanctuary was worth about £5 14s., consequently the
      morning dress cost about £68 8s.

  208 The zuz was worth about 6-1/2d., consequently the evening dress cost
      about £21 13s. 4d.

  209 Literally, “cover over”; _i.e._, “atone for.”

  210 King of Adiabene, a proselyte to Judaism about A.D. 45.

  211 The accused woman.

  212 See Treatise on “Measurements,” ii. 3, note.

  213 A. V. “Scapegoat,” or for the “devil.” Others translate “wholly put
      away” in reference to the sins of the people, or for “the hard
      mountain,” and others the “demon of dry places.” Some, however,
      think Azazel to be the fallen angel mentioned in the Book of Enoch,
      and identical with Sammael, the angel of death. Symmachus translates
      “the goat that departs.” Theodotion translates “the goat sent away.”
      Aquila, “the goat set free.” The LXX. and Josephus understand by the
      term “the averter of ills,” and the Vulgate “caper emissarius.”

  214 A tongue-shaped piece of scarlet wool.

  215 A cab contained 2.8333 pints.

  216 A seah contained one peck and one pint.

  217 On the altar.

  218 The size of the priest’s hands was proportionate to his stature.

  219 That he had been struck dead.

  220 Supposed by some to be the SUKHRAH in the present Mosque of OMAR.
      From its position, however, it seems more probably to have been the
      foundation of the altar of burnt-offerings. This sacred rock is
      sixty feet across and five feet high. It is pierced quite through,
      to allow, as some think, the blood of the sacrifices to flow off
      into the “Noble Cave” and the canals beneath it.

  221 A priest continued to stir the blood to prevent its coagulation.

  222 Or, “as a thrasher.”

  223 Or, “as a thrasher.”

  224 Or, “the clean place.”

_  225 I.e._, the gardeners became liable for a trespass-offering.

  226 R. Judah addresses in imagination the goat.

  227 It seems, according to the Talmud, that there was no “laying on of
      hands” on either the morning or evening sacrifice; or on any other
      public sacrifice, excepting the scapegoat and the bullock, when the
      congregation had sinned through ignorance.

  228 Lev. xvi. 30.

  229 Or viaduct, or causeway.

  230 Supposed to be Alexandrine Jews, so called from hatred to the
      Babylonians.

  231 Zuk is supposed by Lieutenant Conder of the Palestine Exploration
      Fund to be the modern el Mûntâr, about six and a half miles east of
      Jerusalem in the direction of the Dead Sea, and on the way to the
      ruins of Mird (Mons Mardes). A well near the place is still called
      Bir es Sûk.

_  232 I.e._, broken to pieces.

  233 Maimonides says that those connected with the red heifer and
      scapegoat were rendered unclean because these animals were
      “sin-bearing” animals. All that Israelites now have to offer on the
      day of atonement is for males a white cock (because gever in Hebrew
      signifies a man and a cock), and for females a hen. And they pray,
      “Let this be my substitute—this my atonement. This cock goeth to
      death, but may I be gathered and enter into a long and happy life,
      and into peace.”

  234 “Place of the hollow.”

  235 Bereitha, or External Traditions.

  236 Isaiah i. 18.

  237 Lev. xvi.

  238 Lev. xxiii. 27.

  239 Num. xxix. 7.

  240 Num. xxix. 7.

  241 Urim and Thummin (lights and perfections), the Jews think, gave
      answer by the divine illumination of the suitable letters composing
      the names of the tribes which were graven on the breastplate of the
      High Priest.

  242 Sandals were, however, allowed where there was fear of serpents and
      scorpions. Woollen socks might be used.

_  243 I.e._, God omnipresent. The Jews in a spirit of reverence use the
      words “Place” and the “Name” to denote God. In reading they do not
      now pronounce the word Jehovah, but substitute Adonai for it; and
      when Jehovah is followed by the word Adonai they then use the word
      Elohim. The true pronunciation of the Name has been a subject of
      much contention. It has been variously given, as Yeheveh, Yehveh,
      Yahveh, Yahavah, Yahaveh, and Yehovah. When it was uttered on the
      Day of Atonement the worshippers “fell on their faces” in reverence
      for it (vi. 2). It was spoken for the last time in the Temple by the
      mouth of Simon the Just. Henceforward, the Gemara says whoever
      attempts to pronounce it shall have no part in the world to come.

  244 According to Maimonides, we have in this treatise proof that it is
      coeval with the laws of Moses on the same subject.

  245 The cloth would change it into a tent.

  246 But he may go up on the middle days of the feast.

  247 Lest he should render the food legally unclean with his unwashed
      hands. Mark vii. 2, 5.

  248 Eccles. i. 15.

  249 He lived about eighty years before the destruction of the Temple.

  250 Deut. xiii. 13.

  251 Supposed to be the mountain east of the Dead Sea, above Callirrhoe.

  252 Lev. xix. 23.

  253 Num. xviii. 11, 12.

  254 Ps. cxviii. 1.

  255 Ps. cxviii. 25.

  256 Ps. cxviii. 25.

  257 Ps. cxiii. to cxviii. inclusive.

  258 These not being legally bound to this duty cannot act as deputies
      for another.

  259 His ignorance of reading.

  260 “I will praise thee,” etc.—Ps. cxviii. 21 to end.

  261 Lev. xxiii. 10, 11.

  262 Permission arising out of his intention to fulfil the law.

  263 Means a place exempt from taxation called Colonin, perhaps the
      modern Colonia. Some, however, say it was a place in the Kedron
      Valley.

  264 Deut. xxxii. 39.

  265 The seventh day on which they used the willows.

  266 A log is about half a pint.

  267 He is said to have been a Sadducee who rejected tradition. Alexander
      Jannæus, to show his contempt for the Pharisees, poured the water on
      the ground. The people became excited, and pelted him with their
      ethrogs or citrons till his body-guard interfered, and, as fighting
      took place, some six thousand Jews were killed in the Temple.
      Josephus, “Antiq.,” book xiii. chap. xiii. 5.

  268 Isa. xii. 3; John vii. 37, 38.

  269 Galleries were erected for the women, and the men stood below them.

  270 Ps. cxx. to cxxxiv. inclusive.

  271 The signal for drawing water.

  272 The orthodox worshippers in the Temple looked toward the west, or
      Holy of Holies. The Baal or Sun worshippers turned toward the east,
      and used the eastward position. Under the Christian dispensation
      believers are directed to look to Jesus, who promises to be in their
      midst (Matt. xviii. 20).

  273 Ezek. viii. 16.

  274 This is one of the very few specimens of Hebrew poetry, apart from
      Scripture (dating prior to the destruction of the temple), which
      have come down to us.

  275 The priesthood was divided into twenty-four courses (1 Chron. xxiv.
      7-19). During the feast all the courses ministered, and, as each day
      the number of bullocks was decreased by one, the lambs were
      redistributed so as to supply an offering for every course.

  276 In the feast of weeks there were two leavened wave loaves (Lev.
      xxiii. 17).

  277 Those priests who were slow in attendance, as they were obliged to
      share their perquisites with the whole priesthood.

  278 The course Bilgah was fifteenth (1 Chron. xxiv. 14). Each course had
      a ring to which the heads of the victims were tied, and also a
      closet for stores. These were taken from the course Bilgah as a mark
      of disgrace. During the persecution of Antiochus, Miriam, a daughter
      of Bilgah, married a Syro-Grecian husband. When the Greeks took the
      Temple, she struck the altar with her shoe, exclaiming, “O wolf,
      wolf, how long art thou to consume the wealth of Israel, and canst
      not preserve them in their hour of need!” It was supposed that she
      must have learned something evil in her father’s house, and the
      whole course was therefore degraded. The Rabbis say that the courses
      of the priests were first ordained by Moses, and that he established
      eight of them. Four courses he assigned to the line of Eleazar, and
      four he assigned to the line of Ithamar. Samuel is said to have
      added eight courses more, and the remaining eight were added by
      David. The Scriptures, however, assert that David arranged the whole
      twenty-four courses. This arrangement continued till the captivity.
      After the captivity only four courses returned—namely Jedaiah,
      Harim, Pashur, and Immer. The Babylon Talmud mentions Jojarib
      instead of Harim. To restore again the number of courses,
      twenty-four lots were cast into a box, and each head of the four
      courses, which returned, drew six lots—one for himself, and five for
      the courses which they wished to revive. The restored order of
      courses continued as of old, except in the case of Jojarib, who
      yielded the first rank to Jedaiah, as Jedaiah was of the family of
      the High-priest Joshua, the son of Jozedek. They soon increased in
      numbers, and we read that each course kept a station of 2,400
      priests at Jerusalem, and half a station at Jericho. The lesser
      number was stationed at Jericho to give honor to Jerusalem.

  279 Nisan answered to part of March and April. The reign of kings was
      counted from this month, so that if a king began to reign in Adar
      (February and March), in the following Nisan he would be reckoned to
      have reigned two years.

  280 The passover was the first of the three feasts, beyond which one
      could not neglect a vow.

  281 Part of August and September.

  282 Part of September and October.

  283 Lev. xix. 23-25.

  284 Ps. xxxiii. 15.

  285 Part of July and August.

  286 Part of November and December.

  287 Part of February and March.

  288 Part of April and May.

  289 That is, for the new moon observances.

  290 The Talmud states that when the sun and moon were first created they
      were of equal size. The moon became jealous of the sun, and she was
      reduced in bulk. The moon then appealed to God, and she was consoled
      by the promise that Jacob, Samuel, and David were to be likewise
      small. As, however, some injustice seemed to have been committed,
      God ordained “a sin-offering” on every new moon, because the moon
      had become less than the sun!

  291 The Sanhedrin treated gamblers and usurers as thieves.

  292 Those who bred pigeons, to bet on their quickness of flight, or to
      entice their neighbors’ pigeons to their dovecotes.

  293 Lev. xxiii. 4.

  294 Literally, Bithosin, the followers of Biothos, who, with Zadok, the
      founder of the Sadducees, was a scholar of Antigonus of Socho.

  295 Babylon.

  296 So called in the Mishna. It means “the place fenced in.” The Gemara
      reads, Beth Yazak, “the place of chains.”

_  297 I.e._, the Sabbath, when they could only go four cubits.

  298 To carry money on the day of atonement was unlawful, but according
      to R. Joshua’s reckoning it would have been a day too late.

  299 Lev. xxiii. 4.

  300 Exod. xxiv. 9.

  301 Not to remind God of the sin of the golden calf.

  302 Deut. xxxiii. 17.

  303 Josh. vi. 5.

  304 Num. x.

  305 From the obligation of hearing or sounding.

  306 Exod. xvii. 11.

  307 Num. xxi. 8.

  308 There is a supposed hiatus in the Mishna text to the following
      effect: “In Jerusalem they sounded through the whole city during the
      session of the Sanhedrin (_i.e._, till noon); but in Jamnia they did
      not sound in the city, but only before the tribunal of justice. And
      again,” etc.

_  309 I.e._, of the sheaf of the first-fruits. Lev. xxiii. 10.

  310 The titles or the headings of the blessings which were used in the
      services of the Temple and of the synagogues out of Jerusalem.

  311 Three were read from the Law, three from the Psalms, and three from
      the Prophets—such passages as Exod. xv. 18, Ps. xxiv., Ezek. xx. 33,
      Zech. xiv. 9, etc.

_  312 I.e._, they would not read such passages as Ps. lxxviii. 39.

_  313 I.e._, to improve its tone.

  314 To clear its tone.

_  315 I.e._, the Chazan that prays Musaph.

  316 Nisan corresponded partly to March and April.

  317 Joel ii. 23.

  318 Marchesvan corresponded partly to October and November.

  319 Part of November and part of December.

  320 The fast-days of strict Pharisees were Mondays and Thursdays,
      because on a Thursday Moses went up to Mount Sinai, and returned on
      a Monday with the second Tables of the Law.

  321 1 Sam. xii. 17.

  322 Jonah iii. 10.

  323 Joel ii. 13.

  324 Prayers for the New Year.

  325 Prayers for the New Year.

  326 Ps. cxx. 1.

  327 Ps. cxxi. 1.

  328 Ps. cxxx.

  329 Ps. cii.

  330 1 Kings viii. 37.

  331 Jer. xiv. 1.

  332 Some understand the priests ministering in their course, others
      explain this expression by Deut. xviii. 8. The priests were divided
      into twenty-four Watches. Each Watch ministered for a week in the
      Temple. These Watches were again subdivided into seven “Father’s
      Houses,” and each “Father’s House” officiated for a day in the
      Temple. A dispensation from fasting was granted to the priests on
      duty, that they might not be weak in the service of the Sanctuary.

  333 This means the officiating priests.

  334 The delegates were the representatives of the congregation, who
      attended at the public sacrifices, and prayed on their behalf.

  335 This was a book written in Chaldee, as is proved by the quotations
      from it.

  336 Amos iv. 7.

  337 A stone on which lost property was deposited, and publication of it
      was made, so that its owner might reclaim it.

  338 Prov. xxiii. 25.

  339 Ps. cxxxvi.

  340 Num. xxviii. 2.

  341 Gen. i. 6, etc.

  342 Deut. vi. 4, etc.

  343 Part of March and April.

  344 Part of June and July.

  345 Part of July and August.

_  346 I.e._, “thieves of the pestle and dried figs”; because when
      forbidden by Jeroboam to go up to the Temple with the first-fruits
      and wood, they deceived the watchers by saying they were only going
      to press figs.—Jer. Tal.

  347 Part of August and September.

  348 Part of December and January.

  349 Antiochus Epiphanes.

  350 Prov. xxxi. 30, 31.

  351 Sol. Song, iii. 11.

  352 The feast-offering (“chagiga”) was the offering of individual
      worshippers, and was quite distinct from the sacrifices of the whole
      congregation. See “Treatise on the Passover,” vi. 4, note.

  353 Exod. xxiii. 14.

  354 Worth perhaps 3d.

  355 Jer. Tal. says “Tabernacles.”

  356 Deut. xvi. 17.

  357 Eccl. i. 15.

  358 From motives of delicacy.

  359 This must be done only by one (Deut. iv. 32).

  360 Ezek. x.; Isa. vi.

  361 This decision is for private sacrifices, but for public sacrifices
      there seems (according to the Talmud) to have been no “laying on of
      hands,” except in the case of the scapegoat and the bullock, when
      the congregation had sinned through ignorance.

_  362 I.e._, the Sadducees (Lev. xxiii. 15).

  363 There are reckoned six degrees of uncleanness: The father of
      fathers, the fathers, the first, second, third, and fourth children
      of defilement. There are altogether twenty-nine fathers of
      uncleanness, of which eleven arise from contact with a dead body.

  364 A city about fifteen miles from Jerusalem.

  365 Toward Jerusalem.

  366 This decision refers to the case of a dealer whose wine or flour
      might become legally defiled by contact with the common people.

  367 The Tosephta relates, that when the Pharisees were baptizing the
      candlestick, the Sadducees used to mock them by saying, they were
      baptizing the sun.

  368 The Jewish year is composed of twelve lunar months. It is adapted to
      the solar year by the use of an intercalary month called Veaddar—the
      additional Addar. Every nineteen years there are seven occasions on
      which this embolismic month must be introduced to prevent the
      various feasts revolving over the four seasons of the year, like the
      Moslem fast of Ramadhan. Formerly the Sanhedrin arranged this
      intercalary month to suit the harvest, so that if it were late, the
      wave sheaf and other observances should still be kept according to
      their proper dates. When, however, the Sanhedrin was suppressed by
      the Emperor Constantine, Hillel II of Tiberias ruled that an
      intercalary month of twenty-nine days should be added in the 3d,
      6th, 8th, 11th, 13th, 17th, and 19th years of the Metonic Cycle.
      This decision has since remained the Jewish standard for reckoning
      time.

  369 Deut. xxi. 4.

  370 Deut. xx. 5, 9.

  371 Lev. xix. 24.

  372 Deut. xiv. 22-25.

  373 Exod. xxi. 29.

  374 Num. xi. 17.

  375 Num. xxxv. 24, 25. A congregation, or “minyan,” must not be less
      than ten men. If there be 10,000 women they cannot form a minyan.
      The Lord Jesus more mercifully promises His presence to “two or
      three gathered together.” Matt. xviii. 20.

  376 Num. xiv. 27.

  377 Exod. xxiii. 2.

  378 Exod. xxiii. 2.

  379 The Great Sanhedrin could whip a high-priest for certain offences,
      and afterward restore him to his office.

  380 Deut. xxv. 9.

  381 Lev. xxi. 12.

  382 2 Sam. iii. 35.

  383 2 Sam. xii. 8.

  384 2 Sam. iii. 31.

  385 Deut. xvii. 19.

  386 Deut. xvii. 15.

  387 Lev. xix. 16.

  388 Prov. xi. 13.

  389 Lev. xxiv. 22.

  390 This rule was violated in the case of our Lord Jesus Christ. Matt.
      xxvi. xxvii.; Mark xiv.; Luke xxii. xxiii.; John xix.

  391 Gen. iv. 10.

  392 Lev. v. 1.

  393 Prov. xi. 10.

  394 Before executing a criminal, a quantity of frankincense in a cup of
      wine was given to him to stupefy him and render him insensible to
      pain. The compassionate ladies of Jerusalem generally provided this
      draught at their own cost. This custom was in obedience to Prov.
      xxxi. 6, “Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and
      wine unto those that be of heavy hearts.”

  395 Lev. xxiv. 14.

  396 Josh. vii. 19, 20, 25

  397 Deut. xvii. 7.

  398 Deut. xxi. 23.

  399 This supposes a man sorrowful, because he is obliged to punish his
      own son.

_  400 I.e._, the Divine Presence. The luminous cloud of glory in the Holy
      of Holies.

  401 The words in the original, “Baal Aob,” are supposed by some to
      denote a ventriloquist from “Aob,” meaning a “bottle” or “stomach.”
      “Aob” seems, however, much more likely to be allied to the Coptic
      word for “a serpent” or “Python.” Acts xvi. 16.

  402 Matt. xxvi. 65.

  403 The image of Molech was made of brass. It was hollow within and
      heated with fire outside. It stood in the valley of Hinnom without
      the walls of Jerusalem. Kimchi says the image of Molech contained
      seven chapels. These chapels are supposed by some to represent the
      seven planets. In the first chapel flowers were offered; in the
      second, turtle doves or young pigeons; in the third, lambs; in the
      fourth, rams; in the fifth, calves; in the sixth, oxen; “but
      whosoever offered his son, they opened to him the seventh chapel.”
      The face of Molech was like the face of a calf, and the image
      stretched forth its hands “as a man who opens his hands to receive
      something of his neighbor.” “They kindled the image with fire, and
      the priests took the babe and put it into the hands of Molech, and
      the babe gave up the ghost.” They called it Tophet; because they
      made a noise with drums (“tophim”), that the father might not hear
      the screams of his child and have pity upon him. And they called it
      Hinnom, because the child roared (“menahem”) in his anguish. Others
      say it was called Hinnom, because the priests used to say, “May it
      profit thee—may it be sweet to thee.”

  404 Cutting off is generally supposed to have extended to the family as
      well as the guilty person. It seems to have included the future as
      well as the present life.

  405 Deut. xxi. 18.

  406 Deut. xxi. 20.

  407 Prov. xxiii. 20.

  408 Deut. xxi. 19, 20.

_  409 I.e._, they are saved from crime by immediately depriving them of
      life. This summary mode of procedure was called “the rebel’s
      beating.” It was a kind of lynch law inflicted by the people at
      once. John viii. 59.

  410 As the former class of intending criminals could at once be killed,
      so this latter class must be guilty of the act, and they are then
      judged for it.

  411 Isa. xxx. 20.

  412 Isa. lx. 21.

  413 Literally, outside.

  414 Exod. xv. 26.

_  415 I.e._, to meditate with the intention to mutter JEHOVAH over a
      wound.

  416 2 Chron. xxxiii. 13.

  417 Gen. vi. 3.

  418 Gen. xi. 8.

  419 Gen. xiii. 13.

  420 Ps. i. 5.

  421 Num. xiv. 37.

  422 Num. xiv. 35.

  423 Ps. l. 5.

  424 Num. xvi. 33.

  425 1 Sam. ii. 6.

  426 Deut. xxix. 28.

  427 Deut. xiii. 13.

  428 Deut. xiii. 15.

  429 Deut. xiii. 16.

  430 Deut. xiii. 17.

  431 Deut. xxiv. 7.

  432 Deut. xvii. 8.

  433 Deut. xvii. 10.

  434 Deut. xvii. 12.

  435 Now called Yebna.

  436 Deut. xvii. 13.

  437 Deut. xviii. 19.

  438 Literally, strange worship. It chiefly means the worship of the
      stars and other heavenly bodies.

  439 Jer. xxxiv. 5.

  440 Or sugar-cane.

  441 For executions.

  442 For races.

  443 Where harangues were delivered involving life and death.

  444 Nor graves.

  445 Deut. vii. 26.

  446 Hadrian’s mixture was balls of clay saturated with wine and taken on
      military expeditions. When the soldiers wished to drink, they soaked
      them in water so that it had a taste of wine, and the mud settled at
      the bottom of the vessel.

  447 The heart torn out of the animal when alive to be offered in
      idolatrous worship.

  448 A village where calves were offered in idolatry. Consequently the
      rennet was forbidden, and the cheese made from their rennet was also
      forbidden.

  449 Sol. Song, i. 2. The question is, whether the friendship sprang from
      the wine or not, and his conclusion is that as the savor is
      connected with the oil, so is the friendship with the wine, and so
      is the cheese connected with idolatry.

_  450 I.e._, for legal defilement.

  451 The locusts might be mixed in the basket with wine or liquor, which
      would cause legal defilement.

  452 The Salt Sea generally means in the Talmud the Dead Sea. It is now
      called by the Arabs “Bahr-Lût,” _i.e._, the Sea of Lot.

  453 Deut. xiii. 17.

  454 The modern Akka (Acre).

  455 Deut. vii. 25.

  456 Deut. vii. 26.

  457 Lest the lettuce might derive profit from the shade of the
      idolatrous grove.

  458 These stones must be arranged as two on the ground, and one over
      them, and not more than four ells distant from the image, to fulfil
      the conditions of being an idolatrous offering. If the stones did
      not fulfil these conditions, an Israelite might use them for
      building purposes.

  459 If the idol be disregarded in time of peace, the heathen have ceased
      to esteem it as a god, and Israelites might use it for some purpose.
      But if the heathen neglected it during the confusion of war, there
      was no proof that they would not worship it at another time.

_  460 I.e._, triumphal arches with statues upon them.

  461 Because the idolater might have made an idolatrous libation from
      both flasks.

  462 Exod. xxi. 29.

  463 Deut. xxi. 4.

  464 Num. vi. 18.

  465 This refers to the killing or slaughtering of cattle and fowls for
      profane or domestic purposes. They were called profane to
      distinguish them from the holy sacrifices.

  466 Num. xxxi. 23.

  467 The men of the great synagogue were the “Scribes” who flourished
      from the return out of Babylon till the Græco-Syrian persecution,
      220 B.C. Their object was to preserve the sacred text with
      scrupulous minuteness, and make a “fence” for the law. They added
      numberless directions for the better observance of the old precepts.
      The Scribes were succeeded by the “learners,” the “repeaters,” and
      the “master builders,” who continued from 220 B.C. till 220 A.D. In
      their time fall the Maccabæan revolution, the birth of Christ, the
      overthrow of the Temple by Titus, the rebellion of Barchochba, the
      complete destruction of Jerusalem, and the dispersion of the Jews.

  468 Supposed by some to be the Sameas and Pollio of Josephus. Though
      others try to identify Sameas with Simon, son of Shetach.—“Antiq.”
      xiv. ix. 4, etc.

  469 Ps. xxxvii. 21.

  470 Deut. vi. 4, etc.

  471 Joel ii. 13.

  472 Ps. i. 1.

  473 Mal. iii. 16.

  474 Lam. iii. 28.

  475 Isa. xxviii. 8.

  476 Ezek. xli. 22.

  477 Ps. lxxxii. 1.

  478 Amos ix. 6.

  479 Ps. lxxxii. 1.

  480 Mal. iii. 16.

  481 Exod. xx. 24.

  482 1 Chron. xxix. 14.

  483 Deut. iv. 9.

  484 Deut. iv. 9.

  485 Gen. ix. 6.

  486 Deut. xiv. 1.

  487 Prov. iv. 2.

  488 Jer. xvii. 6.

  489 Jer. xvii. 8.

  490 Ps. cxix. 99.

  491 Prov. xvi. 32.

  492 Ps. cxxviii. 2.

  493 1 Sam. ii. 30.

  494 The Rabbis reckon that the expression “God said” is used nine times
      in the first chapter of Genesis, and that the tenth expression is to
      be found in the first verse, “In the beginning God created the
      heaven and the earth.”

  495 Num. xiv. 22.

  496 The shameer is the worm which knows how to hew stones, and helped
      Solomon to build the Temple.

  497 Num. xv. 20.

  498 Deut. xxxiii. 21.

  499 1 Kings xiv. 16.

  500 Prov. viii. 21.

  501 Ps. lv. 23.

  502 Or, perhaps, “for meditation.”

  503 Prov. viii. 14.

  504 Prov. xi. 22.

  505 Ex. xxxii. 16.

  506 Num. xxi. 19.

  507 Ps. lv. 13.

  508 Prov. iii. 35.

  509 Prov. iv. 2.

  510 Esther ii. 22.

  511 Prov. iv. 22.

  512 Prov. iii. 8.

  513 Prov. iii. 18.

  514 Prov. i. 9.

  515 Prov. iv. 9.

  516 Prov. iii. 16.

  517 Prov. iii. 2.

  518 Prov. xvi. 31.

  519 Prov. xvii. 6.

  520 Isa. xxiv. 23.

  521 Prov. vi. 22.

  522 Ps. cxix. 72.

  523 Hag. ii. 8.

  524 Prov. viii. 22.

  525 Isa. lxvi. 1.

  526 Ps. civ. 24.

  527 Gen. xiv. 19.

  528 Exod. xv. 16.

  529 Ps. xvi. 3.

  530 Exod. xv. 17.

  531 Ps. lxxviii. 54.

  532 Isa. xliii. 7.

  533 Isa. xlii. 21.

  534 See the treatise on “Measurements,” chap. i.

  535 Membranes over the fat.

  536 In the form of an apple.

  537 A cor was equal, according to the Rabbis, to 44.286 gallons, but
      Josephus reckons it to have been 86.696 gallons.

  538 A seah, according to the Rabbis, was 1.4762 gallon.

  539 Or, of “the treasurers.”

  540 In this chamber were kept the “seals” or “tokens” given to those
      persons who bought their offerings from the Levites. These “seals”
      were of four sorts, and were respectively inscribed with “calf” or
      “kid,” according to the offerings to be presented; and with the word
      “male” when the offering was to be a ram; and “sinner” when it was
      to be a sin-offering.

  541 Others read “a basket.”

  542 Or jug.

  543 Ezek. xliv. 2.

  544 Jericho is about eighteen miles distant from Jerusalem.

  545 Perhaps “a gong” or “a bell.” Some think it to have been a “musical
      instrument,” and others consider it to have been “an organ.”

  546 Some think “Machærus” on the east of the Dead Sea, about fifty miles
      distant from Jerusalem.

  547 In each act of sprinkling, the priest, standing before a corner,
      sprinkled the blood on two sides of the altar. And thus, in two acts
      of sprinkling, he put the blood on its four sides.

  548 Called the Shema. It consisted of the following three passages of
      Scripture, as given in the next footnotes.

  549 Deut. vi. 4-9.

  550 Deut. xi. 13-21.

  551 Num. xv. 37-41.

  552 The lot for the incense was always arranged for a new man who had
      never burned it before. It might come to a priest once in his
      lifetime, and never again afterward. Luke i. 9.

  553 The chambers for vestments had separate rooms for each of the
      twenty-four courses, and separate wardrobes for each of the four
      kinds of vestments.

  554 About 37-1/2 gallons.

  555 See note 5, chap. iii. 8.

  556 The Delegates were appointed to represent the whole congregation of
      Israel in the temple services.

  557 Jehovah.

  558 That is by substituting for the Name (Jehovah) the word “Adonai,”
      except where “Adonai” and “Jehovah” come together. In such cases
      “Elohim” is substituted for “Jehovah.”

  559 Lev. ix. 22.

  560 Who had charge of the channels from the altar.

  561 Ps. xxiv. 1.

  562 Ps. xlviii. 1.

  563 Ps. lxxxii. 1.

  564 Ps. xciv.

  565 Ps. lxxxi.

  566 Ps. xciii.

  567 A famous maker of incense.

  568 Sparkling.

  569 Burning. The watch at certain gates seems to have been hereditary in
      certain families. Just as at the present time the custody of
      Rachel’s tomb is the privilege of a certain family in Jerusalem.
      Each guard consisted of ten men, so that there were 210 Levites in
      the twenty-one stations. The three more important places contained
      guards of both Levites and Priests, thirty of each. There were
      therefore 240 Levites on guard each night.

  570 He rolled up his overcoat and laid it down for a cushion.

  571 Rev. xvi. 15.

  572 Obscurity.

  573 Platform or rampart.

  574 1 Mac. ii. 25.

  575 So called either because Nicanor, a Pharisee, had the gate made in
      Alexandria, and though it was thrown overboard from a ship in a
      storm, it yet came safe to land; or because Nicanor, a Greek prince,
      was slain there in the time of the Asmoneans.

  576 Ezek. xlvi. 2.

  577 Ezek. xliii. 16.

  578 As this corner would have been in the tribe of Judah, it was not
      added, that the whole altar might remain in the tribe of Benjamin.
      Gen. xlix. 27.

  579 This sloping ascent to the altar was strewn with salt. This salt was
      brought from the mountain of Sodom at the south of the Dead Sea. The
      salt was intended to keep the priests from slipping and falling,
      which might easily happen, as they were obliged to minister
      barefooted. The coldness of the pavement in winter, and eating so
      much flesh of the sacrifices, brought various diseases on the
      priests.

  580 House of the vineyard.

  581 Deut. xxvii. 5.

  582 Zech. vi. 14.

  583 The Rabbis say that “the world is like an eye. The ocean is the
      white of the eye. The pupil is Jerusalem. And the image in the pupil
      is the Sanctuary.”

  584 Ezek. xli. 23.

  585 Ezek. xli. 24.

  586 Ezek. xliv. 2.

  587 1 Kings vi. 6.

  588 Curiously graven and gilt.

  589 Is. xxix. 1.

  590 “The king only, and no man else (remarks Maimonides) might sit in
      the court of the Temple in any place; and even this privilege was
      confined to a king of the family of David.” Cunœus further observes,
      that the king was esteemed nearer to God than the priests
      themselves, and a greater president of religion.

  591 The Temple services were arranged by the council of fourteen. This
      council was composed of the High Priest, the Sagan (the deputy or
      Suffragan of the High Priest), two Katholikin, who had charge of the
      treasuries, three Gizbarim, who were assistants of the Katholikin,
      and seven Ammarcalin, who had charge of the gates.

  592 The Nethinim, or the “given ones,” were added, it is supposed, from
      among the Gibeonites to fill up the deficiencies in the number of
      Levites who returned from the captivity in Babylon. They were held
      in low estimation, and were forbidden to intermarry with Israelites.

  593 Exod. xxxviii. 27.

  594 Exod. xxvi. 31-33.

  595 Exod. xxvi. 19.

  596 Exod. xxvi. 17.

  597 Exod. xvi. 24

  598 Exod. xxvi. 28.

  599 Exod. xxvi. 29.

  600 Exod. xxvi. 29.

  601 Exod. xxvi. 1.

  602 Exod. xxvi. 3.

  603 Exod. xxvi. 4.

  604 Exod. xxvi. 6.

  605 Exod. xxvi. 2.

  606 Exod. xxvi. 2.

  607 Exod. xxvi. 7, 8.

  608 Exod. xxvi. 9.

  609 Exod. xxxvi. 17.

  610 Exod. xxvi. 11.

  611 Exod. xxvi. 8.

  612 Exod. xxvi. 9.

  613 Exod. xxvi. 12.

  614 Some commentators explain these to be “skins of seals” or
      “dolphins,” and others understand the meaning to be a “blue color.”
      Exod. xxvi. 14.

  615 Num. iv. 25.

  616 Exod. xxvi. 33.

  617 Exod. xxvi. 35.

  618 Or, in the “House of dispensations.”

  619 Exod. xxxix. 3.

  620 Exod. xxvi. 31.

  621 Exod. xxvi. 36.

  622 Exod. xxx. 6.

  623 Exod. xxvii. 9.

  624 Exod. xxvii. 11.

  625 Exod. xxvii. 12.

  626 Exod. xxvii. 13.

  627 Exod. xxxviii. 14, 15.

  628 Exod. xxvii. 18.

  629 Exod. xxvii. 18.

  630 Exod. xxvii. 19.

  631 Num. iv. 26.

  632 Exod. xxvii. 18.

  633 Some explain this to mean “multiply fifty with 100” (Aruch); others
      think that the measurement is to be made with a rope of fifty cubits
      (Eruvin).

  634 Some read “in the name of,” etc.

  635 Exod. xxv. 10.

  636 Sol. Song, iii. 9, 10.

  637 Deut. xxxi. 26.

  638 1 Sam. vi. 8.

  639 Num. x. 33.

  640 Num. xiv. 44.

  641 1 Sam. xiv. 18.

  642 2 Sam. xi. 11.

  643 1 Sam. iv. 4.

  644 1 Kings viii. 9.

  645 Exod. xxv. 11.

  646 Exod. xxv. 21.

  647 Exod. xxv. 15.

  648 1 Kings viii. 3.

  649 1 Kings viii. 8.

  650 1 Kings viii. 8.

  651 1 Kings viii. 7, 8.

  652 1 Kings viii. 8.

  653 2 Chron. xxxv. 3.

  654 2 Kings xx. 17.

  655 Ezek. xli. 23.

  656 Some commentators interpret “Traksin” to mean “place of doubting,”
      as zealots continually disputed the exact division between the Holy
      Place and the Holy of Holies.

  657 Exod. xxv. 23.

  658 Lev. xxiv. 7.

  659 Num. ii. 20. The Hebrew letters Ayin and Lamed therefore means “by”
      or “next,” as well as “upon.”

  660 2 Chron. iv. 8.

  661 1 Kings vii. 48.

  662 2 Chron. iv. 19.

  663 Exod. xxv. 31.

  664 Exod. xxv. 39.

  665 Num. x. 2.

  666 Exod. xxv. 32.

  667 Exod. xxv. 34.

  668 Gen. iv. 7.

  669 Gen. xlix. 7.

  670 Exod. xvii. 9.

  671 Exod. xxv. 34.

  672 Deut. xxxi. 16.

  673 Exod. xxv. 33.

  674 Or, “egg-shaped, oval.”

  675 Exod. xxv. 40.

  676 2 Chron. iv. 7.

  677 2 Chron. xiii. 11.

  678 2 Chron iv. 20, 21

  679 Num. viii. 2.

  680 Lev. xxiv. 4.

  681 Exod. xxx. 1.

  682 Exod. xxx. 3.

  683 Exod. xxxviii. 1.

  684 Num. iv. 26.

  685 Lev. ix. 5.

  686 Exod. xxx. 18.

  687 2 Chron. iv. 6.

  688 1 Kings vii. 23, 26.

  689 2 Chron. iv. 5.

  690 Ezek. xlv. 11, 14.

  691 Lev. xv. 13.

  692 2 Chron. iv. 2.

  693 2 Chron. iv. 4.

  694 2 Chron. iv. 3.

  695 The Jerusalem Talmud states that the water poured through the feet
      of the oxen, and that this was the well of Etham.

  696 Num. iii. 29.

  697 Num. iii. 31.

  698 Num. iii. 23.

  699 Num. iv. 25.

  700 Num. iii. 35.

  701 Num. iii. 36.

  702 Num. iii. 38.

  703 Num. ii. 17.

  704 Num. x. 14.

  705 Num. iv. 5.

  706 Num. x. 21.

  707 Num. iv. 15.

  708 Num. x. 22.

  709 Num. ii. 17.

  710 Num. ix. 18.

  711 Num. ix. 23.

  712 Num. x. 2.

  713 Exod. xl. 34.

  714 Exod. xl. 38.

  715 Isa. lx. 1, 19, 20.

  716 Exod. xxx. 6.

  717 Exod. xxx. 36.

  718 Exod. xxix. 42.

  719 The Jews say that Solomon, who understood all the commands of God,
      could not comprehend the full meaning of the Red Heifer.

  720 The meaning is that he who spends as much time in a leprous house as
      is sufficient for eating a loaf of such a size, becomes defiled in
      his garments. See “Leprosy,” xiii. 10.

  721 Num. viii. 8.

  722 The age of the lamb was reckoned from its birthday in Elul of last
      year till the first day of Elul in the current year.

  723 Lev. xxiii. 10, 17. The omer or wave-sheaf of barley was always cut
      on the evening of the 15th Nisan, even though it were a Sabbath. It
      must always have been gathered from a fresh harvest cultivated even
      in the Sabbatical year. The reapers asked these questions three
      times of those who were witnesses, “Has the sun gone down?” “With
      this sickle?” “Into this basket?” “On this Sabbath [first day of the
      Passover]?” “Shall I reap?” After the witnesses answered these
      questions the sheaf was reaped. It was finally ground into flour,
      and a handful of it mixed with frankincense was burned on the altar.
      The remainder belonged to the priests.

  724 Num. xxviii. The two wave-loaves of wheaten flour were always
      offered on the Jewish Pentecost.

  725 Deut. xxiii. 18.

  726 Nehem. ii. 8. 1 Chron. xxix. 1.

  727 According to Jewish tradition a dead body covered in with earth
      conveyed legal uncleanness to everyone who walked over it; but if a
      vault was over the body, or if air intervened between the corpse and
      the surface of the ground, it was regarded as a non-conductor. There
      are reckoned six degrees of uncleanness—the father of fathers, the
      fathers, the first, second, third, and fourth children of
      defilement. There are altogether twenty-nine fathers of uncleanness,
      of which eleven arise from contact with a dead body.

  728 Some commentators explain that “each heifer requires a fresh lad.”

  729 Num. xix. 3.

  730 The Pharisees asserted that a priest might be defiled, and that
      after washing he was legally clean for burning the red heifer. But
      the Sadducees maintained that he was not legally clean before
      sunset. Num. xix. 9, 10.

  731 Lev. xxii. 7.

  732 The cedar, hyssop, and scarlet wool were laid parallel to each
      other, and whatever portion of the scarlet wool remained too long
      was wrapped round the bundle.

  733 Num. xix. 9.

  734 Or thick parts of straw.

  735 If the vessels had been in the first row, someone might have touched
      them, or some vessel might have come in contact with them, so as to
      render them unclean.

  736 Num. xix. 15.

  737 It does not disallow the purifying pool if water flowed through a
      crevice in the rock into the pool.

  738 The principle laid down in this mishna is that if one merely carried
      the rope for drawing the water, it was allowed to him to do so. But
      if he used the rope for any work advantageous to himself it was
      disallowed.

  739 The modern Yebna (Jamnia).

  740 The water is disallowed, because the man gained something for
      himself during the act of drawing it. His intention was not
      single-minded and pure.

  741 Lev. iv. 12, 21.

  742 Primary uncleanness arises from touching a dead body, leprosy, etc.
      Secondary uncleanness arises from touching one who had primary
      uncleanness.

  743 A tertiary uncleanness follows from contact with secondary
      uncleanness.

  744 That is one over whom evening had not yet come, nor was his offering
      yet made. Lev. xxii. 6, 7.

  745 Gen. i. 10.

  746 Isa. lviii. 11.

  747 The river Jarmuk is the Hieromax of the Greeks. It falls into the
      Jordan about four miles below the Lake of Tiberias. The Arabs now
      call it the Sheriat el Mandhûr.

  748 The well of Ahab is supposed by some to be the source of a river
      near Beirut. This supposition is, however, very doubtful.

  749 The modern Banias, one of the sources of the Jordan. It is situated
      under Mount Hermon, close to the remains of the ancient Cæsarea
      Philippi.

  750 Literally, “from time to time.”

  751 The meaning is, that if the greater part of the ashes be legal,
      purification would follow; but if the greater part be ordinary
      ashes, there would be no purification.

  752 The dispute is now about what constitutes “a clean place.”

  753 Heb. ix. 13, 14.

  754 Num. xix. 15.

  755 Maimonides translates “lattice-work.”

  756 Or trelliswork.

  757 This doctrine of intention has also been adopted into the system of
      Romanism. The Council of Trent (Session vii. Canon xi.) teaches that
      “Whoever shall affirm that when ministers perform and confer a
      sacrament, it is not necessary that they should have at least the
      intention to do what the Church does; let him be accursed.” It
      follows, that if, for example, in the sacrament of orders, any
      bishop in any age failed in due intention, all the orders which
      flowed from him are invalid.

  758 Chap. ix. 9; viii. 5.

  759 Another rendering is, “in his garment.”

  760 A log is about half a pint.

  761 Before eating ordinary food the hands must be washed once. Before
      eating consecrated food they must be washed twice.

  762 Num. xix. 15.

_  763 I.e._, from the uncleanness of a dead reptile.

  764 And consequently does not purify the place covered by the splinter
      or stone, which remained unwashed by the first water.

  765 Those that were legally clean continue clean, and those legally
      unclean continue unclean.

  766 His hands render unclean what they touch.

  767 His hands render sacred things unclean.

_  768 I.e._, the putting his hands into a house infected with leprosy.

  769 Literally “father of uncleanness,” such as a corpse or dead reptile,
      etc.

_  770 I.e._, uncleanness not containing the principle of uncleanness.

  771 An object unclean in the secondary degree cannot make another
      unclean in the same degree.

  772 Num. x. 35, 36. The rabbis count these verses a distinct book of the
      law.

  773 When R. Eleazar, the son of Azariah, was made president of the
      school in Jamnia.

  774 A cab is about three pints.

  775 And could not contain water enough to wash one foot.

  776 Of an unclean person.

  777 It continues as long as its name, and as such cannot become unclean
      from pressure.

_  778 I.e._, with Israelites dwelling there.

  779 Tithe for the poor could be eaten anywhere.

  780 Second tithes could only be eaten in Jerusalem. Deut. xiv. 22, 23.

  781 The sixth year was fixed for the tithe to the poor, consequently in
      countries outside the land of Israel, and not subject to the
      Sabbatical rest, Israelites should pay the second tithe.

  782 Mal. iii. 8. It is assumed that the prophet means the consecrated
      second tithe, and not the unconsecrated tithe for the poor.

  783 Ps. xxv. 10.

  784 Deut. xxiii. 3.

  785 Isa. x. 13.

  786 Jer. xlix. 6.

  787 Amos ix. 14.

  788 The ancient Hebrew letters are now called Samaritan. They are still
      used for writing by the small community of Samaritans who dwell in
      Nablus, in the Holy Land. The Jews now use the Chaldee characters;
      and the Talmud therefore errs in calling the old national letters
      Assyrian.

  789 Some suppose the writings of Homer are meant; others think that
      these were books against revealed religion.

  790 Exod. v. 2. The name of Pharaoh cannot be considered an insult to
      Moses, since it precedes the name of God.

  791 Exod. ix. 27. This is merely added to avoid ending with Pharaoh’s
      blasphemy.

  792 That is, who had formed part of the Greater Holy Assembly

  793 Meaning that the Greater Holy Assembly had been as it were the
      reflection of the conclave of the Sephiroth above. The word used for
      “chariot” is not “Mercavah,” but “Rethikh.”

_  794 I.e._, the Paradise above.

  795 In the original both this and the foregoing section, apparently by
      an oversight, have the number thirty-three attached to them.

  796 Carrying on the simile of the lantern and its rays.

  797 The Sephiroth.

  798 Which is the number of Th, the last letter of the Hebrew alphabet,
      which includes the symbology of the cross.

  799 That is to say, which will hardly admit even of so vague a
      definition, seeing it is the Indefinite Absolute in Kether.

  800 We must be most careful not to misapprehend the meaning intended to
      be conveyed in this passage. Kether, the Ancient One, Macroprosopus,
      is not in the more restricted sense of the first Sephira, the AIN,
      but that that idea links back from Him must be manifest on
      consideration. Yet even He, the Vast Countenance, is hidden and
      concealed; how much more, then, the AIN! From Negative to Positive,
      through Potential Existence, eternally vibrates the Divine Absolute
      of the Hidden Unity of processional form masked in the Eternal Abyss
      of the Unknowable, the synthetical hieroglyph of an illimitable
      pastless futureless Present. To the uttermost bounds of space rushes
      the Voice of Ages, unheard save in the concentrated unity of the
      thought-formulated Abstract, and eternally that Voice formulates a
      Word which is glyphed in the vast ocean of limitless life.

  801 The thirteen conformations of the beard of Macroprosopus.

  802 The Trinity completed by the Quaternary.

  803 Kether, the first Sephira, from which all the other Sephiroth
      proceed, namely, those which are summed up in the Tetragrammaton.

_  804 I.e._, his manifestation is triune.

  805 This refers to the Triads in the Sephiroth, when the Autz Chaiim is
      formed. (See Introduction.) It will be found that in this
      arrangement of the ten Sephiroth there are ten Triads, viz.:

      (1) Kether, Chokmah, Binah.

      (2) Chesed, Geburah, Tiphereth.

      (3) Netzach, Hod, Yesod.

      (4) Chokmah, Chesed, Netzach.

      (5) Tiphereth, Yesod, Malkuth.

      (6) Binah, Geburah, Hod.

      (7) Chokmah, Tiphereth, Hod.

      (8) Binah, Tiphereth, Netzach.

      (9) Chesed, Tiphereth, Hod.

      (10) Geburah, Tiphereth, Netzach.

      Wherein Kether and Malkuth are each repeated once; Chokmah, Binah,
      Chesed, and Geburah, thrice; Tiphereth, six times; Netzach and Hod
      each four times; and Yesod twice.

  806 In many of the ancient mysteries a “feast” was part of the ceremony,
      analogous to our Eucharist. Verbum sapientibus.

  807 That is, the greatest triad of the Sephiroth, the Crown, King, and
      Queen; which finds a parallel in the Osiris, Isis, and Horus; the
      Axieros, Axiochersos, and Axiochersa of Lemnos and Samothrace, etc.

  808 Described in other places as the Supernal Eden and the Inferior
      Eden.

  809 The Duad equated in the Monad. Compare what I have previously
      remarked concerning the profile symbolism of Macroprosopus.

  810 The student will observe throughout the Qabalah that great stress is
      laid on the power of names, which arises from the fact that each
      qabalistical name is the synthesis of a power. Hence to “pronounce
      that name” is to use that power.

  811 The word I have translated “Maternal” is AMH, Amah, with a double
      Kametz point. Rosenroth renders it, “Yod Membri.”

  812 Speaking of the unity, the “Sepher Yetzirah” says: “One is She, the
      Spirit of the Elohim of life (blessed and more than blessed be His
      name who is the life of ages), Voice, and Spirit, and Word—this is
      She, the Spirit of holiness.”

  813 The word is OVTRA. Rosenroth translates it by “Aporrhea.” It may
      also be translated “vapor,” or “nebula.”

  814 The ten numbers and twenty-two letters.

  815 MZL = 40 x 7 x 30 = 77, which is OZ, Strength or Vigor. This
      Gematria is worthy of note as giving the idea of foundational power.

_  816 I.e._, the containing power.

  817 Daath is the conjunction of Chokmah and Binah. (See “Book of
      Concealed Mystery,” chap. i. § 40.)

  818 This is analogous to the teaching of the “Sepher Yetzirah,” that the
      Three Mothers, A, M, Sh, radiate into three paternal forms of the
      same. A, M, and Sh symbolize the potencies of Air, Water, and Fire.

  819 For “commencement” denotes end, and end denotes “commencement”; how,
      then, in the Absolute can there be either? Nevertheless, in the
      Absolute must we seek for the hypothetical starting-point of life.

  820 Let the student carefully note that this is the second Sephira, the
      I of IHVH, the Father proceeding from Macroprosopus, Kether, as He
      proceedeth from Ain Soph.

  821 The Sephiroth, or numbers.

  822 “Chokmoth” is plural of “Chokmah,” Wisdom.

  823 Chokmah is the second and Binah is the third of the Sephiroth. This
      section is a sufficient condemnation of all those who wish to make
      out that woman is inferior to man.

  824 This clause refers to the “Unwritten Qabalah.”

  825 Chokmah, the second Sephira, which, however, is as it were the
      repetition of Kether.

  826 That is, the letter I, Yod, in HIVH, which is said in the “Book of
      Concealed Mystery” to symbolize Macroprosopus only in its highest
      point.

  827 See “Book of Concealed Mystery,” chap. ii. § 37; chap. iv. § 11.

  828 See “Book of Concealed Mystery,” chap. ii. § 37.

  829 The amount of occult symbolism in this section is enormous, and the
      key of it is the name of the letter I, which is IVD, Yod. This is a
      trinity of letters, and their numerical value is I = 10, V = 6, D =
      4, total 20, equivalent to double I; but for reasons given in the
      “Book of Concealed Mystery” the second I is reproduced by a Hexad
      and a Tetrad—namely, V and D. I = 10, the decimal scale of
      Sephirotic notation, the key of processional creation; V = 6 =
      Tiphereth, and Microprosopus the Son united to D = 4, the Cross.
      Here is the mystery of the crucifixion of the Son on the tree of
      life; and again the Qabalah agrees with Christian symbolism.

  830 “Be Ama,” “with the Mother;” here Ama, AMA, Mother = 42. Be Aima, in
      the Mother; here Aima, AIMA = 52 = BN, Ben, Son. This Gematria is
      most important, because, be it noted, Aima, AIMA, is the letter I,
      Yod, which we have just been told represents Chokmah, joined to AMA,
      Mother, which is Binah, BINH, which again is BN IH by Metathesis,
      Ben Yod He—_i.e._, son of IH, eternally conjoined in Briah.

  831 The number answering to the “fifty gates of Binah.” See “Book of
      Concealed Mystery,” chap. i. § 46.

  832 Compare this with the Egyptian Horus, the son of Isis and Osiris.
      Also notice the interchange of symbols between Amen, Kneph, and
      Khom. The name of the great Egyptian God Amen is noticeable when we
      compare it with the qabalistic name AMN.

  833 Compare with this the alchemical symbolism of Duenech, the King of
      Earth, after being overwhelmed by the waters, rising again,
      glorified and crowned with the triple crown of silver, iron, and
      gold—Chesed, Geburah, and Tiphereth, in the alchemic Sephiroth of
      the metals.

  834 The meaning is, that Father and Mother are contained in the Son; for
      these are the second, third, and sixth Sephiroth—_i.e._, 2, 3, and
      6; and both 2 and 3 are contained in 6, for 2 x 3 = 6.

  835 The reflexive essence of Kether, the Crown, which operates in
      Chokmah and Binah.

  836 Plural of “Däath.”

  837 By Metathesis.

  838 Meaning the period of revealing these matters, not exactly a day of
      twenty-four hours: day in the scriptural and qabalistical sense.

  839 In other words, where there is unbalanced force, there is the origin
      of evil.

  840 Because in those severities, and behind them, he can see the
      Countenance of God.

  841 Chokmah.

  842 Binah.

  843 See Introduction concerning the parts of the soul, Chiah, Neschamah,
      Ruach, and Nephesch.

  844 See “Greater Holy Assembly,” ch. xlii. §§ 984-996; ch. xxvi. §§
      513-532.

  845 See “Book of Concealed Mystery,” chap. i. §§ 2, 3, 4 et. seq.

  846 Compare this with Miölner, the hammer of Thor, of Scandinavian
      mythology.

  847 Chokmah and Binah, included in Kether.

  848 It is to be noted that this word is MNA, Manna, and is a Metathesis
      of the letters of AMN, Amen, which has been shown in the “Book of
      Concealed Mystery” to be equal by Gematria to IHVH ADNI.

  849 Astral Light.

  850 Right and left; while in Macroprosopus “all is right.”

  851 At first sight this seems a contradiction, but on careful
      examination the difficulty disappears. A triangle is a fit
      expression of the number 3. It has three angles, it has three sides;
      but there is the whole figure itself also, which is the synthesis of
      the sides and the angles. So there are the three angles and the
      whole figure itself which contains them, and thus completes the
      Trinity by the Quaternary: in the Tetragrammaton, IHV, and H final,
      which forms the synthesis.

  852 Thus rigidly following out the rule of the symbolism before given,
      that Chokmah and Binah are contained in Kether. In this is the key
      of all religions.

  853 BCHKMTHA, Be-Chokmatha; CHKMTHA is the emphatic Chaldee form of
      CHKMA, which is Chaldee for Hebrew CHKMH.

  854 That is, the locks which have their origin in the influence of the
      Great Mother are interwoven mutually with those which originate from
      Chokmah.

  855 Meaning, let him supplicate Macroprosopus, developed in the forms of
      Chokmah and Binah, which are summed up in Aima the Great Mother, to
      incline Microprosopus to be favorable. This is identical with the
      Catholic custom of invoking the intercession of the Virgin with her
      Son; for Mary = Mare = Sea;and the great Sea is Binah.

  856 The word translated “forehead” is MTZCH, Metzach; now if a
      metathesis be formed of this word by placing the last letter between
      the first and second letters, we get MCHTZ, “he shall smite.” Hence
      the first form symbolizes Mercy, and the second Severity.

  857 And therefore is the divine name of Tzabaoth, or hosts, attributed
      both to Netzach and to Hod, the seventh and eighth Sephiroth.

  858 And 20 is H, He, in the four worlds, for H = 5, which multiplied by
      4 = 20.

  859 The simple meaning of this and the preceding section is, that the
      eyes can only see when the upper eyelashes are separated from the
      lower ones by the lids being raised.

  860 Moses, in this passage of Deuteronomy.

  861 That is, MRSHITH, instead of MRASHITH.

  862 That is, irrevocably, so that the word would cease to bear the same
      meaning were A not there. In other words, were A a radical letter of
      it.

  863 The first, RASHVN, Rashon, where this word, derived from the same
      root as RASHITH, is spelt with A.

  864 The Hebrew idiom for having mercy always refers to the nose, as “to
      defer anger” is in Hebrew “to lengthen the nose,” etc.

  865 The three divisions of the Brain of Microprosopus.

  866 See Introduction concerning the names of the parts of the Soul.

_  867 I.e._, the various degrees of the whiteness.

  868 Answering to the number of the letters of the Hebrew alphabet, which
      together with the ten Sephiroth form the thirty-two paths of wisdom
      of the “Sepher Yetzirah.”

  869 See “Book of Concealed Mystery,” chap. ii. §§ 31, 40, etc.

  870 In the “Book of Concealed Mystery,” chap. i. § 31, HVA and ALHIM are
      shown to be interchangeable, and they both are feminine. And now we
      come to the “Three Mothers,” of the “Sepher Yetzirah,” the Great
      Supernal Feminine Triad, which is even before the triune father. I
      may say no more here; in fact, I have almost revealed too much. Let
      the reader carefully meditate on § 651, for there the indicible
      Arcanum is shadowed.

  871 That is the number 18 on the plane of Asiah. And 18 is the fourth
      part of 72. And 72 is the number of the Schemahamphorasch (see
      ante), and the number of the Quinaries or sets of five degrees in
      the 360 degrees of the Zodiac. And there are six such sets in the
      thirty degrees of each sign. And thus we return to the twelve signs
      of the Zodiac, and these are operated on from the ten Sephiroth
      through the “seven paths of the Queen,” and these again depend from
      the first three Sephiroth, and these again from Kether, and Kether
      is Macroprosopus, from whom backward depend the Negative Existences
      in their Veils; and Macroprosopus is called HVA, Hoa, which = 12,
      and finds its expression in “Aima Elohim.” Thus rusheth through the
      Universe the Flux and Reflux of the Eternal Word.

  872 I am doubtful as to whether this is the best translation of the last
      clause; Rosenroth has not translated it at all. The Chaldee is
      MMTHQIM VDAI MAI CHKV KDA VCHIK ITOVM LAKVL, Mamthaqim Vadeai Maai
      Chiko Kedea Vecheik Yitauom Leakol.

  873 This whole section requires comment. I must first observe that Knorr
      de Rosenroth in his Latin version has supposed that in the word
      “MCHMDIM,” Machemadim, fire and water (ASH and MIM) are hidden as in
      a sort of anagram. Now while it is true that “MIM” can be thus
      extracted, “ASH” cannot, for the remaining letters, CHMD, will by no
      exegetical rule I know of form a word signifying fire. The following
      I take to be the real meaning of the passage. Chokmah is the fire,
      I, and Binah is the water, H, the Father and Mother Who, conjoined,
      produce the Son. Now the fire is symbolized by a triangle with the
      apex uppermost, and water by a triangle with the apex reversed;
      these two together united form the sign of the Macrocosm, the
      external symbol of Vau, V, Microprosopus. And He inherits the double
      qualities of the Father and the Mother, shown by the word “delights”
      (“Machemadim”) being written in the plural.

  874 The letters of the Hebrew alphabet are usually classed in the
      following manner:

      Gutturals = A, H, Ch, O (R by some).

      Palatals = G, I, K, Q.

      Linguals = D, Th, T, L, N.

      Dentals = Z, S, Sh, Tz (R by others).

      Labials = B, V, M, P.

      The “Sepher Yetzirah” further classes them as—

      3 Mothers (Primitives) = A, M, Sh.

      7 Duplicated = B, G, D, K, P, R, Th.

      12 Simples = H, V, Z, Ch, T, I, L, N, S, O, Tz, Q.

      In the above classification it classes R as a dental.

  875 This section contains references to the Edomite kings and their
      symbology; namely, as denoting the primal worlds which were
      destroyed. (See “The Book of Concealed Mystery,” chap. i. § 3; “The
      Greater Holy Assembly,” chap. ii. and chap. xxvi.; and “The Lesser
      Holy Assembly,” chap. x.

_  876 I.e._, tracing out the properties, etc., of the Sephiroth which
      form the King, Microprosopus, and, as appears from the latter part
      of this section, those only in their aspect of Judgment and Wrath.

  877 This section is another all-sufficient proof of the teachings
      maintained throughout the Qabalah, namely, that Man and Woman are
      from the creation coequal and coexistent, perfectly equal one with
      the other. This fact the translators of the Bible have been at great
      pains to conceal by carefully suppressing every reference to the
      Feminine portion of the Deity, and by constantly translating
      feminine nouns by masculine. And this is the work of so-called
      religious men!

  878 Chokmah, Wisdom, the second Sephirah, is Male in respect of Binah,
      but Female in respect of Kether. This is somewhat analogous to the
      Greek idea of the birth of Athené, Wisdom, from the brain of Zeus.

  879 Compare the symbolism of the many breasts of the Ephesian Diana.

  880 The original of the “Hymn of Unity” is in seven very long parts.
      These short ones merely give the leading idea in each of the
      original parts.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEBREW LITERATURE***



CREDITS


March 20, 2009

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>.



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 28369-0.txt or 28369-0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/8/3/6/28369/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

      You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

      You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

      You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***

