Chapter VIII


1. One may bring out wine sufficient for the cup,(121) milk sufficient for
a gulp, honey sufficient for a bruise, oil sufficient to anoint a small
member, water sufficient to moisten the eye-salve, and the rest of all
beverages a quarter of a log, and whatever can be poured out(122) a
quarter of a log. Rabbi Simeon says, “all of them by the quarter log.” And
they did not mention these measures save for those who reserve them.

2. “Whoever brings out cord sufficient to make an ear for a tub, bulrush
sufficient to hang the sieve and the riddle?” Rabbi Judah said,
“sufficient to take from it the measure of a child’s shoe; paper
sufficient to write on it the signature of the taxgatherers; erased paper
sufficient to wrap round a small bottle of balm—is guilty” (of death).

3. Leather sufficient for an amulet; parchment polished on both sides,
sufficient to write a sign for a door-post; vellum sufficient to write on
it a small portion, which is in phylacteries, that is, “Hear, O Israel;”
ink sufficient to write two letters; kohl(123) sufficient to paint one
eye.

4. Bird-lime sufficient to put on the top of a perch; pitch or sulphur to
fill a hole; wax sufficient to fill the mouth of a small hole; brick-clay
sufficient to make a mouth of a crucible bellows for goldsmiths—Rabbi
Judah says, “sufficient to make a crucible stand;” bran sufficient to put
on the mouth of a crucible blow-pipe for goldsmiths; ointment sufficient
to anoint the little finger of girls—Rabbi Judah says, “sufficient to make
the hair grow;” Rabbi Nehemiah says, “to freshen the temple.”

5. Red earth “as the seal of merchants”—the words of R. Akiba; but the
Sages say, “as the seal of letters;” dung and fine sand, “sufficient to
manure a cabbage stalk,”—the words of Rabbi Akiba; but the Sages say,
“sufficient to manure a leek;” coarse sand sufficient to put on a full
lime-hod; a reed sufficient to make a pen. “But if it be thick or split?”
“sufficient to boil with it a hen’s egg easy (to be cooked) among eggs,
mixed with oil and put in a pan.”

6. A bone sufficient to make a spoon,—Rabbi Judah said, “sufficient to
make the ward of a key;” glass sufficient to scrape the top of a shuttle;
a lump of earth or a stone sufficient to fling at a bird; Rabbi Eliezer
said, “sufficient to fling at a beast.”

7. “A potsherd?” “Sufficient to put between two beans,”—the words of Rabbi
Judah; Rabbi Meier says, “sufficient to take away fire with it;” Rabbi
José says, “sufficient to receive in it the fourth of a log.” Said Rabbi
Meier, “Although there is no visible proof of the matter, there is an
indication of the matter, as is said, ‘there shall not be found in the
bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth.’ ”(124) Rabbi José
said to him, “thence is the visible proof, ‘or to take water out of the
pit.’ ”(125)




On The Passover


    Searching for Leaven—How Leaven Is to be Put Away—Restrictions
    with Regard to It—What Things Make Leaven—Leavening—Work on the
    Eve of the Passover—Trades Allowed—Men of Jericho—Hezekiah—The
    Daily Offering—Intention—Slaughter of Passover Offering—Mode of
    Proceeding—The Passover on a Sabbath—Discussion Between R. Akiba
    and R. Eleazar—Roasting the Passover—Various
    Contingencies—Hindrances—Rules and Directions—How the Passover Is
    to be Eaten—Praise and Thanksgiving.



Chapter I


1. On the eve of the fourteenth day of Nisan(126) men search for leaven by
candlelight. Every place where men do not bring in leaven, there is no
need of search. “And wherefore do they say, two lines of barrels in the
wine cellar?” “The place is meant into which persons bring leaven.” The
school of Shammai say, “two rows in front of the whole cellar.” But the
school of Hillel say, “the two outer lines on the top.”

2. People need not suspect, lest perchance the weasel have slipped (with
leaven) from house to house or from place to place. If so, from court to
court, from city to city, there is no end to the matter.

3. Rabbi Judah said, “men search on the eve of the fourteenth and on the
morning of the fourteenth day, and at the time of burning it.” But the
Sages say, “if one did not search on the eve of the fourteenth, he must
search on the fourteenth; if he did not search on the fourteenth, he must
search during the feast; if he did not search during the feast, he must
search after the feast; and whatever remains, he shall leave well
concealed, that there be no further need of search after it.”

4. Rabbi Meier said, “men may eat it till five o’clock,(127) and burn it
at the beginning of six.” Rabbi Judah said, “they may eat it till four,
and they are in suspense about five, but they burn it at the beginning of
six.”

5. And again said R. Judah, “two loaves of the disallowed praise-offering
were placed on the portico of the Temple inclosure; whilst they were
placed there, all the people might eat leaven. If one were taken down they
were in suspense; they neither ate nor burned it. When both were taken
down they began to burn it.” Rabban Gamaliel said, “men may eat ordinary
food till four o’clock, and the heave-offering till five o’clock, but they
burned the leaven at six o’clock.”

6. Rabbi Chanina, the deputy of the priesthood, said, “from the (first)
days of the priesthood the priests did not object to burn the flesh
rendered legally unclean(128) with the second degree of uncleanness, with
the flesh rendered legally unclean with the first degree of uncleanness.
Even though they should add legal uncleanness to legal uncleanness.” Rabbi
Akiba went further and said, “from the (first) days of the priesthood the
priests did not object to light the oil which was disallowed on the day of
a man’s baptism (who had been legally unclean), with a candle which was
unclean with the uncleanness of the dead, even though they should add
legal uncleanness to legal uncleanness.”

7. Said R. Meier, “from their words we learn that men may burn the clean
heave-offering of leaven, with that which is unclean, on account of the
passover.” To him replied Rabbi José, “this is not the conclusion.” But
Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Joshua confess “that men should burn each by
itself.” And the contention is with regard to what is doubtful, and what
is unclean. Because Rabbi Eliezer said, “thou shalt burn each by itself.”
But R. Joshua said, “both at once.”



