Chapter IX: Concerning Microprosopus and His Bride in General


He said: Mouth, mouth, which hath followed out all these things, they
shall not dry up thy fountain.

Thy fountain goeth forth and faileth not: surely concerning thee may this
be applied, “And a river went forth out of Eden”; also that which is
written, “Like a fountain of waters whose waters fail not.”

Now I testify concerning myself, that all the days which I have lived I
have desired to behold this day, yet was it not the will (of God).

For with this crown is this day crowned, and now as yet I intend to reveal
certain things before God the Most Holy—may He be blessed!—and all these
things crown mine head.

And this day(838) suffereth not increase, neither can it pass on into the
place of another day, for this whole day hath been yielded unto my power.

And now I begin to reveal these things, that I may not enter ashamed into
the world to come. Therefore I begin and say:

“It is written, Ps. lxxxix. 14: ‘TZDQ VMSHPT, _Tzedeq Va-Meshephat_,
Justice and Judgment are the abode of Thy throne; CHSD VAMTH, _Chesed
Va-Emeth_, Mercy and Truth shall go before Thy countenance.’ ”

What wise man will examine this, so that he may behold His paths, (those,
namely) of the Most Holy Supernal One, the judgments of truth, the
judgments which are crowned with His supernal crowns.

For I say that all the lights which shine from the Supreme Light, the Most
Concealed of All, are all paths (leading) toward that Light.

And in that Light which existeth in those single paths, whatsoever is
revealed is revealed.

And all those lights adhere mutually together, this light in that light,
and that light in this light.

And they shine mutually into each other, neither are they divided
separately from each other.

That Light, I say, of those lights, severally and conjointly, which are
called the conformations of the King, or of the Crown of the King, that
which shineth and adhereth to that Light, which is the innermost of all
things, nor ever shineth without them.

And therefore do all things ascend in one path, and all things are crowned
by one and the same thing, and one thing is not separated from another,
since HVA, _Hoa_, Himself, and His Name, are one.

That Light which is manifested is called the Vestment; for He Himself, the
King, is the Light of all the innermost.

In that Light is Hoa, Who is not separated nor manifested.

And all those lights and all those luminaries shine forth from the Most
Holy Ancient One, the Concealed with all Concealments, who is the Highest
Light.

And whensoever the matter is accurately examined, all those lights which
are expanded are no longer found, save only that Highest Light.

Who is hidden and not manifested, through those vestments of ornament
which are the vestments of truth, QSHVT, _Qeshot_, the forms of truth, the
lights of truth.

Two light-bearers are found, which are the conformation of the throne of
the King; and they are called TZDQ, _Tzedeq_, Justice, and MSHPT,
_Meshephat_, Judgment.

And they are the beginning and the consummation. And through them are all
the Judgments crowned, as well superior as inferior.

And they all are concealed in Meshephat. And from that Meshephat is Tzedeq
nourished.

And sometimes they call the same, MLKI TZDQ MLK SHLM, _Meleki Tzedeq Melek
Shalem_, Melchizedek, King of Salem.

When the judgments are crowned by Meshephat, all things are mercy; and all
things are in perfect peace, because the one temperateth the other.

Tzedeq and the Rigors are reduced into order, and all these descend into
the world in peace and in mercy.

And then is the hour sanctified, so that the Male and the Female are
united, and the worlds all and several exist in love and in joy.

But whensoever sins are multiplied in the world, and the sanctuary is
polluted, and the Male and the Female are separated.(839)

And when that strong Serpent beginneth to arise, Woe, then, unto thee, O
World! who in that time art nourished by this Tzedeq. For then arise many
slayers of men and executioners (of judgment) in thee, O World. Many just
men are withdrawn from thee.

But wherefore is it thus? Because the Male is separated from the Female,
and Judgment, Meshephat, is not united unto Justice, Tzedeq.

And concerning this time it is written, Prov. xiii. 23, “There is that is
destroyed, because therein is not Meshephat.” Since Meshephat is departed
from this Tzedeq which is not therefore restrained; and Tzedeq hath
operation after another manner.

And concerning this (matter) thus speaketh Solomon the king, Eccles. vii.
16: “All these things have I seen in the days of my HBL, _Hebel_; there is
a just man who perisheth in his Tzedeq,” etc.

Where by the word HBL, _Hebel_ (which is usually translated “vanity”), is
understood the breath from those supernal breathers forth which are called
the nostrils of the King.

But when he saith HBLI, _Hebeli_, of my breath, Tzedeq, Justice, is to be
understood, which is MLKVTHA QDISHA, _Malkutha Qadisha_, the holy Malkuth
(_Sanctum Regnum_, the Holy Kingdom).

For when She is stirred up in Her judgments and severities, then hath this
saying place, “There is a just man who perished in his Tzedeq.”

For what reason? Because Judgment, Meshephat, is far from Justice, Tzedeq.
And therefore is it said, Prov. xiii. 23, “And there is that is destroyed
because therein is not Meshephat.”

Come and see! When some sublimely just man is found in the world, who is
dear unto God the Most Holy One—may He be blessed!—then even if Tzedeq,
Justice, alone be stirred up, still on account of him the world can bear
it.

And God the Most Holy—may He be blessed!—increaseth His glory so that He
may not be destroyed by the severity (of the judgments).

But if that just man remaineth not in his place, then from the midst is he
taken away for example by that Meshephat, Judgment, so that before it he
cannot maintain his place, how much less before Tzedeq, Justice.

David the king said at first, Ps. xxvi. 2, “Try me, O Tetragrammaton, and
prove me!” For I shall not be destroyed by all the severities, not even by
Tzedeq, Justice Herself, seeing that I am joined thereunto.

For what is written, Ps. xvii. 15, “In Tzedeq, Justice, I will behold Thy
countenance.” Therefore, properly speaking, I cannot be destroyed through
Tzedeq, seeing that I can maintain myself in its severities.(840)

But after that he had sinned, he was even ready to be consumed by that
Meshephat, Judgment. Whence it is written, Ps. cxliii. 2, “And enter not
into Meshephat, Judgment, with Thy servant!”

Come and see! When that Tzedeq, Justice, is mitigated by that Meshephat,
Judgment, then it is called TZDQH, _Tzedeqah,_ Liberality.

And the world is tempered by Chesed, Mercy, and is filled therewith.

As it is written, Ps. xxxii. 5: “Delighting in TZDQH, Liberality, and
MSHPT, Judgment; the earth is full of the CHSD, Mercy, of Tetragrammaton.”

I testify concerning myself, that during my whole life I have been
solicitous in the world, that I should not fall under the severities of
Justice, nor that the world should be burned up with the flames thereof.

As it is written, Prov. xxx. 20, “She eateth and wipeth her mouth.”

Thenceforward and afterward all and singular are near unto the Abyss.

And verily in this generation certain just men are given (upon earth); but
they are few who arise that they may defend the flock from the four angels
(otherwise, but judgments arise against the world, and desire to rush upon
us).




