Chapter III


1. He whose dead lies before him is exempted from reciting the
Shemah,—from the prayer,—and from the phylacteries.(23) Those who carry
the bier, and those who relieve them, and those who relieve the
relief,—those who go before the bier, and those who follow it, who are
required for the bier, are exempted from reciting the Shemah. But those
not required for the bier are bound to recite it. Both (parties) are
exempted from the prayer.

2. When they have buried the dead, and return, if they have time to begin
and end (the Shemah) before they reach the rows (of mourners), they must
begin: if not, they must not begin. Of those standing in the rows the
inner (mourners) are exempt, but the outer ones are bound to recite the
Shemah.

3. Women, slaves, and children, are exempt from reciting the Shemah, and
also from the phylacteries; but they are bound in the prayer, the sign on
the door-post, and the blessing after food.

4. A man in his legal uncleanness is to meditate in his heart on the
(Shemah), but he is not to bless before, or after it. After his food he
blesses, but not before it. R. Judah says “he blesses both before and
after it.”

5. If one stand in prayer, and recollect that he is in his uncleanness, he
is not to pause, but to shorten (the prayer). If he has gone down into the
water (to bathe),(24) and can go up, dress, and recite the Shemah before
the sun shines forth, he is to go up, dress, and recite it. But he is not
to cover himself with foul water or with water holding matter in solution
unless he has poured clean water to it. “How far is he to keep from foul
water, or excrement?” “Four cubits.”

6. A man in his uncleanness with a running issue, a woman in her
uncleanness, during separation, and she who perceives the need of
separation, require the bath. But R. Judah “exempts them.”



Chapter IV


1. The morning prayer may be said till noon. R. Judah says “until the
fourth hour.” The afternoon prayer until the evening. R. Judah says “until
half the afternoon.” The evening prayer has no limit, and the additional
prayers may be said all day. R. Judah says “until the seventh hour.”

2. R. Nechooniah, son of Hakanah, used to pray when he entered the
lecture-room, and when he went out he said a short prayer. The (Sages)
said to him, “what occasion is there for this prayer?” He said to them,
“when I enter I pray that no cause of offence may arise through me; and
when I go out I give thanks for my lot.”

3. Rabban Gamaliel said, “one must daily say the eighteen prayers.” R.
Joshua said “a summary of the eighteen.” R. Akivah said, “if his prayer be
fluent in his mouth, he says the eighteen; if not, a summary of the
eighteen.”

4. R. Eleazar said, “if one make his prayer fixed, his prayer is not
supplications.” R. Joshua said, “if a man travel in dangerous places, let
him use this short prayer: ‘Save, O Lord, thy people, the remnant of
Israel; at every stage of their journey(25) let their wants be before
thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hearest prayers.’ ”

5. If one ride on an ass, he must dismount: if he cannot dismount, he must
turn his face; and if he cannot turn his face, he must direct his heart
toward the Holy of Holies.

6. If one be seated in a ship, or in a carriage, or on a raft, he must
direct his mind toward the Holy of Holies.

7. R. Eleazar, the son of Azariah, said “the additional(26) prayers are
only to be said in a public congregation.” But the Sages say, “if there be
a public congregation, or no public congregation.” R. Judah said in his
name, “in every place, where there is a public congregation, individuals
are exempted from additional prayers.”



Chapter V


1. Men should not stand up to pray, except with reverential head. The
pious of ancient days used to pause one hour before they began to pray,
that they might direct their hearts to God. Though the king salute, one
must not respond; and though a serpent wind itself round his heel, one
must not pause.

2. Men should mention the heavy rain in praying for the resurrection of
the dead; and entreat for rain in the blessing for the year, and “the
distinction between the Sabbath and weekday”(27) is to be said in the
prayer “who graciously bestows knowledge.”(28) R. Akivah said, “the
distinction between the Sabbath and week-day is to be said in a fourth
prayer by itself.” R. Eleazar said, “in the thanksgivings.”

3. He who says, “Thy mercies extend to a bird’s nest,” or, “for goodness
be Thy name remembered,” or he who says, “we give thanks, we give
thanks,”(29) is to be silenced. If a man pass up to the ark (where the
rolls of the Law are kept) and make a mistake, another must pass up in his
stead; nor may he in such a moment refuse. “Where does he begin?” “From
the beginning of the prayer in which the other made the mistake.”

4. He who passes up to the ark is not to answer “Amen” after the priests,
lest his attention be distracted. If no other priest be present but
himself, he is not to lift up his hands (to bless the congregation). But
if he be confident that he can lift up his hands, and then resume, he is
at liberty.

5. If a man pray, and make a mistake, it is a bad sign for him. If he be a
representative of a congregation, it is a bad sign for his constituents,
for a man’s representative is like himself. They say of R. Hanina, son of
Dosa, that when he prayed for the sick, he used to say, “this one will
live,” or “this one will die.” The (Sages) said to him, “how do you know?”
He said to them, “if my prayer be fluent in my mouth, I know that he is
accepted; but if not, I know that he is lost.”



