Chapter I: Which Containeth the Introduction


Tradition.—On that day on which the Companions were assembled together in
the house of Rabbi Schimeon, and on which he had arranged his affairs
because he was about to depart from the world, before him were Rabbi
Eleazar his son, and Rabbi Abba, and the rest of the Companions; and the
house was full.

Therefore lifting up his eyes, Rabbi Schimeon saw that the house was full.
And Rabbi Schimeon wept, saying: “The second time when I was sick, and
Rabbi Benchas Ben Yair was in my presence, and until I had chosen my
place, life hath been prolonged unto me even until now.

“When I was restored, fire surrounded (my habitation) which hitherto hath
never ceased, neither did any man enter in unto me without permission.

“But now I see that it is taken away, and that the house is filled.”

While they were sitting down, Rabbi Schimeon, opening his eyes, beheld a
certain vision, and lo! fire surrounded the house!

Therefore all (the others) went forth, and Rabbi Eleazar his son, and
Rabbi Abba remained; but the other Companions sat without.

Rabbi Schimeon said unto Rabbi Eleazar his son: “Go forth, and see whether
Rabbi Yitzchaq be present for whom I have made myself surety.

“And say thou unto him that he dispose his affairs, and that he may sit
down with me. Blessed is his portion.”

Rabbi Schimeon arose and again sat down; and he laughed aloud, and
rejoicing said, “Where are the companions?”

Rabbi Eleazar arose and introduced them, and they sat down in his
presence.

Rabbi Schimeon lifted up his hands and prayed a prayer, and was joyful.

And he said, “Let those Companions who were in the former Conclave(792)
assembled here.”

Therefore, all the others having gone forth, there remained Rabbi Eleazar
his son, and Rabbi Abba, and Rabbi Yehudah, and Rabbi Yosi Bar Yoqeb, and
Rabbi Chiya.

In the meantime Rabbi Yitzchaq entered, to whom Rabbi Schimeon said: “How
excellent is thy lot! How much joy is this day stored up for thee!”

Rabbi Abba sat down behind his (_i.e._, Rabbi Schimeon’s) back, and Rabbi
Eleazar before him (_i.e._, Rabbi Schimeon).

Rabbi Schimeon spake and said: “Surely now is the time of benevolence, and
I desire to enter without confusion into the world to come.

“And verily these sacred things, which hereunto have never been revealed,
I desire to reveal before the Schekhinah;

“Lest they should say that I have kept back anything, and that I have been
taken away from the world; for even until now these things have been
concealed in my heart, so that having entered into these very matters I
may be with them in the world to come.

“But this is my arrangement of you; let Rabbi Abba write, and let Rabbi
Eleazar my son speak openly; but let the rest of the Companions in silence
meditate in their heart.”

Rabbi Abba arose from his seat behind him, and Rabbi Eleazar his son sat
down.

He said unto him, “Arise, O my son, for another shall sit in that seat”;
and Rabbi Eleazar arose.

Rabbi Schimeon covered himself and sat down; and he commenced, and said,
Ps. cxv. 17: “ ‘The dead shall not praise IH, _Yah_, nor all they who go
down into silence!’

“ ‘The dead shall not praise Yah;’ so it is certain that it is assuredly
those who are called dead; for He, God, the most Holy One—may He be
blessed!—is called the Living One, and is Himself commemorated among those
who are called living, and not with those who are called dead.

“And the end of this text runneth thus: ‘Nor all they who go down into
silence;’ for all they who go down into silence remain in Gehenna.

“There is another reason appertaining to those who are called living, for
God the most Holy One—may He be blessed!—desireth their glory.”

Rabbi Schimeon said: “How different is this occasion from that of the
former conclave! For into a certain conclave(793) came He, the most Holy
and Blessed God, and His Chariot.

“Now verily He, the Holy One, is here—may He be blessed—and He hath
approached with those Just who are in the Garden of Eden,(794) which did
not occur in the former conclave.

“And God, the Most Holy One—may He be blessed—more promoteth the glory of
the Just than His own glory.

“As it is written concerning Jeroboam, who sacrificed unto and served
other gods, and yet God, the Most Holy One—may He be blessed!—waited for
him.

“But because he stretched forth his hand against Iddo the prophet, his
hand became withered.

“For it is written, 1 Kings xiii. 4, ‘And his hand became withered, etc.’
Here it is not written that it was because he served other gods, but
because he extended his hand against Iddo the prophet, etc.

“Now, therefore, God the Most Holy One—may He be blessed!—promoteth their
glory (_i.e._, that of the Just), and they all come with Him.”

He said, “Verily, Rav Hamenuna the elder is here, and around him are
seventy Just represented in his circle, of whom certain shine with the
splendor of the Ancient and Most Holy One, the Concealed with all
Concealments.

“He, I say, cometh, in order that with joy he may hear those words which I
shall speak.”(795)

And when he had sat down he said: “Assuredly here a seat hath been set
aside for Rabbi Benchas Ben Yair.”

The companions who were there trembled greatly, and they arose, and sat
down in the lowest part of the house; but Rabbi Eleazar and Rabbi Abba
(still sat) before Rabbi Schimeon.

Rabbi Schimeon said: “In the former Assembly we acted thus; namely, that
all the companions spoke, and I also with them, by turns.

“Now I shall speak alone, and let all hear my words, superiors and
inferiors; blessed be my portion this day!”

Rabbi Schimeon commenced, and said, Cant. vii. 10: “ ‘I am my beloved’s,
and his desire is toward me.’

“As long as I have been bound unto this world in one link with God, the
Most Holy One—may He be blessed!—have I been bound, and therefore now is
His desire toward me.

“For He Himself and His whole holy company come, so that with joy they may
hear the concealed words, and the praise of Him, the Most Holy Ancient
One, the Concealed with all Concealments.

“And He separateth Himself ever more and more; He is separated from all
things, neither yet doth He altogether separate Himself, seeing that unto
Himself all things adhere, and that He Himself adhereth unto all; HVA,
_Hoa_, He Himself is all; He the Most Holy Ancient of all Ancients, the
Concealed with all Concealments.

“He hath been formed, and yet as it were He hath not been formed. He hath
been conformed, so that He may sustain all things; yet is He not formed,
seeing that He is not discovered.

“When He is conformed He produceth nine Lights, which shine forth from
Him, from His conformation.

“And from Himself those Lights shine forth, and they emit flames, and they
rush forth and are extended on every side, like as from an elevated
lantern the rays of light stream down on every side.

“And those rays of light,(796) which are extended, when anyone draweth
near unto them, so that they may be examined, are not found, and there is
only the lantern alone.

“So also is He the Most Holy and Ancient One: He is that highest Light
concealed with all concealments, and He is not found; those rays(797)
(proceeding from Him) being excepted, which are extended, which are
revealed, and which are hidden.

“And they are called the Holy Name, and therefore are all things One.

“Which truly our companions have said in former books, that certain paths
have been created by the Most Holy Ancient One, who is revealed through
them collectively and severally; since they are the conformations of the
Most Holy Ancient One, concerning them now there is not time for
examination.

“I have spoken concerning them in the Holy Assembly, and I have beheld
that which before I did not understand in such a manner, and I have hidden
the matter in my heart.

“But now I alone will describe these things before the Holy King, and all
those assuredly just men who have assembled to hear these words.”




