Chapter I


1. “How long do men plough in a field with trees on the eve of the
Sabbatical year?”(38) The school of Shammai say, “so long as it is useful
for the fruit;” but the school of Hillel say, “till Pentecost,” and the
words of the one are near to the words of the other.

2. “What is a field with trees?” “Three trees to every fifty cubits
square, if they be fit to produce a heap of figs worth sixty Italian
minas;(39) on their account men can legally plough the earth for the whole
fifty cubits square around them. Less than for these they may not legally
plough, save the extent of the gatherer of fruit with his basket outward.”

3. “Whether they be fruitless or fruitful?” “Men may regard them as though
they were fig-trees.” “If they be fit to produce a heap of figs worth
sixty Italian minas?” “On their account they may legally plough the whole
fifty cubits square around them. Less than for these they may not plough,
save what is absolutely needful.”

4. “One tree produced a heap of figs, and two trees did not produce it; or
two trees produced it, and one did not produce it?” “Men may not plough
save what is absolutely needful for them, till they be from three to nine
in number.” “If they be ten?” “On their account men may legally plough
around them the whole fifty cubits square; and also from ten trees and
upward, whether they produce or do not produce it.” As is said, “in
earing-time and in harvest thou shalt rest.”(40) There is no need to say
earing-time and harvest in the Sabbatical year, but earing-time on the eve
of the Sabbatical year, when it is just entering on the Sabbatical year;
and harvest of the Sabbatical year, which is proceeding toward the close
of the Sabbatical year. Rabbi Ishmael said, “as the earing-time (mentioned
Exod. xxxiv. 21) is voluntary, so the harvest is voluntary, except the
harvest of the (omer) sheaf.”(41)

5. “If the three trees belong to three owners?” “They are reckoned as one,
and on their account they may legally plough the whole fifty cubits square
around them.” “And how much space must be between them?” Rabban Simon, the
son of Gamaliel, said, “that a bullock with his ploughing instruments may
pass.”

6. “If there be ten saplings dispersed in the fifty cubits square?” “On
their account men may plough the whole fifty cubits square around them
till new year’s day.” “If they be placed in a row, or rounded like a
crown?” “Men may not plough save what is absolutely needful for them.”

7. The saplings and the gourds are reckoned alike in the fifty cubits
square. Rabban Simon, the son of Gamaliel, said, “for every ten cucumbers
in the fifty cubits square, men may plough the fifty cubits square around
them till new year’s day.”

8. “How long are they called saplings?” Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Azariah,
said,(42) “till they can be used.” R. Joshua said, “till the age of seven
years.” R. Akiba said, “a sapling, as commonly named.” “A tree decays and
sprouts afresh; when less than a handbreadth, it is a sapling; when more
than a handbreadth, it is a tree.” The words of Rabbi Simon.



Chapter II


1. “How long may men plough in a white(43) field on the eve of the
Sabbatical year?” “Till the productiveness ceases; so long as men usually
plough to plant cucumbers and gourds.” Said R. Simon, “thou hast put the
law in every man’s hand. But men may plough in a grain field till the
Passover, and in a field of trees till Pentecost.”

2. Men may dung and dig among cucumbers and gourds till new year’s day,
and they may also do so in a parched-up field. They may prune them, remove
their leaves, cover them with earth, and fumigate them, till new year’s
day. R. Simon said, “one may even remove the leaf from the bunch of grapes
in the Sabbatical year.”

3. Men may remove stones till new year’s day. They may gather the ears,
they may break off branches, they may cut off the withered part till new
year’s day. R. Joshua said, “as they may break off branches and cut off
the withered part of the fifth year, so also they may do it in the sixth
year.” Rabbi Simon said, “every time I am permitted to work among the
trees, I am permitted to cut off the withered part.”

4. Men may smear the saplings, and bind them, and cut them down, and make
sheds for them, and water them, till new year’s day. R. Eleazar, the son
of Zadok, said, “one may even water the top of the branch in the
Sabbatical year, but not the root.”

5. Men may anoint unripe fruits, and puncture(44) them, till new year’s
day. Unripe fruit of the eve of the Sabbatical year which is just entering
on the Sabbatical year, and unripe fruit of the Sabbatical year which is
proceeding to the close of the Sabbatical year, they may neither anoint
nor puncture. Rabbi Jehudah said, “the place where it is customary to
anoint them, they may not anoint them, because that is work. The place
where it is not customary to anoint them, they may anoint them.” R. Simon
“permitted it in trees because it is allowable in the usual culture of the
trees.”

6. Men may not plant trees, make layers, or engraft them, on the eve of
the Sabbatical year, less than thirty days before new year’s day. And if
one plant them, or make layers, or engraft them, they must be rooted out.
Rabbi Judah said, “every graft which does not cohere in three days has no
more cohesion.” Rabbi José and R. Simon said “in two weeks.”

7. Rice, and millet, and poppy, and simsim,(45) which have taken root
before new year’s day, must be tithed for the past year, and are allowed
for use in the Sabbatical year; otherwise they are forbidden in the
Sabbatical year, and must pay tithes for the following year.

8. R. Simon of Shezur said, “Egyptian beans which are sown at first for
seed are reckoned like them.” R. Simon said, “the large lentils are
reckoned like them.” R. Eliezer said, “the large lentils which put forth
pods before new year’s day are also reckoned like them.”

9. “Onions, not for seed, and Egyptian beans, from which water is withheld
thirty days before new year’s day, must pay tithes for the past year, and
they are allowed for use in the Sabbatical year. Otherwise they are
forbidden in the Sabbatical year, and must be tithed for the coming year,
and so also (the produce) of a rain-field(46) from which the water of
irrigation is withheld on two occasions.” The words of R. Maier. But the
Sages say “three.”

10. “The gourds which stand over for seed?” “If they dry up before new
year’s day and are unfit for human food, it is lawful to let them remain
on the Sabbatical year. Otherwise it is forbidden to let them stand over
on the Sabbatical year. Their buds are forbidden in the Sabbatical year.
But they may be sprinkled with white dust.”(47) The words of R. Simon.
Rabbi Eliezer, the son of Jacob, “forbade them.” Men may irrigate rice in
the Sabbatical year. Rabbi Simon said, “but they must not cut its leaves.”



