Chapter III


1. There are more weighty rules for holy things, than for the
heave-offering. Because vessels may be baptized in vessels for the
heave-offering, but not for holy things. The outside and inside and handle
(are reckoned separately) for the heave-offering, but not for holy things.
He who carries that which defiles by treading upon it, may carry the
heave-offering but not the holy flesh. Treading on the garments of those
who eat the heave-offering defiles for the holy flesh. The measure of the
holy flesh is not as the measure of the heave-offering. Because for the
holy flesh one must loose his garments and dry himself, and baptize and
afterward bind them up. But in the heave-offering he can bind them up and
afterward baptize himself.

2. Vessels completed in purity must be baptized for holy things, but not
for the heave-offering. A vessel unites whatever is inside to holy things,
but not to the heave-offering. The fourth degree of legal uncleanness(363)
is disallowed in holy things, and the third degree in the heave-offering.
In the heave-offering, if one of the hands be unclean, its fellow may be
clean, but in holy things one must baptize both hands; because each
renders its fellow unclean for holy things, but not for the
heave-offering.

3. Men may eat with unwashen hands the dry meat of the heave-offering, but
not the holy flesh. The first day mourner, and he who failed in atonement,
have need of baptism for the holy flesh, but not for the heave-offering.

4. There are weighty rules for the heave-offering, because in Judah men
are credited with the purity of wine and oil during the whole year. And in
the time of wine-pressing and oil-pressing (men are credited) even for the
heave-offering. When the time for wine and oil pressing has passed over,
and a barrel of wine is brought for the heave-offering, it must not be
received. But one may let it stand over for the wine-pressing next year.
But if one said, “I put into it a quarter log of holy wine,” it is
credited. “Jugs of wine and jugs of oil which are mixed?” They are
credited in the time of wine-pressing and oil-pressing, and seventy days
before that time.

5. From Modiyith(364) and inward,(365) men are credited for the purity of
earthen vessels. From Modiyith and outward they are not credited. “How?”
“The potter, when he is selling pots, comes inward from Modiyith.” One
says, “this is the potter,” and “these the pots,” and “these the
purchasers,” “it is credited.” “When he went outward?” “It is not
credited.”

6. The tax-gatherers when they enter the house, and also the tax-gatherers
when they restore the vessels, are credited in saying, “we did not touch
them.” And in Jerusalem they are credited in holy things (that they did
not defile them), and at the time of the feast they are credited even in
the heave-offering.

7. “He who opened his barrel of wine,(366) and commenced with his dough
for the use of the feast?” R. Judah said, “he may finish it” (after the
feast). But the Sages say, “he must not finish it.” When the feast was
over, the priests looked round for the purity of the Temple court. If the
feast ended on Friday, they did not look round for honor to the
approaching Sabbath. R. Judah said, “even they did not look round on
Thursday, because the priests are not then idle.”

8. “How did they look round for the purity of the court?” “The priests
baptized the vessels, which were in the Sanctuary, and used to say to the
people, ‘Watch and do not touch the table and the candlestick, lest you
render them unclean.’ ” All the vessels in the Sanctuary were double and
treble, because if the first became unclean, they could bring duplicates
instead of them. “All the vessels which were in the Sanctuary required
baptism(367) except the golden altar, and the brazen altar, because they
are as earth.” The words of R. Eliezer. But the Sages say, “because they
were overlaid.”




The Sanhedrin


    Judges—Judgments—The Tribunal of Seventy-one—The Great
    Sanhedrin—The Small Sanhedrin—High Priest—Funerals—King—Royal
    Wives—Book of the Law—Objections to Judges—Relations—Examination
    of Witnesses—Evidence—Judgments in Money and Judgments in
    Souls—Form of the Sanhedrin—Appointment of Judges—Intimidation of
    Witnesses—Investigation—Acquittal or
    Condemnation—Stoning—Hanging—Burning—Beheading
    —Strangling—Blasphemy—Idolatry—Enticing—Sorcery—A Son Stubborn and
    Rebellious—Burglary—Murder—Theft—Those Who Have No Portion in the
    World to Come—The Rebellious Elder—The False Prophet—The False
    Witness.



Chapter I


1. “Judgments for money (require) three (judges). Robbery and beating
(require) three. Damages or half damages, double payments and payments
four or five fold (require) three.” “Constraint, and enticement, and
slander (require) three.” The words of R. Meier. But the Sages say,
“slander (requires) twenty-three judges, because there exist in it
judgments of souls.”

2. Stripes (require) three judges. In the name of Rabbi Ishmael, the Sages
say, “twenty-three.” “The intercalary month(368) requires three. The
intercalary year requires three.” The words of Rabbi Meier. Rabban Simon,
the son of Gamaliel, said, “with three judges they begin, and with five
they discuss, and they conclude with seven; and if they concluded with
three it is intercalated.”

3. “The appointment of elders, and striking off the heifer’s neck(369)
(require) three.” The words of Rabbi Simon. But Rabbi Judah said, “five.”
The loosing off the shoe,(370) and dissatisfaction in marriage (require)
three. The produce(371) of the fourth year,(372) the second tithes, of
which the value is unknown (require) three. The valuation of holy things
(requires) three. The estimation of movable things requires three. R.
Judah said, “one of them must be a priest.” Immovable things require nine
judges and a priest; and the valuation of a man (slave) is similar.

4. Judgments of souls (require) twenty-three judges. Bestiality (requires)
twenty-three, as is said, “and thou shalt slay the woman and the beast,”
and it is also said, “the beast thou shalt slay.” An ox to be stoned
(requires) twenty-three judges; as is said, “The ox shall be stoned, and
his owner also shall be put to death,”(373) as is the death of the owner,
so is the death of the ox. The wolf, and the lion, and the bear, and the
leopard, and the panther, and the serpent, are to be put to death with
twenty-three judges. R. Eliezer said, “everyone who first killed them has
gained honor.” R. Akiba said, “they are to be put to death after a
judgment with twenty-three (judges).”

5. A tribe must not be judged, nor a false prophet, nor a high priest,
save before the tribunal of seventy-one. And soldiers must not go forth to
lawful warfare, save by a decree of the tribunal of seventy-one. Men must
not add to the city or to the temple courts, save by a decision of the
tribunal of seventy-one. They must not appoint judges to the tribes, save
by a decision of the tribunal of seventy-one. A city must not be excluded,
save by the tribunal of seventy-one. And the tribunal must not exclude a
city on the border, nor exclude three cities, but only one or two.

6. The Great Sanhedrin consisted of seventy-one members, and the small one
of twenty-three. And whence know we that the great one contained
seventy-one? as is said, “Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of
Israel”,(374) and Moses over them. There are seventy-one. R. Judah said
“seventy.” And whence know we that the small one consisted of
twenty-three? as is said, “Then the congregation shall judge”;(375) “and
the congregation shall deliver.” A congregation to judge, and a
congregation to deliver, there is twenty. And whence know we that a
congregation required ten? as is said, “How long shall I bear with this
evil congregation?”(376) Joshua and Caleb were excepted. “And whence know
we to produce the other three?” From the meaning, as is said, “Thou shalt
not follow a multitude to do evil.”(377) I am hearing that “I shall be
with them for good.” If so, why is it said, “to decline after many to
wrest judgment”?(378) “Because thy inclinations to good do not equal thy
inclinations to evil. Thy inclinations to good are by the report of one.
Thy inclinations to evil are by the report of two. And a tribunal must not
be balanced. Another must be added. There are twenty-three.” “And how
populous must be the city suited for judges?” “One hundred and twenty.” R.
Nehemiah said “230 to represent twenty-three overseers of tens.”



