Chapter VIII


1. “The married woman, while she is in the house of her husband?” “Her
husband slaughtered on her account, and her father slaughtered on her
account?” “She must eat the passover with her husband.” “She went to spend
the first feast after her marriage in the house of her father—her father
slaughtered on her account, and her husband slaughtered on her account?”
“She may eat in the place which she wishes.” “An orphan on whose account
the guardians slaughtered?” “He may eat in the place which he wishes.” “A
slave of two partners?” “He must not eat with both.” “A slave who is half
free?” “He must not eat with his master.”

2. One said to his slave, “go and slaughter for me the passover.” “He
slaughtered a kid?” “He may eat it.” “He slaughtered a lamb?” “He may eat
it.” “He slaughtered a kid and a lamb?” “He may eat of the first.” “He
forgot what his master said to him—what shall he do?” “He must slaughter a
lamb and a kid, and shall say, ‘If my master said to me—a kid, the kid is
on his account, and the lamb is on my account; and if my master said to
me—a lamb, the lamb is for him, and the kid is for me.’ ” “If his master
forgot what he said to him?” “Both animals must go forth to the house of
burning; and they are free from keeping the second passover.”

3. One said to his sons, “I am ready to slaughter the passover for you who
shall first go up to Jerusalem.” As soon as one of them entered with his
head and the greater part of his body inside the city gate, he gained his
own share of the passover, and gained it for his brothers with him. They
may always be reckoned in one company, when each one obtains the size of
an olive. They may first be reckoned, and afterward withdraw from a
company till the passover be slaughtered. Rabbi Simon said, “until its
blood be poured out on their account.”

4. “He who reckoned others with himself in his portion of the lamb?” “The
members of the company are allowed to give to him his share, and he may
eat of it with his own guests; and they may eat their portion with their
own guests.”

5. “If one observed an issue twice?” “They may slaughter the lamb on his
account on the seventh day of the issue if it be the fourteenth day of
Nisan.” “If he observed it thrice?”(174) “They may only slaughter on his
account on the eighth day of the issue” (if it be the fourteenth day of
Nisan).

6. “The mourner and the person who opened a heap,(175) and also the person
who has the promise of release from prison, and the sick, and the aged,
who are able to eat the size of an olive?” “They may slaughter the
passover for them.” For all of them they must not slaughter the lamb on
their own account alone, lest they bring the passover into contempt,(176)
because there might happen to them some abomination. They are freed from
keeping a second passover—excepting him who in opening the heap was
unclean from the beginning.

7. “They must not slaughter the passover for one person.” The words of
Rabbi Judah; but Rabbi José “allowed it.” Even for a company of a hundred,
when they cannot eat the size of an olive, they must not slaughter the
passover; and they must not form a company of women, of slaves, and of
little ones.

8. A mourner may be baptized, and eat his passover in the evening, but not
other holy things. “He who heard of a death, or had the bones of his
relations collected?” “He may be baptized and eat holy things.” “A
stranger who was proselytized on the eve of the passover?” The school of
Shammai say, “He may be baptized and eat his passover in the evening”; but
the school of Hillel say, “he who just departed from the foreskin is as
legally unclean as he who just departs from the grave.”



Chapter IX


1. He who was legally unclean, or in a journey afar off, and did not keep
the first, must keep the second (passover). “He mistook it, or was
constrained by force, and did not keep the first?” “He must keep the
second.” “If so, why is it said unclean(177) or in a journey afar off?”
“Because such persons are free from being cut off, but those bound to
observe it are to be cut off if they neglect it.”

2. What is a “journey afar off?” “From Modiim(178) and outward; and so is
the measure from Jerusalem on every side.” The words of Rabbi Akiba; Rabbi
Eleazar said, “from the threshold of the temple-court and outward.” Said
R. José, “for this reason there is a dot on the ‘he,’ to explain not that
it is really afar off, but that one is afar off from the threshold of the
temple-court and outward.”

3. “What is the difference between the first and second passover?” “The
first passover forbids leaven to be seen or found; but the second allows
unleavened and leavened bread in one’s house.” The first passover requires
hallel(179) during eating, but the second does not require hallel during
eating. Both require hallel in their preparations, and the paschal
sacrifices must be eaten roasted on unleavened bread with bitter herbs,
and they both abrogate the Sabbath.

4. “The passover-offering which was brought during legal uncleanness?”
“The man or woman with an issue may not eat of it, nor she in separation
or in childbirth. But if they eat they are free from being cut off.” Rabbi
Eleazar “frees them even in going into the sanctuary.”

5. “What is the difference between the passover of Egypt and the passover
of succeeding generations?” “The passover of Egypt was taken on the tenth
day,(180) and required the sprinkling with a bunch of hyssop on the lintel
and the two side posts, and was eaten with haste in one night; but the
passover of succeeding generations exists the whole seven days.”

6. Said R. Joshua, “I once heard that the substitute(181) of the
passover-offering can be sacrificed, and that the substitute of the
passover-offering cannot be sacrificed, I have no one to explain.” Said R.
Akiba, “I will explain: the passover-offering, which was found (after
being lost) before the time for slaughtering its substitute, may be
pastured till it be blemished, and it can be sold, and the owner can take
for its price peace-offerings, and so also for its substitute. After the
time for slaughtering the passover-offering its substitute may be offered
for a peace-offering, and so can also its substitute.”

7. “He who set apart a ewe for his passover, or a male of two years?” “He
may pasture it till it be blemished. And he can sell it, and its price may
be used for a free-will offering.” “He who selected his passover, and
afterward died?” “His son must not offer it after him with the intention
of a passover, but he may offer it with the intention of a
peace-offering.”

8. “The passover-offering which was mixed up with other sacrifices?” “All
must be pastured till they be blemished, and they must be sold, and the
offerer must bring the price of the best of this kind and the price of the
best of that kind, and the loss he must make up from his private means.”
“The passover-offering which was mixed up with first-borns?” Rabbi Simon
said, “if there be companies of priests they may eat it.”

9. “A company(182) which lost its passover-offering, and said to someone,
‘go and seek it and slaughter it for us’; and he went and found it and
slaughtered it, and they meanwhile also took one and slaughtered it,—if
his be first slaughtered?” “He may eat of his and they may eat with him of
his.” “But if theirs be first slaughtered?” “They may eat of theirs, and
he may eat of his.” “But if it be not known which of them was first
slaughtered, or both were slaughtered at once?” “He must eat of his
passover, but they cannot eat with him, and their passover must go forth
to the house of burning; and they are freed from keeping a second
passover.” “He said to them, ‘if I be too late, go and slaughter for me’;
he went, and meanwhile found (the lost) one and slaughtered it, and they
took and also slaughtered one. If theirs be first slaughtered?” “They may
eat of theirs, and he may eat with them.” “But if his were first
slaughtered?” “He shall eat of his, and they shall eat of theirs.” “But if
it be not known which of them was first slaughtered or both of them were
slaughtered at once?” “They shall eat of theirs, but he must not eat with
them, and his lamb must go forth to the house of burning, and he is freed
from keeping a second (passover).” “If he said to them ‘slaughter for me,’
and they also said to him ‘slaughter for us?’ ” “All shall eat of that one
first slaughtered.” “But if it be not known which of them was first
slaughtered?” “Both must go forth to the house of burning.” “If he did not
say it to them, nor they say it to him?” “They are not sureties one for
the other” (and they must eat apart from each other).

10. “Two companies had their passover-offerings mixed: this company drew
out one for themselves, and that company drew out one for themselves. One
of these comes to those, and one of those comes to these, and thus they
say, ‘if this passover be ours, let our hands be withdrawn from yours and
be counted with ours; but if this passover be yours, let our hands be
withdrawn from ours and be counted with yours.’ And so with five companies
of five each, and ten of ten each, they may draw out and join one from
every company, and say so.”

11. “Two persons who had their passover-offerings mixed?” “One draws out
one for himself, and the other draws out one for himself. This one can
count with himself a person invited from the market. And that one can
count with himself a person invited from the market. This individual comes
to that one, and that one comes to this one, and so they say, ‘if this
passover be mine, let thy hands be withdrawn from thine, and be counted
with mine; and if this passover be thine, let my hands be withdrawn from
mine, and be counted with thine.’ ”



