Chapter VI


1. When the judgment was finished, they brought him forth to stone
him.(394) The place of stoning was outside the judgment-hall; as is said,
“Bring him forth that hath cursed.”(395) One stood at the door of the
judgment-hall with towels in his hand, and another man rode a horse at a
distance from him, but so that he might see him. If one said, “I have
something to tell for clearing,” this one waved the towels, and the other
galloped his horse, and stopped the accused. And even though he himself
said, “I have something to tell to clear myself,” they brought him back as
many as four or five times, only there must be substance in his words. If
they found him clear, they freed him; but if not, they took him forth to
stone him. And a herald preceded him (crying), “Such a one, the son of
such a one, is brought out for stoning, because he committed such a
transgression, and so and so are witnesses; let everyone who knows aught
for clearing him come forth and tell it.”

2. When he was ten cubits from the place of stoning, they said to him
“confess,” as it is the custom of all about to die to confess, since to
everyone who confesses there is a portion in the world to come. So we find
with Achan when Joshua said to him, “My son, give, I pray thee, glory to
the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him.”(396) And Achan
answered Joshua, and said, “Indeed, I have sinned against the Lord God of
Israel, and thus and thus I have done.” “And from whence know we that his
confession made atonement for him?” “As it is said, ‘And Joshua said, Why
hast thou troubled us? the Lord shall trouble thee this day. This day thou
art troubled, but thou shalt not be troubled in the world to come.’ ” And
if he did not know how to confess, they told him to say, “let my death be
an atonement for all my sins.” Rabbi Judah said, “if he knew that he was
falsely condemned, he said, ‘let my death be an atonement for all my sins,
except this one’;” the (Sages) said, “if so, every man will speak thus to
make themselves innocent.”

3. When he was four cubits from the place of stoning, they stripped off
his garments. “If a man, they covered him in front; if a woman, before and
behind.” The words of Rabbi Judah. But the Sages say “a man was stoned
naked, but the woman was not stoned naked.”

4. The place of stoning was two men high. One of the witnesses thrust him
down on his loins. If he turned on his heart, the witness must turn him on
his loins. If he died with that thrust it was finished; but if not, the
second (witness) took the stone, and cast it upon his heart. If he died
with that blow, the stoning was finished. But if not, he was stoned by all
Israel, as is said, “The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to
put him to death, and afterward the hands of all the people.”(397) “All
who were stoned were hung up.” The words of Rabbi Eliezer. But the Sages
say, “none were hung up, save the blasphemer and the idolater.” “The man
is to be hung with his face toward the people, but the woman with her face
toward the wood.” The words of Rabbi Eliezer. But the Sages say, “the man
was hung up, but they do not hang up a woman.” Rabbi Eleazar said to them,
“and did not Simon, the son of Shatach, hang women in Askalon?” They said
to him, “he hung up eighty women (witches), and two could not be judged,
in one day.” “How did they hang him?” “They sunk a beam in the ground, and
a traverse beam proceeded from it, and they bound his hands, one over the
other, and hung him up” (by them). R. José said, “the beam was inclined
against the wall, and he was hung upon it, just as the butchers do.” And
they loosed him immediately afterward. “But if he was out all night?” “It
was a transgression of a negative command, as is said, ‘His body shall not
remain all night upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him that
day (for he that is hanged is accursed of God),’ ”(398) etc. As one says,
“wherefore is this one hung?” “Because he blasphemed the NAME, and it
follows that the heavenly NAME is profaned.”

5. Rabbi Meier said, “when man is sorrowful,(399) what language does the
Shekinah(400) make him to utter?” If it be lawful so to speak, “my head
makes me ashamed, my arm makes me ashamed.” If, to speak after the manner
of men, OMNIPRESENCE is sorrowful, when the blood of the wicked is poured
out, how much more sorrowful is He for the blood of the righteous? And not
in the case of the condemned alone, but everyone who leaves his dead
overnight, is a transgressor of a negative command. If they left him for
the sake of honor, to bring a coffin and a shroud for him, there is no
transgression. But they did not bury him (the condemned) in the sepulchres
of his fathers. And there were two burial grounds prepared for the
Judgment Hall—one for the stoned and the burned, and one for those
beheaded and strangled.

6. When the flesh of the condemned was consumed, they gathered his bones
and buried them in their proper place; and his relatives came and asked
after the peace of the judges, and the peace of the witnesses, as much as
to say, “know there is nothing in our hearts against you, as your judgment
was true.” And they did not mourn, but were gloomy, since gloominess is
only in the heart.



Chapter VII


1. Four punishments were permitted to the supreme court—stoning, burning,
beheading, and strangling. R. Simon said, “burning, stoning, strangling,
and beheading.” The preceding chapter is the order of stoning.

2. The order for those burned was to be sunk in dung to their knees. And
men put a hard towel in a soft one, and encircled his neck. One pulled on
one side, and another pulled on the other side, till the condemned opened
his mouth. And one lit a wick, and cast it into his mouth, and it went
down to his bowels, and it consumed his intestines. R. Judah said, “if he
died in their hands, they did not complete in him the order of burning;
only they opened his mouth with tongs against his will, and lit the wick,
and cast it into his mouth, and it went down to his bowels and consumed
his intestines.” Said R. Eleazar the son of Zadok, “it happened with the
daughter of a priest, who was immoral, that they surrounded her with dry
branches and burned her.” The Sages replied, “because the court at that
time was unskilled.”

3. The order of those beheaded was to have their heads struck off with a
sword, as is the custom of governments. R. Judah said, “that was an abuse;
they only rested his head on a block, and hewed it off with an axe.” The
Sages replied to him, “no death is a greater abuse than that.” The order
for those strangled was, that they were sunk down in dung to their knees,
and they put a hard towel inside a soft one, and encircled his neck. One
pulled on one side, and another pulled on the other side, till his soul
departed.

4. These were stoned; ... a blasphemer, and an idolater, and he who gave
his seed to Molech, and one with a familiar spirit,(401) and a wizard, and
he who profaned the Sabbath, and he who cursed father or mother, and he
who came to a betrothed maid, and an enticer to idolatry, and a withdrawer
to idolatry, and a sorcerer, and a son stubborn and rebellious.

5. The blasphemer was not guilty till he expressed the NAME. Said R.
Joshua, the son of Korcha, every day they examined the witnesses under a
substituted (feigned) name, for example, “José shall beat José.” When the
judgment was finished, they could not execute him under the nickname, but
they withdrew all men outside, and interrogated the principal witness, and
said to him, “tell us clearly what thou hast heard?” and he said it. And
the judges stood up on their feet, and rent their garments,(402) and they
were never sewn again. And the second witness said, “even I (heard) as
he,” and the third said, “even I (heard) as he.”

6. One committed idolatry, whether he served the idol, or sacrificed to
it, or burned incense to it, or made a libation to it, or bowed down to
it, or accepted it for his god. And also, he who said to it, “thou art my
God.” But he who embraced it, and kissed it, and honored it, and dusted
it, and washed it, and anointed it, and dressed it, and put shoes on it,
transgressed a negative command. He who vowed in its name, and performed
the vow in its name, transgressed a negative command. “He exposed himself
to Baal peor?” “That is positive service.” “He cast a stone to Mercury?”
“That is positive service.”

7. He who gave his seed to Molech(403) is not guilty till he hand it to
Molech, and pass it through the fire. “If he hand it to Molech, and do not
pass it through the fire, (or if) he passed it through the fire, and did
not hand it to Molech?” “He is not guilty till he hand it to Molech, and
pass it through the fire.” One has a familiar spirit, when the Python
speaks from his arm. But the wizard speaks with his mouth. These are to be
stoned, and inquiry from them is forbidden.

8. He who profaned the Sabbath by aught which renders him guilty of
presumption is to be cut off;(404) but if he profaned the Sabbath in
error, a sin-offering (is required) from him. He who cursed father or
mother is not guilty till he curse them by the NAME. “If he curse them
with a substituted name of God?” R. Meier pronounces him “guilty”; but the
Sages “free him.”

9. “If one came to a betrothed maid?” “He is not guilty, except she be a
virgin, and betrothed, and in the house of her father.” “If two came to
her?” “The first is to be stoned and the second strangled.”

10. “The enticer to idolatry?” “This ordinary man enticed an ordinary man;
he said to him, ‘there is an object of fear in such a place, so it eats,
so it drinks, so it does good, so it does evil.’ ” Of all who are guilty
of death in the law, we are not to set witnesses in concealment to convict
them, except in this case of an enticer to idolatry. When he has spoken of
his idolatry to two persons, they as witnesses bring him to the
judgment-hall, and stone him. If he spoke thus to one, this one replies,
“I have companions who desire to hear so and so.” “If he be cunning, and
he does not speak before them?” “Witnesses are concealed behind a wall,
and he says to the idolater, ‘tell me what thou saidst to me alone,’ and
the idolater told him. And he replied to him, ‘how can we leave our God,
who is in heaven, and go and serve wood and stone?’ ” “If the idolater
returned from his sin, it is well; but if he said, ‘so is our duty, and so
it is excellent for us,’ they who stood behind the wall bring him to the
judgment-hall, and stone him; if he said, ‘I shall serve, I shall go and
serve, let us go and serve; I will sacrifice, I will go and sacrifice, let
us go and sacrifice; I will burn incense, I will go and burn incense, let
us go and burn incense; I will pour a libation, I will go and pour a
libation, let us go and pour a libation; I will bow down, I will go and
bow down, let us go and bow down’—the withdrawer is he who says, ‘let us
go and serve idols.’ ”

11. The sorcerer, who has done the act, is guilty of death, but he is not
guilty who merely deludes the eyes. R. Akiba said in the name of R.
Joshua, “two sorcerers can gather cucumbers—one gathers them and is free,
but another gathers them and is guilty. He who has performed the act is
guilty. He who has merely deluded the eyes is free.”



