Chapter II


1. At first everyone who wished to (cleanse) the altar, cleansed it. When
they were many, they ran and mounted the ascent, and each one, who at the
middle outstripped his companion by four cubits, won it. If two were equal
the president said to them, “lift your fingers.”(202) “And what is that?”
“They lifted one or two fingers, but no one lifted the thumb in the
Sanctuary.”

2. It happened that two were equal, and running and mounting the ascent,
one of them thrust his companion, so that he fell, and his leg was broken.
And when the great Sanhedrin saw that they were getting into danger, they
decreed that they should not cleanse the altar save by lot. There were
four lots, and this was the first lot.

3. The second lot was: Who should slay? Who sprinkle? Who should take the
ashes from the inner altar? and who should take the ashes from the
candlestick? and who should carry the members to the ascent? the head and
the right foot, and the hind feet, the tail, and the left foot, the
breast, and the throat, and the two sides, and the inwards, and the fine
flour, and the pancakes, and the wine. Thirteen priests discharged this
lot. Said Ben Asai in the presence of R. Akiba from the mouth of Rabbi
Joshua, “like to its way of motion” (when alive).

4. The third lot(203) was for new men who came to offer incense, and they
cast the lots. The fourth lot was for new men with the old, who should
carry the members from the ascent to the altar.

5. The daily offering was with nine, ten, eleven, twelve, priests; not
less and not more. “How?” “Itself with nine: at the feast of Tabernacles
in the hand of one, a glass of water there is ten. The evening offering
with eleven, itself with nine, and in the hands of two, two fagots of
wood. On Sabbath, eleven; itself with nine, and two, in their hands two
fragments of incense of the showbread. And on the Sabbath in the feast of
Tabernacles in the hand of one a glass of water.”

6. The ram was offered with eleven; the flesh with five, the inner part,
and the fine flour and the wine, to each two and two.

7. The bullock was offered with twenty-four priests. “The head and the
right foot?” “The head with one, and the foot with two.” “The chine and
the left foot?” “The tail with two, and the left foot with two.” “The
breast and the throat?” “The breast with one, and the throat with three,
the two hind feet with two, and the two sides with two, the inner parts
and the fine flour, and the wine, each with three and three.” “Of which is
that said?” “Of the offering for the whole congregation.” “But for the
offerings of an individual?” “If he wished to offer, he might offer.” “For
the skinning and cutting up?” “For these all were equal.”



Chapter III


1. The overseer said to them, “go and look if the time for slaughter is
come.” If it came, the watchman said, “it is brightening.”(204) Matthew
the son of Samuel said, “is the whole east light as far as Hebron?” and he
said “yes.”

2. “And why was that necessary?” “Because it once happened that the light
of the moon came up, and they deemed it the light from the east.” And they
slaughtered the daily offering, and they brought it to the house of
burning. And they brought down the High Priest to the house of Baptism.
This was the rule in the Sanctuary that everyone who covered his feet (was
required) to wash; and everyone retiring was required to sanctify his
hands and feet.

3. No one entered the court for service, however clean, until he washed.
The High Priest made five washings and ten purifications in this day, and
all were in the Holy place above the house of Parva,(205) with the
exception of the first one alone.

4. They made a screen of linen between him and the people. He undressed,
descended, and washed. He came up and wiped himself. They brought to him
robes of gold, and he dressed, and he sanctified his hands and feet. They
brought to him the daily offering. He cut (its throat), and another
finished the slaughter at his hand. He received the blood and sprinkled
it. He entered to offer the morning incense and to trim the lights, and to
offer the head and the members, and the things fried in the pan, and the
wine.

5. The morning incense was offered between the blood and the members. That
of the evening(206) between the members and the libations. If the High
Priest were old, or delicate, they heated for him (iron), and they put it
into the cold water, that its temperature should be changed.

6. They brought him to the house of Parva, and it was in the Sanctuary.
They divided with the screen of linen between him and the people. He
sanctified his hands and feet and undressed. R. Meier said, he undressed
and sanctified his hands and feet, he descended and washed, he came up and
he wiped himself. They brought to him white robes, he dressed and
sanctified his hands and feet.

7. “In the morning he was dressed with Pelusian linen worth twelve
minas,(207) and in the evening with Indian linen worth 800 zuz.”(208) The
words of R. Meier. But the Sages say, “that in the morning his dress was
worth eighteen minas, and in the evening twelve minas”; all these thirty
minas were from the congregation, and if he wished to add to them he might
add of himself.

8. He came to the side of his bullock, and the bullock was standing
between the porch and the altar; his head to the North, and his face to
the West; and the Priest stood in the East, and his face Westward, and he
placed both hands upon him and made confession, and thus he spake, “I
beseech thee, O Name, I have committed iniquity. I have sinned before
Thee—I, and my house—I beseech thee, O Name, pardon(209) now the
iniquities and the transgressions and the sins which I have perversely
committed, and transgressed, and sinned before thee, I, and my house, as
is written in the law of Moses thy servant, that in this day ‘He will
atone for you,’ etc. And they answered after him, ‘BLESSED BE THE NAME.
THE HONOR OF HIS KINGDOM FOREVER AND EVER.’ ”

9. He came to the east of the court to the north of the altar. The Sagan
was at his right hand, and the chief of the fathers at his left. And there
were the two goats; and the urn was there, and in it were two lots of
boxwood, and Ben Gamla made them of gold, and they commemorated him as
praiseworthy.

10. The son of Katin made twelve pipes to the laver, where before there
were but two; and also he made a wheel for the laver, lest its water
should be polluted by night. Monobazus(210) the king made all the handles
of the vessels, of gold for the day of atonement. Helena, his mother, made
a chandelier of gold near the door of the Sanctuary, and she also made a
tablet of gold upon which the section of the Sota(211) was written.
Wonders were wrought for the doors of Nicanor,(212) and they were
commemorated as praiseworthy.

11. And these were in ignominy: The family of Garmu, who were unwilling to
instruct in the preparation of the show-bread. The family of Abtinas, who
were unwilling to instruct in the preparation of incense. Hogrus, the son
of Levi, knew a tune in the chant, and was unwilling to instruct. The son
of Kamzar was unwilling to instruct in the art of writing. Concerning the
former it is said, “The memory of the just is blessed”; and concerning the
latter it is said, “but the name of the wicked shall rot” (Prov. x. 7).



