Chapter V


1. The length of the whole court(590) was 187 cubits. The breadth 135.
From east to west 187. The place for the tread of the feet of Israel was
eleven cubits. The place for the tread of the priests eleven cubits. The
altar thirty-two. Between the porch and the altar twenty-two cubits. The
temple 100 cubits; and eleven cubits behind the House of Atonement.

2. From north to south there were 135 cubits. From the sloping ascent to
the altar sixty-two. From the altar to the rings eight cubits. The space
for the rings twenty-four. From the rings to the tables four. From the
tables to the pillars four. From the pillars to the wall of the court
eight cubits. And the remainder lay between the sloping ascent and the
wall and the place of the pillars.

3. In the court were six chambers, three in the north, and three in the
south. In the north, the chamber of salt, the chamber of parva, the
chamber of washers. In the chamber of salt they added salt to the
offerings. In the chamber of parva they salted the skins of the offerings;
and upon its roof was the house of baptism for the High Priest on the day
of atonement. In the chamber of washers they cleansed the inwards of the
offerings; and from thence a gallery extended up to the top of the house
of parva.

4. In the south were the chamber of wood, the chamber of the captivity,
and the chamber of hewn stone. The chamber of wood, said Rabbi Eleazar,
the son of Jacob, “I forget for what it served.” Abashaul said, “the
chamber of the High Priest was behind them both, and the roof of the three
chambers was even. In the chamber of the captivity was sunk the well with
the wheel attached to it, and from thence water was supplied to the whole
court. In the chamber of Hewn Stone the great Sanhedrin of Israel sat, and
judged the priesthood, and the priest in whom defilement was discovered,
clothed in black, and vailed in black, went out and departed; and when no
defilement was found in him, clothed in white, and vailed in white, he
went in and served with his brethren the priests. And they made a
feast-day, because no defilement was found in the seed of Aaron the
Priest, and thus they said, ‘Blessed be the Place. Blessed be He, since no
defilement is found in the seed of Aaron. And blessed be He who has chosen
Aaron and his sons to stand and minister(591) before the Lord in the House
of the Holy of Holies.’ ”

OUR BEAUTY BE UPON THEE, WHOLE COURT;
AND COMPLETION TO THEE, TRACT
MEASUREMENTS.




The Tabernacle


    Heave-offerings—Dimensions of the Tabernacle—Boards—Bars—Rings of
    Gold—Overlaying with Gold—Pipes of
    Gold—Curtains—Threads—Coupling—Taches—Sockets—Vail—Holy of
    Holies—Holy Place—Sacred Vessels—Cunning
    Work—Court—Bars—Pins—Hangings—The Ark—The Tables of the Law both
    Whole and Broken—The Staves—The Table of Showbread—The
    Candlestick—Indefinite Expressions—The Altar of Incense—The Altar
    of Burnt-offerings—The Line for the Sprinkling of Blood—The
    Laver—Guards—Encampment—Standards—Preparations—Blowing the
    Trumpet—The March—Signs for Encamping—The Pillar of Cloud—The
    Shechinah.



Chapter I


Rabbi Judah the Holy, said, there were ten heave-offerings, the
heave-offering of the Lord, and the heave-offering of the tithes, of the
dough, and of the first-fruits; and the heave-offering of the Nazarite,
and the heave-offering of thanksgiving, and the heave-offering of the
land, and the heave-offering of Israelites dwelling in Midian, and the
heave-offering of the shekels, and the heave-offering of the tabernacle.
The heave-offering of the Lord, and the heave-offering of the tithes, and
of the dough, and of the first-fruits, and the heave-offering of the
Nazarite, and the heave-offering of thanksgiving, were for the priests.
The heave-offering of the land was for the priests, the Levites, and the
Nethinim,(592) and the Sanctuary and Jerusalem. The heave-offering of
Midian was for Eleazar the priest, the heave-offering of shekels was for
the sockets of the tabernacle, the heave-offering of the tabernacle
furnished the material of the tabernacle, and the oil for lighting, and
the sweet incense, and the garments of the priests, and the garments of
the High Priest. The length of the tabernacle was thirty cubits, and its
breadth was ten cubits, and its height was ten cubits. Rabbi José said,
“its length was thirty-one cubits.” “How was the tabernacle set up?”
“Forty sockets of silver were placed on the north, and forty sockets of
silver on the south, and sixteen on the west, and four on the east. These
are 100 sockets. As is said,(593) ‘An hundred sockets of the hundred
talents, a talent for a socket.’ ” “How were the boards set up?” “Twenty
boards were placed on the north, and twenty boards on the south, and eight
on the west. On the east there was no board, but there were four pillars
of shittim-wood. Upon them the vail was hung. As is said,(594) ‘thou shalt
make a vail,’ etc., ‘and thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of
shittim-wood, overlaid with gold,’ etc., and ‘thou shalt hang up the vail
under the taches.’ ” And the sockets were made with holes, and these were
cut out in the boards below, a quarter from one side and a quarter from
the other side, and there was cut out half of it in the middle, and it
made two pins like two supports, and they entered into two sockets, as is
said, “two sockets under one board for its two tenons.”(595) The pins
extended from the boards two and two, to every one which was inserted, the
positive into the negative, as it is said,(596) “Set in order one against
the other.” The words of Rabbi Nehemiah, when Rabbi Nehemiah said, “there
is no meaning in saying, ‘set in order.’ ” “And what is meant by set in
order?” “It is meant that there should be made for them rungs like an
Egyptian ladder.” There was cut out from the board above a finger-breadth
from one side, and a finger-breadth from the other side, and they were put
into the golden ring, that they should not separate one from the other, as
is said, “And they shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be
coupled together above the head of it unto one ring.”(597) There is no
meaning in saying, “unto one ring,” and what is meant by saying, “unto one
ring?” “The place where the bar was put in, and every board had in it two
rings of gold, one above, and one below; in them were put in the bars.”
And there were two upper bars, and two lower (bars) on the south side; the
length of each of them was fifteen cubits. It follows that two were in
length thirty cubits against twenty boards, and the middle (bar) was in
length thirty cubits against twenty boards, which was inserted in the
middle of the boards from east to west, as is said, “And the middle bar in
the midst of the boards shall reach from end to end.”(598) As the boards
were made in the south, so the boards were made in the north, but in the
west they were not so; but the length of the upper bar and the lower one
was six cubits against four boards, and the middle (bar), twelve cubits
against eight boards. And the boards, and the bars, and the pillars, and
the sockets, the place of the thickness of the boards were overlaid with
gold, as is said, “And the boards thou shalt overlay with gold.”(599) “The
places for the bars,” there is no meaning in saying, “places for the
bars”; and what is the meaning of saying, “places for the bars”? “The
place where the bar entered the boards.” “And the bars themselves shall be
overlaid with gold.”(600) “How was it done?” “Two pipes of gold were
introduced—the length of each of them was a cubit and a half; and they
were put into the hole of the board, the place where the bars were put
in.”



