Chapter II: Concerning the Skull of the Ancient One, and Concerning His
Brain; and Concerning the Three Heads, and the Hair, and the
Discriminatory Paths


The skull of the White Head hath not beginning, but its end is the
convexity of its joining together, which is extended, and shineth.

And from it the just shall inherit 400(798) desirable worlds in the world
to come.

And from this convexity of the joining together of this White Skull daily
distilleth a dew into Microprosopus, into that place which is called
Heaven; and in that very place shall the dead be raised to life in the
time to come.

Like as it is written, Gen. xxvii. 27: “And Elohim shall give thee from
the dew of heaven.”

And His head is filled with that dew, and all the place of the apple-trees
distilleth therewith.

He, the Most Holy Ancient One, is hidden and concealed, and in that Skull
is the Supernal Wisdom concealed, who is found and who is not found.

For assuredly in Him, the Ancient One, nothing is revealed save the Head
alone, seeing that that Head is itself the Head of all heads.

The beginning of that Supernal Wisdom which also is itself the Head, is
hidden therein, and is called the Supernal Brain, the Hidden Brain, the
Tranquil and Calm Brain; neither doth any man know it, save He Himself.

Three Heads have been formed forth, one within the other, and the other
above the other.

One Head is the Concealed Wisdom, which is covered and is not disclosed.

And this Hidden Wisdom is the Head of all things, and the Head of the
remaining Wisdoms.

The Supernal Head is the Most Holy Ancient One, the Concealed with all
Concealments.

The Head of all Heads, the Head which is not a Head(799)—namely, that
which is _in_ that Head—neither knows nor is known, because it cannot be
comprehended either by Wisdom or Understanding.

And therefore is it read, Num. xxiv. 11: “Fly thee in thy place;” and
Ezek. i. 14. The _Chaioth_, living creatures, are said to run forth and
return.

And therefore is the Most Holy Ancient One called AIN, _Ain_, the
Negatively Existent; seeing that back from Him dependeth the AIN, the
Negative Existence.(800)

But all those hairs and all those locks depend from the Hidden Brain.

And all are calm (otherwise, are disposed) in the Equilibrium; neither in
any manner is the neck seen (_i.e._, because of the locks which overshadow
it).

Because He the Most Holy Ancient One is in an unvarying condition of joy,
neither changeth He from mercy forever.

But in the thirteen measurements(801) of mercies is He found, because that
Wisdom hidden in Him is divided into three(802) paths in a quaternary, and
He Himself the Ancient One comprehendeth them, and through them doth He
reign over all things.

One (path) which shineth in the midst of the hairs going forth from the
Skull, is that path by whose light the just are led into the world to
come.

Like as it is written, Prov. iv. 18, “And the path of the just shineth as
the Light.”

And concerning this it is written, Isa. lviii. 14, “Then shalt thou
delight thyself in Tetragrammaton.”

And from that path(803) are all the other paths illuminated which depend
from Microprosopus.

He the Eternal Ancient of the Ancient Ones is the highest Crown among the
Supernals, wherewith all Diadems and Crowns are crowned.

And from Him are all the Lights illuminated, and they flash forth flames,
and shine.

But He verily is the Supreme Light, which is hidden, which is not known.

And all the other Lights are kindled by Him, and derive (their) splendor
(from him).

He the Most Holy Ancient One is found to have three heads, which are
contained in the One Head.(804)

And He Himself is that only highest supreme Head.

And since He the Most Holy Ancient One is thus symbolized in the Triad,
hence all the other Lights which shine are included in Triads.(805)

Moreover, the Most Holy Ancient One is also symbolized by the Duad.

And the division of the Ancient One in the Duad is so that the (one form
is) the Highest Crown of all the Supernals, the Head of all Heads.

And (the other is) that superior Head, and It is not known.

So also all the remaining Lights are mystically divided into Duads.

Furthermore, the Most Holy Ancient One is symbolized and concealed under
the conception of the Unity, for He himself is One, and all things are
One.

And thus all the other Lights are sanctified, are restricted, and are
bound together in the Unity or Monad, and are One; and all things are HVA,
_Hoa_, Himself.




