Chapter III: Concerning the Forehead of the Most Holy Ancient One


The Forehead, which is uncovered in the Most Holy Ancient One, is called
Grace.

For that Supernal Head concealed in the Higher, which no man hath known,
expandeth a certain external manifestation, beautiful and gracious, which
is comprehended in the Forehead.

And since He Himself is the grace of all graciousness; hence He assumeth
the conformation of the Forehead, which is disclosed in the most intense
light (otherwise, hath a formation in the figure of a leaf).

And when It is disclosed, the grace of all graciousness is found in all
worlds.

And all the prayers of the Inferiors are accepted; and the countenance of
Microprosopus is illuminated, and all things are found to exist in mercy.

And since (through this) all judgments are hidden and subjected, hence in
the Sabbath, in the time of the afternoon prayers, in which all judgments
are excited, that Forehead is disclosed.

And all the judgments are turned aside, and mercies are found.

And therefore is the Sabbath found without judgment, as well that which is
above as that which is below; also the fire of Gehenna is restrained in
its place, and the transgressors are at rest.

And therefore is the Spirit NSHMTH, of joy added on the Sabbath.

And it behoveth man to rejoice with three feasts on the Sabbath; for all
truth, and the whole system of true faith, is found therein (_i.e._, in
the Sabbath).

And it behoveth man to prepare the table, that he may eat in the three
feasts of true faith, and rejoice in them.(806)

Rabbi Schimeon said: “I attest concerning myself, before all these who are
here present, that through all my days I have not omitted these three
feasts, and that because of them I have not been compelled to fast on the
Sabbath.

“Furthermore, also on other days I have not been compelled (to fast), much
less on the Sabbath, for he who rightly acteth concerning these (feasts)
is the adept of perfect truth.

“The first feast is that of the Great Mother; the second that of the Holy
King; and the third that of the Most Holy Ancient One, the Concealed with
all Concealments.(807)

“And in this world, who can thoroughly follow out, through them, those
paths?

“If this RTZVN, _Ratzon_, Grace, be revealed, all those judgments are
enlightened, and are diverted from their concentrated rigor.

“The conformation of Him, the Most Holy Ancient One, is instituted through
one form, which is the ideal Syntagma of all forms.

“The same is the Concealed Supernal Wisdom, the synthesis of all the rest.

“And this is called ODN, _Eden_, or the supernal Paradise, concealed with
all occultations.

“And it is the Brain of the Most Holy Ancient One, and that Brain is
expanded on every side.

“Therefore is it extended into Eden, or another Paradise,(808) and from
this is Eden or Paradise formed forth.

“And when this Head, which is concealed in the Head of the Ancient One,
which is not known, extendeth a certain frontal formation, which is formed
for brilliance, then flasheth forth the Lightning of His Brain.

“And it is formed forth and illuminated with many Lights.

“And it produceth and designeth (a certain effect) in this Light
(otherwise, in this opening), in this Forehead, whereon is inscribed a
certain Light, which is called RTZVN, _Ratzon_, Grace.

“And that Grace is extended backward into the beard, even unto that place
where it can remain in the beard, and it is called the Supernal, CHSD,
_Chesed_, Mercy.

“And when this Grace is uncovered, all the Lords of Judgment behold It,
and are turned aside.”




Chapter IV: Concerning the Eyes of the Most Holy Ancient One


The eyes of the Head of the Most Holy Ancient One are two in one,(809)
equal, which ever watch, and sleep not.

Like as it is written, Ps. cxxi. 4, “The Keeper of Israel neither
slumbereth nor sleepeth,” etc.; namely, of Israel the holy.

And therefore are there no eyebrows nor eyelashes unto His eyes.

This Brain is conformed and illuminated with three supernal white
brilliances.

With this white brilliance are the eyes of Microprosopus bathed.

As it is written, Cant. v. 12, “Washed with milk,” flowing down from the
fullness of that primal white brilliance.

And with the remaining white brilliances are the other lights cleansed and
purified.

The Brain is called the Fountain of Benevolence, the fountain wherein all
blessings are found.

And since this Brain radiateth into the three white brilliances of the eye
(of Microprosopus), hence is that called the “good eye,” concerning which
it is said, Prov. xxii. 9, “It shall be blessed,” or rather that from it
dependeth blessing.

For through the Brain are manifested the white brilliances of the eye.

And when this eye looketh upon Microprosopus, all the worlds are (in a
state of) happiness.

This is the right eye. The inferior eyes are right and left, two in
duplicate color.

In the “Book of Concealed Mystery” have we taught that there is a Superior
Yod, an Inferior Yod; a Superior He, an Inferior He; a Superior Vau, an
Inferior Vau.

Unto the Ancient One pertain all the Superiors, and unto Microprosopus the
Inferiors.

They depend not in another manner, but only thus; for from the Most Holy
Ancient One do they depend.

For the Name of the Ancient One is concealed in all things, neither is it
found.

But those letters which depend from the Ancient One, so that they may be
established, are all inferiors. For were it not so, they could not be
established.

And therefore is the Holy Name(810) _alike_ concealed and manifest.

For that which is concealed pertaineth unto the Most Holy Ancient One, the
Concealed in all things.

But that, indeed, which is manifested, because it dependeth, belongeth
unto Microprosopus. (Otherwise, that which is manifested, is so for this
reason—that it is manifested because it dependeth, etc.)

And therefore do all the blessings require both concealment and
manifestation.

Those concealed letters which hang behind depend from the Most Holy
Ancient One.

Wherefore do they hang behind? For the purpose of establishing the
Inferior Yod. (Otherwise, assuredly from the Skull, from the Forehead,
from the Eyes, do they depend. And the Yod Maternal(811) dependeth toward
the Inferior Yod.)




