Chapter VI


1. “With what may a woman go out?” And “with what may she not go out?” “A
woman may not go out with laces of wool, nor with laces of flax, nor with
straps on her head, and she cannot baptize herself in them till she
unloose them; nor with frontlets, nor temple fillets, unless sewn to her
cap, nor with a headband, into the public street, nor with a golden crown
in the form of Jerusalem, nor with a necklace, nor with nose-rings, nor
with a ring without a seal, nor with a needle without an eye; but, if she
go out, she is not guilty of a sin-offering.”

2. A man must not go out with hobnailed sandals,(111) nor with one sandal
when there is no sore on his other foot, nor with phylacteries, nor with
an amulet unless it be of an expert, nor with a coat of mail, nor with a
helmet, nor with greaves; but, if he go out, he is not guilty of a
sin-offering.

3. “A woman must not go out with an eyed needle, nor with a signet ring,
nor with a spiral head-dress, nor with a scent-box, nor with a bottle of
musk; and if she go out she is guilty of a sin-offering.” The words of
Rabbi Meier. But the Sages “absolve the scent-box and the bottle of musk.”

4. The man must not go out with sword, nor bow, nor shield, nor sling, nor
lance; and if he go out he is guilty of a sin-offering. Rabbi Eleazar
said, “they are his ornaments.” But the Sages say, “they are only for
shame, as is said, ‘And they shall beat their swords into ploughshares,
and their spears into pruning hooks: nation shall not lift up sword
against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.’ ”(112) Garters are
clean, and they may go forth in them on Sabbath. Anklets(113) contract
uncleanness, and they must not go out in them on Sabbath.

5. A woman may go out with plaits of hair whether they be her own, or her
companion’s, or a beast’s hair, with frontlets and temple fillets, when
they are sewn to her cap, with a headband or a stranger’s curl into the
courtyard, with wool in her ear, and wool in her shoe, and wool prepared
for her separation, with pepper, or with a grain of salt,(114) or with
anything which she will put inside her mouth, except that she shall not
put it in for the first time on the Sabbath, and if it fall out she must
not put it back. “A false tooth or a tooth of gold?” Rabbi “allows it.”
But the Sages “forbid it.”

6. A woman may go out with a coin on a sore foot. Little girls may go out
with plaits and even splinters in their ears. Arab women go out veiled,
and Median women with mantillas; and so may any one, but, as the Sages
have said, “according to their custom.”

7. A mantilla may be folded over a stone, or a nut, or money, save only
that it be not expressly folded for the Sabbath.

8. “The cripple may go out on his wooden leg.” The words of Rabbi Meier.
But Rabbi José forbids it. “But if it have a place for receiving rags?”
“It is unclean.” His crutches cause uncleanness by treading. But they may
go out with them on the Sabbath, and they may enter with them into the
Temple court. The chair and crutches (of a paralytic) cause uncleanness by
treading, and they must not go out with them on the Sabbath, and they must
not enter with them into the Temple court. Stilts(115) are clean, but they
must not go out with them.

9. The sons may go out with their (father’s) girdles. And sons of kings
with little bells; and so may anyone, but, as the Sages have said,
“according to their custom.”

10. “They may go out with an egg of a locust,(116) and a tooth of a
fox,(117) and a nail of one crucified, as medicine.”(118) The words of
Rabbi Meier. But the Sages say (others read the words of Rabbi José and
Rabbi Meier) “it is forbidden even on a week day, because of the ways of
the Amorites.”(119)



Chapter VII


1. The Sages laid down a great rule for the Sabbath: “Everyone who forgets
the principle of Sabbath, and did many works on many Sabbaths, is only
responsible for one sin-offering. Everyone who knows the principle of
Sabbath, and did many works on many Sabbaths, is responsible for every
Sabbath. Everyone who knows that there is Sabbath, and did many works on
many Sabbaths, is responsible for every principal work.(120) Everyone who
has done many works, springing from one principal work, is only
responsible for one sin-offering.”

2. The principal works are forty, less one—sowing, ploughing, reaping,
binding sheaves, threshing, winnowing, sifting, grinding, riddling,
kneading, baking, shearing wool, whitening, carding, dyeing, spinning,
warping, making two spools, weaving two threads, taking out two threads,
twisting, loosing, sewing two stitches, tearing thread for two sewings,
hunting the gazelle, slaughtering, skinning, salting, curing its skin,
tanning, cutting up, writing two letters, erasing to write two letters,
building, demolishing, quenching, kindling, hammering, carrying from
private to public property. Lo, these are principal works—forty, less one.

3. And another rule the Sages laid down: “All that is worthy of
reservation, and they reserve its like—if they carry it out on the
Sabbath, they are responsible for a sin-offering; and everything which is
not worthy of reservation, and they do not reserve its like—if they carry
it out on the Sabbath, none is responsible but the reserver.”

4. Whoever brings out straw—a heifer’s mouthful; hay—a camel’s mouthful;
chaff—a lamb’s mouthful; herbs—a kid’s mouthful; garlic leaves and onion
leaves—if fresh, the size of a dried fig—if dry, a kid’s mouthful; but
they must not add one with the other, for they are not equal in their
measures. Whoever carries out food the size of a dried fig, is guilty of
death. And victuals, they may add one to another as they are equal in
their measures, excepting their peels and their kernels, and their stalks
and the fine and coarse bran. Rabbi Judah says, “excepting the peels of
lentils, as they may cook them with them.”



