Chapter V


The court of the tabernacle was in length 100 cubits, and in breadth fifty
cubits, as is said, “And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle for
the south side, etc., 100 cubits,(623) and likewise for the north side an
hundred cubits,” as is said, “and likewise for the north side in length
there shall be hangings of 100 cubits long.”(624) And on the west fifty
cubits, as is said, “On the west side shall be hangings of fifty
cubits.”(625) And on the east fifty cubits, as is said, “On the east side
eastward _shall be_ fifty cubits.”(626) Take from them fifty cubits for
hangings, as is said, “The hangings of one side of the gate shall be
fifteen cubits,”(627) etc. “And for the other side,” etc. From both sides
the hangings on the south to the tent were twenty cubits, and the tent was
ten cubits broad, and from the tent to the hangings on the north were
twenty cubits. This teaches that the breadth (of the court) was fifty
cubits. From the hangings on the west to the tent were twenty cubits, and
the tent was thirty cubits long; and from the tent to the hangings on the
east, there were fifty cubits. This teaches that its length was 100
cubits, as is said, “The length of the court shall be 100 cubits, and the
breadth fifty everywhere.”(628) Rabbi José said there is no meaning in
saying “fifty everywhere,” and what is meant by saying “fifty everywhere”?
“That is in front of the tent.” This teaches that its length was 100
cubits, and its breadth fifty cubits. But you could not know the breadth
of the hangings till you know the height of the court, as he (Moses) said,
“And the height five cubits”;(629) as the height was five cubits, so was
the breadth five cubits. “How was the court set up?” Twenty sockets of
brass were put on the north side, and twenty on the south side, and there
was a pillar in every one of them. And there were beams, and a ring was
fastened in their middle, and the beams were fastened with ropes and
pillars; and the length of every beam was six hand-breadths, and its
breadth was three (hand-breadths). And the ring was hung on the hook in
the pillar; and the hanging was rolled on it like the sail of a ship. It
follows that the hanging extended from the pillar two cubits and a half on
one side, and two cubits and a half on the other side; and so with the
second pillar. This teaches that between each pillar there were five
cubits. The beams were coupled with ropes and pillars, and they were
coupled in the pins of brass; and as there were pins to the tabernacle, so
were there pins to the court, as is said, “All the vessels of the
tabernacle in all the service thereof, and all the pins thereof, and all
the pins of the court, shall be of brass.”(630) But you could not know how
much space there was from the hangings to the entrance of the court, till
he said, “And the hangings of the court, and the hanging for the door of
the gate of the court, which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar.”(631)
As between the tabernacle and the altar there were ten cubits, so from the
hangings to the entrance of the court there were ten cubits. But you could
not know how high was the entrance of the court, till he said, “And for
the gate of the court shall be a hanging of twenty cubits,” in length and
height. In breadth it was five cubits. “There was no meaning in saying
five cubits, and what is the meaning of saying five cubits?” “To instruct
thee that its length was ten cubits, and its breadth five cubits.” As was
the entrance of the tent, so was the entrance of the court. As was the
entrance of the court, so was the entrance of the sanctuary. As was the
height of the entrance of the sanctuary, so was the breadth of the
entrance of the porch. “The length of the court shall be 100 cubits, and
the breadth of it fifty everywhere.”(632) The oral law says, “Take fifty
and surround them with fifty.”(633) Hence said Rabbi José, the son of
Rabbi Judah,(634) “an enclosed space which can contain two seahs (of sown
grain) as the court of the tabernacle, is lawful for carrying burdens on
the Sabbath day.”



Chapter VI


The ark which Moses made in the desert was in length two cubits and a
half, and in breadth one cubit and a half, and in height one cubit and a
half, as is said, “And they shall make an ark of shittim-wood, two cubits
and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth
thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.”(635) R. Meier said,
“with a cubit containing six hand-breadths—thus they make fifteen
hand-breadths. Take from them twelve hand-breadths for the breadth of the
tables, and two hand-breadths for the place where the roll of the Law lay,
and half a hand-breadth from either side for the thickness of the ark. And
the breadth of the ark was nine hand-breadths. Take from them six
hand-breadths for the length of the tables, and for the place where the
roll of the Law lay, two hand-breadths, that it should not be pressed
going in and out, and half a hand-breadth on either side for the thickness
of the ark.” R. Judah said, “with a cubit containing five hand-breadths,
thus there were twelve hand-breadths and a half, and four tables lay in
it—two perfect, and two broken. And the length of each table was six
hand-breadths, and their breadth six, and their thickness three. Take from
them twelve hand-breadths for the breadth of the tables, and a
finger-breadth on either side for the thickness of the ark.” And the
breadth of the ark was seven hand-breadths and a half. Take from them six
hand-breadths for the length of the tables, and one hand-breadth for the
place where the handles (pillars) lay; and on it the explanation of the
prophets is, “King Solomon made himself a chariot of the wood of Lebanon.
He made the pillars thereof of silver.”(636) And (there was) a
finger-breadth on either side for the thickness of the ark, but the roll
of the Law was put on the side, as is said, “And put it in the side of the
ark of the covenant of the LORD.”(637) And so with the Philistines, he
said, “And put the jewels of gold, which ye return for a
trespass-offering, in a coffer by the side thereof.”(638) R. Judah, the
son of Lachish, said, “there were two arks, one which abode in the
encampment, and one which went forth with them to war, and in it were the
broken tables,” as is said, “And the ark of the covenant of the Lord
went.”(639) But the one with them in the encampment contained the roll of
the Law. That is what is written, “Nevertheless the ark of the covenant of
the Lord; and Moses departed not out of the camp.”(640) And so he said
with regard to Saul, “And Saul said unto Ahiah, bring hither the ark of
God.”(641) And so of Uriah it is said, “The ark, and Israel, and Judah
abide in tents.”(642) But the ark of the covenant went not forth to war,
save once only, as is said, “So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might
bring from thence the ark of the covenant of the Lord of hosts.”(643) R.
Judah said, “there was nothing in the ark save the tables of the covenant
only,” as is said, “There was nothing in the ark save the two tables of
stone.”(644)



