Chapter VI


1. The priests began ascending the steps of the porch. They who gained the
lot for the removal of ashes from the inner altar and from the
candlestick, proceeded in front. He who gained the lot for the removal of
ashes from the inner altar, entered the Holy Place, and took the flagon,
and he bowed down and went out. He who gained the lot for the removal of
snuff from the candlestick, entered the Holy Place, and found the two
eastern lamps burning; he removed the snuff from the eastern one and left
the western one burning, and from it he lighted the candlestick in the
evening. If he found it extinguished, he removed the snuff, and lit it
from the altar of burnt offerings. He took the cup from the second step,
and he bowed down, and went out.

2. He who gained the lot for the censer, gathered the live coals on the
top of the altar of incense; and he smoothed them with the bottom of the
censer, and he bowed down, and went out.

3. He who gained the lot for the incense, took the pan from the cup, and
gave it to his friend or to his neighbor. When the incense was dispersed
in it, he supplied it to him in handfuls. And he instructed him, “be
careful and do not begin too near yourself, lest you be burned.” He
smoothed it and went out. The offerer could not offer the incense, till
the Captain said to him, “offer incense.” If the offerer were the high
priest, the captain said, “My Lord, High Priest, offer the incense.” The
people dispersed, and he offered the incense, and he bowed down and went
out from the Holy Place.



Chapter VII


1. When the High Priest entered to worship, three priests had hold of him,
one on his right hand, one on his left hand, and one by the jewels on his
breast-plate. And so soon as the Captain of the Temple heard the sound of
the footsteps of the High Priest as he proceeded on his way, he lifted the
veil for him. He entered the holy place, bowed himself, and went out. And
his brethren the priests entered, and bowed down, and went out.

2. The priests came and stood on the steps of the porch. The first came
and stood to the south of his brother priests. And they had five vessels
in their hands—the flagon in the hand of one, and the cup in the hand of
one, and the censer in the hand of one, and the pan in the hand of one,
and the spoon with its cover in the hand of one. They blessed the people
once. In the city they said the service in three blessings, but in the
sanctuary they said it in one blessing. In the sanctuary they pronounced
the Name(557) as it is written, but in the city they pronounced it by its
substitute.(558) In the city the priests raised their hands (in blessing)
opposite their shoulders, but in the sanctuary they raised them above
their heads, excepting the High Priest, who could not lift his hands above
the golden plate. R. Judah said, “even the High Priest could lift his
hands above the golden plate, as is said, ‘Aaron lifted up his hand toward
the people and blessed them.’ ”(559)

3. When the High Priest desired to offer incense he went up on the ascent
to the altar, and the Sagan (Suffragan) was on his right. When he reached
the half of the ascent, the Sagan took him by his right hand and helped
him up. The first (priest) reached to him the head and hind foot of the
lamb, and he laid his hand on them, and then pushed them away. The second
priest reached out to the first one the two fore-legs, and he handed them
to the High Priest, and he laid his hands upon them, and then pushed them
away; the second priest was dismissed, and he departed, and so they
reached out to him all the members of the lamb, and he laid his hands upon
them and pushed them away; but when he desired, he merely laid his hands
on them, and others pushed them away. He next came to make a circuit of
the altar. “From what place did he begin?” “From the southeastern corner,
northeastern, northwestern, southwestern.” They gave to him the wine for
libation. The Sagan stood by the corner of the altar with the banners in
his hand, and two priests stood by the table of the fat with two silver
trumpets in their hands: They sounded a blast, they blew an alarm, and
again they sounded the trumpets. They came and took their position beside
the son of Arza.(560) One stood on his right hand and one stood on his
left. The High Priest bowed down to make the libation, and the Sagan waved
the banners, and the son of Arza clanged the cymbals, and the Levites
intoned the chant. When they came to a full stop, the trumpets sounded,
and the people bowed themselves. At every full stop there was a blast, and
at every blast there was bowing down. This is the order of the daily
offering for the service of the House of our God. May it be His will to
build it speedily in our days. Amen.

4. The chant which the Levites intoned in the sanctuary on the first day
of the week was, “The earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof; the
world, and they that dwell therein.”(561) On the second day they said,
“Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised, in the city of our God, in
the mountain of his holiness.”(562) On the third day they said, “God
standeth in the congregation of the mighty: He judgeth among the
gods.”(563) On the fourth day they said, “O Lord God, to whom vengeance
belongeth; O God, to whom vengeance belongeth, show thyself.”(564) On the
fifth day they said, “Sing aloud unto God our strength, make a joyful
noise unto the God of Jacob.”(565) On the sixth day they said, “The Lord
reigneth, he is clothed with majesty,”(566) etc. On the Sabbath they said
the chant composed for the Sabbath day, the chant composed for the future,
for the day to come, when all will be rest and repose for life
everlasting.




On Measurements


    Priests and Levites Guarding the Temple—Officer of the
    Watch—Gates—Chambers—Keys—Manner of Entering the
    House—Nicanor—Steps—Altar—Place of Slaughter—The Laver—The
    Porch—The Sanctuary—Repairing the Holy of
    Holies—Measurements—Judging the Priesthood.



