Chapter V


1. The Sabbatical year of white figs(57) is the second after the
Sabbatical year, because they produce in three years. Rabbi Judah said,
“The Sabbatical year of the Persian figs is the close of the Sabbatical
year, because they produce in two years.” The Sages replied to him, “they
only said white figs.”

2. “If one store eschalots in the Sabbatical year?” R. Maier said, “there
must be not less than two seahs,(58) in height three handbreadths, and
over them an handbreadth of dust.” But the Sages say, “not less than four
cabs, in height an handbreadth, and an handbreadth of dust over them, and
they must be stored in a place where men tread.”(59)

3. “Eschalots over which the Sabbatical year has passed?” Rabbi Eleazar
said, “if the poor have gathered the leaves they are theirs; but if not,
the owner must reckon with the poor.” R. Joshua said, “if the poor have
gathered the leaves, they are theirs; but if not, the poor cannot reckon
with the owner.”

4. “Eschalots of the eve of the Sabbatical year which have entered on the
Sabbatical year, and summer onions, and also dye(60) plants of the best
ground?” The school of Shammai say, “they are to be rooted out with wooden
spades.” But the school of Hillel say, “with metal axes.” But they both
agree with regard to dye plants on rocky ground, that they are to be
rooted out with metal axes.

5. “From what time is it allowed to buy eschalots on the departure of the
Sabbatical year?” R. Judah said, “off hand”; but the Sages say, “when the
new ones become plenty.”

6. These are the implements which the farmer is not permitted to sell in
the Sabbatical year—the plough with all its implements, the yoke, the
shovel, and the goad. But he may sell the hand-sickle, and the
harvest-sickle, and the wagon, with all its implements. This is the rule:
“all implements, the use of which may be misapplied for transgression, are
forbidden; but if they be (partly for things) forbidden and (partly for
things) allowed, they are permitted.”

7. The potter may sell five oil-jugs, and fifteen wine-jugs, because it is
usual to collect fruits from the free property. And if one bring more than
these, it is allowed, and he may sell them to idolaters in the land, and
to Israelites out of the land.

8. The school of Shammai say, “a man must not sell a ploughing heifer on
the Sabbatical year”; but the school of Hillel allow it, “because the
buyer may slaughter her.” He may sell fruits in the time of sowing, and
may lend another man his measure, even if he know that the other man have
a threshing-floor, and he may change money for him, even if he know that
he have laborers. But if it be openly declared, all is forbidden.

9. A woman may lend to her companion on the Sabbatical year, even when she
is suspicious, a flour-sieve or a grain-sieve, and a hand-mill and an
oven; but she is neither to pick the wheat nor grind it with her. A woman
of a special religious society may lend to the wife(61) of an ordinary man
a flour-sieve, or a grain-sieve, and may pick wheat, or grind it, or sift
it, with her. But when she (the wife of an ordinary man) pours in the
water, she (a woman of a special religious society) must not touch the
flour (to knead it) with her, lest she strengthen the hands of a
transgressor. And all these things were not said save for the sake of
peace. And we may strengthen the hands of idolaters in the Sabbatical
year, but not the hands of Israel; and in salutation we may ask after
their peace, for the sake of peace.



Chapter VI


1. Three countries (are included) in the laws of the Sabbatical year. In
all the possessions of those who returned from Babylon—from the (border)
of the land of Israel and to Cezib,(62) we may not eat cultivated fruit,
and we may not cultivate the ground. And in all the possessions of those
who came up from Egypt from Cezib, and to the river of Egypt, and to the
Amana,(63) we may eat cultivated fruits, but we may not cultivate the
ground. From the river of Egypt, and from the Amana to the interior, we
may eat the fruits and cultivate the ground.

2. Men may labor in that which is separated from the ground in Syria, but
not in that which is attached to the ground. They may thresh, and shovel,
and tread out, and make sheaves, but they must not reap the grain nor
glean the grapes, nor beat the olives. This is the rule; said Rabbi Akiba,
“all things similar to that which is allowed in the land of Israel, men
may do in Syria.”

3. “Onions upon which fell rain and they sprouted?” “If the leaves on them
be dark, they are forbidden; if green, they are allowed.” Rabbi Chanina,
the son of Antigonus, said, “if they can be pulled up by their leaves they
are forbidden; and contrariwise if it happened so in the close of the
Sabbatical year, they are allowed.”

4. “From what time may men buy greens at the close of the Sabbatical
year?” “From the time that similar young ones are produced. If the earlier
ones are prematurely ripened, than the later ones are allowed.” Rabbi(64)
allowed greens to be bought off-hand at the close of the Sabbatical year.

5. Men must not export oil(65) which is only to be burned, nor fruits of
the Sabbatical year, from the land to lands abroad. Said Rabbi Simon, “I
expressly heard that they may be exported to Syria, but that they must not
be exported to lands abroad.”

6. Men must not import a heave-offering from abroad into the land. Said
Rabbi Simon, “I expressly heard that they may import it from Syria, but
that they must not import it from lands abroad.”



