Chapter I


1. Removals(91) on the Sabbath are two. Of these removals four are inside
a place. And there are two other removals, of which four are outside a
place. “How?” “A beggar stands without, and the master of the house
within. The beggar reached his hand within, and gave something into the
hand of the master of the house, or took something from it and brought it
out?” “The beggar is guilty,(92) and the master of the house is free.”
“The master of the house reached his hand outside and gave something into
the hand of the beggar, or took something from it and brought it in?” “The
master of the house is guilty, but the beggar is free.” “The beggar
reached his hand within, and the master of the house took something from
it, or gave something into it, and the beggar brought it out?” “Both are
free.” “The master of the house reached his hand without, and the beggar
took something from it, or gave something into it, and the master brought
it in?” “Both are free.”

2. A man must not sit before the barber near to evening prayer,(93) until
he has prayed. He must not enter a bath, nor a tannery, nor eat, nor
judge. “But if they began?” “They need not cease.” They may cease to read
the “Hear,”(94) etc., but they must not cease to pray.

3. A tailor must not go out with his needle near dusk,(95) lest he forget
and go (afterward). Nor a scribe go out with his pen. Nor may one search
his garments. Nor shall one read at the light of the lamp. In truth they
said, “the teacher may overlook when children are reading, but he himself
shall not read.” Similar to him, one with an issue shall not eat with her
who has an issue, because of the custom of transgression.

4. And these following are from the decisions which they mentioned of the
upper chamber of Hananiah, the son of Hezekiah, the son of Gorion, when
the Sages went up to visit him. The school of Shammai was counted, and was
more numerous than the school of Hillel. And eighteen matters were
determined on that day.

5. The school of Shammai said, “they must not soak ink, nor paints, nor
vetches, unless they be sufficiently soaked while it is yet day.” But the
school of Hillel allows it.

6. The school of Shammai said, “they must not put bundles of flax inside
the oven, except it be sufficiently steamed while it is yet day, nor wool
into the boiler except it imbibe sufficient dye in the eye of day.” But
the school of Hillel allow it. The school of Shammai said, “they must not
spread nets for beasts, nor birds, nor fishes, except they be netted while
it is yet day.” But the school of Hillel allows it.

7. The school of Shammai said, “they must not sell to a stranger, and they
must not lade his ass with him, and they must not load on him, except they
have sufficient time to reach a near place before the Sabbath.” But the
school of Hillel allows it.

8. The school of Shammai said, “they must not give skins to a tanner, nor
articles to a strange laundress; except they can be sufficiently done
while it is yet day.” But all of them the school of Hillel allow “with the
sun.”

9. Said Rabbi Simon, the son of Gamaliel, “the house of my father used to
give white articles to a strange laundress three days before the Sabbath.”
But both schools agree that “they may carry(96) beams to the oil-press and
logs to the wine-press.”

10. “They must not fry flesh, onions, and eggs; except they be
sufficiently fried while it is yet day. They must not put bread in the
oven at dusk, nor a cake on coals, except its face be sufficiently crusted
while it is yet day.” Rabbi Eliezer said, “that its under side be
sufficiently crusted.”

11. “They may hang up the passover(97) offering in an oven at dusk. And
they may take a light from the wood pile in the house of burning.”(98) And
in the suburbs “when the fire has sufficiently lighted the greater part.”
Rabbi Judah says, “from the coals however little” (kindled before the
Sabbath).



Chapter II


1. “With what may they light (lamps) on the Sabbath?” “And with what may
they not light?” “They may not light with cedar moss, nor with unhackled
flax, nor with floss silk, nor with a wick of willow, nor with a wick of
nettles, nor with weeds from the surface of water, nor with pitch, nor
with wax, nor with castor oil, nor with the defiled oil of heave-offering,
nor with the tail, nor with the fat.” Nahum the Median said, “they may
light with cooked fat.” But the Sages say, “whether cooked or uncooked,
they must not light with it.”

2. They must not light with the defiled oil of the heave-offering on a
holiday. Rabbi Ishmael said, “they must not light with pitch dregs for the
honor of the Sabbath.” But the Sages allow all oils, “with sesame oil,
with nut oil, with radish oil, with fish oil, with colocynth oil, with
pitch dregs and naphtha.” Rabbi Tarphon said, “they must only light with
olive oil.”

3. “They must not light with anything that grows from wood, except flax.
And all that grows from wood does not contract the uncleanness of
tents,(99) except flax.” “A wick of cloth folded but not singed?” Rabbi
Eliezer says, “it contracts uncleanness, and they must not light it.”
Rabbi Akiba says, “it is clean, and they may light it.”

4. A man must not perforate an eggshell, and fill it with oil, and put it
on the mouth of the lamp, because it drops, even though it be of pottery.
But Rabbi Judah “allows it.” “But if the potter joined it at first?” “It
is allowed, since it is one vessel.” A man must not fill a bowl of oil,
and put it by the side of the lamp, and put the end of the wick into it
because it imbibes. But Rabbi Judah “allows it.”

5. “Whoever extinguishes the lamp because he fears the Gentiles, or
robbers, or a bad spirit, or that the sick may sleep?” “He is free.” “He
spares the lamp?” “He spares the oil?” “He spares the wick?” “He is
guilty.” But Rabbi José frees in all cases except the wick, because “it
makes coal.”

6. For three transgressions women die in the hour of childbirth: when they
neglect times, and the dough offering,(100) and lighting the Sabbath lamp.

7. Three things are necessary for a man to say in his house on the eve of
the Sabbath at dusk. “Have you taken tithes?” “Have you prepared
erub?”(101) “Light the lamp.” “It is doubtful if it be dark or not?”(102)
“They must not tithe that which is certainly untithed, and they must not
baptize vessels, and they must not light the lamps. But they may take
tithes of the doubtful heave-offering, and prepare erub, and cover up hot
water.”



