Chapter IV


1. Judgments in money and judgments in souls must be equally inquired into
and investigated; as is said, “Ye shall have one manner of law.”(389)
“What is the difference between judgments in money and judgments in
souls?” “Judgments in money (require) three judges, judgments in souls
twenty-three. Judgments in money open the case either for clearing or
proving indebted, but judgments of souls open the case for clearing, and
the case is not opened for condemning. Judgments in money are balanced by
one judge either for clearing or proving indebted; but judgments in souls
are balanced by one for clearing and by two for condemning. Judgments in
money may be reversed either for clearing or proving indebted; but
judgments in souls may be reversed for clearing, but must not be reversed
for condemnation. All may express an opinion on judgments in money for
clearing or proving indebted. All may express an opinion on judgments in
souls for clearing, but all must not express an opinion for condemnation.
He who has expressed an opinion on judgments in money for proving
indebted, may express an opinion for clearing, and he who has expressed an
opinion for clearing, may express an opinion for proving indebted. He who
has expressed an opinion on judgments in souls for condemnation may
express an opinion for clearing, but he who has expressed an opinion for
clearing must not reverse it to express an opinion for condemnation.
Judgments in money are conducted by day and settled by night. Judgments in
souls are conducted by day and settled by day. Judgments in money are
settled on the same day, either for clearing or proving indebted.
Judgments in souls are finished on the same day for clearing, and on the
day after it for condemnation—wherefore there can be no judgments on
Friday or on the eve of a festival.”(390)

2. Judgments in legal uncleanness and legal cleansings begin with the
Supreme (judge). Judgments in souls begin with a judge at his side. All
are eligible to pronounce judgments in money matters, but all are not
eligible to pronounce judgments in souls—only priests, Levites, and
Israelites who can intermarry into the priesthood.

3. The Sanhedrin was like half a round threshing-floor, in order that the
members might observe each other. And two scribes of the judges stood
before them—one on the right and one on the left. And they wrote the
sentence of acquittal, and the sentence of condemnation. R. Judah said,
“three; one scribe wrote the sentence of acquittal, and one wrote the
sentence of condemnation; and the third wrote both the sentence of
acquittal and the sentence of condemnation.”

4. And three rows of the disciples of the wise sat before them. And each
one knew his place. When it was necessary to appoint a judge, they
appointed one from the first row. One from the second row came instead of
him into the first, and one from the third row came instead of him into
the second, and they selected another from the congregation, and they
seated him in the third row, and he did not sit in the place of his
predecessor, but he sat in a place suitable for himself.

5. “How did the judges intimidate witnesses in the testimony for souls?”
“They introduced them, and intimidated them.” “Perhaps you are speaking
from guess? or from hearsay? witness from witness? or from a trustworthy
man we heard it?” Or, perhaps, “you don’t know that at the last we shall
proceed to inquire into your own character and investigate it.” “Have a
knowledge that the judgments of money are not as the judgments of souls.
Judgments for money, when the man pays the money he has atoned. In
judgments for souls his blood and the blood of his posterity are suspended
till the end of the world.” So we find it with Cain when he slew his
brother. It is said of him,(391) “the voice of thy brother’s bloods
crieth.” He does not say thy brother’s blood, but bloods of thy brother,
his blood and the blood of his posterity. Another thing is also meant,
that thy brother’s bloods are spattered on wood, and on stones. Therefore
man is created single, to teach thee that everyone who destroys one soul
from Israel, to him is the verse applicable, as if he destroys a full
world. And everyone who supports one soul in Israel, to him is the verse
applicable, as if he supports the full world. And it is also said, for the
peace of creation, that no man may justly say to his companion, my father
is greater than thine. And that the Epicureans should not say, that there
are more Creators in the heavens, and it is also said, to show forth the
greatness of the Holy One, blessed be He! When man stamps many coins with
one stamp, all are alike. But the King of Kings, the Holy One, blessed be
He! stamped every man with the stamp of the first Adam, and no one of them
is like his companion; therefore everyone is bound to say, “for my sake
was the world created.” But, perhaps, the witnesses will say “what is this
trouble to us?” But is it not already said, “And is a witness, whether he
hath seen or known of it; if he do not utter it?”(392) But perhaps the
witnesses will say, “what is it to us, to be guilty of this man’s blood?”
But is it not already said, “When the wicked perish, there is
shouting”?(393)



Chapter V


1. The witnesses were examined with seven investigations. “In what
Sabbatical year?” “In what year?” “In what month?” “What date in the
month?” “What day?” “What hour?” “What place?” R. José said, “What day?”
“What hour?” “What place?” “Did you know him?” “Did you warn him?” In a
case of idolatry, “whom did he serve?” “And with what did he serve?”

2. Every judge who extends examinations is praiseworthy. It happened that
the son of Zacchai examined (even) on the stems of figs. And what
difference is there between investigations and examinations? In
investigations if one say, “I don’t know,” their witness is worthless. In
examinations, if one say, “I don’t know,” and even two say, “we don’t
know,” their witness stands. Whether in investigations or examinations,
when they contradict each other, their witness is worthless.

3. One witness said, “on the second of the month,” and another witness
said, “the third of the month.” Their witness stands. Because one knows of
the intercalary month, and another does not know of the intercalary month.
One said, “on the third,” and another said, “on the fifth”; their witness
is worthless. One said, “at the second hour,” and another said, “at the
third hour”; their witness stands. One said, “at the third,” and another
said, “at the fifth”; their witness is worthless. R. Judah said, “it
stands.” One said, “on the fifth,” and another said, “on the seventh”;
their witness is worthless, because at the fifth (hour) the sun is in the
east, and at the seventh hour the sun is in the west.

4. And afterward they introduce the second (witness) and examine him. If
both their statements agree, they open the case with clearing. One of the
witnesses says, “I possess information to clear him.” Or one of the
disciples of the Sanhedrin says, “I possess information for condemning.”
They order him to keep silence. One of the disciples of the Sanhedrin
says, “I possess information to clear him.” They bring him up, and seat
him between the judges, and he did not go down during the whole day. If
there be substantial information, they give him a hearing. And even when
he (the accused) says, “I possess information for clearing myself,” the
judges give him a hearing; only there must be substantial information in
his words.

5. If the judges found him clear, they released him, but if not they
deferred his judgment till the morrow. They conversed in pairs, and
reduced their eating, and they drank no wine all the day, and discussed
the matter the whole night. And on the morrow they came very early to the
judgment hall. He who was for clearing said, “I was for clearing, and I am
for clearing in my place.” And he who was for condemning said, “I was for
condemning, and I am for condemning in my place.” He who pronounced for
condemning, could pronounce for clearing, but he who pronounced for
clearing, could not turn round and pronounce for condemning. If the judges
erred in a matter, the two scribes of the judges recalled it to their
memory. If they found him clear, they released him: but if not, they stood
to be counted. “Twelve cleared him, and eleven condemned?” “He is clear.”
“Twelve condemned him, and eleven cleared him, and even eleven cleared,
and eleven condemned,” and one said, “I don’t know.” And even twenty-two
cleared or condemned, and one said, “I don’t know?” “They must add
judges.” “How many do they add as judges two by two?” “Up to seventy-one.”
“Thirty-six cleared him, and thirty-five condemned him?” “He is clear.”
“Thirty-six condemned him, and thirty-five cleared him?” “They disputed
with each other until one of the condemning party acknowledged the
statement of the clearing party.”



