Book II

The Order Of The Festivals:

1. “Sabbath” treats of the laws relating to the seventh day.

2. “Mixtures,” or combinations, treats of the extension of boundaries,
whereby all the inhabitants of the court, or entry, where the mixture is
made, are counted as one family inhabiting one domicile; and are therefore
allowed to carry victuals from one house to another. It also treats of the
mixtures for a Sabbath day’s journey, whereby the distance may be extended
for an additional 2,000 cubits.

3. “Passovers” treats of all rites and ceremonies relating to the Paschal
Lamb.

4. “Shekels” (Exod. xxx. 13) treats of the half shekel, which every Jew,
rich or poor, was obliged to pay every year to the daily sacrifice.

5. “Day of Atonement” treats of the solemnities peculiar to it.

6. “Tabernacles” teaches how they are to be built, and how to be used.

7. “The Egg Laid on a Festival” treats of the works which may or may not
be done on any of the festivals, which are called days of holy
convocation, on which no servile work may be done.

8. “New Year” treats of the laws and solemnities of the feast of the New
Year, as also of the feasts of the New Moons.

9. “Fasts” treats of the various fasts throughout the year.

10. “The Roll” treats of the feast of Purim, and gives instructions how
and in what manner the Book of Esther and other Lessons are to be read.
The Gemara directs Jews to get so drunk on this feast, that they cannot
discern the difference between “Blessed be Mordecai and cursed be Haman,”
and “Cursed be Mordecai and blessed be Haman.”

11. “Minor Feasts” treats of the works that may and that may not be
lawfully done on the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, and 6th days, when the first and
seventh are holy; these intermediate days being lesser festivals.

12. “Sacrifices on Festivals” treats of the three great festivals, when
all the males were obliged to appear before the Lord, and of the
sacrifices which they were to bring. It also lays down rules for the
dissolution of vows, which it says “are like mountains hanging on a hair,
for the text is slender and the constitutions many.”

Book III

On Women:

1. “Brother’s Widow” (Deut. xxv. 5-11) treats of the law obliging a
brother to marry the relict of his deceased brother; also, when the
obligation is to take place, and the ceremonies to be used at its
performance.

2. “Marriage Settlements” treats of dowries and women who happen to obtain
estates, either real or personal. From this tract the baptism of infant
proselytes can be proved.

3. “Vows” (Num. xxx. 4-16) shows when vows are binding and when null and
void. When a married woman makes a vow the husband can confirm or annul
it. This tract points out what vows fall under his cognizance and what do
not.

4. “The Nazarite” (Num. vi. 21) treats of the laws relating to the
different sorts of Nazarites.

5. “Trial of Jealousy” (Num. v. 11-31) treats of the mode of trial and
punishment of criminals. Men may go home to their wives from voluntary
wars, but not from wars of command. This tract shows the miserable state
of the Jews at the destruction of the second Temple, and at the future
advent of the Messiah.

6. “Divorces” treats of the laws relating to divorces, also the
formalities to be observed both before and after they are given. A man may
divorce his wife if she spoil his broth, or if he find another more
handsome.

7. “Betrothing” treats of the laws of espousals and some other previous
rites of marriage. It commands sons to be taught suitable trades. It
states that all ass-drivers are wicked, camel-drivers are honest, sailors
are pious, physicians are destined for hell, and butchers are company for
Amalek.

Book IV

On Damages:

1. “First Gate,” so called because in the East law is often administered
in the gateway of a city. It treats of all such damages as may be received
from man or beast. It assesses damages done by a beast according to the
benefit which the beast receives. If it eat a peck of dates its owner
would be fined for a peck of barley, as dates are not more nourishing for
a beast than barley.

2. “The Middle Gate” treats of laws of usury and trusts, of letting out on
hire, of landlord and tenant, etc.

3. “Last Gate” treats of the laws of commerce and co-partnership, of
buying and selling, of the laws of inheritance and the right of
succession.

4. “Sanhedrin” treats of the great national senate.

5. “Stripes” treats of false witnesses, of the law of the forty stripes
save one, of those who were bound to fly to the cities of refuge.

6. “Oaths” explains the laws for administering oaths; when an oath is to
be admitted between contending parties who are qualified to take them. In
Hilchoth Eduth. ix. 1 it is taught that ten sorts of persons are
disqualified—women, slaves, children, idiots, deaf persons, the blind, the
wicked, the despised, relations, and those interested in their evidence.

7. “Evidences” are a collection of many important decisions gathered from
the testimonies of distinguished Rabbis. It is observable that the
decisions of the School of Shammai are more rigorous than those of the
School of Hillel, from whence it is inferred that the former adhered more
closely to Scripture, the latter to tradition. The former were the
Scribes, and are now represented by the Karaites, who reject the Talmud.

8. “Idolatry,” or the worship of stars and meteors, treats of the way to
avoid this grievous sin.

9. “The Fathers” contains a history of those who handed down the Oral Law,
also many maxims and proverbs.

10. “Punishment” treats of the punishment of those disobedient to the
Sanhedrin (Deut. xvii. 8-11).

