Chapter II


1. The high-priest may judge, and be judged.(379) He may bear witness, and
witness may be borne against him. He may have his shoe loosed, and the
shoe may be loosed for his wife.(380) His brother may take his wife, but
he must not take his brother’s wife, because he is prevented from marrying
a widow. If there happened a death in his family, he must not go
immediately behind the bier. “But when the (mourners) are concealed (in a
street), then he is discovered (to the public). They are discovered to the
public, and he is concealed in a street. And he may go with them to the
entrance gate of the city.” The words of R. Meier. R. Judah said, “he must
not depart from the sanctuary”; as is said, “neither shall he go out of
the sanctuary.”(381) And when he comforts others, the fashion of all the
people is to pass one after the other, and the deputy priest puts him in
the middle between himself and the people. But when he is comforted by
others, all the people say to him, “we are thy atonement.” And he says to
them, “you shall be blessed from heaven.” And at the first meal(382) after
a funeral, all the people recline on the ground, and he sits on a stool.

2. The king neither judges, nor is he judged. He neither bears witness,
nor is witness borne against him. He does not unloose the shoe, and the
shoe is not unloosed for his wife. He does not marry his brother’s wife,
nor is his wife married by his brother. R. Judah said, “if he pleased he
may unloose the shoe, or marry his brother’s wife. He is remembered in
prayer for good.” The Sages said to him, “we do not hear him (the king)
(for unloosing the shoe) and his widow must not marry.” R. Judah said,
“the king may marry the widow of a king, as we find with David that he
married the widow of Saul”; as is said, “And I gave thee thy master’s
house, and thy master’s wives into thy bosom.”(383)

3. If there happened a death in his family, he goes not out from the
entrance of his palace. R. Judah said, “if he pleases to go after the bier
he may go, as we find in David that he went after the bier of Abner”; as
is said, “And King David himself followed the bier.”(384) The Sages said
to him, “this only happened to pacify the people.” And at the first meal
after a funeral, all the people recline on the ground, and he sits on a
sofa.

4. And he may go forth to lawful warfare by order of the supreme court of
seventy-one, and he may break down a road for himself, and none can
prevent him. The road of a king is without measure, and all the people
plunder and lay it before him. And he takes part first. He must not
multiply wives beyond eighteen. R. Judah said, “he may multiply wives for
himself so long as they do not turn away his heart.” R. Simon said, “even
if one turn away his heart, he should not marry her.” If so, wherefore is
it said, “he must not multiply for himself wives, even though they be as
Abigail”? He must not multiply horses, except sufficient for his own
riding. And silver and gold he must not multiply much, only sufficient to
pay his own expenses. And he must write a book of the law for himself.
When he goes out to war, he must bring it with him. When he returns, he
must bring it with him. If he sit in judgment it is with him. When he is
seated it is before him, as is said, “And it shall be with him, and he
shall read therein all the days of his life.”(385)

5. None may ride on his horse, and none may sit on his chair, and none may
use his sceptre, and none may see him shaving, either when he is naked, or
in the bath, as is said, “Thou shalt in any wise set him king over
thee,”(386) that his dread be upon thee.



Chapter III


1. “Judgments in money matters (require) three judges. This party chooses
for himself one, and the other party chooses for himself one. And both
parties choose another.” The words of R. Meier. But the Sages say, “the
two judges choose for themselves the other.” “This one may declare the
judge of that one illegal. And that one may declare the judge of this one
illegal.” The words of R. Meier. But the Sages say, “it is only when
witness can be brought against them that they are related or unlawful.”
“But if they be righteous or experienced, they must not be declared
illegal.” “This one may declare illegal the witness of that one. And that
one may declare illegal the witness of this one.” The words of R. Meier.
But the Sages say, “it is only when witness can be brought against them
that they are related or unlawful, but if they be righteous they must not
be declared illegal.”

2. One said to the other, “I trust my father,” “I trust thy father,” “I
trust three cowherds.” R. Meier said, “he may change his mind.” But the
Sages say, “he must not change.” If he must give an oath to his companion,
and he said to him, “vow to me by the life of thy head”? R. Meier said,
“he may change his mind.” But the Sages say, “he must not change his
mind.”

3. And these are illegal (as judges or witnesses), one who played at
cards, or lent on usury, or bet on the flight of doves, or trades in the
Sabbatical year. R. Simon said, “at first they were called gatherers on
the Sabbatical year; when they were forced by Gentiles to cultivate the
ground, they changed to call them traders on the Sabbatical year.” R.
Judah said, “it is only when they have no other occupation but this one
alone: but if they have another occupation, they are allowed.”

4. And these are related, his father and his brother, and the brethren of
his father, and the brethren of his mother, and the husband of his sister,
and the husband of his father’s sister, and the husband of his mother’s
sister. And the husband of his mother and his father-in-law, and his
brother-in-law, they, their children, and their sons-in-law, and his
step-son alone. R. José said, “this was the teaching of R. Akiba; but the
first teaching was, his uncle and the son of his uncle, and all suitable
for inheritance, and everyone related to him at the present time.” “One
was related and became estranged?” “He is lawful.” R. Judah said, “even if
his daughter died, and he has children left by her, they are related.”

5. “Who is a friend? and who is an enemy?” “A friend is the bridegroom’s
best man, an enemy is everyone who has not spoken with him three days in
malice.” The Sages replied to him, “Israelites are not so suspicious.”

6. “How are witnesses examined?” “They are brought in and intimidated; and
all other men are driven out.” And the chief of the witnesses is left, and
they say to him, “tell us how do you know that this man is indebted to
that man?” If the witness said, “he told me that I am indebted to
him”—“such a man told me that he is indebted to him”—he has said nothing,
till he shall say, “he acknowledged in our presence that he owed him 200
zuz.” And afterward the second witness is brought in, and examined. If
their statements were found agreeing, the judges held a conversation. Two
of them said “he is clear,” and one said “he is indebted”? “He is
cleared.” “Two said, he is indebted, and one said, he is clear?” “He is
indebted.” “One said he is clear, and one said he is indebted? And even if
two pronounced him clear or indebted, and one said, ‘I don’t know’?” “The
judges must be increased.”

7. The matter is finished. They bring in the plaintiff and defendant. The
chief judge says, “thou, such a one, art clear; thou such a one, art
indebted.” “And whence know we that one of the judges on going out should
not say, ‘I was for clearing him, but my colleagues pronounced him
indebted, but what shall I do when my colleagues are too many for me’?”
“Of this man it is said, ‘Thou shalt not go up and down as a tale-bearer
among thy people’;(387) and it is said, ‘A tale-bearer revealeth
secrets.’ ”(388)

8. At any time the one condemned may bring evidence and annul the
judgment. The judges said to him, “bring all your evidence within thirty
days from this date.” If he brought them within thirty days, it is
annulled, if after thirty days, it is not annulled. Rabban Simon, the son
of Gamaliel, said, “what shall he do if he did not find them within thirty
days, but found them after thirty days?” “The judges said to him, ‘bring
witnesses’; and he said, ‘I have no witnesses’; they said, ‘bring
evidence’; and he said, ‘I have no evidence’; but afterward he found
evidence, and found witnesses?” “They are nothing.” Rabban Simon, the son
of Gamaliel, said, “what shall he do if he did not know that he had
witnesses, and found witnesses; he did not know that he had evidence, and
found evidence?” “They said to him, ‘bring witnesses’; he said, ‘I have no
witnesses.’ ‘Bring evidence,’ and he said, ‘I have no evidence.’ ” “He saw
that he will be pronounced indebted in judgment, and he said, ‘approach
such a one, and such a one, and bear witness for me,’ or ‘he pulled out
evidence from his pocket’?” “It is nothing.”



