Chapter IV


1. “The heifer which was slaughtered without the proper intention, (the
priest) caught the blood and sprinkled it without the proper intention, or
with the proper intention and afterward without the proper intention, or
without the proper intention and (afterward) with the proper intention?”
“She is disallowed.” R. Eliezer “allowed her.” “And if the priest did not
wash his hands and his feet?” “She is disallowed.” R. Eliezer “allowed
her.” “If she was not slaughtered by the High-priest?” “She is
disallowed.” R. Judah “allowed her.” “If any of his garments were
wanting?” “She is disallowed.” And the rites were performed in white
vestments.

2. “If the priest burned her out of her prepared place, or in two places,
or burned two in one place?” “She is disallowed.” “If he sprinkled her
blood but not straight in front of the DOOR?” “She is disallowed.” “If he
sprinkled her blood the sixth time for the seventh—he then turned and
sprinkled the seventh?” “She is disallowed.” “If the priest sprinkled the
seventh time for the eighth—he then turned and sprinkled the eighth?” “She
is allowed.”

3. “If the priest burned the red heifer without wood, or with every sort
of wood, even with stubble and dung?”(734) “She is allowed.” “If he
skinned and cut her?” “She is allowed.” “If he slaughtered her on
condition of eating from her flesh and drinking from her blood?” “She is
allowed.” Rabbi Eliezer said, “intention does not disallow the heifer.”

4. All who are busied about the heifer from the beginning to the end
render their garments legally unclean. And any work gained from her
renders her disallowed. If any illegality happened during her slaughter,
she does not render their garments unclean. If it happened during the
sprinkling of her blood, everyone busied before her disallowance renders
his garments unclean. After her disallowance he does not render his
garments unclean. It follows that her difficulty is his convenience. They
who are busied about her are always liable for a trespass-offering. They
may add wood to her during her burning. And her business is done in the
day and by a priest. Every work for gain with her causes her disallowance
until she be reduced to ashes. And work for gain causes disallowance in
the water also, until the ashes be strewn upon it.



Chapter V


1. He who brings earthen vessels for the ashes of the heifer must wash
them, and place them in the furnace over night. Rabbi Judah said, “even if
he bring them from his house they are allowed. Since everyone is trusted
about the heifer. But in the heave-offering he opens the furnace and takes
out the vessels.” R. Simon said, “from the second(735) row.” R. José said,
“from the third row.”

2. He who washes vessels for the ashes of the red heifer, in water
unsuitable for purification, must dry them. If he wash them in water
suitable for purification, it is not necessary to dry them. If he add
therein water for purification, whether of one sort or the other sort of
water, he must dry them.

3. A pumpkin bottle which is washed in water unsuitable for purification,
may be used for purification, till it becomes legally unclean. When it is
unclean, they may no longer purify in it. R. Joshua said, “if one purify
in it at first, one may purify in it to the last; if it cannot purify at
last, it cannot purify at first.” Whether it be clean or unclean, one must
not add therein water for purification.

4. “A hollow reed cut for the ashes of the red heifer?” R. Eliezer said,
“it must be washed at once.” R. Joshua said, “it must be rendered legally
unclean, and afterward washed.” Everyone is suitable for purifying
excepting a deaf person, an idiot, and a child. R. Judah “allows a child,
but disallows a woman and a neuter.”

5. Water may be prepared for purification in every vessel, even in vessels
of dung, in vessels of stone and vessels of clay and in a boat. Water must
not be prepared for purification in the sides of vessels nor in the bottom
of a vase nor in the cork of a barrel nor in one’s fists, since they are
not used for filling water, and they must not purify with them. And the
water of the ashes of the heifer is not sprinkled without a vessel. There
is no safety from defilement in the covering(736) bound except in proper
vessels—there is no safety from the defilement of earthen vessels except
in proper vessels.

6. An egg-shaped vessel of the potters is allowed for the purifying water.
R. José “disallows it.” “The egg (shell) of a hen?” R. Meier and R. Judah
“allow it,” but the Sages “disallow it.”

7. “A trough in a rock?” “They do not fill water with it, they do not
purify in it, and they do not sprinkle from it, and it does not need the
covering bound, and it does not disallow(737) the purifying-pool.” “If
there were a vessel united (to it) with lime?” “They may fill water with
it, they may purify in it, and sprinkle from it, and it needs a covering
bound, and (if it becomes legally unclean) it disallows the purifying
pool.” “It had a hole in the bottom, and it was stuffed with a rag?” “The
water in it is disallowed, because it is not (entirely) surrounded with
the vessel.” “If the hole were in the side, and it was stuffed with a
rag?” “The water within it is allowed, because it is surrounded with the
vessel.” “If a rim of mud was made for it, and the water rose up to it?”
“It is disallowed.” “If it were so strong that the vessel could be lifted
by it?” “It is allowed.”

8. “There are two troughs in one stone. One of them is legally purified.
The water in the second is not purified. There are holes from one trough
to the other like the pipe of a bottle, or water overflowed from above
only as much as the peeling of a garlic, and the owner had purified one of
them?” “The water in the second can also purify.”

9. “Two stones which are placed near to each other, and one made of them a
(drinking-) trough, and also two kneading-troughs, and also a
drinking-trough, which was divided?” “The water, which is between them,
does not purify.” “If one connected them with lime or gypsum, and they can
be lifted at once?” “The water, which is between them, can purify.”



