Chapter V: Concerning the Nose of the Most Holy Ancient One


The Nose. From this nose, from the openings of the nostrils, the Spirit of
Life rusheth forth upon Microprosopus.

And from that opening of the nose, from those openings of the nostrils,
dependeth the letter He, in order to establish the other and inferior He.

And that Spirit proceedeth from the hidden brain, and She is called the
Spirit of Life, and through that Spirit(812) will all men understand
CHKMTHA, _Chokmatha_, Wisdom, in the time of King Messiah.

As it is written, Isa. xi. 2: “And the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding,
RVCH CHKMH VBINH, _Ruach Chokmah Va-Binah_, shall rest upon Him,” etc.

This nose is life in every part; perfect joy, rest of spirit, and health.

The nose of Microprosopus is as we have (before) conformed it.

Since concerning Him it is said, Ps. xviii. 9, “There ascendeth a smoke in
his nose,” etc.

But concerning this it is written, Isa. xlviii. 9, “And for my name’s sake
will I defer mine anger (literally, lengthen my nose) for thee.”

(But in the book which is called “The Treatise of the School of Rav Yeyeva
the Elder,” the letter He is located in the mouth, and he doth not argue
in the same manner as in the text, neither doth he bring about the same
combination, although the matter eventuateth in the same manner.)

But yet from the letter the judgment dependeth, and judgment pertaineth
unto the nose (of Microprosopus). Like as it is written, Ps. xviii. 9,
“Smoke ascendeth out of His nose.”

And if thou sayest that behold also it is written, “And fire out of His
mouth consumeth,” surely the foundation of wrath dependeth from His nose.

All the conformations of the Most Holy Ancient One are formed forth from
the calm and concealed brain.

And all the conformations of Microprosopus are formed through the Inferior
_Chokmah_, Wisdom. Like as it is written, Ps. civ. 24, “All these hast
thou made in Chokmah.” And certainly it (Wisdom) is the epitome of all
things.

Now what is the difference between H, _He_, and H, _He_? By the Inferior
_He_ is judgment stirred up; but in this instance, through the other _He_,
mercy unto mercy is denoted.




Chapter VI: Concerning the Beard of the Most Holy Ancient One


From the Beard of the Most Holy Ancient One hangeth the whole ornament of
all, and the Influence; for all things are called from that beard,
Influence.

This is the Ornament of all Ornaments, and this influence do all the
superiors and inferiors alike behold.

From this Influence dependeth the life of all things.

From this Influence heavens and earth depend, the rains of grace, and the
nourishment of all things.

From this Influence cometh the providence of all things. From this
Influence depend all the superior and inferior hosts.

Thirteen fountains of excellent and precious oil depend from this beard of
most glorious Influence, and they all flow down into Microprosopus.

Say not thou, however, that all do so, but nine of them are found (in
Microprosopus) for the purpose of diverting the judgments.

And whensoever this Influence hangeth down in equilibrium even unto the
heart, all the Holinesses of the Holinesses of Holiness depend from it.

In that Influence is extended an expansion of the Supernal Emanation,(813)
which is the Head of all Heads, which is not known nor perfected, and
which neither superiors nor inferiors have known, because from that
Influence all things depend.

In this beard the Three Heads concerning which we have spoken are
expanded, and all things are associated together in this Influence, and
are found therein.

And therefore every ornament of ornaments dependeth from that Influence.

Those letters which depend from this Ancient One all hang in that beard,
and are associated together in that Influence.

And they hang therein for the purpose of establishing the other letters.

For unless those letters could ascend into the Ancient One, those other
letters could not be established.

And therefore Moses saith when necessary IHVH, IHVH, twice; and so that an
accent distinguishes the one from the other.

For assuredly from the Influence all things depend.

By that Influence are both superiors and inferiors brought unto reverence,
and are prostrate before it.

Blessed is he who attaineth hereunto.




