Chapter X


1. On the eves of the passovers near to the time of evening prayer a man
must not eat till it be dark. And even the poorest in Israel must not eat
till he can recline at ease, and they must not withhold from him the four
cups of wine, even though he receives the weekly alms.

2. When they mix for him the first cup of wine,(183) the school of Shammai
say, “he shall repeat the blessing for the day, and after that the
blessing for the wine.” But the school of Hillel say, “he shall repeat the
blessing for the wine, and after that the blessing for the day.”

3. The attendants bring before him greens and lettuce. He dips the lettuce
in its sauce till he come to the time for the seasoning of the bread. They
bring before him unleavened bread, and lettuce, and the fruit sauce, on
two dishes, even though the fruit sauce is not a command. Rabbi Eleazar,
the son of Zadok, said (it is) “a command, and in the time of the
sanctuary they used to bring before him the body of the passover
offering.”

4. The attendants mixed for him the second cup, and here the son asks his
father, and if the son have no knowledge his father teaches him, “in what
is this night different from all other nights?” “Because in all other
nights we eat leavened and unleavened bread. In this night all is
unleavened. Because in all other nights we eat every herb, in this night
bitter herbs. Because in all other nights we eat flesh roasted, well
boiled, and boiled. In this night all is roasted. Because in all other
nights we dip what we eat once, in this night twice” (_i.e._, in the sauce
and in the seasoning). And according to the knowledge of the son his
father teaches him. He begins in shame and he ends in praise. And he
expounds from “a Syrian ready to perish was my father,”(184) till he end
the whole passage.

5. Rabban Gamaliel used to say, “everyone who did not speak of these three
things in the passover did not discharge his duty, and these are they: the
passover, the unleavened bread, and bitter herbs. Passover, because
OMNIPRESENCE passed over the houses of our fathers in Egypt. Unleavened,
because our fathers were redeemed from Egypt. Bitter, because the
Egyptians made the lives of our fathers bitter in Egypt.” In every
generation man is bound to look to himself as though he in person went out
from Egypt, as is said,(185) “And thou shalt show thy son in that day,
saying, This is done because of that which the Lord did unto me when I
came forth out of Egypt.” For this reason we are bound to acknowledge, to
thank, to praise, to glorify, to exalt, to magnify, to bless, to elevate,
without limit, HIM who has done for our fathers and us all these miracles.
He brought us from slavery to freedom, from sorrow to joy, and from
mourning to festivity, and from thick darkness to great light, and from
servitude to redemption, and let us say before Him Hallelujah.

6. “How far does he repeat?” The school of Shammai say, till “a joyful
mother of children.”(186) But the school of Hillel say, till “the flint
into a fountain of waters,”(187) and he finished with a “blessing for
redemption.” Rabbi Tarphon said, “ ‘Who redeemed us and redeemed our
fathers from Egypt,’ and he does not end with any other blessing.” Rabbi
Akiba adds, “So the Lord our God and the God of our fathers shall bring us
to holidays and other feast-days yet to come to us in peace, rejoicing in
the building of THY city, and delighting in THY service; and we shall eat
there the sacrifices and the passovers, etc., until ‘Blessed be Thou,
Lord, the Redeemer of Israel.’ ”

7. When the attendants mixed for him the third cup(188) he says the
blessing for his food, with the fourth cup he finished the hallel, and
said over it the blessing of the Song.(189) Between the first and second
cups if he wish to drink, he may drink as much as he likes. Between the
third and fourth he must not drink.

8. Persons are not free after the passover to ask for more food. “If some
fall asleep during the passover?”(190) “They may afterward eat of it.”
“All?” “They must not eat of it.” Rabbi José says, “If they dozed?” “They
may eat of it.” “If they slept?” “They must not eat of it.”

9. The passover after midnight renders hands legally unclean. False
intention and the remains of the feast render hands legally unclean.(191)
“When one repeated the passover-blessing?” “He is free from the
sacrifice-blessing, but the sacrifice-blessing does not free him from that
of the passover.” The words of R. Ishmael. Rabbi Akiba said, “this does
not free from that, nor that from this.”




On The Day Of Atonement


    Preparations of the High Priest—Cleansing the Altar—Casting
    Lots—Daybreak—Offerings—Dress—Prayer—The
    Goats—Monobazus—Helena—Azazel—The Golden Censer—The Vail—Holy of
    Holies—“Foundation”—Sprinkling the Blood—Sending Forth the Goat
    into the Wilderness—High Priest Burning the Bullock and
    Goat—Reading—Ceremonial—Rules and Exceptions—Repentance and
    Atonement.



Chapter I


1. Seven days before the Day of Atonement the High Priest was removed from
his house to the chamber(192) Parhedrin, and the council prepared for him
another priest,(193) lest there happen to him any defilement. R. Judah
said, “they prepared also another wife, lest his wife die”; as is
said,(194) “And he shall atone for himself and for his house”; for his
house, _i.e._, for his wife. The Sages said to him, “if so, there is no
end to the matter.”

2. All these seven days, he (the high priest) sprinkled the blood, burned
the incense, and trimmed the lamps, and offered the head and the foot. On
the remainder of all the days, if he wished to offer, he offered; since
the high priest first offered part, and first took part (in the
sacrifices).

3. The elders from the elders of the great Sanhedrin delivered to him, and
read before him, the ceremonial of the day; and they said to him, “My Lord
High Priest, read with thy mouth, perchance thou hast forgotten, or
perchance thou hast not learned.”(195) On the eve of the day of atonement,
toward dawn, they placed him in the eastern gate (of the Temple), and they
caused to pass before him bullocks, rams, and lambs, that he might be
skilled and expert in his ministry.

4. All the seven days they did not withhold from him food and drink; the
eve of the day of atonement, with the beginning of darkness, they did not
permit him to eat much, since food induces sleep.

5. The elders of the great Sanhedrin delivered him to the elders of the
priesthood, who brought him to the upper chamber of the house Abtinas. And
they administered to him the oath,(196) and they left him and departed.
And they said to him, “My Lord High Priest, we are ambassadors of the
great Sanhedrin, and thou art our ambassador, and the ambassador of the
great Sanhedrin. We adjure thee by Him, whose Name dwells in this house,
that thou wilt not change aught of all which we have said to thee.” He
went apart and wept. They went apart and wept.(197)

6. If he were a learned man, he expounded; but if not, the disciples of
the learned expounded before him. If he were skilled in reading, he read;
but if not, they read before him. “And in what did they read before him?”
“In Job, and in Ezra, and in Chronicles.” Zachariah, the son of Kebutal,
said, “I often read before him in Daniel.”

7. If he desired to sleep, the young priests filliped with the first
finger(198) before him, and said to him, “My Lord High Priest, stand up
and refresh thyself(199) once on the pavement,” and they kept him
occupied(200) until the time approached for slaying (the victims).

8. Every day they cleansed the altar at cockcrow, or at its approach,
intermediate before or after it; and on the day of atonement(201) at
midnight; and in the three great feasts, at the first watch. And before
cockcrow the court was crowded with Israel.



