Chapter II


1. Rabbi Eliezer said, “a heifer for a sin-offering is allowed even in
pregnancy.” But the Sages disallow her. R. Eliezer said, “she is not to be
taken from foreigners.” But the Sages allow her. And not only she, but all
the offerings of the congregation, and of the individual, may come from
the Land (of Israel), or from outside the land, from the fresh harvest and
from the old harvest, except the omer,(723) and the two loaves,(724) which
may only come from the fresh harvest, and from the Land.

2. A heifer whose horns and hoofs are black should have them cut away. The
pupil of the eye and the teeth and the tongue cause no blemish in the
heifer. If she be diminutive, she is allowed. “Had she a wen which was cut
away?” R. Judah “disallowed her.” Rabbi Simon said, “every place which was
cut down, and no red hair sprang up in its place, renders her blemished.”

3. A heifer produced from the side or from the hire of immorality or
exchanged for a dog is disallowed. R. Eliezer allowed it, “as is said,
‘Thou shalt not bring the hire of a whore or the price of a dog into the
house of the Lord thy God.’(725) But she did not come into the house.” All
blemishes which are disallowed in holy things are disallowed in the
heifer. If one rode on her or leaned on her or hung something on her tail
or crossed a river on her or doubled the rope over her or put his garment
on her, she is disallowed. But if one bound her with a rope or made a shoe
to prevent her slipping or spread his garment over her because of the
flies, she is allowed. This is the rule: Everything which was necessary
for her is allowed; if there be any use of her for another’s benefit, she
is disallowed.

4. If a bird rested on her, she is allowed. If the male came to her, she
is disallowed. R. Judah said, “if he were brought, she is disallowed, but
if he came of himself, she is allowed.”

5. If she had two black or white hairs in one cavity, she is disallowed.
R. Judah said, “even in one pore.” “If they be in two pores and they prove
united?” “She is disallowed.” Rabbi Akiba said, “even four or five, if
they be scattered, may be plucked out.” Rabbi Eleazar said, “even fifty.”
R. Joshua, son of Bathira, said, “if there be even one in her head and one
in her tail, she is disallowed.” “If there be two hairs, their roots black
and their tops red, their roots red and their tops black?” “All follows
after the appearance,” the words of Rabbi Meier. But the Sages say, “after
the root.”



Chapter III


1. Seven days before the burning of the heifer, the priest who burned the
heifer was removed from his house to the chamber in front of the Temple
Palace toward the northeast;(726) and it was called the Stone House. And
he was sprinkled during all the seven days from all the ashes of red
heifers which were there. R. José said, “they did not sprinkle him save on
the third and seventh days only.” R. Hananiah, the deputy high-priest,
said, “on the priest who burned the heifer they sprinkled during all the
seven days, but on him who took service on the Day of Atonement they did
not sprinkle save on the third and seventh days only.”

2. There were courts in Jerusalem built of stone, and beneath they were
hollow,(727) through fear of an unseen grave. And pregnant women were
brought, and they were delivered there. And there they reared their sons,
and oxen were brought with doors on their backs, and the lads were seated
on them with stone cups in their hands. They came to Siloam, they
dismounted, and filled them. They remounted, and returned on the backs of
the oxen. R. José said, “from their seats on the backs of the oxen they
let down (the cups) and filled them (with water).”

3. The lads came back to the Mountain of the House and dismounted. The
Mountain of the House and its courts were hollow below, through fear of an
unseen grave. And at the door of the court there were prepared the ashes
of the red heifers; and they brought a ram from the sheep, and they
twisted a rope between his horns, and they twisted a stick and stuck it
into the end of the rope, and it was dipped into the ashes, and the ram
got a blow, and he skipped backward, and took them, and caused them to
appear on the surface of the water. R. José said, “you should not give an
opportunity to the Sadducees for scoffing: but (the lad) took and prepared
the ashes.”

4. They did not make use of (what pertained) to one red heifer for a
second one, nor did they use another lad for(728) his (prepared)
companion. “And the lads themselves were in need of sprinkling,” the words
of Rabbi José the Galilean. R. Akiba said, “they had no need of
sprinkling.”

5. If they did not find (ashes) of seven red heifers, six were sufficient,
five, four, three, two, one. “And who made them?” “Moses made the first,
and Ezra the second, and (there were) five from Ezra and afterward,” the
words of Rabbi Meier. But the Sages say, “seven from Ezra and afterward.”
“And who made them?” “Simon the Just, and John the High-priest made each
two. Elihueni, son of Hakuf, and Hanamel the Egyptian, and Ishmael, son of
Piani, made one each.”

6. And a causeway was made from the Mountain of the House to the Mount of
Olives, with arches over arches. And there was an arch in front of the
last pillar for fear of an unseen grave. Over it the priest who burned the
heifer, and the heifer with all her attendants, proceeded to the Mount of
Olives.

7. If the heifer were unwilling to go, they did not bring with her a black
one, lest it be said, “they slaughtered a black one” nor a red one, lest
it be said, “they slaughtered two.” R. José said, this was not the reason,
but because it is only said, “That he may bring her forth.”(729) And the
elders of Israel preceded her on foot to the Mount of Olives. And a house
for washing was there. And the priest who burned the heifer was rendered
unclean because of the Sadducees,(730) lest they should say, “it is
needful for sunset to pass over him.”(731)

8. The elders put their hands on the priest and said, “my Lord
High-priest, wash once.” He descended and washed, and he came up and wiped
himself. And wood was set in order there, cedar and ash and cypress and
fig-wood smoothed. And it was made like a tower, and windows were opened
in it, and their direction was westward.

9. The red heifer was bound with a rope of bulrushes and she was put on
the place of preparation, with her head southward and with her face
westward. The priest stood in the east with his face westward. He
slaughtered the heifer with his right hand, and received (the blood) in
his left hand. R. Judah said, “he received it in his right hand and put it
into his left, and sprinkled it with his right hand.” He dipped his hand,
and sprinkled the blood seven times in front of the House of the Holy of
Holies. For every sprinkling of blood he dipped his hand. When he finished
sprinkling the blood he wiped his hand on the body of the heifer. He went
down and kindled the fire with chips. Rabbi Akiba said, “with
palm-branches.”

10. She burst and moved from her place. He took cedar-wood and hyssop and
scarlet (wool). He said to them, “is this cedar-wood, is this cedar-wood?”
“is this hyssop, is this hyssop?” “is this scarlet, is this scarlet?”
three times for each thing. And they said to him, “yes,” “yes,” three
times for each thing.

11. He wrapped them in the remainder(732) of the tongue of scarlet wool,
and cast them into the midst of the burning. When the fire was burned
down, the ashes were beaten with sticks and sifted with sieves. R. Ishmael
said, “with stone hammers, and the work was finished with stone sieves.” A
black piece in which there are ashes must be pulverized, and that which
has no ashes is left. Bones with or without ashes were pulverized. And
they were divided into three parts. One part was put in the Chel, and one
was put on the Mount of Olives, and one was divided for all the
guards(733) (_i.e._, the representatives of all Israel).



