Chapter III


1. The order of these fasts is said only for the first rains. But if the
sprouts wither, men blow an alarm off-hand. And if the rains cease between
rain and rain forty days, men blow an alarm off-hand. Because it is a sign
of famine.

2. If the rains came down for the sprouts, but did not come down for the
trees, for the trees, but not for the sprouts, for both these, but not for
the wells, pits, and caves, men must blow an alarm for them off-hand.

3. And so also for the city, on which the rain did not come down, as is
written,(336) “And I caused it to rain upon one city, and caused it not to
rain upon another city; one piece was rained upon, and the piece whereupon
it rained not withered.”

This city fasts and blows an alarm, and all its neighboring cities fast,
but do not blow alarms. R. Akiba said, “they blow alarms, but do not
fast.”

4. And so for a city, in which there is pestilence, or falling of
buildings, that city fasts and blows an alarm, and all the neighboring
cities fast, but do not blow an alarm. Rabbi Akiba said, “they blow
alarms, but do not fast.” “What is pestilence?” “A city containing 500
men, and there go forth from it three dead in three days, one after the
other; this is pestilence, less than this is not pestilence.”

5. For these things men blow an alarm in every place—for the blasting and
for the blighting, for the locust and for the caterpillar, and for the
evil beast, and for the sword, they blow an alarm over them, because it is
a spreading wound.

6. It happened that the elders went down from Jerusalem to their cities,
and proclaimed fasting, because the blasting appeared, as much as would
fill an oven, in Askelon. And again they proclaimed a fast, because the
wolves devoured two children beyond Jordan: Rabbi José said, “not because
they devoured them, but because the wolves were seen.”

7. For these things men blow an alarm on the Sabbath—for a city,
encompassed by Gentiles, or by a flood, and for a ship tossed in the sea.
Rabbi José said, “for help, but not for a cry of distress.” Simon the
Temanite said, “also for pestilence,” but the Sages did not admit it.

8. For all distress—may it not come on the congregation—men sound an
alarm, except for too much rain. It happened that they said to Honé
Hammeagal, “pray that the rain come down”: he said to them, “go and bring
in the passover ovens, that they be not dissolved.” He prayed, but the
rain did not come down—What did he do? He dug a hole and stood in it, and
said before HIM, “Our Lord of the world, thy sons have turned toward me,
because I am a son of the House in Thy Presence. I am sworn in Thy great
Name, that I move not from hence, till Thou have pity on Thy children.”
The rain began to drop; he said, “I did not ask it thus, but rains for
wells, pits, and caves.” The rain began to descend with storm. He said, “I
did not ask it thus, but reasonable rain, with blessing and free-will.”
The showers came down as they ought, until all Israel went up from
Jerusalem to the Mount of Olives on account of the rains. They came and
said to him, “as thou hast prayed that the rains should come down, so pray
that they may depart.” He said to them, “go and see if the Stone of
Proclamation(337) be covered.” Simon the son of Shatach sent to him word,
“if thou wert not Honé, I would excommunicate thee; but what shall I do to
thee, since thou prayest before OMNIPRESENCE, and He does thy will, as a
son who plays upon his father, and he does his will? and for thee the
Scripture says, ‘Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that
bare thee shall rejoice.’ ”(338)

9. “If men were fasting and the rains came down for them before the sun
rose?” “They need not complete the day.” “If the rains came down after
sunrise?” “They must complete it.” R. Eliezer said, “before noon they need
not complete it, if after noon they must complete it.” It happened, that
the rulers proclaimed a fast in Lydda, and the rains came down in the
forenoon. Said R. Tarphon, “go and eat, and drink, and make holiday.” They
went and ate and drank, and made holiday, and they came in the evening and
read the great Thanksgiving.(339)



Chapter IV


1. Three times in the year the priests elevate their hands to bless the
people, four times a day—in the morning prayer, in the following prayer,
in the evening prayer, and at the locking of the gates. These times are
the fast days, on the fasts of the deputies, and on the day of atonement.

2. These are the Delegates, according as is said, “Command the children of
Israel, and say unto them, My offering and my bread for my sacrifices made
by fire.”(340) And how is it possible, that the offering of a man should
be sacrificed, and he does not stand by it? Therefore, the former prophets
decreed four-and-twenty Watches. For every Watch there were Delegates in
Jerusalem of priests, Levites, and Israelites. When the time approached
(for them) to go up, the priests and Levites went up to Jerusalem, and the
Israelites, who belonged to the Watch, gathered in their cities and read
in the history of Genesis.

3. And the Delegates used to fast four days in the week, from the second
day till the fifth. But they did not fast on the eve of the Sabbath, for
honor to the Sabbath. Nor on the first day, that they should not go forth
from repose and enjoyment, to toil, and fasting, and death. On the first
day they read in Genesis,(341) “and let there be a firmament.” On the
second, “let there be a firmament and let the waters be gathered
together.” On the third day, “let the waters be gathered together, and let
there be lights.” On the fourth, “let there be lights, and let the waters
bring forth abundantly.” On the fifth, “let the waters bring forth
abundantly,” and “let the earth bring forth.” On the sixth, “let the earth
bring forth,” and “the heavens were finished.” Two men read a large
portion, but a small portion was read by one. At morning prayer, at the
following prayer, at the evening prayer, they went in and read orally (by
heart), as they read the “Hear,”(342) etc. On the eve of the Sabbath they
did not go in to evening prayer for honor to the Sabbath.

4. Every day when there is praise, the Delegates are not at morning
prayer. When there is the additional offering at the following prayer,
there is not the closing prayer at the locking up of the gates. “When
there is the offering of the wood, there is not the evening prayer.” The
words of Rabbi Akiba. The son of Azai said to him, R. Joshua thus taught
it: “when there was an additional offering, the Delegates did not come to
evening prayer; when there was the offering of the wood, they did not come
to prayer at the locking up of the gates.” R. Akiba changed his opinion,
and taught as the son of Azai.

5. The times of bringing wood for the altar by priests and people were
nine. On the first of Nisan,(343) the children of Arach, son of Judah,
brought it. On the twentieth of Tammuz,(344) the children of David, the
son of Judah, brought it. On the fifth of Ab,(345) the children of
Parhush, the son of Judah, brought it. On the seventh, the children of
Jonadab, the son of Rechab, brought it. On the tenth, the children of
Sinah, the son of Benjamin, brought it. On the fifteenth, the children of
Zathva, the son of Judah, brought it, and with them the priests and
Levites and all who were ignorant of their tribe. And the children of
Gonebi Eli(346) and the children of Kozhi Kezihoth. On the twentieth, the
children of Pachath Moab, the son of Judah, brought it. On the twentieth
of Elul,(347) the children of Adin, the son of Judah, brought it. On the
first of Tebeth, the children of Parush returned the second time. On the
first of Tebeth,(348) there was no meeting of the Delegates, as there was
on it “The Praise,” and the additional offering at the following prayer,
and the offering of the wood.

6. Five things happened to our fathers on the seventeenth of Tammuz, and
five on the ninth of Ab. On the seventeenth of Tammuz the stone tables
were broken, and the daily offering ceased, and the city was broken up,
and Apostemus(349) burnt the law, and he set up an image in the Temple. On
the ninth of Ab it was proclaimed to our fathers, that they should not
enter the land, and the House was ruined for the first and second time,
and Bither was taken, and the city was ploughed up. On entering Ab we must
diminish joy.

7. The week in which the ninth of Ab comes, men are not allowed to clip
their hair, or wash their clothes; but on Thursday they are allowed, for
honor to the Sabbath. On the eve of the ninth of Ab one must not eat from
two dishes, must not eat flesh, and must not drink wine. Rabban Simon, the
son of Gamaliel, said, “one must change the style of living.” R. Judah
“enjoined to turn over the beds,” but the Sages did not approve him.

8. Said Rabban Simon, the son of Gamaliel, “there were no holidays in
Israel like the fifteenth of Ab, or like the day of atonement. Because in
them the daughters of Jerusalem promenaded in white garments borrowed,
that no one might be ashamed of her poverty. All these garments must be
baptized. And the daughters of Jerusalem promenaded and danced in the
vineyards. And what did they say? ‘Look here, young man, and see whom you
choose; look not for beauty, look for family;’ ‘Favor is deceitful, and
beauty is vain, but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be praised;’
and it is said, ‘Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works
praise her in the gates,’(350) and also it is said, ‘Go forth, O ye
daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with the crown, wherewith his
mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the
gladness of his heart.’(351) The day of his espousals, this is the gift of
the Law; and in the day of the gladness of his heart, this is the building
of the Sanctuary, and may it be speedily built in our days. Amen.”




The Feast-Offering(352)


    What is a Child?—Offerings—Crooked and Straight—Remission of
    Vows—Persons Unsuitable for the World—Laying on of
    Hands—Baptisms—Defilements—Purity—Vessels of the Sanctuary.



