Chapter VI


1. These things in the passover abrogate the command against work on the
Sabbath: its slaughtering, and the sprinkling of its blood, and purging
its inwards, and incensing its fat. But its roasting and the rinsing of
its inwards do not abrogate the Sabbath. But to carry it, and to bring it
beyond a Sabbath day’s journey, and to cut off its wen, do not abrogate
the Sabbath. Rabbi Eleazar said, “they abrogate it.”

2. Said Rabbi Eleazar, “and is not this the teaching? when slaughtering is
work it abrogates the Sabbath. Things which are for ‘resting’ do not
abrogate the Sabbath.”(161) To him said Rabbi Joshua, “a holiday will give
the proof; the Sages permitted that which is work, and they forbade that
which is resting.” Rabbi Eleazar said to him, “what do you mean, Joshua?
what comparison is there between a command and that which is voluntary?”
Rabbi Akiba answered and said, “sprinkling(162) will give the proof,
because it is a positive command, and it is for ‘resting,’ and does not
abrogate the Sabbath; but you should not wonder at this, even though it be
a command, as it is for ‘resting,’ and does not abrogate the Sabbath.”
Rabbi Eleazar said to him, “and on that I form my judgment, when
slaughtering is work it abrogates the Sabbath; sprinkling, which is for
‘resting,’ does it not teach that it abrogates the Sabbath?” Rabbi Akiba
said to him, “on the contrary, if sprinkling, which is for ‘resting,’ does
not abrogate the Sabbath, slaughtering, which is for work, is it not the
teaching? should not abrogate the Sabbath.” Rabbi Eleazar said to him,
“Akiba, thou hast annulled what is written in the Law, ‘between the
evenings,’ ‘in its appointed time,’ whether it be a week-day or a
Sabbath.” He said to him, “My teacher, give me proof of an appointed time
for these things, like the appointed time for slaughtering the
passover-offering?” The rule is, said R. Akiba, “all work for the passover
which it is possible to do on the eve of the Sabbath does not abrogate the
Sabbath; slaughtering, which it is impossible to do on the eve of the
passover which falls on a Sabbath, abrogates the Sabbath.”

3. “When do men bring with the passover a feast-offering?” “When the
passover falls on a week-day, when those who offer it are legally clean,
and when the lamb is too small for the eaters. But when the passover falls
on a Sabbath, when the lamb is too much for the eaters, and there is legal
uncleanness, they should not bring with it a feast-offering.”

4. The feast-offering(163) came from flocks, from herds, from sheep and
goats, from rams and ewes, and it may be eaten during a period of two days
and one night.

5. “The passover which was slaughtered without the proper intention on a
Sabbath?” “The offerer of it is indebted for a sin-offering.” “And all the
other sacrifices which he slaughtered for the passover?” “If they be not
suitable for it he is guilty.” “And if they be suitable?” Rabbi Eleazar
declares him “indebted for a sin-offering.” But R. Joshua “frees him.”
Said Rabbi Eleazar, “what! if the passover which was allowed for proper
intention when the offerer changed its intention, makes him guilty; is it
not the teaching that sacrifices, which are disallowed for want of proper
intention when the offerer changed their intention, make him also guilty?”
Rabbi Joshua said to him, “no; if thou saidst in the passover when he
changed its intention it is changed to a thing disallowed, thou wilt say
in the other sacrifices when he changed their intention they are changed
to a thing allowed.” Rabbi Eleazar said to him, “the congregational
offerings will give the proof, because they are rendered lawful on the
Sabbath by intention, but whoever slaughtered (another) sacrifice with
their intention is guilty.” Rabbi Joshua said to him, “no; if thou sayest
so in the congregational offerings, which are a determined number, thou
wilt also say so in the passover sacrifice which has no determined
number.” Rabbi Meier said, “even he who slaughtered other offerings on the
Sabbath, with the intention of the congregational offerings, is free.”

6. “When one slaughtered the passover, but not for its eaters, or not for
those numbered to eat it, for uncircumcised and for unclean persons?” “He
is guilty.” “For its eaters and not for its eaters? For its reckoning and
not for its reckoning? For circumcised and uncircumcised? For clean and
unclean?” “He is free.” “He slaughtered it, and it was found blemished?”
“He is guilty.” “He slaughtered it and it was found torn in secret?” “He
is free.” “He slaughtered it, and it became known that its owners retired
from it, or died, or became legally unclean?” “He is free, because he
slaughtered it with lawful permission.”



Chapter VII


1. “How do men roast the passover?” “They bring a stick of pomegranate and
thrust it through its mouth to its tail. And they put its legs and
intestines inside it.” The words of R. José, the Galilean. Rabbi Akiba
said, “that is a kind of boiling, therefore they hang them outside of it.”

2. Men must not roast the passover on a spit or a gridiron. Said R. Zaduk,
“it happened to Rabban Gamaliel that he said to Zabi, his servant, ‘go and
roast for us the passover on the gridiron.’ ” “If it touch the side of the
oven?” “That part must be peeled off.” “If its gravy drop on the side of
the oven, and again return on it?” “That part must be taken out.” “If the
gravy drop on the fine flour?” “That part must be pulled out” (and
burned).

3. “If men anointed (basted) it with oil of the heave-offering?” “If it be
a company of priests, they may eat it.” “If it be a company of
Israelites?” “If it be raw they can wash it away.” “But if roast?” “They
must peel off the surface.” “If it was anointed with oil of the second
tithe?” “Its value in money must not be charged to the members of the
company, because they cannot redeem(164) the second tithes in Jerusalem.”

4. Five things may be brought during legal uncleanness, but they must not
be eaten in legal uncleanness: the sheaf,(165) the two wave loaves,(166)
and the shewbread,(167) sacrifices of peace-offerings of the
congregation,(168) and the kids(169) on the feast of the New Moon. The
passover which was brought during legal uncleanness, may be eaten in
uncleanness, because in the beginning the command came only for eating.

5. “If the flesh be legally unclean and the fat unpolluted?” “The priest
must not sprinkle its blood on the altar.” “If the fat be unclean and the
flesh unpolluted?” “The priest may sprinkle its blood.” But with other
holy offerings it is not so, for though their flesh be unclean, and their
fat remains unpolluted, the priest may sprinkle their blood on the altar.

6. “If the congregation be legally unclean, or its majority, or the
priests be legally unclean, and the congregation legally clean?” “The
passover may be kept in legal uncleanness.” “If the minority of the
congregation be legally unclean?” “The clean majority can keep the first,
and the unclean minority the second passover” (on the fourteenth day of
the following month).

7. When the blood of the passover-offering was poured on the altar, and it
was afterward known that it was unclean, the (golden)(170) plate of the
High Priest makes it accepted. When the body of the paschal sacrifice was
unclean, “the plate” cannot make it accepted, as they say the Nazarite and
the celebrant of the passover have the uncleanness of the blood accepted
with “the plate.” But “the plate” does not make the legal uncleanness of
the body of the paschal lamb accepted. If it be legally unclean with an
unknown uncleanness, the plate makes it accepted.

8. “If it be legally unclean in whole or in most part?” “The passover must
be burned in front of ‘the palace’(171) with the wood of the altar.” “A
little which is unclean, and that which is left over?” “The owners may
burn it in their own courts, or on their roofs with their own wood.” The
stingy ones burnt it in front of the palace, that they might use the wood
of the altar.

9. “The passover which was carried out of the city, or became unclean?”
“The owner must burn it off-hand.” “Its masters became unclean or died?”
“Let its appearance change, and let it be burned on the sixteenth.”(172)
Rabbi Jochanan, the son of Beruka, said, “even it must be burned off-hand,
because it has no one to eat it.”

10. “Bones and tendons and what is left over?” “They must be burned on the
sixteenth.” “If the sixteenth happened on a Sabbath?” “They must be burned
on the seventeenth, because they cannot abrogate either the laws of the
Sabbath or the holiday.”

11. All that is eaten in a great ox may be eaten in a tender kid, and the
tops of the shoulder-blades, and the gristle. “Whoever broke any bone in a
clean passover?” “He must receive forty stripes.” “But for what is left
over in the clean, and broken in an unclean passover?” “He does not
receive the forty”.

12. “A member partly displaced?” “One must cut in till he reach the bone,
and he must peel off the flesh till he reach the joint, and he cuts it
off. But in other holy offerings one may cleave the displaced members with
an axe, since there does not exist any (prohibition of) breaking the bone
for them.” (For example), from the door-post and inwards is inside. From
the door-post and outwards is outside. The windows and thickness of the
wall are reckoned as inside.

13. “Two companies which eat the passover in one house?” “These turn their
faces to this side and eat; and those turn their faces to that side and
eat. And the boiler(173) is between the companies. The servant stands to
mix wine. The servant must shut his mouth till he serve the other company.
He afterward turns his face till he reach his own company, and then he may
eat. And she who is newly married can turn her face aside and eat it.”



