Chapter I


1. There are four new years. The first of Nisan(279) is a new year for
kings and for festivals.(280) The first of Elul(281) is a new year for the
tithing of cattle; but R. Eleazar and R. Simeon say, “it is on the first
of Tishri.”(282) The first of Tishri is a new year for civil years, for
years of release, and for jubilees, also for planting of trees(283) and
herbs. The first of Sebat is a new year for (the tithing of) trees
according to the school of Shammai, but the school of Hillel say, “on its
fifteenth.”

2. The world is judged at four periods: at the passover, for the growth of
corn; at Pentecost, for the fruit of trees; at new year’s day, when all
human beings pass before Him like lambs, as is said, “He fashioneth their
hearts alike; He considereth all their works”;(284) and at the feast of
tabernacles, judgment is given for the rains.

3. Messengers went forth (from Jerusalem) in six months: in Nisan for the
passover; in Ab(285) for the fast; in Elul for the new year; in Tishri for
the regulation of the feasts; in Kislev(286) for the dedication; in
Adar(287) for the feast of lots; and also in Iyar(288) during the
existence of the Temple for the little passover.

4. For two months(289) they may profane the Sabbath, for Nisan and for
Tishri, because in them the messengers went forth to Syria, and in them
they regulated the feasts. And during the existence of the Temple they
might profane it in all the months for the regulation of the offerings.

5. If the moon(290) appeared high and clear, or did not appear high and
clear, the witnesses may profane the Sabbath on account of it. R. José
says, “if it appeared high and clear, they may not profane the Sabbath on
account of it.”

6. It happened that more than forty pairs of witnesses were passing
through, when R. Akivah detained them in Lydda. Rabban Gamaliel sent to
him, “if thou thus detainest the people, it will be a stumbling-block in
the future.”

7. When father and son have seen the new moon, they must go (before the
Sanhedrin), not that they may be combined together, but in order that,
should the evidence of either of them be disallowed, the other may be
combined with another witness. R. Simeon says, “father, and son, and
relatives in every degree, may be allowed as competent witnesses for the
new moon.” R. José says, “it happened that Tobias, the physician, his son,
and his freed slave, saw the new moon in Jerusalem, and the priests
accepted his evidence, and that of his son, but disallowed his slave; but
when they came before the Sanhedrin, they accepted him and his slave, but
disallowed his son.”

8. These witnesses are disallowed—gamblers with dice, usurers,(291)
pigeon-breeders,(292) traders in produce of the Sabbatical year, and
slaves. This is the rule: all evidence that cannot be received from a
woman cannot be received from any of these.

9. “He who has seen the new moon but cannot walk?” “They must bring him on
an ass or even in a bed.” Those afraid of being waylaid may take sticks in
their hands, and if they have a long way to go, they may take provisions.
If they must be a day and a night on the road, they may profane the
Sabbath in travelling to testify for the new moon; as is said, “These are
the feasts of the LORD, which ye shall proclaim in their seasons.”(293)



Chapter II


1. If a witness were unknown, another was sent to testify to him. At first
they received evidence of the new moon from anyone; but when the
heretics(294) bribed (the witnesses), they ordained that evidence should
only be received from those who were known.

2. At first high flames were lighted, but when the Samaritans mimicked
them, it was ordained that messengers should be sent forth.

3. “How were these high flames lighted?” “They brought long staves of
cedarwood, canes, and branches of the olive tree, and the tow of flax,
which was tied with twine. And one went to the top of the mountain and
lighted them, and waved the flame to and fro, up and down, till he could
perceive his companion doing so on the second mountain, and so on the
third mountain,” etc.

4. “And where were these high flames lighted?” “From the Mount of Olives
to Sartaba; from Sartaba to Grophinah; from Grophinah to Hoveran; from
Hoveran to Bethbaltin; there they did not cease to wave them to and fro,
up and down, till the whole country of the captivity(295) looked like
torches of fire.”

5. There was a large court in Jerusalem called Beth Yangzek,(296) there
all the witnesses met, and there the Sanhedrin examined them. And they
made great feasts for them, that they might come often. At first they did
not stir from thence all day.(297) Rabban Gamaliel the elder ordained,
that they might go 2,000 cubits on every side. And not only they, but the
midwife going to a birth; and they who go to rescue from fire, or from
enemies, or from inundation, or from fallen buildings. These are as
inhabitants of the place, and they have 2,000 cubits on every side.

6. “How did they examine the witnesses?” “The first pair which came were
examined first, and they brought in the eldest of them, and they said to
him, ‘Tell us how you saw the moon—(her horns) toward the sun, or away
from the sun? To the north, or to the south? What was her altitude? Toward
where her declination? And what was her breath?’ If he said ‘toward the
sun,’ he said nothing. Afterward they brought in the second and examined;
if the evidence was found to agree, the evidence stood. The remaining
pairs of witnesses were then superficially examined, not because there was
necessity for their evidence, but not to discourage them, that they might
be willing to come again.”

7. The chief of the Sanhedrin said, “(the feast) is sanctified”; and all
the people answered after him, “Sanctified, sanctified.” Whether the new
moon had been seen in its season, or not, they sanctified it. R. Eleazar,
son of Zadok, said, “if it were not seen in its season, they did not
sanctify it, for heaven had already sanctified it.”

8. Rabban Gamaliel had on a tablet and on the wall of his chamber figures
and phases of the moon which he showed to ignorant witnesses, and said,
“was it like this you saw her, or like that?” It happened once that two
witnesses came, and said, “we saw the moon in the morning in the east, and
in the evening in the west”; said R. Jochanan, son of Nourri, “they are
false witnesses,” but when they came to Jamnia, Rabban Gamaliel received
their evidence. Two other witnesses came, and said, “we saw the moon in
her season, but on the next evening of the intercalary day she was
invisible,” and R. Gamaliel received them. Said R. Dosah, son of Arkenaz,
“they are false witnesses, for how can they testify of a woman being
delivered, and on the morrow she is still pregnant?” To him said R.
Joshua, “I approve thy words.”

9. Rabban Gamaliel sent to (R. Joshua), “I order thee to come to me with
thy staff and money on the day of atonement, according to thy
reckoning.”(298) R. Akivah went to (R. Joshua), and found him sorrowing.
He said to him, “I can prove that all Rabban Gamaliel has done is well
done, for it is said, ‘These are the feasts of the Lord, even holy
convocations, which ye shall proclaim in their seasons,’(299) or out of
their seasons; I have no other feasts but these.” R. Joshua came to R.
Dose, son of Arkenaz. He said to him, “if we are to judge the tribunal of
Rabban Gamaliel, we must also judge the tribunals which have existed from
the days of Moses till now,” for it is said, “Then went up Moses and
Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel.”(300) “And
why were not the names of the elders mentioned, but to inform us that
every three men in Israel who compose a tribunal, are as a tribunal of
Moses?” R. Joshua took his staff and money in his hand, and went to Jamnia
to Rabban Gamaliel on the day when the atonement began, according to his
reckoning. Rabban Gamaliel stood up and kissed him on his head, saying to
him, “come in peace, my master and disciple—my master in wisdom, my
disciple in obeying my words.”



