Chapter IV


1. He shook the urn and brought up two lots; one was written “for the
Name,” and the other was written “for Azazel.”(213) The Sagan stood at his
right hand, and the Chief of the Fathers at his left. If “for the Name”
came up in his right hand the Sagan said to him, “My Lord High Priest,
lift up thy right hand”; and if “for the Name” came up in his left the
Chief of the Fathers said to him, “My Lord High Priest, lift up thy left
hand.” He placed them upon the two goats, and said, “for the Lord is the
sin-offering.” R. Ismael said, “it was not necessary to mention the
sin-offering” but “for the Lord.” And they answered after him, “BLESSED BE
THE NAME. THE HONOR OF HIS KINGDOM FOREVER AND EVER.”

2. He twisted a tongue(214) of brightness on the head of the goat to be
sent away, and he placed him opposite the gate from whence he should be
sent. And the one for slaughter he placed opposite the slaughter-house. He
himself came beside his bullock the second time, and laid his two hands
upon him and made confession, and thus he spake: “I beseech Thee, O Name,
I have committed iniquity, I have transgressed, I have sinned before Thee.
I, and my house, and the sons of Aaron, Thy holy people. I beseech Thee, O
Name, pardon iniquities, transgressions, and sins which I have perversely
committed, and transgressed, and sinned before Thee, I, and my house, and
the sons of Aaron, Thy holy people, as is written in the law of Moses, Thy
servant, saying, that in this day he will atone for you to purify you from
all your sins ‘Before the LORD. Ye shall be pure.’ ” And they answered
after him, “BLESSED BE THE NAME. THE HONOR OF HIS KINGDOM FOREVER AND
EVER.”

3. He slaughtered him and caught his blood in a bowl, and he gave it to
him who mixed it upon the fourth platform of the Sanctuary, that it might
not congeal. He took the censer, and went up to the top of the altar, and
raked the live coals here and there, and gathered out from the inner
embers. And went down and placed it upon the fourth platform in the court.

4. Every day he gathered out the coals with one of silver and poured them
out into one of gold, but to-day he gathered them with one of gold and he
entered with it. Every day he gathered them out with one of four cabs(215)
and poured them into one of three cabs. But to-day he gathered them out
with one of three cabs, and with it he entered. Rabbi Joseph said, “every
day he gathered out with one containing a seah,(216) and poured it into
one of three cabs. But to-day he gathered out with one of three cabs, and
with it he entered. Every day it was heavy, but to-day it was light. Every
day its handle was short, but to-day long. Every day it was green gold;
to-day red.” The words of Rabbi Menachem. “Every day he offered half a
pound in the morning, and half a pound in the evening, but to-day he added
his handful. Every day it was fine; but to-day the finest of the fine.”

5. Every day the priests went up the ascent (to the altar) in the east and
descended in the west. But to-day the High Priest went up in the middle
and descended in the middle. R. Judah said, “The High Priest ever went up
in the middle and descended in the middle.” Every day the High Priest
sanctified his hands and his feet from the laver; but to-day from the
golden basin. R. Judah said, “The High Priest ever sanctified his hands
and his feet from the golden basin.”

6. “Every day there were there four rows(217) of hearths; but to-day
five,” the words of R. Meier. Rabbi Joseph said, “every day three; but
to-day four.” Rabbi Judah said, “every day two; but to-day three.”



Chapter V


1. They brought out for him the cup and the censer, and filled his hand
full (of incense), and put it into the cup, the large according to his
largeness,(218) and the smaller according to his smallness, and so was its
measure. He took the censer in his right hand, and the spoon in his left.
He proceeded in the Sanctuary until he came between the two vails dividing
between the holy and the holy of holies, and intermediate was a cubit. R.
Joseph said, “there was one vail only,” as He said, “the vail is the
division for you between the Holy and the Holy of Holies” (Exod. xxvi.
33). Outside it was looped up southward, inside northward. He proceeded
between them till he reached the north. When he reached the north his face
was turned southward. He proceeded leftward near the vail till he came to
the ark. When he came to the ark, he put the censer between its two
staves, he heaped the incense on the live coals, and the whole house was
entirely filled with smoke. He went out, and returned by the way of his
entrance, and he offered a short prayer in the outer house, and he did not
prolong his prayer, lest he should excite terror(219) in Israel.

2. When the ark was removed, a stone was there from the days of the first
prophets, and it was called “FOUNDATION.”(220) It was three digits high
above the earth, and upon it he put the censer.

3. He took the blood from the mixer.(221) With it he entered to the place
where he entered, and stood in the place where he stood. He sprinkled of
it once on high, and seven times below, and he did not purpose to sprinkle
neither on high nor below, but unintentionally,(222) and so he counted,
“one, one and one, one and two, one and three, one and four, one and five,
one and six, one and seven.” He went out and placed it on the golden
pedestal, which was in the Sanctuary.

4. They brought to him the goat, he slaughtered it and caught his blood in
a bowl. He entered to the place where he entered, and stood in the place
where he stood, and sprinkled of it once on high and seven times below,
and he did not purpose to sprinkle neither on high nor below, but
unintentionally;(223) and so he counted, “one, one and one, one and two,”
etc. He went out, and placed it on the second pedestal, which was in the
Sanctuary. R. Judah said “there was but one pedestal only.” He took the
blood of the bullock and laid down the blood of the goat, and sprinkled of
it on the vail opposite the ark, on the outside, once on high, seven times
below, and he did not purpose, etc., and so he counted. He took the blood
of the goat and laid down the blood of the bullock, and sprinkled of it on
the vail opposite the ark, on the outside, once on high and seven times
below, etc. He poured the blood of the bullock into the blood of the goat,
and infused the full into the empty.

5. And he went out to the altar which is before the LORD. This was the
golden altar. He began cleansing it, and went down. “From what place did
he begin?” “From the Northeastern corner, the Northwestern, Southwestern,
and Southeastern, the place where he began with the sin-offering of the
outer altar, at the same place he finished upon the inner altar.” R.
Eliezer said, “he stood in his place and cleansed, and in general he
operated from below upward, excepting that which was before him, on that
he operated from above downward.”

6. He sprinkled on the middle(224) of the altar seven times, and the
remainder of the blood he poured out on the western foundation of the
outer altar, and the blood from the outer altar he poured out on the
southern foundation. This and that commingled in the channel, and flowed
out to the Kidron Valley, and they were sold to the gardeners for manure,
and they became guilty(225) in themselves.

7. All work of the day of atonement is described in order. If the High
Priest performed one before the other, he did nothing. If the blood of the
goat be sprinkled before the blood of the bullock, he must return, and
sprinkle from the blood of the goat after the blood of the bullock. And if
he had not finished the performances within, the blood was spilled. He
must bring other blood, and return to sprinkle first from within. And so
in the Sanctuary, and so in the golden altar, because all are an atonement
in themselves. R. Eleazar and R. Simon say, “from the place where he
stopped there he began.”



