Chapter II


“How was the tabernacle covered?” “There were provided ten curtains of
blue, of purple, and scarlet, and fine-twined linen.” As is said,
“Moreover, thou shalt make the tabernacle (with) ten curtains of
fine-twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet.”(601) “Their threads
were doubled thirty-two times,” the words of Rabbi Nehemiah, when R.
Nehemiah said, “thread,” _i.e._, one doubled in two, “twined,” _i.e._, to
four, “fine-twined,” _i.e._, to eight. It follows that their threads were
doubled thirty-two times. But the Sages say, “thread,” _i.e._, one doubled
in two, “twined,” _i.e._, to three, “fine-twined,” _i.e._, to six. It
follows that their threads were doubled twenty-four times. They were
coupled in two vails, one of five, and one of five.(602) As is said, “the
five curtains shall be coupled together one to another: and (other) five
curtains (shall be) coupled one to another,” and they were coupled with
loops of blue, as is said,(603) “And thou shalt make loops of blue upon
the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling; and
likewise shalt thou make in the uttermost edge of (another) curtain, in
the coupling of the second.” And they were coupled to fifty taches of
gold, as is said,(604) “And thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and
couple the curtains together with the taches; and it shall be one
tabernacle.” And the taches appeared in the tabernacle as stars in the
firmament. The length of the curtains was twenty-eight cubits, as is
said,(605) “the length of one curtain (shall be) eight and twenty cubits.”
Take from them ten cubits for the breadth of the tabernacle, there will
remain nine cubits from the one side, and nine cubits from the other side.
They hung down and covered the boards till they reached the sockets. This
teaches that the sockets were one cubit high. And the breadth of the
curtains was forty cubits. As is said,(606) “and the breadth of one
curtain four cubits.” Take from them thirty cubits from the east to the
west, which were on the roof of the tabernacle, and ten cubits to the west
behind the tabernacle, there are forty.



Chapter III


There were provided eleven curtains of goats’ hair, and the length of
every one of them was thirty cubits, as is said, “And thou shalt make
curtains of goats’ (hair) to be a covering upon the tabernacle: eleven
curtains shalt thou make. The length of one curtain (shall be) thirty
cubits.”(607) And they were coupled in two vails, one of five, and one of
six, as is said, “And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and
six curtains by themselves,”(608) and they were coupled with fifty loops,
as is said, “And he made fifty loops upon the outmost edge of the curtain
in the coupling, and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain
which coupleth the second.”(609) And the loops were coupled to fifty
taches of brass, as is said, “And thou shalt make fifty taches of brass,
and put the taches into the loops, and couple the tent together that it
may be one.”(610) The length of the curtains was thirty cubits. Take from
them ten cubits for their breadth, there will remain ten cubits from one
side, and ten cubits from the other side, as they hung down and covered
the boards and the sockets. The breadth of the curtains was forty-four
cubits, as is said, “And the breadth of one curtain four cubits; and the
eleven curtains shall be all of one measure.”(611) Take from them thirty
cubits for the length of the tabernacle, and ten cubits behind the
tabernacle—these are forty. There was left there one curtain which was
doubled in front of the tent, as is said, “And thou shalt double the sixth
curtain in the fore-front of the tabernacle.”(612) Rabbi Judah said, “half
of it was doubled in the fore-front of the tabernacle, and half of it was
hanging behind the tabernacle,” as is said, “And the remnant that
remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth
shall hang over the back-side of the tabernacle.”(613) There was also
provided one great cover of rams’ skins dyed red, its length thirty
cubits, and its breadth ten cubits; with it they clothed the tent upon the
tabernacle from east to west, as is said, “And thou shalt make a covering
for the tent of rams’ skins dyed red, and a covering above of badgers’
skins,”(614) and it was made “like patchwork,” the words of Rabbi
Nehemiah. Rabbi Judah said, “there were two covers—the lower one of rams’
skins dyed red, and the upper one of badgers’ skins,” as is said, “his
covering and the covering of the badgers’ skins that is above upon
it.”(615)



Chapter IV


The vail was woven ten cubits square, and there were made in it four
loops, and it was hung on hooks on the tops of the pillars, and it was
spread in the third portion of the tabernacle, that there should be from
it inward ten cubits, and from it outward twenty cubits, as is said, “And
thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches.”(616) It follows that the
place of the Holy of Holies was ten cubits square, and there were put the
ark, and the pot of manna, and the pan of anointing oil, and Aaron’s rod
with its almonds and flowers; and there Aaron entered four times on the
day of atonement. Outside the vail were placed the table and candlestick.
But the table was on the north, and opposite to it was the candlestick on
the south; as is said, “And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and
the candlestick over against the table.”(617) And as they were placed in
the tent of the congregation, so were they placed in the everlasting
House.(618) Now the tent of the congregation was in length thirty cubits,
and in breadth ten cubits. But the everlasting House was in length sixty
cubits, and in breadth twenty cubits. This teaches that the tent of the
congregation was one-fourth part of the everlasting House. And as the vail
was woven, so was woven the ephod and the breastplate, only in these there
was an additional thread of gold; as is said, “And they did beat the gold
into thin plates and cut _it into_ wires.”(619) As was the weaving of the
covering vail, so was the weaving of the covering for the entrance. But
the vail was cunning work, as is said, “Thou shalt make the vail of blue
and purple,” etc.; “cunning work.”(620) But the covering of the entrance
was needle-work, as is said, “And thou shalt make an hanging for the door
of the tent,” etc., “of needle-work.”(621) The words of R. Nehemiah. R.
Nehemiah usually said, “every place where it is said cunning work (there
were) two figures—in the needlework (there was) but one figure only.” And
the branches of the candlestick were right opposite to the breadth of the
table. And the golden altar was placed in the middle of the house, and
divided the house, and its half inward was right opposite to the ark; as
is said, “And thou shalt put it before the vail that is by the ark of the
testimony before the mercy-seat.”(622) From the boards on the south to the
branches of the candlestick (there were) two cubits and a half. And from
the branches of the candlestick to the table (there were) five cubits. And
from the table to the boards on the north (were) two cubits and a half.
This teaches that the breadth of the Holy Place (was) ten cubits. From the
boards on the west to the vail (were) ten cubits. From the vail to the
table were five cubits. From the table to the golden altar (were) five
cubits. From the golden altar to the boards on the east (were) ten cubits.
This teaches that the length of the tabernacle was thirty cubits.



