Chapter VI


1. Both he-goats for the day of atonement are commanded to be alike in
color, and in stature, and in price, and to be selected at the same time,
and although they be not equal, yet are they lawful. “If one be selected
to-day and the other tomorrow?” “They are lawful.” “If one of them died?”
If he died before the lot be cast, the priest shall take a pair for the
second; and if after the lot be cast he die, the priest shall fetch
another pair, and cast the lot over them anew. And he shall say, “if that
for the Name die, this over which this lot comes will be a substitute for
the Name; and if that for Azazel die, this over which this lot comes will
be a substitute for Azazel.” And the second shall go to pasture, until he
become blemished, and he shall be sold, and his price must be put into the
offertory. Since the sin-offering of the congregation dies not. R. Judah
said, “thou shalt die”;(226) and again said R. Judah, “is his blood shed?”
“The one to be sent forth shall die.” “Has the one to be sent forth died?”
“His blood shall be shed.”

2. The high priest came to the side of the goat to be sent forth, and he
placed his two hands(227) on him and made confession, and thus he spake:
“I beseech Thee, O Name, Thy people, the house of Israel, have done
perversely, have transgressed and sinned before Thee. I beseech Thee, O
Name, pardon now their perverse doings, and their transgressions, and
their sins, which they have perversely committed, and transgressed, and
sinned before thee. Thy people the house of Israel, as is written in the
law of Moses Thy servant, saying, ‘For on that day shall he make an
atonement for you to cleanse you from all your sins; before the LORD ye
shall be pure.’(228) And the priests and the people who stood in the
court, on hearing the Name clearly pronounced by the mouth of the High
Priest, knelt and worshipped, and fell on their faces and said, ‘BLESSED
BE THE NAME. THE HONOR OF HIS KINGDOM FOREVER AND EVER.’ ”

3. They delivered (the goat) to his conductor. All were eligible for
conducting him. But the great priests made a rule, and they did not permit
Israel to lead him forth. Said R. Joseph, “it occurred that Arsela of
Zippori led him forth, and he was an Israelite.”

4. And they made steps(229) for him by reason of the Babylonians,(230) who
plucked off his hair and said to him, “take and go, take and go.” The
nobles of Jerusalem escorted him to the first booth. There were ten booths
from Jerusalem to Zuk,(231)—ninety stadia—seven and a half to every mile.

5. At every booth they said to him, “there is food, there is water,” and
they escorted him from booth to booth, except the last. For they came not
with him to Zuk, but stood afar off and saw his acts.

6. “What did he do?” “His conductor divided the tongue of brightness (iv.
2). Half he twisted on the rock, and half he twisted between his horns.
And he thrust him backward, and the goat rolled, and descended, and he had
not reached to the half of the mountain, till his members were made
members.(232) He returned and sat under the last booth until darkness set
in.” “And when did he render garments unclean?”(233) “From his exit from
the wall of Jerusalem.” R. Simon said, “from the time of his thrusting at
Zuk.”

7. The High Priest came beside the bullock and he-goat which were to be
burned. He cleft them, and brought out their entrails. He put them on a
dish, and caused them to smoke upon the altar. He folded them in their
skins, and caused them to be carried to the place of burning. “And when
did he render garments unclean?” “From his proceeding without the wall of
the court.” R. Simon said, “when the fire kindled on the greatest part”
(of the sacrifice).

8. They said to the High Priest, “the he-goat has arrived in the
wilderness.” “And whence knew they that the he-goat had arrived in the
wilderness?” “They set watchmen, who waved handkerchiefs, and they knew
that the he-goat had arrived in the wilderness.” Said R. Judah, “and was
not this a great sign to them? from Jerusalem to Bethhoron(234) there were
three miles. They went a mile and returned, and rested the time of a mile,
and they knew that the he-goat arrived in the desert.” R. Ishmael(235)
said, “and was there not another sign to them?” A tongue of brightness was
twisted on the door of the Sanctuary, and when the he-goat arrived in the
wilderness the tongue blanched, as is said, “Though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be white as snow.”(236)



Chapter VII


1. The High Priest came to read. If he wished to read in linen garments,
he read. If not, he read in his own white stole. The public Minister of
the congregation took out the roll of the Law, and delivered it to the
Chief of the congregation, and the Chief of the congregation gave it to
the Sagan, and the Sagan gave it to the High Priest. And the High Priest
stood and received it and read. He stood and read “after the death”(237)
and “also on the tenth day.”(238) And he rolled up the book of the Law,
and put it into his bosom, and said, “More than what I have read before
you is written here.” And “on the tenth”(239) in the Pentateuch of
overseers he recited, and pronounced upon it eight blessings; upon the
Law, and upon the Service, and upon the confession, and upon the
forgiveness of sins, and upon the Sanctuary separately, and upon Israel
separately, and upon Jerusalem separately, and upon the Priests
separately, and upon the remainder of the prayer.

2. He who saw the High Priest, when he read, could not see the bullock and
the he-goat, when they were burning. And he who saw the bullock and the
he-goat, when they were burning, could not see the High Priest, when he
read. Not because it was forbidden, but because the way was far, and the
work of both was proceeding at once.

3. If he read in linen garments, he sanctified his hands and his feet, he
undressed, he descended and bathed. He came up, and wiped himself. They
brought him golden garments, and he dressed, and he sanctified his hands
and his feet, and went forth and offered the ram for himself, and the ram
for the people, and seven lambs without blemish of a year old. The words
of R. Eleazar. R. Akiba said, “with the morning sacrifice they were
offered.” And the bullock of burnt-offering and the he-goat,(240) which
was prepared without, were offered with the evening sacrifice.

4. He purified his hands and his feet, and undressed, and washed, and he
came up, and wiped himself. They brought to him white garments, and he
dressed, and sanctified his hands and his feet. He entered to bring forth
the spoon and the censer, he sanctified his hands and his feet, and
undressed, and he descended, and washed. He came up, and wiped himself.
They brought to him garments of gold, and he dressed, and sanctified his
hands and his feet. And he entered to offer the evening incense, and to
trim the lights; and he sanctified his hands and his feet, and he dressed.
They brought to him his own garments, and he dressed. And they escorted
him to his house. And he made a feast-day for his friends, when he went
out in peace from the Sanctuary.

5. The High Priest ministered in eight vestments. And the ordinary priest
in four, in the tunic, and drawers, and bonnet, and girdle. To these, the
High Priest added the breast-plate, and ephod, and robe, and (golden)
plate. In these they inquired by Urim and Thummim.(241) And they did not
inquire in them for a private person; only for the King and the great
Sanhedrin, and for whomsoever the congregation is necessary.



