Chapter XIV


When Israel was to encamp, the pillar of cloud rose up and spread out over
the children of Judah like a kind of booth, and it covered the tent
outward, and filled the tabernacle inward; as is said, “Then a cloud
covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the
tabernacle.”(713) And this was one of the clouds of glory, which served
the Israelites in the wilderness forty years. One on the right hand, and
one on the left, and one before them, and one behind them. And one over
them, and a cloud dwelling in their midst (and the cloud, the SHECHINAH
which was in the Tent), and the pillar of cloud which moved before them,
making low before them the high (places), and making high before them the
low (places), and killing serpents and scorpions, and burning thorns and
briers, and guiding them in a straight way. Rabbi Simon, the son of José,
said, “during the forty years, when the Israelites were in the wilderness,
none of them had need of the light of the sun by day, nor the light of the
moon by night. When it became reddish they knew that the sun had set, and
when it became whitish they knew that the sun rose. And when one looked
into a barrel, he knew what was in it; and into a pitcher, and he knew
what was in it, by reason of the cloud, the SHECHINAH in their midst,” as
is said, “For the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and
fire was on it by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel
throughout all their journey.”(714) And so it is prepared to come in the
future: as is said, “Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of
the Lord is risen upon thee.” “The sun shall be no more thy light by day;
neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the Lord
shall be unto thee an everlasting light.” “Thy sun shall no more go down;
neither shall thy moon withdraw itself; for the Lord shall be thine
everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.”(715)
“From whence did the SHECHINAH speak with Moses?” Rabbi Nathan said, “from
the altar of incense,” as is said, “And thou shalt put it before the vail
that is by the ark of the testimony, etc.,

WHERE I WILL MEET WITH THEE.”(716)

Rabbi Simon, the son of Yochai, said, “beside the altar of incense,” as is
said, “And thou shalt beat some of it very small, and put of it before the
testimony in the tabernacle of the congregation,

WHERE I WILL MEET WITH THEE.”(717)

The disciples of Rabbi Ishmael said, “beside the altar of burnt-offering,”
as is said, “This shall be a continual burnt-offering throughout your
generations at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, before the
Lord,

WHERE I WILL MEET YOU.”(718)




The Heifer(719)


    The Heifer’s Age—Ages of Other Offerings—Places From Which the Red
    Heifer May Come—Blemishes—Black Hairs—Separation of the Priest for
    Burning the Red Heifer—Sprinkling—Lads who Drew Water from
    Siloam—Number of Red Heifers—Bridge to the Mount of
    Olives—Procession of Heifer and Attendants—Pile for
    Burning—Position of the Heifer—Position of the Priest—Slaughter of
    the Heifer—Sprinkling the Blood—Kindling the Pile—Gathering the
    Ashes—Doctrine of Intention—Vessels—Pumpkin Bottles—A Hollow
    Reed—Purifications—Cases of Casuistry—Seas—Wells—Reptiles—A Clean
    Place—Hyssop—Sprinkling.



Chapter I


1. Rabbi Eliezer said, “the red heifer must be a calf of a year old or a
heifer of two years.” But the Sages say, “a calf of two years and a heifer
of three years or of four years.” Rabbi Meier said, “even of five years
she is allowed, or older. But they are not to wait (longer) for her, lest
she turn black and be disallowed.” Rabbi Joshua said, “I only heard,
third.” They said to him, “what is the meaning of ‘third’?” He said to
them, “thus I heard it, without explanation.” The son of Azai said, “I
will explain it, if you say ‘third,’ that is to others in counting; but if
you say ‘one of three,’ that is, of three years.” As when they say, “a
fourth vineyard.” They said to him, “what means ‘fourth’?” He said to
them, “thus I heard it, without explanation.” Said the son of Azai, “I
will explain. If you say ‘fourth,’ that is, to others in counting. But as
you say ‘one of four,’ that is, of four years. As when they say, he who
eats in a leprous house a half-loaf,(720) of three loaves to the cab of
flour.” They say to him, “say eighteen loaves to the seah of flour.” He
said to them, “Thus I heard it, without explanation.” Said the son of
Azai, “I will explain. If you say, ‘three to the cab,’ there is no
dough-offering. But if you say, ‘eighteen to the seah,’ the dough-offering
diminishes it.”

2. R. José the Galilean said, “the cleansing of the Levites required
bullocks of two years old,” as is said, “And another young bullock shalt
thou take for a sin-offering.”(721) But the Sages say, “even of three
years.” R. Meier said, “bullocks even of four and five years are allowed,
but old ones are not brought, for honor’s sake.”

3. Sacrifices required lambs of a year old and rams of two years old, and
all (are reckoned) from day to day.(722) If they be thirteen months old,
neither ram nor lamb is allowed. R. Tarphon called it, “half and between.”
The son of Azai called it, “pointed out.” R. Ishmael called it, “recalled
coin.” If the ram be brought for offering, and the libation of the ram be
brought with him, it does not pass for his offering, except he be thirteen
months and one day old. That is the law for the ram.

4. The sin-offering of the congregation and their burnt-offerings, the
sin-offering of an individual and the trespass-offering of the Nazarite
and the trespass-offering of the leper are allowed for thirty days and
upward, and even on the thirtieth day. And if they are brought on the
eighth day, they are allowed; vows, freewill-offerings, the first-born,
and the tithe and the passover are allowed from the eighth day and upward,
and even on the eighth day.



