Chapter XII


1. Short hyssop is made sufficient for sprinkling with a thread and
spindle, and it is dipped and lifted, and one holds the hyssop and
sprinkles. R. Judah and R. Simon say, “as is the rule for sprinkling with
the hyssop, so is the dipping with the hyssop” (_i.e._, in holding it).

2. “If one sprinkled and there is a doubt if the water with ashes came
from the thread, or a doubt if it came from the spindle, or a doubt if it
came from the stalk?” “His sprinkling is disallowed.” “If he sprinkled on
two vessels, there is a doubt; if he sprinkled on both, there is a doubt
that the sprinkling splashed from one to the other?” “His sprinkling is
disallowed.” “A needle is placed on a potsherd, and he sprinkled it, there
is a doubt if he sprinkled on the needle, there is a doubt if the
sprinkling splashed from the potsherd upon it?” “His sprinkling is
disallowed.” “A pan for purification with a narrow mouth?” “He is to dip
the hyssop in and lift it out as usual.” R. Judah says, “the first
sprinkling (is allowed).” “The water of purification which became
diminished?” “One may dip in even the tops of the stalks and sprinkle,
except that he should not dry up the vessel.” “His intention(757) was to
sprinkle before him, and he sprinkled behind him; to sprinkle behind him,
and he sprinkled before him?” “His sprinkling is disallowed.” “Before him,
and he sprinkled sidewise in front?” “His sprinkling is allowed.” He may
sprinkle a man whether he be aware of it or not. He may sprinkle a man, or
vessels, even should they be 100.

3. “His intention was to sprinkle on anything which can receive
defilement, and he sprinkled on a thing which cannot receive defilement?”
“If there remain (water) in the hyssop he must not repeat it.” “His
intention was to sprinkle on something which does not receive defilement,
and he sprinkled on something which does receive defilement?” “If there
remain (water) in the hyssop, he may repeat it.” “If upon man, and he
sprinkled on a beast?” “If there remain (water) in the hyssop, he must not
repeat it.” “Upon beast and he sprinkled on man?” “If there be (water) in
the hyssop he may repeat it.” Water which has dropped from the hyssop is
allowed, because it renders everything unclean like the water of
purification.(758)

4. He who sprinkled from a public window and entered the sanctuary, and
the water was afterward found (to be) disallowed, is free. He who
sprinkled from a private window and entered the sanctuary, and the water
was afterward found (to be) disallowed, is a debtor. But the high-priest,
whether he sprinkled from a private, or from a public window, is free,
since no high-priest is indebted (for an offering) on his entering the
sanctuary. Persons were slipping in water of purification before a public
window, and treading in it and were not hindered, because the (Sages) say,
“the water of purification, which has done its duty, causes no
uncleanness.”

5. A clean man who took the axe of one legally unclean by the handle,(759)
and sprinkled it, even though there be so much water upon it as is
sufficient for sprinkling, is clean. “How much water is sufficient for
sprinkling?” “Sufficient that the tops of the stalks of hyssop be dipped
and sprinkled.” R. Judah said, “we regard them as though the hyssop were
copper.”

6. “He who sprinkled with unclean hyssop?” “If it be the size of an egg,
the water is disallowed, and the sprinkling is disallowed.” “If it be not
the size of an egg?” “The water is allowed, but the sprinkling is
disallowed, and he who is sprinkled renders his companion unclean, and he
again his companion, even though there be 100.”

7. He who was cleansed for purification, if his hands became unclean, his
body is unclean, and he renders his companion unclean, and he again his
companion, even though there be 100.

8. A jug for purification, which became unclean on the outside, becomes
unclean inside, and renders unclean the one next to it, and it again the
next one, even though they be 100. The bell and its clapper are reckoned
as one. The spindle for bulrushes is not to be sprinkled either on the
spindle or on the ring. But if it be sprinkled, it is sprinkled. If it be
a spindle for flax, its parts are all reckoned as one. The skin which
covers a couch which is joined to rings, is reckoned as one with it. The
canopy is neither reckoned for uncleanness or cleanness. All handles of
vessels which enter them are reckoned as one with them. Rabbi Jochanan,
the son of Nuri, said, “even if they be only attached.”

9. The panniers of an ass, and the staff of the threshing-wagon, and the
pole of a bier, and the horn vessels of travellers, and a chain for keys,
and the stitch-hooks of washers, and a garment sewed with a mixture of
wool and linen, are reckoned as one for uncleanness, but not reckoned as
one for sprinkling.

10. “The cover of a kettle which is bound by a chain?” The school of
Shammai say, “it is reckoned as one for uncleanness, but not reckoned as
one for sprinkling.” The school of Hillel say, “he sprinkled the kettle,
he sprinkled the cover; he sprinkled the cover, he did not sprinkle the
kettle.” All are permitted to sprinkle, except a neuter and a woman, and a
child without understanding. A woman may help a man when he sprinkles, and
she may hold for him the water. And he dips the hyssop and sprinkles. If
she take hold of his hand even in the moment of sprinkling, it is
disallowed.

11. “One dipped the hyssop by day and sprinkled by day?” “It is allowed.”
“He dipped the hyssop by day and sprinkled by night, by night and
sprinkled by day?” “It is disallowed.” “By day, and sprinkled on the day
following?” “It is disallowed.” But he himself washed by night, and
sprinkled by day, since we do not sprinkle till the sun rise; and
everything done in sprinkling when the pillar of the morn ascends, is
allowed.




Hands


    Pouring Water—Vessels—Water—Who May Pour—How It Is to Be
    Poured—Hindrances to Cleanness—Doubting—Primary
    Uncleanness—Secondary Uncleanness—Derived Uncleanness—Rabban
    Simeon, Son of Gamaliel—Straps of Phylacteries—Rolls of the
    Law—Holy Scriptures—Canticles and Ecclesiastes—Foot-baths—Ammon
    and Moab—Discussion between Rabbis Eleazar, Ishmael, and
    Tarphon—Weeping of R. Eleazar—An Ammonite Proselyte—Chaldee
    Writing—Assyrian Writing—The Sadducees—The Books of Homer—The
    Pharisees—Writing the Name.



