Chapter IV


1. The priests did not tie the four feet of the lamb together, but they
bound its fore and hind feet. He who gained the lot for carrying the
members, held it; and thus was it bound, its head southward, and its face
westward. The slaughterer stood in the east with his face westward. The
morning sacrifice was slaughtered at the northwestern corner on the second
ring. The evening sacrifice was slaughtered at the northeastern corner on
the second ring. The slaughterer slaughtered, and the receiver caught (the
blood). The priest came to the northeastern corner of the altar, and he
sprinkled the blood northeast. He came to the southwest, and sprinkled the
blood southwest:(547) the remainder of the blood he poured out on the
southern altar-base.

2. The priest did not break its leg, but he made a hole in the midst of
its side, and by that it was hung up. He skinned it downward till he came
to the breast. When he came to the breast, he cut off the head, and gave
it to him who had gained (its lot). He cut off the two hind feet, and gave
them to him who had gained them for his lot. He finished the skinning; he
tore out the heart, that the blood should come out. He cut off the two
fore feet, and gave them to him who had gained them for his lot. He came
to the right leg; he cut it off, and gave it to him who had gained it for
his lot. He cleft the body, and it became all open before him. He took out
the caul, and put it on the place of slaughter, with the head on the top
of it. He took out the intestines and gave them to him who had gained them
for his lot to cleanse them. And the belly they cleansed in the house of
the washers, as much as was needful. And the intestines were cleansed
three times at least, upon the marble tables between the pillars.

3. The priest took the knife and separated the lungs from the liver, and
the finger of the liver from the liver, but he did not remove it from its
place. He made a hole in the breast, and gave it to him who gained it for
his lot. He came to the right side, and he cut it downward to the
backbone, but he did not touch the backbone, till he came to the two
tender ribs. He cut it off and gave it to him who gained it for his lot,
with the liver hanging upon it. He came to the neck, and left the two side
bones on both sides. He cut it off and gave it to him who had gained it
for his lot, with the windpipe and the heart and the lungs hanging upon
it. He came to the left side, and left on it the two tender ribs, above
and below, and so he left it on the corresponding side. It follows that he
left on the two sides, two and two ribs above, and two and two ribs below.
He cut it off, and gave it to him who gained it for his lot, the backbone
with it, and the spleen hanging upon it. And it was large, but the right
side is called large, as the liver hangs upon it. He came to the tail; he
cut it off and gave it to him who gained it for his lot, and the fat, and
the finger of the liver, and the two kidneys with it. He took the left
hind leg, and gave it to him who gained it for his lot. It follows that
all the priests stood in one row with the members in their hands. The
first priest with the head and hind foot, the head in his right hand with
the nose toward his arm, and the horns between his fingers, and the place
of slaughter upward, and the caul placed on it; and the right hind foot in
his left hand with the skin outside. The second priest stood with the two
fore legs, the right in his right hand, and the left in his left hand, and
the skin outside. The third priest stood with the tail and the hind foot;
the tail in his right hand, and the fat wrapped between his fingers, and
the finger of the liver and the two kidneys with it; the left foot was in
his left hand with the skin outward. The fourth priest stood with the
breast and the throat. The breast was in his right hand, and the throat in
his left, and its side bones between his fingers. The fifth priest stood
with the two sides, the right side in his right hand, and the left side in
his left hand, and the skinny side outward. The sixth priest stood with
the intestines placed in a pan, and the legs over them. The seventh priest
stood with the fine flour. The eighth priest stood with the pancakes. The
ninth priest stood with the wine. They then proceeded and deposited the
members on the lower half of the ascent westward, and they salted them,
and descended, and came to the chamber of the hewn stone to read the
“Hear,”(548) etc.



Chapter V


1. The Captain of the Watch said, “give one blessing,” and the priests
blessed and read the ten commandments, “Hear,”(549) etc. “And it shall
come to pass if ye shall hearken,”(550) etc. And “He spake,”(551) etc.
They then gave the three blessings to the people, “Truth and Sureness,”
and “the Service,” and “the Blessing of the Priests.” And on the Sabbath
they added one blessing for the outgoing Temple-guard.

2. He said to them, “novices(552) to the incense, come and cast lots.”
They cast lots. He gained who gained. He said to them, “novices with old
men come and cast lots, who shall bring up the members of the lamb from
the ascent to the altar.” R. Eliezer, the son of Jacob, said, “those
priests who brought the members to the ascent must also bring them to the
top of the altar.”

3. He handed the priests over to the sextons. They divested them of their
dresses, leaving them their breeches only, and there were windows there,
and over them was written, “used for vestments.”(553)

4. He who gained the lot for the incense, took the spoon; and the spoon
resembled a great measure of gold containing three cabs. And the pan was
heaped full of incense; and it had a covering like a kind of weight upon
it.

5. He who gained the lot for the censer, took the silver censer, and went
up to the top of the altar, and he turned the live coals here and there,
and he put them into the censer. He descended, and poured them into a
censer of gold. There was dispersed from them about a cab of live coals,
and he brushed them into the channel for refuse. On the Sabbath he put
over them a cover. And the cover was a great vessel containing a
letech.(554) And there were two chains to it, one by which the priest drew
it down, and one by which he held it from above, that it should not be
rolled about; and it was useful for three purposes, as a covering over the
live coals, and as a covering over the reptile on the Sabbath, and it was
also used to carry down the ashes from the altar.

6. The priests arrived between the porch and the altar. One of them took
the shovel,(555) and flung it between the porch and the altar. No one
could hear the voice of his neighbor in Jerusalem from the rattling of the
shovel. And it was useful for three purposes: when the priest heard its
rattle, he knew that his brother priests were entering to worship, and he
came running; and the Levite, when he heard its rattle, knew that his
brother Levites were entering to chant, and he came running; and the chief
of the Delegates(556) compelled the defiled men to stand in the eastern
gate of the Temple.



