Chapter II


1. “If one sleep under a bed in the booth?” “He has not discharged his
duty.” R. Judah said, “we used to sleep under a bed before the elders, and
they said nothing to us.” R. Simon said, “it happened that Tabbi, the
slave of R. Gamaliel, used to sleep under a bed, and R. Gamaliel said to
the elders, ‘you have seen my slave Tabbi, he is a disciple of the Sages,
and knows that slaves are exempted from the booth, therefore he sleeps
under a bedstead.’ From this we in our way infer that he who sleeps under
a bed has not discharged his duty.”

2. “If a man support his booth with the posts of his bed?” “It is
allowed.” R. Judah says, “a booth which cannot stand by itself, is
disallowed.” A booth, which is unequally covered, and its shade greater
than its sunlight, is allowed. If the covering be thick like a house roof,
even though the stars are not seen through it, it is allowed.

3. “If one make his booth on the top of a wagon, or on a boat?” “It is
allowed; and he may go up to it on the festival.” “If one make it on the
top of a tree, or on the back of a camel?” “It is allowed, but he must not
go up to it on the festival.”(246) “If two sides (be formed) by a tree,
and one by the hands of man, or two by the hands of man and one by a
tree?” “The booth is allowed, but he must not go up to it on the
festival.” “If three (sides be formed) by hands of man and the fourth by a
tree?” “The booth is allowed, and he may go up to it on the festival.”
This is the rule—when, on the removal of the tree, it can stand by itself,
the booth is allowed, and one may go up to it on the festival.

4. “If one make his booth between trees, and the trees form side walls?”
“The booth is allowed.” Messengers on a pious errand are exempted from the
booth. The sick and their attendants are exempted from the booth. Persons
may occasionally eat or drink outside the booth.

5. It happened that they brought to R. Jochanan, son of Zachai, a dish to
taste, and to Rabban Gamaliel two dates and a jar of water, and they said,
“bring them to the booth.” But when they brought to R. Zadok food smaller
than an egg, he took it in the napkin(247) and ate it outside the booth,
but he did not say a blessing after it.

6. R. Eleazar says, “a man is bound to eat fourteen meals in the booth,
one by day and one by night”; but the Sages say the matter is not
determined, except on the first night of the festival. Moreover R. Eleazar
said, “he who has not taken his meal on the first night of the festival,
may complete it on the last night of the festival; but the Sages say that
he must not complete it, and for this it is said, ‘(That which is) crooked
cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting, cannot be
numbered.’ ”(248)

7. “If anyone’s head, and the greater part of his body, be in the booth,
and his table in the house?” The school of Shammai “disallow it”; but the
school of Hillel “allow it.” The school of Hillel said to the school of
Shammai, “did it not happen that the elders of the school of Shammai, and
those of the school of Hillel, went to visit R. Jochanan, son of Hachorni,
and they found him sitting with his head and the greater part of his body
in the booth while his table was in the house, and they said nothing to
him?” The school of Shammai said to them, “Is that a proof? Even the
elders did say to him, ‘if such has been thy custom, thou hast never in
thy life fulfilled the commandment of the booth.’ ”

8. Women, slaves, and children, are exempted from the booth. A boy who no
longer needs his mother is bound to the booth. It happened that the
daughter-in-law of Shammai, the elder,(249) gave birth to a son, and
Shammai removed the ceiling and covered over her bed on account of the
little one.

9. During the whole seven days a man is to make the booth his regular
dwelling, and (to use) his house only occasionally. “If rain fall, when is
it permitted to remove from it?” “When the porridge is spoiled.” The
elders illustrate this by an example: “To what is the matter like?” “It is
as if a servant pour out a cup for his master, who in return dashes a
bowlful in his face.”



Chapter III


1. A palm branch stolen or withered is disallowed. One from an idolatrous
grove, or from a city withdrawn to idolatry,(250) is disallowed. If the
point be broken off, or the leaves torn off, it is disallowed. If they be
only parted, it is allowed. R. Judah says, “it must be tied together at
the top.” Short-leaved palms from the Iron Mount(251) are allowed. A palm
branch measuring three hands, sufficient to shake it by, is allowed.

2. A myrtle bough stolen, or withered, is disallowed. One from an
idolatrous grove, or from a city withdrawn to idolatry, is disallowed. If
the point be broken off, or the leaves torn off, or if it have more
berries than leaves, it is disallowed. But if the berries be lessened it
is allowed; but they must not diminish them on the festival.

3. A willow of the brook stolen, or withered, is disallowed. One from an
idolatrous grove, or from a town withdrawn to idolatry, is disallowed. If
the point be broken off, or the leaves torn off, or if it be a mountain
willow, it is disallowed. One faded, or from which some leaves have
dropped off, or which has grown on dry ground, is allowed.

4. R. Ishmael says, “three myrtle boughs, two willows, one palm branch,
and one citron, even if two out of the three myrtle boughs have their
points broken off.” R. Tarphon says, “even if three have their points
broken off.” R. Akivah says, “even as there is one citron and one palm
branch, so there is one myrtle bough and one willow.”

5. A citron stolen or withered is disallowed. One from an idolatrous
grove, or from a city withdrawn to idolatry, is disallowed. One off an
uncircumcised tree(252) is disallowed. One from an unclean
heave-offering(253) is disallowed. From the clean heave-offering one is
not to take a citron, but if it be taken, it is allowed. “One from what is
doubtful as to payment of tithe?” The school of Shammai “disallow it,” but
the school of Hillel “allow it.” One is not to take a citron from the
second tithe in Jerusalem, but if it be taken it is allowed.

6. If a stain spread over the greater part (of the citron), if it have
lost its crown, or its rind be peeled off, or if it be split, or bored, or
if ever so little be wanting, it is disallowed. If a stain be spread over
the smaller part of it, if it have lost its stalk, or if it be bored so
that no part however small be wanting, it is allowed. A dusky citron is
disallowed. A leek green one R. Meier “allows,” but R. Judah “disallows
it.”

7. “What is the (legal) size of a small citron?” R. Meier says “like a
nut.” R. Judah says “like an egg.” “And of a large citron?” “That one can
hold two in his hand,” the words of R. Judah. But R. José says, “One if
(it must be held) in two hands.”

8. “They must only tie the palm-branch with its own kind,” the words of R.
Judah. But R. Meier says, “even with twine.” R. Meier said, “it happened
that the men of Jerusalem tied their palm-branches with gold thread.” The
Sages said to him, “underneath they tied them with their own kind.”

9. “When did they shake the palm-branch?” At the beginning and ending of
“Oh, give thanks unto the Lord,”(254) and at “Save now, I beseech Thee, O
Lord,”(255) the words of the school of Hillel. But the school of Shammai
say, “also at ‘O Lord, I beseech Thee,’ send now prosperity.”(256) R.
Akivah said, “I watched Rabban Gamaliel and R. Joshua; and when all the
people shook their palm-branches, they only shook theirs at ‘Save now, I
beseech Thee.’ ” If one be on the road, and have no palm-branch with him,
he must, when he gets home, shake it at his table. If he have not done it
in the morning, he must do it toward evening, as the whole day is allowed
for the palm-branch.

10. If the hymns(257) be read to a man by a slave, or a woman, or a
child,(258) he must repeat after them what they read, but it is a
disgrace(259) to him. If a grown-up man read it to him, he must repeat
after him, Hallelujah.

11. In a place where it is the custom to repeat,(260) a man must repeat;
to simply read, a man must simply read; to bless after the palm-branch, a
man must bless. In every case according to the custom of the country. If a
person buy a palm-branch from his neighbor during the Sabbatical year, he
must give him a citron as a gift, for it is not permitted to buy a citron
during the Sabbatical year.

12. At first the palm-branch was used in the Sanctuary seven days, and in
the country one day. But after the Sanctuary was destroyed, R. Jochanan,
the son of Zachai, decreed, “that in the country the palm-branch should be
used seven days, in memory of the Sanctuary.” He at the same time also
decreed, “that on the day of the wave-sheaf(261) it should be unlawful to
eat new grain.”

13. If the first day of the feast fall on a Sabbath, all the people are to
bring their palm-branches (beforehand) to the Synagogue. In the morning
they come early, and each man must distinguish his own palm-branch, and
take it, for the Sages say, “that a man cannot discharge his duty on the
first day of the feast by means of his neighbor’s palm-branch, but on the
other days of the feast he may discharge his duty by means of his
neighbor’s palm-branch.”

14. R. José says, “if the first day of the feast fall on the Sabbath, and
a man forget, and carry his palm-branch out on the public common, he is
absolved, because he carried it out with permission.”(262)

15. A woman may receive the palm-branch from the hand of her son, or of
her husband, and put it back into water on the Sabbath. R. Judah says, “on
the Sabbath they may put it back; on the feast they may add water; and on
the middle days they may change the water.” A child who knows how to
shake, is bound to shake the palm-branch.



