Chapter VI


1. “How do we bless for fruit?” “For fruit of a tree say, ‘Who createst
the fruit of the wood,’ excepting the wine. For wine say, ‘Who createst
the fruit of the vine.’ For fruits of the earth say, ‘Who createst the
fruit of the ground,’ excepting the morsel. For the morsel say, ‘Who
bringest forth bread from the earth.’ For vegetables say, ‘Who createst
the fruit of the ground.’ R. Judah says, ‘Who createst various kinds of
herbs.’ ”

2. He who blessed the fruits of the tree (thus), “Who createst the fruits
of the ground?” “He is free.” And for the fruits of ground (said), “Who
createst the fruits of the wood?” “He is not free.” But, in general, if
one say, “(Who createst) everything?” “He is free.”

3. For the thing which groweth not from the earth, say, “(Who createst)
everything.” For vinegar, unripe fruit, and locusts, say “everything.” For
milk, cheese, and eggs, say “everything.” R. Judah says, “whatever it be,
which had its origin in a curse, is not to be blessed.”

4. If a man have before him many kinds of fruits? R. Judah says, “if there
be among them of the seven(30) kinds, he is to bless them.” But the Sages
say “he may bless whichever of them he pleases.”

5. “If one blessed the wine before food?” “The blessing frees the wine
after food.” “If he blessed the titbit before food?” “It frees the titbit
after food.” “If he blessed the bread?” “It frees the titbit.” But the
blessing on the titbit does not free the bread. The school of Shammai say,
“neither does it free the cookery.”

6. “If several persons sit down to eat?” “Each blesses for himself.” “But
if they recline together?” “One blesses for all.” “If wine come to them
during food?” “Each blesses for himself.” “But if after food?” “One
blesses for all.” He also blesses for the incense, even though they have
not brought it till after the repast.

7. “If they first set salt food before a man and bread with it?” “He
blesses the salt food, which frees the bread, as the bread is only an
appendage.” The rule is, whenever there is principal and with it
appendage,—the blessing on the principal frees the appendage.

8. “If one have eaten figs, grapes, and pomegranates?” “He must say after
them three blessings.” The words of Rabban Gamaliel. But the Sages say,
“one blessing—a summary of the three.” R. Akivah says, “if one have eaten
boiled (pulse); and it is his meal, he must say after it three blessings.”
Whoever drinks water for his thirst, says, “By whose word everything is,”
etc. R. Tarphon says, “Who createst many souls,” etc.



Chapter VII


1. Three men who have eaten together are bound to bless after food. “If a
person have eaten of that which is doubtful, whether it has paid tithe or
not; or of first tithe from which the heave offering has been taken; or of
second tithe or consecrated things, which have been redeemed; also, if the
waiter have eaten the size of an olive; or a Samaritan be of the party?”
“The blessing must be said.” “But if one have eaten the untithed—or first
tithes from which the heave offering has not been taken—or consecrated
things which are unredeemed; or if the waiter have eaten less than the
size of an olive, or a stranger be of the party?” “The blessing is not to
be said.”

2. There is no blessing at food for women, slaves, and children. What
quantity is required for the blessing at food? The size of an olive. R.
Judah says “the size of an egg.”

3. “How do we bless at food?” “If there be three, one says, ‘Let us
bless,’ etc.; if three and himself, he says, ‘Bless ye,’ etc.: if ten, he
says, ‘Let us bless our God,’ etc.; if ten and himself, he says, ‘Bless
ye,’ etc.; (so) if there be ten or ten myriads. If there be an hundred, he
says, ‘Let us bless the Lord our God,’ etc.; if there be an hundred and
himself, he says, ‘Bless ye,’ etc.: if there be a thousand, he says, ‘Let
us bless the Lord our God, the God of Israel;’ if there be a thousand and
himself, he says, ‘Bless ye,’ etc.: if there be a myriad, he says, ‘Let us
bless the Lord our God, the God of Israel, the God of Hosts, who sitteth
between the Cherubim,’ etc.; if there be a myriad and himself, he says,
‘Bless ye,’ etc. As he pronounces the blessing, so they respond after him,
‘Blessed be the Lord our God, the God of Israel, the God of Hosts, who
sitteth between the Cherubim, for the food we have eaten.’ ” R. José the
Galilean says they should bless according to the number of the assembly;
for it is written, “Bless ye God in the congregations; (even) the Lord
from the fountain of Israel.”(31) Said R. Akivah, “What do we find in the
synagogue? whether many or few the minister says, ‘Bless ye the Lord,’ ”
etc. R. Ishmael says, “Bless ye the Lord, who is ever blessed.”

4. When three have eaten together, they are not permitted to separate
without blessing; nor four or five. But six may divide into two parties,
and so may any number up to ten. But ten may not separate without
blessing, nor any number less than twenty (who can divide into two
parties).

5. If two companies have eaten in one house, and some of each company be
able to see some of the other company, they may join in the blessing; but
if not, each company blesses for itself. “They should not bless the wine
till it has been mixed with water.” The words of R. Eleazar. But the Sages
say “they may bless it unmixed.”



