Chapter VII


“How did Bezaleel make the ark?” “He made three boxes, two of gold and one
of wood. He put the wooden one inside the golden one, and the golden one
inside the wooden one, and covered the upper edge with gold; as is said,
‘And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold: within and without shalt thou
overlay it.’ ”(645) “And what is the meaning of saying, ‘thou shalt
overlay it’?” “It means that he covered the upper edges (with) gold.” The
golden mercy-seat was placed above upon it; as is said, “And thou shalt
put the mercy-seat above upon the ark.”(646) And four rings of gold were
fastened in it, two on the north and two on the south, and in them the
staves were put, and they were never moved from thence; as is said, “The
staves shall be in the rings of the ark; they shall not be taken from
it.”(647) Even though Solomon made the pattern of all the vessels, the
pattern of the ark he did not make; as is said, “And all the elders of
Israel came, and the priests took up the ark.”(648) The ark was placed in
the midst of the House, and divided the House ten cubits by ten cubits.
And two cherubs of gold stood on their feet on the ground. From the wall
to the cherub there were five cubits, and from the cherub to the wall five
cubits. “Where is it mentioned, that as soon as the priests brought in the
ark the staves were drawn out, and they reached to the vail, and they
touched the entrance?” As is said, “And they drew out the staves, that the
ends of the staves were seen out in the holy place before the
oracle.”(649) For that reason the doors of the Holy of Holies were never
closed. “And they were not seen without.”(650) It is not possible to say
that they were not seen, since it was already said “they were seen.”
Neither is it possible to say that they were seen, since it is already
said “they were not seen.” “How is it?” “They were pushing out in the
vail, and were seen in the sanctuary like the two paps of a woman.” “And
from whence (do we know) that they were drawn out from the inside?” As is
said, “And they were not seen without.” There we learned that they were
drawn out from the inside. And from thence (we learned) that they were
drawn out to the outside, as is said, “And the ends of the staves were
seen.” And where thou sayest that as the staves were drawn out, so were
drawn out the wings of the cherubim, and they covered the ark, and
overshadowed the house from above, as is said, “And the cherubims covered
the ark and the staves thereof, above.”(651) “And where was the ark
concealed?” Rabbi Judah, the son of Lachish, said, “in its place in the
house of the Holy of Holies, as is said, ‘And there they are unto this
day.’ ”(652) But the Sages say, “in the chamber of the wood.” “And who
concealed it?” Rabbi Judah the Holy said, Josiah concealed it, as it is
said, “And said unto the Levites that taught all Israel, which were holy
unto the Lord, Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon, the son of
David, King of Israel, did build; it shall not be a burden upon your
shoulders.”(653) He said to them, “it shall not be carried captive with
you to Babylon, that you should bear it upon your shoulders.” Rabbi
Eleazar said, “it went to Babylon, as is said, ‘Nothing shall be left
saith the Lord,’(654) nothing, not even the words in it.” The house of the
Holy of Holies, which Solomon made for it, had a wall, entrance, and
doors, as is said, “And the temple and the sanctuary had two doors.”(655)
But in the latter house there was no wall, only two boards were there, and
the length of each one was a cubit and a half. And two vails of gold were
there, spread over them from above, and it was called the place of
Partition.(656)



Chapter VIII


The table which Moses made in the wilderness was in length two cubits, and
its breadth one cubit, and its height was one cubit and a half, as is
said, “Thou shalt also make a table of shittim-wood, two cubits shall be
the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a
half the height thereof.”(657) Rabbi Judah said, “the cubit (contained)
five hand-breadths, thus there are ten hand-breadths.” From thence the
Sages said, “the table was in length ten hand-breadths, and in breadth
five hand-breadths. And the showbread was in length ten hand-breadths, and
in breadth five. The length of the showbread was placed against the
breadth of the table. It extended over two hand-breadths and a half on
either side. It follows that its length quite filled the breadth of the
table.” Rabbi Meier said, “the table was in length twelve hand-breadths,
and in breadth six hand-breadths. And the showbread was in length ten
(hand-breadths), and in breadth five. And its length was placed against
the breadth of the table. It extended over two hand-breadths on either
side; and there was an opening of two hand-breadths in the middle, that
the air might blow through them (the loaves).” Aba Shaul said, “they put
there two cups of incense of the showbread.” The Sages said to him, “and
is it not already said, ‘And thou shalt put pure frankincense upon each
row’?”(658) He replied to them, “and is it not already said, ‘And by him
shall be the tribe of Manasseh’?”(659) Although Solomon made ten tables,
and all of them were lawful for service, as is said, “He made also ten
tables, and placed them in the temple, five on the right side, and five on
the left.”(660) “If thou sayest five on the south, and five on the north,
is not a table on the south worthless?” But what is the meaning of saying,
“five on the right and five on the left”? “Five to the right of the table
of Moses, and five to the left of the table of Moses, even though he did
not arrange the showbread, save for the table of Moses only, as is said,
‘And the table whereupon the showbread was.’ ”(661) Rabbi José, the son of
Rabbi Judah, said, “all the tables were arranged for showbread as is said,
‘And the tables whereon the showbread was set.’ ”(662)



Chapter IX


The candlestick which Moses made in the wilderness was wrought from gold,
and required hammering, and required knops and flowers, as is said, “And
thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold; of beaten work shall the
candlestick be made: his shaft and his branches, his bowls, his knops, and
his flowers, shall be of the same.”(663) “Do I hear that he shall make
separate members and join them to it?” “The teaching says, that ‘they
shall be of the same.’ ” “Whence know we that it extends to the light?”
“The teaching says, ‘Thou shalt make.’ ” “I am of opinion that it should
be extended to the bowls, knops, and flowers. The teaching says ‘it,’ and
what dost thou see to extend it to the light, and withhold it from the
bowls, the knops, and the flowers?” “Because the verse extends and
withholds, (therefore) I extend (it to) the lights that they should be
made with it, and I withhold the bowls, the knops, and the flowers, that
they should not be made with it.” “Whence know we to extend (it to) the
tongs and snuff-dishes?” “The teaching says, ‘thou shalt make.’ ” “I am of
opinion to extend (it to) the snuffers, and the tweezers.” “The teaching
says, ‘it,’ and what dost thou see to extend (it to) the tongs and
snuff-dishes, and to withhold (it from) the snuffers?” “Because the verse
extends and withholds. I extend (it to) the tongs and snuff-dishes, since
they are used with it. And I withhold (it from) the snuffers and tweezers,
since they are not used with it.” As it was made of gold, it required
hammering; when it was not of gold it did not require hammering. When it
was made of gold it required bowls, knops, and flowers; when it was not of
gold it did not require bowls, knops, and flowers. When it was made of
gold it required a talent; when it was not of gold it did not require a
talent. Rabbi Joshua, the son of Korcha, said, “it (the candlestick) was
made of a talent, but the lights, and the tongs, and the snuff-dishes,
were not from the talent,” as is said, “Of a talent of pure gold shall he
make it.”(664) “And what do I establish?” “That all these vessels were
vessels of pure gold. But the trumpets which Moses made in the wilderness
were made of silver only, as is said, ‘Make thee two trumpets of
silver.’ ”(665)



