Chapter III


1. “A cooking oven which was heated with stubble or brushwood?” “They may
place on it cookery.” “With oil-dregs and with wood?” “They must not place
it, till the coals are raked out, or ashes put in.” The school of Shammai
say, “hot water, but not cookery.” But the school of Hillel say, “hot
water and cookery.” The school of Shammai say, “they may take it off, but
not place it back.” But the school of Hillel say, “they may place it
back.”

2. “A cooking stove, which was heated with stubble or brushwood?” “They
must not place anything either inside or upon it.” “A bake oven, which was
heated with stubble or brushwood?” “It is as a cooking oven.” “With
oil-dregs or with wood?” “It is as a cooking stove.”

3. They must not put an egg beside a boiler, lest it be boiled. And they
must not wrap it in towels. But Rabbi José allows it. And they must not
hide it in sand, or in the dust of the roads, lest it be roasted.

4. It happened that the men of Tiberias arranged, and introduced a pipe of
cold water into a canal of the hot springs. The Sages said to them, “if it
be Sabbath, it is as if hot waters were heated on Sabbath, they are
forbidden for washing and drinking. But if on a holiday, as if hot waters
were heated on a holiday, they are forbidden for washing but allowed for
drinking.” “A skillet with attached brazier?” “If one rake out the coals
(on Friday evening), persons may drink its hot waters on Sabbath.” “A pan
with double bottom?” “Even though the coals are raked out, they must not
drink of it.”

5. “The boiler which is set aside (from the fire)?” “They must not put
into it cold water to be warmed; but they may put into it—or into a
cup—cold water to make it lukewarm.” “A saucepan or an earthen pot, which
they took off boiling?” “They must not put into it spices, but they may
put them into a bowl or into a plate.” Rabbi Judah says, “they may put
them into all vessels, excepting a thing in which there is vinegar or
fish-brine.”

6. They must not put vessels under a lamp to catch the oil. “But if they
place them, while it is still day?” “It is allowed.” But they must not use
it, because it is not purposely prepared (for Sabbath use). They may
remove a new lamp, but not an old one. Rabbi Simon says, “all lamps may be
removed, except the lamp lighted for the Sabbath.” They may put a vessel
under the lamp to catch sparks, but they must not put water into it, as it
quenches.



Chapter IV


1. “With what may they cover up (pots to retain the heat)?” “And with what
may they not cover them up?” “They may not cover them up with oil-dregs,
or dung, or salt, or lime, or sand either fresh or dry, or straw, or
grape-skins, or woollen, or herbs when they are fresh, but they may cover
up with them when they are dry. They may cover up with garments, and
fruits, with doves’ wings, with carpenters’ sawdust, and with tow of fine
flax.” Rabbi Judah forbids “fine,” but allows “coarse.”

2. They may cover up with hides, and remove them—with woollen fleeces, but
they must not remove them. “How does one do?” “He takes off the cover, and
they fall down.” Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Azariah, says “the vessel is
inclined on its side, and he takes them away.” “Perhaps he took them away
and cannot return them?”(103) But the Sages say “he may take them away,
and return them.” “He does not cover it, while it is yet day?” “He must
not cover it, when it begins to be dark.” “He covered it, and it opened?”
“It is allowed to cover it again.” A man may fill the goblet, and put it
under the pillow or under the bolster (to warm it).



Chapter V


1. “With what is a beast led forth, and with what is it not led
forth?”(104) One may lead forth the camel with a head-stall, and the
she-camel with a nose-ring, and the Lydda(105) asses with a bridle, and a
horse with a halter, and all animals that wear a halter they may lead
forth with a halter, and they are held with a halter, and, if unclean,
they may sprinkle water upon them, and baptize them in their places.

2. The ass one may lead forth with a pack-saddle when it is bound on it.
Rams go forth tied up. Ewes go forth with tails bound back, doubled down,
or put in a bag. The goats go forth bound tightly. Rabbi José “forbids
all, excepting ewes, to have their tails in a bag.” Rabbi Judah says “the
goats go forth bound tightly to dry up their udders, but not to guard the
milk.”

3. “And with what must they not go forth?” “A camel must not go forth with
a rag bound as a mark to its tail, nor fettered, nor with fore-foot tied
doubled up, and so with the rest of all beasts; a man must not bind camels
one to another, and lead them, but he may take their ropes into his hand,
and hold them, guarding that they be not twisted.”(106)

4. One must not bring forth an ass with a pack-saddle, when it is not tied
upon him before the Sabbath; nor with a bell, even though it be muffled,
nor with a ladder(107) on its throat, nor with a strap on its leg; nor may
cocks and hens be led forth with twine or straps on their legs. Nor may
rams be led forth with a gocart under their tails, nor ewes with John
wood.(108) And the calf must not be led forth with a muzzle, nor a cow
with the skin of the hedgehog,(109) nor with a strap between her horns.
The cow(110) of Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Azariah, used to go out with a
strap between her horns, but not with the will of the Sages.



