Chapter XVII: Concerning the Countenance of Microprosopus


His countenance is as two abodes of fragrance, and all that I have before
said is His testimony.

For the testimony, SHDVTHA, _Sahedutha_, dependeth from Him, and in all
His testimony dependeth.

But these places of fragrance are white and red; the testimony of Ab the
Father, and Aima the Mother; the testimony of the inheritance which He
hath taken by right and obtained.

And in our tradition we have also established by how many thousand degrees
the whiteness differeth from the redness.

But yet at once they agree together in Him in one,(867) under the general
form of the whiteness; for whensoever it is illuminated from the light of
the white brilliance of the Ancient One, then that white brilliance
overcloudeth the redness, and all things are found to be in light.

But whensoever judgments ascend (otherwise, threaten) in the universe, and
sinners are many, leprosy is found in all things (otherwise, throughout
the universe), and the redness spreadeth over the countenance, and
overcloudeth all the whiteness.

And then all things are found in judgment, and then (He putteth on) the
vestments of zeal, which are called “the garments of vengeance” (Isa. lix.
17), and all things depend herefrom.

And because the testimony existeth in all things, hence so many Lords of
Shields are enshrouded by those colors, and attend upon those colors.

When those colors are resplendent, the worlds all and singular exist in
joy.

In that time when the white brilliance shineth all things appear in this
color; and when He appeareth in redness, similarly all things appear in
that color.




Chapter XVIII: Concerning the Beard of Microprosopus


In those abodes (otherwise forms) of fragrance the beard beginneth to
appear from the top of the ears, and it descendeth and ascendeth in the
place of fragrance.

The hairs of the beard are black, and beautiful in form as in (that of) a
robust youth.

The oil of dignity of the supernal beard of the Ancient One (floweth down)
in this beard of Microprosopus.

The beautiful arrangement of this beard is divided into nine parts. But
when the most holy oil of dignity of the Most Holy Ancient One sendeth
down rays into this beard, its parts are found to be twenty-two.(868)

And then all things exist in benediction, and thence Israel the patriarch
(_i.e._, Jacob) took his blessing. And the symbol of this is to be found
in these words, Gen. xlviii. 20, “BK, with the twenty-two shall Israel
bless.” (The real translation of BK is “in thee,” but the numerical value
of BK is twenty-two; hence the symbolism here rendered.)

We have described the conformations of the beard already, in the Conclave
of the Assembly. Here also I desire to enter upon this matter in all
humility.

Now we thus examined all the parts of the beard, that in the Conclave of
the Assembly (we found) that they were all disposed from the parts of the
beard of the Most Holy Ancient One.

Six there are; nine they are called. For the first conformation goeth
forth through that Spark of the most refulgent Light-bearer,(869) and
goeth down beneath the hair of the head, assuredly beneath those locks
which overhang the ears.

And it descendeth before the opening of the ears unto the beginning of the
mouth.

But this arrangement is not found in the Most Holy Ancient One. But when
that fountain of Wisdom, CHKMTHA, _Chokmatha_, floweth down from MZLA,
_Mezla_, the Influence of the Most Holy Ancient One, and dependeth from
Him, and when Aima, the Mother, ariseth, and is included in that subtle
ether, then She, Aima, assumeth that white brilliance.(870)

And the Scintilla entereth and departeth, and together mutually are They
bound, and thence cometh the One Form.

And when there is need, One ariseth above the Other, and the Other again
is concealed in the presence of Its Companion.

And therefore there is need of all things; of one thing for performing
vengeance, of another for showing forth mercy.

And therefore David the king hath sought out this beard, as we have shown
already.

In this beard nine conformations are found, (among which are) six myriads
which depend among them, and are extended throughout the whole body.

And those six which depend hang in the locks which are beneath the abodes
of fragrance, three on this side and three on that.

And in the ornamentation of the beard hang the three remaining
(conformations); one above the lips, and two in those locks which hang
down upon the chest.

And all those six (other conformations), three on this side and three on
that side, go forth, and all depend from those locks which hang down, and
they are extended throughout the whole body.

But on account of those three (conformations), which are more connected
with the ornament of the beard than all the others, the Holy Name is
written in its purity.

When it is written thus, Ps. cxviii. 5: “I invoked IH, _Yah_, in my
trouble: IH, _Yah_, heard me at large: Tetragrammaton is with me,
therefore I will not fear.”

But that which we have already laid down in the Conclave of the Assembly
concerning these words, “In my trouble I invoked IH, _Yah_,” that this is
to be referred to that place where the beard beginneth to be extended,
which place is more remote, and before the ears, is also correct.

And in the book of the dissertation of the school of Rav Yeyeva the Elder
it is thus said and established, that the beginning of the beard cometh
from the supernal CHSD, _Chesed_, Mercy.

Concerning which it is written, “LK IHVH HGDVLH VHGBVRH VHTHPARTH, _Leka,
Tetragrammaton; Ha-Gedulah, Ve-Ha-Geburah, Ve-Ha-Tiphereth_, Thine, O
Tetragrammaton, Gedulah, (another name for Chesed), Geburah, and Tiphereth
(the names of the fourth, fifth, and sixth Sephiroth, which Protestants
usually add to the end of the Lord’s Prayer, substituting, however,
Malkuth for Gedulah), Thine, O Tetragrammaton, are the Mercy, the Power,
and the Glory (or Beauty).” And all these are so, and thus it (the beard)
commenceth.

Therefore the nine (conformations) arise from and depend from the beard;
and thus it commenceth from before the ears. But (the conformations)
remain not in permanence save through another cause, as we have before
laid down.

For whensoever the universe hath need of mercy, the Influence, Mezla, of
the Ancient One is uncovered; and all those conformations which exist in
the most adorned beard of Microprosopus are found to be entirely mercies,
yet so that they can exercise vengeance against the haters of the
Israelites, and against those who afflict them.

But the whole ornament of the beard consisteth in those locks which hang
down, because all things depend thencefrom.

All those hairs which are in the beard of Microprosopus are hard and
rigid, because they all subject the judgments when the Most Holy Influence
is manifested.

And when there is to be contention, then He appeareth like unto a brave
hero, victorious in war. And then that becometh bare of hair which is bare
of hair, and that becometh bald which is bald.

Moses commemorated these nine conformations a second time, Num. xiv. 17,
when there was need to convert them all into mercy.

For although he recite not now the thirteen conformations (of the beard of
Macroprosopus), yet from this idea the thing depended; for he did not
allow himself to enter into those conformations simply that he might
enumerate them.

But unto the Influence directed he his meditation, and made mention
thereof. As it is written, Num. xiv. 17, “And now, I beseech thee, let
KCH, _Kach_, the Power of Tetragrammaton, be great!”

What is to be understood by KCH, IHVH, _Kach Tetragrammaton_, the Power of
Tetragrammaton? Thus is MZLA QDISHA, _Mezla_, _Qadisha_, the Holy
Influence, called, even the Concealed with all Concealments. And from the
Influence that Strength and that Light depend.

And since of this (Influence) Moses was speaking, and this (Influence) he
was commemorating, and concerning this (Influence) he was meditating, he
then immediately recited those nine conformations which belong unto
Microprosopus.

So that they all might exist in light, and that judgment might not be
found therein. And therefore this whole judgment (otherwise, this whole
beard) dependeth from the Influence.

When the hairs begin to be restrained He Himself is as the hero of an army
victorious in war.

In this beard (of Microprosopus) floweth down the oil of dignity from the
Concealed Ancient One, as it is said, Ps. cxxxiii. 2, “Like excellent oil
upon the head, descending upon the beard, the beard of Aaron.”




