Chapter VIII


1. A son stubborn and rebellious.(405) “From what time is he decidedly a
son stubborn and rebellious?” “From the time the two hairs have come, and
up to the time the beard has sprouted; but the Sages spoke in modest
language. As is usually said, when a man has a son—a son, but not a
daughter; a son, but not a man; a child as yet free from coming under the
rule of the commandments.”

2. “From what time is he guilty?” “From the time he ate three-quarters of
a pound of flesh, and drank half a log of Italian wine.” R. José said, “a
pound of flesh and a log of wine.” “He ate it in an appointed feast; he
ate it in the intercalary month; he ate it during the second tithes in
Jerusalem; he ate of a carcass and of things torn, abominable things and
creeping things; he ate of that which had not paid tithes, and the first
tithes before the heave-offering was separated from them and the second
tithes and holy things which were not redeemed; he ate of a thing which is
commanded, and of a thing which is a transgression; he ate every kind of
meat, but he did not eat flesh; he drank every kind of fluid, but he did
not drink wine?” “He is not a son stubborn and rebellious till he eat
flesh and drink wine,” as is said, “A glutton and a drunkard”;(406) and
even though there is no conclusive evidence, there is a memorial to the
matter, as is said, “Be not among winebibbers; among riotous eaters of
flesh.”(407)

3. “If he steal it from his father, and eat it (with permission) on the
property of his father; from others, and eat it on the property of others;
from others, and eat it on the property of his father?” “He is not a son
stubborn and rebellious till he steal it from his father and eat it on the
property of others.” R. José, the son of R. Judah, said, “till he steal it
from his father and from his mother.”

4. “If his father desires (his punishment), and his mother does not desire
it; his father does not desire it, and his mother does desire it?” “He is
not declared a son stubborn and rebellious until both of them desire it.”
R. Judah said, “if his mother was not suitable for his father, he is not
declared a son stubborn and rebellious.” “One of them was broken-handed,
or lame, or dumb, or blind, or deaf?” “He is not declared a son stubborn
and rebellious,” as is said, “ ‘Then shall his father and his mother lay
hold on him,’(408) which is impossible if they be broken-handed; ‘and
bring him out,’ which is impossible if they be lame; ‘and they shall say,’
which is impossible if they be dumb; ‘this our son,’ which is impossible
if they be blind; ‘he will not obey our voice,’ which is impossible if
they be deaf. They must warn him before three judges, and then flog him.”
“He returned to his bad habits?” “He is to be judged before twenty-three
judges, but he is not to be stoned till the three first (judges) are
present, as is said, ‘this our son’ who was flogged before you.” “He ran
away before his judgment was finished, and afterward came to puberty?” “He
is free.” “But if he ran away after the decision and then came to
puberty?” “He is guilty.”

5. A son stubborn and rebellious is judged for the sake of his future
prospects. The law says, “better die when he is innocent, and not die when
he is guilty.” The death of the wicked is pleasant for them, and pleasant
for the world; but the death of the righteous is evil for them, and evil
for the world. Wine and sleep are pleasant to the wicked, and pleasant to
the world; but for the righteous, it is evil for them, and evil for the
world. Separation for the wicked is pleasant for them, and pleasant for
the world; but for the righteous, it is evil for them, and evil for the
world. Union for the wicked is evil for them, and evil for the world; but
for the righteous, it is pleasant for them, and pleasant for the world.
Rest for the wicked is evil for them, and evil for the world; but for the
righteous, it is pleasant for them, and pleasant for the world.

6. If one engaged in burglary, he is judged for the sake of his future
prospects. “He engaged in burglary and broke a barrel?” “If the owner
might not kill him, he must pay for the barrel; but if the owner might
kill him, he is freed from paying for the barrel.”

7. These are they who are rescued(409) with their souls—he who pursued
after his companion to kill him, and one after a betrothed girl. But one
about to profane the Sabbath, and one about to serve idols, such cannot be
saved with their souls.(410)



Chapter IX


1. And these are to be beheaded. The murderer and the men of a city
withdrawn to idolatry. “The murderer who smote his neighbor with a stone
or iron, and he pressed him down in the midst of the water, or in the
midst of fire, and he could not come out from thence, and he died?” “He is
guilty.” “He pushed him into the midst of water, or into the midst of
fire, and he could come out, but he died?” “He is free.” “He encouraged a
dog against him, he encouraged a serpent against him?” “He is free.” “He
caused a serpent to bite him?” Rabbi Judah declared him “guilty,” but the
Sages “freed him.” “He smote his companion either with a stone or his
fist, and he was counted for dead, and he became lighter, and afterward
became heavier, and died?” “He is guilty.” R. Nehemiah said, “he is free,
because there are extenuating circumstances in the matter.”

2. “His intention was to kill a beast, and he killed a man—a foreigner,
and he killed an Israelite—a premature birth, and he killed a timely
child?” “He is free.” “His intention was to smite his loins, and there was
not sufficient force in the blow to cause death in his loins, and it
passed to his heart, and there was sufficient force in the blow to cause
death in his heart, and he died?” “He is free.” “His intention was to
smite him on his heart, and there was sufficient force in the blow to
cause death on his heart, and it passed on to his loins, and there was not
sufficient force in the blow to cause death on his loins, but he died?”
“He is free.” “His intention was to smite an adult, and there was not
sufficient force in the blow to cause death to an adult, and it passed off
to a child, and there was sufficient force to kill the child, and he
died?” “He is free.” “His intention was to smite a child, and there was
sufficient force in the blow to cause death to a child, and it passed to
an adult, and there was not sufficient force to cause death to the adult,
but he died?” “He is free.” “But his intention was to smite him on his
loins, and there was sufficient force in the blow to cause death on his
loins, and it passed to his heart, and he died?” “He is guilty.” “His
intention was to smite an adult, and there was sufficient force in the
blow to cause the death of the adult, and it passed to a child, and he
died?” “He is guilty.” R. Simon said, “even if his intention be to kill
this one, and he killed that one, he is free.”

3. “A murderer, who is mingled with others?” “All are to be freed.” R.
Judah said, “they are to be collected in a prison.” “Several condemned to
(different) deaths are promiscuously mingled?” “They are all to be
adjudged the lightest punishment.” “Those condemned to stoning with those
condemned to burning?” R. Simon said, “they are to be condemned to
stoning, because burning is more grievous,” but the Sages say, “they are
to be condemned to burning, because stoning is more grievous.” To them
replied R. Simon, “if burning were not more grievous, it would not have
been assigned to the daughter of a priest who was immoral.” They replied
to him, “if stoning were not more grievous, it would not have been
assigned to the blasphemer, and the idolater.” “Those condemned to
beheading, mingled with those condemned to strangling?” R. Simon said,
“they are to be put to death with the sword,” but the Sages say, “with
strangling.”

4. “He who is found guilty of two deaths by the judges?” “He is condemned
to the more grievous punishment.” “He committed a transgression, which
made him deserve two deaths?” “He is condemned to the more grievous.” R.
José said, “he is condemned for the first deed which he committed.”

5. “He who is flogged once and again?” “The judges commit him to prison,
and they give him barley to eat till his belly bursts.” “He who killed a
person without witnesses?” “They commit him to prison, and they give him
to eat the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction.”(411)

6. “A thief who stole a sacred vessel, and he who cursed in necromancy,
and the paramour of an Aramæan?” “The avengers may at once fall upon him.”
“The priest who served in legal uncleanness?” “His brother priests have no
need to bring him to the tribunal, but the young priests drag him outside
of the court, and dash out his brains with fagots of wood.” “A stranger
who served in the sanctuary?” R. Akiba said, he is to be killed “with
strangling,” but the Sages say, “by the visitation of heaven.”



