Chapter IV


1. On that day(773) they voted and decided, “that a foot-bath containing
from two logs to nine cabs,(774) which was split,(775) may become unclean
from pressure,”(776) although R. Akiba says, “that a foot-bath is as its
name.”(777)

2. On that day they said, “that all sacrifices offered without due
intention are allowed, but they do not absolve the owners from their
obligation, except the passover-offering, and the sin-offering—the
passover-offering in its time, and the sin-offering at all times.” R.
Eleazar says, “also the trespass-offering, the passover-offering in its
time, and the sin or trespass-offering at all times.” R. Simeon, the son
of Azai, said, “I received it by tradition from the mouth of the
seventy-two elders, on the day they inducted R. Eleazar, the son of
Azariah, into the president’s seat, that all sacrifices offered without
due intention, are allowed, but they do not absolve the owners from their
obligation, except the passover-offering, and the sin-offering.” The son
of Azai only added the burnt-offering, but the Sages did not agree with
him.

3. On that day they said, “how is it with Ammon and Moab(778) in the
Sabbatical year?” R. Tarphon decided “they must pay tithes for the
poor”;(779) but R. Eleazar, son of Azariah, decided “second tithes.”(780)
R. Ishmael then said, “Eleazar, son of Azariah, it behoves thee to prove
it, for thou addest to the burden (of the Law); and whoever adds to the
burden (of the Law) it behoves him to prove it.” R. Eleazar, son of
Azariah, said to him, “Ishmael, my brother, I have not changed from the
order of the years,(781) but my brother Tarphon has changed, therefore it
behoves him to prove it.” R. Tarphon replied, “Egypt is out of the land,
and Ammon and Moab are out of the land: as Egypt pays tithes for the poor
in the Sabbatical year, so Ammon and Moab pay tithes for the poor in the
Sabbatical year.” R. Eleazar, son of Azariah, replied: “Babylon is out of
the land, and Ammon and Moab are out of the land; even as Babylon pays
second tithes in the Sabbatical year, so Ammon and Moab pay second tithes
in the Sabbatical year.” R. Tarphon replied, “Egypt being near, is subject
to tithes for the poor, in order that the poor in Israel may be supported
in the Sabbatical year; so Ammon and Moab, which are near, must also be
subject to tithes for the poor, in order that the poor in Israel may be
supported in the Sabbatical year.” R. Eleazar, the son of Azariah,
replied, “thou seekest to increase money, but thou only losest souls;
wouldest thou be the cause that heaven should neither send down dew nor
rain, as is said, ‘Will a man rob God?’ Yet ye have robbed me. But ye say,
Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.”(782) R. Joshua
said, “Behold I will answer for my brother Tarphon, but not according to
the sense of his words—Egypt is a new arrangement, Babylon is an old
arrangement; the judgment before us is a new arrangement. Let the new
arrangement be judged from the new arrangement, but let not a new
arrangement be judged from an old arrangement. Egypt is an arrangement by
the elders (of the Sanhedrin), but Babylon is an arrangement by the
prophets—the judgment before us is an arrangement by the elders. Let
therefore the arrangement by the elders be judged from an arrangement by
the elders; but let not an arrangement by the elders be judged from an
arrangement by prophets.” They voted and decided “that Ammon and Moab must
pay tithes for the poor in the Sabbatical year.” When R. José, son of
Dormiskith, came to R. Eleazar at Lydda, he said to him, “what had you new
in the college to-day?” He answered, “they voted and decided that Ammon
and Moab must pay tithes in the Sabbatical year.” R. Eleazar wept and
said, “ ‘The secret of the LORD is with them that fear him; and He will
show them His covenant.’(783) Go and tell them, be not anxious about your
vote, for I received it by tradition from Rabban Jochanan, the son of
Zachai, who heard it from his teacher, up to the decision of Moses from
Sinai, that Ammon and Moab must pay tithes to the poor, in the Sabbatical
year.”

3. On that day came Judah, an Ammonitish proselyte, and stood before them
in the college. He said to them, “How am I to come into the congregation?”
Rabban Gamaliel said to him, “thou art forbidden.” R. Joshua said to him,
“thou art allowed.” Rabban Gamaliel said, “the Scripture says, ‘An
Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the LORD;
even to their tenth generation, etc.’ ”(784) To him said R. Joshua, “Are
then the Ammonites or Moabites still in their own land? Sennacherib, King
of Assyria, aforetime came up, and commingled the nations, as is said,
‘And I have removed the bounds of the people, and have robbed their
treasures, and I have put down the inhabitants like a valiant
(_man_).’ ”(785) Rabban Gamaliel said to him, “the Scripture says, ‘And
afterward I will bring again the captivity of the children of Ammon’;(786)
and they are already returned.” To him said R. Joshua, “the Scripture
says, ‘And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel,(787)
and Judah.’ But they are not yet returned.” And they allowed him to come
into the congregation.

4. The Chaldee passages in Ezra and Daniel render the hands unclean.
Chaldee written in Hebrew, and Hebrew written in Chaldee, or in
Hebrew,(788) do not render the hands unclean. In no case do they cause
uncleanness, unless the writing be Assyrian, on parchment with ink.

5. The Sadducees said, “we blame you Pharisees, because you say sacred
Scriptures render the hands unclean, but the books Hameram(789) do not
render the hands unclean.” Rabban Jochanan, the son of Zachai, said, “and
have we nothing else against the Pharisees but this? Behold they say,
‘that the bones of an ass are clean, but the bones of Jochanan the
high-priest are unclean.’ ” They said to him, “according to their value is
their uncleanness, so that no one may make the bones of his father and
mother into spoons.” He said to them, “so (are) the sacred Scriptures:
according to their value is their uncleanness. The books Hameram, which
are not valued, do not render the hands unclean.”

6. The Sadducees said, “we blame you Pharisees, that you declare the
stream flowing (from a clean into an unclean vessel) to be clean.” The
Pharisees said, “we blame you Sadducees, that you declare a stream of
water flowing from a graveyard to be clean.” The Sadducees said, “we blame
you Pharisees, because you say, if my ox or my ass cause damage, we are
responsible; but if my slave or my bondwoman cause damage, we are free.
What! if I be responsible for my ox and my ass, for which I have no
obligation, I am bound for my slave or bondwoman for whom I have
obligation. It is just that I should be bound for their damages.” They
said to them “no! if you speak of my ox and my ass which have no
knowledge, as you speak of my slave and bondwoman who have knowledge:
then, if I offend them, they may go and set fire to the stacks of corn of
another, and I should be bound to pay.”

7. A Galilean Sadducee said, “I blame you Pharisees, because you write the
name of the reigning sovereign in the letter of divorce with Moses.” The
Pharisees said, “we blame you Galilean Sadducee, that you write the
sovereign on the same page with the NAME, and not only so, but you write
the sovereign above, and the name below, as is said, ‘And Pharaoh said,
“Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice to let Israel go?” ’ ”(790)
But when he was punished, what did he say? “The LORD is righteous.”(791)





THE KABBALAH UNVEILED: THE LESSER HOLY ASSEMBLY


                  Translated by S. L. Macgregor Mathers




