Chapter III


1. “How long may men bring out dung to the heap?” “Till the time comes for
stopping work.” The words of R. Maier. R. Judah said, “till its
fertility(48) dry out.” R. José said, “till it hardens into a lump.”

2. “How much may men manure?” “As much as three times three heaps for
fifty cubits square of ten times ten ass panniers, each containing a
letech.(49) They may increase the panniers, but they must not increase the
heaps.” Rabbi Simon said, “also the heaps.”

3. A man may make for his field three times three heaps to the fifty
cubits square. “For more than these he must excavate the earth.” The words
of R. Simon. But the Sages “forbid it, till he sink the heaps three
handbreadths, or till he raise them three above the earth.” A man may keep
his manure in store. Rabbi Maier “forbade it till he sink it three
handbreadths, or till he raise it three.” If he have only a little, he may
increase it and proceed in his work. Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Azariah,
“forbade it till he sink the manure three handbreadths, or raise it three,
or till he place it on a rock.”

4. “He who stables his cattle in his field?” “He may make a pen twice
fifty cubits square. He may remove three sides and leave the middle one.
It follows that he has a stable four times fifty cubits square.” Rabbi
Simon, the son of Gamaliel, said “eight times fifty cubits square.” “If
his whole field were four times fifty square cubits?” “He should leave a
little space because of the observant eye, and he may remove the manure of
his cattle from the pen and put it into the middle of his field, as men
usually manure.”

5. A man may not open a quarry in the beginning of the Sabbatical year in
his field, unless there be already in it three heaps of stones measuring
three cubits by three cubits, and in height three cubits, counting
twenty-seven stones in each heap.

6. A fence composed of ten stones each, of weight sufficient for two men,
may be removed. “If the fence measure ten handbreadths?” “Less than this
he may clear off, but he must leave it a handbreadth high over the
ground.” These words only speak of his own field. But from his neighbor’s
field he may take away what he pleases. These words speak of the time when
one did not begin the work on the eve of the Sabbatical year. “But if one
begin on the eve of the Sabbatical year?” “He may take away what he
pleases.”

7. Stones shaken by the plough, or those covered and afterward exposed, if
there be among them two of a burden for two men, may be removed. He who
removes stones from his field may remove the upper (ones),(50) but he must
leave those touching the earth. And so also from a heap of rubbish, or a
heap of stones, one may take away the upper part, but must leave that
which touches(51) the earth. If there be beneath them a rock, or stubble,
they may be removed.

8. Men must not build terraces on the face of the hills on the eve of the
Sabbatical year, when the rains have ceased, because that is preparation
for the Sabbatical year. But one may build them in the Sabbatical year,
when the rains have ceased, because that is preparation for the close of
the Sabbatical year. And men must not strengthen them with mortar, but
they may make a slight wall. Every stone which they can reach(52) with
their hands and remove, they may remove.

9. “Shoulder stones may come from every place, and the contractor may
bring them from every place. And these are shoulder stones, every one
which cannot be carried in one hand.” The words of R. Maier. Rabbi José
said, “shoulder stones, commonly so named, all that can be carried, two,
three, upon the shoulder.”

10. He who builds a fence between his own and public property may sink it
down to the rock. “What shall he do with the dust?” “He may heap it up on
the public property, and benefit it.” The words of R. Joshua. R. Akiba
said, “as we have no right to injure public property, so we have no right
to benefit it.” “What shall he do with the dust?” “He may heap it up in
his own field like manure, and so also when he digs a well, or a cistern,
or a cave.”



Chapter IV


1. In olden times they used to say a man may gather wood, stones, and
grass in his own (field), just as he may gather that which is greater out
of his neighbor’s field. When transgressors increased, a rule was made
that this one should gather from that one, and that one from this one,
without benefit; and it is unnecessary to say that one could not promise
victuals to those who gathered.

2. A field cleared of thorns may be sown in the close of the Sabbatical
year. If it be tilled or manured by cattle, it must not be sown in the
close of the Sabbatical year. “If a field be twice ploughed?”(53) The
school of Shammai say, “its fruit must not be eaten in the Sabbatical
year.” But the school of Hillel say, “it may be eaten.” The school of
Shammai say, “they must not eat its fruit on the Sabbatical year, if (the
owner of it have) benefit therefrom.” But the school of Hillel say, “men
may eat it whether there be or be not benefit.” R. Judah said, “the words
are contrary; that which is permitted by the school of Shammai is
restricted by the school of Hillel.”

3. Men may contract for cultivated fields from Gentiles on the Sabbatical
year, but not from Israelites. And they may strengthen the hands of the
Gentiles on the Sabbatical year, but not the hands of Israelites. And in
saluting Gentiles they may ask after their peace for the sake of
peace.(54)

4. “If one thins olive trees?” The school of Shammai say, “only cut them
down,” and the school of Hillel say, “one may root them out”; but they
both agree that for smoothing the earth the trees must be cut down. “What
is meant by thinning?” “Removing one or two.” “What is meant by smoothing
the earth?” “Removing three trees each by the side of the other.” “How is
this understood?” “That one may root them out not only of his own field,
but also when smoothing down the field of his neighbor.”

5. “He who cleaves olive trees must not fill in the vacuum with earth; but
he may cover it over with stones or stubble. He who cuts down trunks of
sycamore must not fill in the vacuum with earth, but he may cover it over
with stones or stubble. Men must not cut down a young sycamore in the
Sabbatical year, because that is labor.” R. Judah said, “if as it is
usually done it is forbidden: but one may allow it to be ten handbreadths
high, or cut it just above the ground.” “He who lops off vine tendrils,
and cuts reeds?” R. José the Galilean said, “he must leave them an
handbreadth high.” Rabbi Akiba said, “he may cut them as it is usual with
an axe, or sickle, or saw, or with whatever he pleases.” “A tree that is
split?” “Men may bind it round in the Sabbatical year, not that it may
cohere, but that its fissure may not extend.”

7. “From what time may the fruits of trees in the Sabbatical year be
eaten?” “Unripe fruits, when they are becoming transparent, may be eaten
with a piece of bread in the field. When they are mellow, they may be
gathered into the house; and so also with all like them.” During the
remainder of the seven years their tithes must be paid.

8. The sour grapes in which there is juice may be eaten with a piece of
bread in the field. Before they rot they may be gathered into the house,
and so also with all like them. During the remainder of the seven years
their tithes must be paid.

9. “Olives from which men have collected the fourth of a log(55) of oil to
the seah?”(56) “They may be crushed and eaten in the field.” When men can
collect from them half a log, they may be pounded and used for anointing
in the field. When those have been collected which have attained a third
of their size they may be pounded in the field, and gathered into the
house, and so also with all like them. During the remainder of the seven
years their tithes must be paid. But for the rest of all fruits of trees,
as are their seasons for the laws of tithes, so are their seasons for the
laws of the Sabbatical year.

10. “From what time may men not cut trees in the Sabbatical year?” The
school of Shammai say, “every tree when it shoots forth.” The school of
Hillel say, “the locust trees when they put forth their curling tendrils,
and the vines when they form berries, and the olives when they flower. And
the rest of the trees when they shoot forth.” But it is permitted to cut
all trees, when they come to the season, for tithes. “How much fruit
should be in the olive tree to prevent its being cut down?” “A quarter
cab.” Rabban Gamaliel said, “the whole depends on the size.”



