Chapter VIII


1. “Two persons watched a trough containing water for purification; one of
them becomes legally unclean?” “It is allowed, because it was in the
safe-keeping of the second.” “He became clean and the second unclean?” “It
is allowed, because it was in the safe-keeping of the first.” “Both became
unclean at once?” “It is disallowed.” “One of them did work?” “It is
allowed, because it was in the safe-keeping of the second.” “He stood
still, and the second did work?” “It is allowed, because it was in the
safe-keeping of the first.” “Both worked at once.” “It is disallowed.”

2. If one put ashes in the water for purification, he must not put on his
sandal, for if the water fall on the sandal, it becomes legally unclean,
and renders him legally unclean. This is the proverb, “What makes thee
unclean, cannot make me unclean, but thou canst make me unclean.” “If
water fall on his flesh?” “He is clean.” “If it fall on his garment?” “It
becomes unclean, and renders him unclean.” This is the proverb, “What
makes thee unclean, cannot make me unclean, but thou canst make me
unclean.”

3. He who burned the red heifer and the bullocks,(741) and he who sent
forth the scapegoat, render garments unclean. The heifer and the bullocks,
and the scapegoat which was sent forth, cannot of themselves render
garments unclean. This is the proverb: “What makes thee unclean, cannot
make me unclean, but thou canst make me unclean.”

4. If one eat from the carcass of a clean bird, as it is in his throat, it
renders garments unclean. The carcass itself does not render garments
unclean. This is the proverb: “What makes thee unclean, cannot make me
unclean, but thou canst make me unclean.”

5. Every(742) secondary uncleanness does not render vessels unclean, but
fluid does so. If fluid become unclean, it renders vessels unclean. This
is the proverb, “What makes thee unclean, cannot make me unclean, but thou
canst make me unclean.”

6. Earthen vessels cannot render each other unclean, but fluid does so. If
fluid becomes unclean, it renders vessels unclean. This is the proverb,
“What makes thee unclean, cannot make me unclean, but thou canst make me
unclean.”

7. Everything(743) which disallows the heave-offering renders the fluid
unclean so as to be a primary uncleanness, for rendering a person unclean,
and disallowing him, except he was one who washed by day.(744) This is the
proverb, “What makes thee unclean, cannot make me unclean, but thou canst
make me unclean.”

8. All seas are reckoned for a pool of purification, as is said, “And the
gathering together of the waters called He seas,”(745) the words of R.
Meier. R. Judah said, “the great sea is as a purifying-pool; it is not
said seas, but there is in it many kinds of seas.” R. José said, “all seas
may purify in flowing, but they are disallowed for issues, and leprosies,
and for purifying with them the water of the ashes of the red heifer.”

9. Waters with a nickname are disallowed. These are the nicknames—“salt”
and “lukewarm.” Deceitful(746) waters are disallowed. These are deceitful
waters—they failed once in seven years, they failed during war and during
famine—yet they are allowed. R. Judah “disallows them.”

10. The waters of Kirmion (Kishon?), and the waters of Pygah (Belus?) are
disallowed, because they are the waters of marshes. The waters of the
Jordan and the waters of Jarmuk(747) are disallowed, because they are
mixed. And these are mixed waters, one allowed and one disallowed are
mixed. Two which are allowed and mixed, are allowed. R. Judah “disallows
them.”

11. “The well of Ahab(748) and the cave of Panias(749) are allowed. Water
which changed, but changed of itself, is allowed. A well of water which
came from a distance is allowed, only it must be watched, that no man
check it.” R. Judah said, “it is taken for granted and allowed.” “A well
into which earth or clay fell?” “One must wait till it clear,” the words
of R. Ishmael. R. Akiba said, “there is no need of waiting.”



Chapter IX


1. “A pan full of the water of purification into which ordinary water,
however little, has fallen?” R. Eliezer said, “one must sprinkle twice
with it.” But the Sages “disallow it.” “If dew fell into it?” R. Eliezer
said, “let him leave it in the sun, and the dew evaporates.” But the Sages
“disallow it.” “If fluid has fallen into it, or fruit juice?” “Let him
pour it out, and it is necessary to dry it.” Ink, gum, and vitriol, and
everything which can be remarked, must be poured out, and there is no
necessity to dry it.

2. “If insects and worms have fallen in and burst or changed their
appearance?” “The water is disallowed.” A black beetle, though not burst
nor changed, disallows it, since it is like a pipe. Rabbi Simon and R.
Eliezer, the son of Jacob, said, “the wheat-worm and the grain-worm are
allowed, because there is no matter in them.”

3. “If a beast or animal drink of it?” “They disallow it.” All fowls
disallow it, excepting the dove, because it sucks. All creeping animals do
not disallow it, excepting the weasel, because it laps. Rabban Gamaliel
said, “also the serpent, because it spews.” R. Eliezer said, “also the
mouse.”

4. “If one think to drink the water of purification?” R. Eliezer said, “it
is disallowed.” R. Joshua said, “when he drew it (toward him).” R. José
said, “of what are they talking, of water in which there are no ashes.”
“But of water in which there are ashes?” R. Eliezer said, “when he drew it
(toward him).” R. Joshua said, “when he drinks.” But if it be poured into
his throat, it is allowed.

5. Water of purification which is disallowed, must not be kneaded in
mortar, lest it bring misfortune to others. R. Judah said, “it is
worthless.” “A cow which drank water of purification?” “Her flesh is
unclean for twenty-four hours.”(750) R. Judah said, “it becomes worthless
in her intestines.”

6. The water of purification and the ashes of purification must not be
passed over a river even in a boat, nor may they be floated on the surface
of water. Nor may one stand on one side and throw them to the other side.
But one may pass with them through water, which is up to his neck. He who
is cleansed for purification, may pass over water with empty vessels in
his hand cleansed for purification, and with water in which there are no
ashes.

7. “Ashes which are allowed for purification, when they are mixed in
ordinary ashes?” “We must follow the majority(751) (in reference to
uncleanness) and they do not purify with them.” Rabbi Eleazar said, “they
may purify with them all.”

8. Water intended for purification which was disallowed, renders unclean
(him who was) cleansed for the heave-offering in his hands and body, but
it does not render unclean him who was cleansed for purification, either
in his hands or in his body. “If it were rendered unclean?” “It renders
unclean (him who was) cleansed for the heave-offering in his hands and in
his body, but (him who was) cleansed for purification it renders unclean,
in his hands, but not in his body.”

9. Ashes which are allowed when put on the surface of water, which is
unsuitable for purification, render unclean him who was cleansed for the
heave-offering in his hands and body, but it does not render unclean him
who was cleansed for purification, either in his hands or in his body.



