Chapter X


“How did Bezaleel make the candlestick?” “He made it from an ingot of
gold, and it was like a beam. And above and below he made bowls, knops,
and flowers, and drew out from it two branches, one on either side, and
from it he drew out two other branches, one on either side, and again drew
out two branches, one on either side, as is said, ‘And six branches shall
come out of the sides of it.’ ”(666) But we could not understand the
hammering of the bowls, until it be said, “And in the candlesticks shall
be four bowls made like unto almonds with their knops and their
flowers.”(667) Aisi, the son of Judah, said, “there are five expressions
in the Law, and they have no fixed meaning. These are they,
‘accepted,’(668) ‘cursed,’(669) ‘to-morrow,’(670) ‘made like unto
almonds,’(671) ‘and will rise up.’ ”(672) “If thou doest well, shalt thou
not be accepted?” or, “thou shalt be accepted even if thou doest not
well.” “Cursed be their anger for it was fierce,” or, “for in their anger
they slew a man, and in their self-will they houghed cursed oxen.”
“To-morrow I will stand” or “go out, fight with Amalek to-morrow.” “Made
like unto almonds with their knops, and their flowers,” or “four bowls
made like unto almonds.” “And this people will rise up,” or, “thou shalt
sleep with thy fathers, and thou shalt rise up.” These are the five
expressions in the Law which have no fixed meaning. Aisa, the son of
Akiba, said, “it happened once to be more (than a talent by) a dinar of
gold, and it was brought into the crucible eighty times.” The body of the
candlestick was eighteen hand-breadths, the feet and the flowers were
three hand-breadths, and two hand-breadths were smooth, and one
hand-breadth was for the bowl, a knop and a flower, and two hand-breadths
were smooth, and one hand-breadth a knop, and two branches proceeded from
it, one on either side. And two hand-breadths were smooth, and one
hand-breadth a knop, and two branches proceeded from it, one on either
side, and two hand-breadths were smooth, and one hand-breadth a knop, and
two branches proceeded from it on either side. There remained three
hand-breadths, in which were the bowls, the knops, and the flowers, as is
said, “Three bowls made like unto almonds with a knop and a flower in one
branch.”(673) It follows that the bowls were twenty-two, and the knops
eleven, and the flowers nine. “The bowls, to what were they like?” “To
cups of Alexandria.” “The knops, to what were they like?” “To the apples
of pine-trees.”(674) “The flowers, to what were they like?” “To the
flowers on the pillars of the temple.” It is found that you learn that
there exist in the candlestick difficulty and forgetfulness more than in
all the other vessels. “And whence know we that OMNIPRESENCE showed to
Moses, the vessels ready, and the candlestick ready?” As it is said, “see
and make them according to their patterns.”(675) Although Solomon made ten
candlesticks and all of them were lawful for service, as is said, “And he
made ten candlesticks of gold according to their form, and set them in the
temple, five on the right hand and five on the left.”(676) If you say,
five on the south and five on the north, is not the candlestick on the
north worthless? “And what is meant by saying, five on the right hand and
five on the left?” “Five on the right side of the candlestick of Moses,
and five on the left side of the candlestick of Moses, even though they
lighted the candlestick of Moses only, as is said, ‘And the candlestick of
gold, with the lamps thereof, to burn every evening.’ ”(677) Rabbi José,
the son of Rabbi Judah, said, “they were all lighted,” as is said,
“Moreover the candlesticks with their lamps, that they should burn after
the manner, before the oracle of pure gold; and the flowers, and the
lamps, and the tongs made he of gold, and that perfect gold.”(678) All
these completed the golden one of Moses. Those on the west and east flamed
in front of the middle light, as is said, “The seven lamps shall give
light over against the candlestick.”(679) From thence Rabbi Nathan said,
“the middle one is the most honorable.” The seven lamps flamed alike, and
their lamps were equal, and they resembled each other. “How did they snuff
it?” “They removed the snuff from the candlestick and deposited it in the
tent, and rubbed it with a sponge.” “It follows that many priests were
busied on one lamp.” The words of Rabbi José. But the Sages say, “they did
not remove the lamps from their places; they only removed the snuff from
the candlestick, as is said, ‘He shall order the lamps upon the pure
candlestick.’ ”(680)



Chapter XI


The altar of incense was in length a cubit, and in breadth a cubit, and in
height two cubits, as is said, “And thou shalt make an altar to burn
incense upon; of shittim-wood shalt thou make it. A cubit shall be the
length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof: four square shall it be:
and two cubits shall be the height thereof: the horns thereof shall be of
the same.”(681) And it was all overlaid with gold.(682) This altar had
three names, the altar of incense, the altar of gold, the inner altar.
_The altar of burnt-offerings_ was in length five cubits, and in breadth
five cubits, and in height three cubits, as is said, “And he made the
altar of burnt-offering of shittim-wood: five cubits was the length
thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof; it was four-square; and
three cubits the height thereof.”(683) The words of Rabbi Meier. To him
said Rabbi José, “from hearing what is said five by five do we not know
that it is four-square? What is the meaning of saying four-square?” “It is
superfluous, save for identification in pronouncing with regard to it an
equal decision. It is said here four-square, and there four-square.” “What
four-square is meant there?” “That its height is double its breadth, even
the four-square mentioned here means that its height is double its
breadth.” Rabbi Meier said to him, “if it be according to thy words, it
follows that the altar is higher than the curtains.” Rabbi José; answered
him, “and is it not already said, ‘And the hangings of the court, and the
hanging for the door of the gate of the court, which is by the tabernacle,
and by the altar round about.’ ”(684) As the tabernacle was ten cubits
broad, so the altar of burnt-offerings was ten cubits broad. A painted
line girdled it in the middle to divide between the blood (sprinkled)
above, and the blood (sprinkled) below. The painted line and downward was
five cubits. The foundation was a cubit. And three cubits was the compass,
and the circuit was a cubit, and there they put the blood sprinkled below.
The painted line and upward was five cubits—a cubit the horns, and three
cubits the compass, and one cubit the circuit. And there they put the
blood which was sprinkled above. And the blood intended to be sprinkled on
the painted line and downward, if it were put on the painted line and
upward, was worthless. And the blood that was intended to be sprinkled
above the painted line, if it were put on the painted line and downward,
was worthless. The altar which Moses made in the wilderness was in height
ten cubits, and the one which Solomon made was in height ten cubits, and
the one which the children of the captivity made was in height ten cubits,
and the one prepared for the Future, its height is ten cubits. The altar
of burnt-offerings was placed in the midst of the court (with) its ascent
on the south, with the laver on the west, with the slaughter-house on the
north, and all the Israelites to the east, as is said, “And all the
congregation drew near and stood before the Lord.”(685) This altar had
three names, the altar of burnt-offering, the altar of brass, the outer
altar.



