Chapter IV


1. “A place in which men are accustomed to do work on the eve of the
passover?” “For half a day they may work.” “A place in which they are not
accustomed to work?” “They must not work.” “If one goes from a place where
they work to a place where they do not work; or from a place where they do
not work to a place where they do work?” “The Sages put on him the
burden(138) of the place from which he went, or the burden of the place to
which he came; but a man should not change the customs of a place, as it
causes quarrels.”

2. Like to him is he who carried fruits of the Sabbatical year from a
place where they were finished growing to a place where they were not
finished growing; or from a place where they were not finished to a place
where they were finished. He is bound to remove them. Rabbi Judah said,
“they can say to him, go and bring them for yourself from the field.”(139)

3. “A place in which men are accustomed to sell small cattle to Gentiles?”
“They may sell them.” “A place in which they are not accustomed to sell
them?” “They may not sell them.” But in no place may they sell working
cattle—calves, ass-foals, either unblemished or broken down.(140) Rabbi
Judah “allowed the broken down.” The son of Bethira “allowed a horse.”

4. “A place where men are accustomed to eat roast meat on the night of the
passover?” “They may eat it.” “A place in which they are not accustomed to
eat it?” “They may not eat it.” “A place in which they are accustomed to
light a candle on the night of the Day of Atonement?” “They may light it.”
“A place in which they are not accustomed to light it?” “They may not
light it.” But men may light candles in the synagogues, and in the
schools, and in the dark streets, and for the sick.

5. “A place in which men are accustomed to do work on the ninth of
Ab;”(141) “They may work.” “A place in which they are not accustomed to
work?” “They may not work.” But everywhere the disciples of the Sages are
idle. Rabban Simon, the son of Gamaliel, said, “a man may always make
himself a disciple of the Sages.” But the Sages say, “in Judah they did
work on the eves of the passovers for half a day, and in Galilee they did
nothing.” And work in the night before the passover the school of Shammai
disallowed; but the school of Hillel “allowed it till sunrise.”

6. Rabbi Meier said, “every work which was begun before the fourteenth day
of Nisan may be finished on the fourteenth; but it must not be commenced
on the fourteenth, even though it can be finished.” And the Sages say,
“three trades can carry on business on the eves of the passovers for half
a day; and these are they—the tailors, and the barbers, and the washers.”
Rabbi José, the son of Judah, said, “also shoemakers.”

7. Persons may set hens on their nests on the fourteenth. “But if the hen
ran off?” “They may return her to her place.” “And if she died?” “They may
set another instead of her.” They may clear away from beneath the feet of
beasts on the fourteenth. But on the holiday (or middle-days) they put it
aside. They may carry to and bring vessels from the house of the trader,
even though they be not necessary for the holiday.

8. The men of Jericho did six things, in three they were prohibited, and
in three they were allowed. And these are they in which they were allowed:
they engrafted dates the whole fourteenth day of Nisan, and they shortened
the “Hear,”(142) and they reaped and stacked new corn before “the
sheaf”(143) was offered; and they were allowed. And in these they were
prohibited: they used the produce of what was consecrated, and they ate on
the Sabbath the fruit that had fallen down from the trees, and they
gave(144) (to the poor) the corners of the fields of vegetables. And the
Sages prohibited them from these things.(145)

9. BEREITHA—EXTERNAL TRADITION.—Hezekiah the king did six things; to three
the Sages consented, and to three they did not consent. He carried the
bones of his father (Ahaz) on a rope bed,(146) and they consented. He
powdered the brazen serpent,(147) and they consented. He concealed the
book of medicines,(148) and they consented. And to three they did not
consent: he cut off (the gold from) the doors of the temple(149) and sent
it to the Assyrian king, and they did not consent. He stopped the waters
of the upper Gihon,(150) and they did not consent. He introduced an
intercalary Nisan, and they did not consent.



Chapter V


1. The daily offering was slaughtered at half-past eight,(151) and offered
at half-past nine. On the eve of the passover it was slaughtered at
half-past seven and offered at half-past eight, whether the passover fell
on a week-day or on the Sabbath. When the eve of the passover began on the
eve of the Sabbath (Friday), it was slaughtered at half-past six, and
offered at half-past seven, and the passover followed after it.

2. “The passover offering, which was slaughtered without intention—and the
priest took its blood, and he went and sprinkled it without intention?” or
“with intention, and without intention?” or “without intention and with
intention?” “It is disallowed.” “How can it be with intention and without
intention?” “With intention partly for the passover, and with intention
partly for peace-offerings.” “Without intention and with intention?” “With
intention partly for peace-offerings, and with intention partly for the
passover-offering.”

3. “If he slaughtered the passover for those who may not legally eat
it—for those who are not reckoned in one company—for the uncircumcised,
and for the unclean?” “It is disallowed.” “For those who may eat, and for
those who may not eat it?” “For those who are reckoned in one company, and
for those who are not so reckoned?” “For circumcised, and for
uncircumcised?” “For unclean, and for clean?” “It is allowed.” “If he
slaughtered it before noon?” “It is disallowed.” Because it is said
“between the evenings.”(152) “If he slaughtered it before the daily
offering?” “It is allowed.” Except that one must keep stirring(153) its
blood, till the blood of the daily offering be sprinkled. “But if it be
_even_ sprinkled (before?)” “It is lawful.”

4. “He who slaughtered the passover-offering possessing leaven?” “He
transgressed a negative command.”(154) Rabbi Judah said, “this applies
even to the daily offering (of that evening).” Rabbi Simon said, “the
slaughter of the passover on the fourteenth with intention for the
passover makes (a man possessing leaven) guilty; but if it be slaughtered
without intention for the passover he is free.” “And in all other
sacrifices during the feast, whether one sacrifice with or without the
proper intention?” “He is free.” “When one thus offers in the feast itself
with proper intention?” “He is free.” “Without proper intention?” “He is
guilty.” “And in all the other sacrifices, when one possessing leaven
offers either with or without intention?” “He is guilty, only excepting
the sin-offering, which was slaughtered without intention.”

5. The passover was slaughtered(155) for three bands in succession, as is
said, “The whole assembly of the congregation of Israel”(156)—assembly,
congregation, Israel. The first band entered, the court was filled, the
doors of the court were locked. The trumpeters blew with the trumpets,
blew an alarm, and blew. The priests stood in rows, and in their hands
were bowls of silver and bowls of gold. All the silver row was entirely
silver, and all the golden row was entirely gold. They were not mingled.
And the bowls were not flat-bottomed, lest they should lay them down, and
the blood be coagulated.

6. When an Israelite slaughtered, and a priest caught the blood, he gave
it to his companion, and his companion to his companion, and he took the
full, and returned the empty bowl. The priest nearest the altar poured it
out at once in front of the foundation of the altar.

7. The first band went out, the second band entered; the second went out,
the third entered. As was the proceeding of the first, so was the
proceeding of the second and the third. They read the praise.(157) When
they finished they repeated it, and after repeating it they read it a
third time, even though they did not complete it thrice in their time. R.
Judah said, “during the time of the third band they did not reach to ‘I
love the Lord, for He hath heard,’ because the people were few.”

8. As was the proceeding in ordinary days, so was the proceeding on the
Sabbath, save that the priests washed out the court,(158) though not with
the will of the Sages. R. Judah said, “a cup was filled with mixed-up
blood,(159) and poured out at once upon the altar;” but the Sages “did not
admit it.”

9. “How did they hang up and skin the passover sacrifices?” “Iron hooks
were fixed in the walls and pillars, and on them they hung them, and
skinned them.” “And every one who had not a place to hang them up and skin
them?” “Thin smooth rods were there, and he rested one on his shoulder and
on the shoulder of his companion, and hung it up and skinned it.” Rabbi
Eliezer said, “when the fourteenth began on a Sabbath, he rested his hand
on the shoulder of his companion, and the hand of his companion on his
shoulder, and he hung it up and skinned it.”

10. He cut it open, and took out its entrails. He put them on a dish and
incensed them on the altar. The first party went out, and sat down on the
Mountain of the House. The second party were in the Chel,(160) and the
third party remained in their place. When it grew dark they went out and
roasted their passovers.



