Chapter III


1. “The Sanhedrin and all Israel saw (the new moon); the witnesses were
examined, but it became dark before they could say, ‘Sanctified’?” “The
month is intercalary.” “The Sanhedrin alone saw it?” “Two members must
stand up and testify before them, and they shall say, ‘Sanctified,
sanctified.’ ” “Three composing a Sanhedrin saw it?” “Two of them must
stand up, and their assessors must be seated with the single member, and
before them they shall testify, and say, ‘Sanctified, sanctified,’ because
an individual cannot be trusted by himself alone.”

2. All cornets are allowed, except (horns) of a heifer,(301) because it is
(written) horn.(302) Said Rabbi José, “are not all cornets called horn?
for it is said, ‘When they shall make a long (blast) with the ram’s
horn.’ ”(303)

3. The cornet of the New Year was a straight horn of a wild goat; and its
mouthpiece was plated with gold. And the two trumpets(304) were stationed
on each side. The cornet prolonged its note when the trumpets ceased,
because the obligation of the day was for the cornet.

4. On fast days (there were) crooked rams’ horns; and their mouthpieces
were plated with silver. And the two trumpets were stationed in the midst.
The cornet ceased, and the trumpets prolonged their notes, because the
obligation of the day was for the trumpets.

5. The jubilee is like the New Year for the sounding and the blessings. R.
Judah says, “on the New Year they sounded rams’ horns; and on the jubilee
wild goats’ horns.”

6. A cornet, which was rent and cemented, is disallowed. One cemented from
fragments of cornets is disallowed. “It had a hole, which was closed?” “If
it hinder the sound, it is disallowed; but if not, it is allowed.”

7. “If one sound the cornet within a pit, a cistern, or in an earthenware
vessel, and one (outside) hears the sound of the cornet?” “He is
free.”(305) “But if he hear the echo of the sound?” “He is not free.” And
so, if one be passing behind a synagogue, or his house adjoin the
synagogue, and he hear the sound of the cornet, or the reading of the roll
of Esther, he is legally free, provided he heard it with due attention;
but if not, he is not legally free. Although one hears as well as another,
yet one hears with hearty intention, and another without hearty intention.

8. “And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand that Israel
prevailed,”(306) etc. And how could the hands of Moses make the battle, or
crush the battle? But it is written to tell thee that while Israel looked
to Heaven for aid, and subjected their hearts to their heavenly Father,
they prevailed; and when they did not do so, they were defeated. Like as
He says, “Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole, and it shall
come to pass that everyone that is bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall
live.”(307) And how could the serpent kill, or make alive? But when the
Israelites looked to Heaven for aid, and subjected their hearts to their
heavenly Father, they were healed; and when they did not do so, they
perished. One deaf and dumb, or an idiot, or a child, cannot, as proxies,
free others from their obligations. This is the rule: all who are not
responsible for a thing, cannot free others from their obligations.



Chapter IV


1. When the feast of New Year happened on the Sabbath, they used to sound
the cornet in the Sanctuary; but not in the provinces. After the
destruction of the Sanctuary, R. Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed that they
should sound it in every place in which there is a tribunal of justice. R.
Eleazar says, “R. Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed it only for Jamnia.” But
the Sages said to him, “it was all one for Jamnia, and all one for every
place in which there is a tribunal of justice.”

2. And again,(308) Jerusalem was privileged above Jamnia, because every
city which could be seen, and the sounding heard, and which was near, and
to which it was allowed to go, might sound the cornet; but in Jamnia they
could only sound it before the tribunal of justice.

3. At first the palm-branch was taken seven days in the Sanctuary, and one
day in the provinces. After the destruction of the Temple, R. Jochanan,
son of Zacai, decreed, “that the palm-branch should be taken in the
provinces for seven days, to commemorate the Sanctuary”; also “that the
whole day of the waving(309) it should be forbidden (to eat new corn).”

4. At first they received evidence of the new moon during the whole
(thirtieth) day; but once the witnesses delayed coming, and the Levites
erred in the chant. They decreed, that they should receive evidence only
till the time of the evening sacrifice; and if witnesses came after the
evening sacrifice, that and the next day were kept holy. After the
destruction of the Sanctuary Rabban Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed, “that
they should receive evidence of the new moon during the whole day.” R.
Joshua, son of Korcha, says, “and again Rabban Jochanan, son of Zacai,
decreed that wherever the chief of the Sanhedrin might be, the witnesses
need only go to the place of its meeting.”

5. The order of blessings to be said on the New Year is, “The
Fathers,”(310) and “The Mighty,” and “Sanctification of the Name,” and
there are comprehended the “Kingdoms” without blowing the trumpet; “The
Holiness of the Day,” and he blows; “The Remembrances,” and he blows; “The
Trumpets,” and he blows. And he says, “The Service,” “The Confession,” and
“Blessing of the Priests.” The words of R. Jochanan, son of Nourri. Said
R. Akivah to him, “if the trumpet be not blown after ‘The Kingdoms,’ why
are they mentioned?” But the order is, “The Fathers,” and “The Mighty,”
and “Sanctification of the Name,” and there are comprehended “The
Kingdoms,” with sanctification of the Day, and he blows; “The
Remembrances,” and he blows; “The Trumpets,” and he blows. And he says,
“The Service,” “The Confession,” and “Blessing of the Priests.”

6. They cannot read less than ten (texts of Scripture) relating to “The
Kingdom,” ten relating to “Remembrances,” and ten to “Trumpets.”(311) R.
Jochanan, son of Nourri, says, “if three be read from all of them, the
duty is fulfilled, but they mention not the remembrance of the kingdom,
and trumpet of vengeance.(312) They must begin with the Law and end with
the Prophets.” R. José says, “if they end with the Law, the duty is
fulfilled.”

7. (The minister of the congregation) must go over to the reading-desk on
the feast of the New Year. The second minister must blow the trumpet. But
at the hour for the hymn the first must read the hymn.

8. For sounding the trumpet of the New Year they may not transgress the
Sabbatical limit, they may not remove for it a heap of stones, they may
not climb a tree, and they may not ride a beast, or swim over water. Nor
may they cut it(313) with anything that violates the Sabbatical rest, or
violates a negative command. But if one wish he may pour into it water or
wine.(314) They may not prevent children from blowing, but they may
practise in teaching them. But he who practises blowing is not freed from
his obligation, and he who listens to the practice is not freed from his
obligation.

9. The order of blowing the trumpet is, three blasts blown thrice. The
measure of the blast is as six alarms. The measure of the alarm is as
three shrieks. If one blew the first and prolonged the blast for the
second to be as two, it reckons but as one. He who has said the blessings,
and afterward a trumpet is given to him, must blow a blast, an alarm, and
a blast three times. As the minister of the congregation is bound, so is
each individual bound. R. Gamaliel says, “the minister of the congregation
releases the public from their obligations.”




On Fasting


    When Rain is to be Prayed for—Proclamations for Fasting—Ceremonial
    of Fasting—Prayers—Blowing of Trumpets—R. Gamaliel and R.
    Meier—Sign of Famine—Partial Rain—Pestilence—Story of Hone
    Hammeagal—Lifting Up of Hands—Deputies—Bringing Wood—Five Things
    Happened in Tammuz and Five in Ab—Mortifications—Rejoicings.



