Book V

On Holy Things:

1. “Sacrifices” treats of the nature and quality of the offerings; the
time, the place, and the persons, by whom they ought to be killed,
prepared, and offered.

2. “Meat Offerings” treats of the flour, oil, and wine, and the wave
loaves.

3. “Unconsecrated Things” treats of what is clean and unclean, of not
eating the sinew that shrank, and not killing the dam and her young in one
day (Deut. xxii. 6).

4. “First Born” treats of their redemption by money, and their being
offered in sacrifice; also of the tithes of all manner of cattle.

5. “Estimations” (Lev. xxvii. 2) treats of the way in which things devoted
to the Lord are to be valued in order to be redeemed for ordinary use;
also, how a priest is to value a field which a person has sanctified.

6. “Cutting Off” treats of offenders being cut off from the Lord.

7. “Exchanges” (Lev. xxvii. 10, 33) treats of the way exchanges are to be
effected between sacred things.

8. “Trespass” (Num. v. 6, 8) treats of things partaking of the nature of
sacrilege. It asserts that if a man take away a consecrated stone or beam
he commits no trespass. If he give it to his companion he commits a
trespass, but his companion commits none. If he build it into his house he
commits no trespass till he lives in the house long enough to gain the
value of a half-farthing. If he take away a consecrated half-farthing he
commits no trespass. If he give it to his companion he commits a trespass,
but his companion commits none. If he give it to a bath-keeper he commits
a trespass though he does not bathe, because the bath-keeper says to him,
“See, the bath is open, go in and bathe.”

9. “The Daily Sacrifice” treats of the morning and evening offerings.

10. “The Measurements” treats of the measurements of the Temple.

11. “Birds’ Nests” treats of the mistakes about doves and beasts brought
into the Temple for sacrifice.

Book VI

On Purifications:

1. “Vessels” treats of those which convey uncleanness (Lev. xi. 33).

2. “Tents” (Num. xix. 14) treats of tents and houses retaining
uncleanness, how persons who enter them become unclean, and how they are
to be cleansed.

3. “Plagues of Leprosy” treats of leprosy of men, garments, or dwellings,
how their pollution is conveyed, and how they are to be purified.

4. “The Red Heifer” directs how she is to be burned, and how her ashes are
to be used in purifying.

5. “Purifications” teaches how purifications are to be effected.

6. “Pools of Water” (Num. xxxi. 23) treats of their construction, and the
quantity of water necessary for cleansing.

7. “Separation” of women.

8. “Liquors” that dispose seeds and fruits to receive pollution (Lev. xi.
38).

9. “Issues” that cause pollution.

10. “Baptism” on the day of uncleanness (Lev. xxii. 6).

11. “Hands” treats of the washing of hands before eating bread, though dry
fruits are allowed to be eaten without such washing.

12. “Stalks of Fruit which convey Uncleanness” treats of fruits growing
out of the earth, which have a stalk and no husk. They can be polluted and
can pollute, but may not be compounded with anything that was unclean
before. If they have neither stalks nor husks they neither can be polluted
nor can they pollute. It also treats of the hair and wool that grows on
some fruits, and the beards of barley, etc.

From the six books or “Orders” the Jews call the Babylon Talmud by the pet
name of “_Shas_” (six). The language in which it is written is Hebrew
intermingled with Aramaic, Chaldee, Syriac, Arabic, Greek, and Latin
words. The Gemara was first begun by Rabban Judah’s two sons, Rabbi
Gamaliel and Rabbi Simeon. It was vigorously carried on by Rabbi Ashé in
Sura, a town on the Euphrates, from 365 A.D. to 425. He divided the Mishna
into its sixty-three treatises, and every half-year summoned his disciples
and assigned to them two fresh portions of the Law and two of the Mishna.
At each meeting their remarks on these portions were discussed, and if
approved were incorporated into the Gemara. Rabbis Zabid, Gebhia Rychuma,
and Semo of Pumbedaitha;(2) and Rabbis Marimer, Adda bar Abbin, Nachman
bar Huno, and Touspho, presidents of the schools of Sura, labored for its
advancement; and it was finally completed by Rabbi Abino (Rabbina), and
sealed by Rabbi José about 498 A.D. He was the last of the “Dictators.”
Those who lived after him were called “Opinionists,” as they did not
dictate any doctrines; but only deduced opinions from what had already
been settled in the canon of the Talmud. The Opinionists were succeeded by
the Sublime Doctors, who were in turn replaced by the ordinary Rabbis. In
addition to the Talmud there has been handed down a vast amount of Jewish
learning, such as the Bereitha, the Tosephtoth or appendices, the Mechilta
or traditions unknown to Rabbi Judah the Holy, and the commentaries Sifra
and Sifre. Of these the Jews regard the Bereitha as second to the Mishna.
“The mark of Bereitha is ‘the sages learned,’ or ‘it is once learned,’ or
‘it is learned in another one.’ And everything which is not disputed of
all these things is an established decision. And whatever is disputed goes
according to the concluded decision. What is disputed in the Bereitha,
which is not questioned in the Mishna, the decision is according to the
Mishna. What is disputed in the Mishna, and not questioned in the
Bereitha, is not to be decided according to the Bereitha. And thus it is
said, ‘If Rabbi Judah the Holy did not teach it, whence could Rabbi Chayya
know it?’ The exception is, that when the decision of Rabbi Eliezer, the
son of Jacob, is given, it is regarded as equal to the Mishna. In 102
questions the decision is always with him.”

The period during which both the Jerusalem and Babylon Talmuds were
compiled was a season of comparative peace for the Jews. From the death of
Rabbi Judah the Holy until Constantine ascended the throne the schools in
Tiberias were unmolested. Judah was succeeded in the Patriarchate by
Gamaliel; and he in turn gave way to Judah the second. Being inferior in
learning to some of his own Rabbis, the splendor of his Patriarchate was
eclipsed by the superior talents of Simon Ben Laches and Rabbi Jochanan.
From that time the Patriarchate gradually sank in estimation, till the
struggles for unlimited power, and the rapacity of the Rabbis, brought the
office into contempt, and caused the Emperor Honorius in one of his laws
to brand them as “Devastators.” Still, with a loyal affection to the race
of Israel, the Jews, wherever scattered in the West, looked to Tiberias as
their Zion, and willingly taxed themselves for the support of its
Rabbinical schools. The Jews in the East regarded the Prince of the
Captivity or Patriarch of Babylon as their centre and chief. He rose to
power between the abandonment of the Mesopotamian provinces by Hadrian and
the rise of the Persian kingdom. He presided over his subjects with
viceregal power and a splendid court. Rabbis were his satraps, and the
wise and learned his officers and councillors. Wealth flowed in upon his
people, who were engaged in every kind of commerce. One of his merchants
in Babylon was said to have had 1,000 vessels on sea and 1,000 cities on
shore. There was for a time a spirit of rivalry between the spiritual
courts of Tiberias and Babylon.

On one occasion there was an open schism about the calculation of the
Paschal feast. The struggle for supremacy took place when Simon, son of
Gamaliel, who claimed descent from Aaron, was Patriarch of Tiberias, and
Ahia, who claimed descent from King David, was Prince of the Captivity.
His two most learned men were Hananiah, the rector of Nahar-pakod, and
Judah, son of Bethuriah. To humble these men was the aim of Simon.
Accordingly he sent two legates with three letters to Babylon. The first
letter was given to Hananiah. It was addressed, “To your holiness.”
Flattered by the title, he politely asked the reason of their visit. “To
learn your system of instruction.” Still more gratified, he paid them
every attention. Availing themselves of their advantage, the legates used
every effort to undermine his teaching and lessen his authority. Hananiah,
enraged by their conduct, summoned an assembly, and denounced their
treachery. The people cried out, “That which thou hast built, thou canst
not so soon pull down; the hedge which thou hast planted, thou canst not
pluck up without injury to thyself.” Hananiah demanded their objections to
his teaching. They answered, “Thou hast dared to fix intercalations and
new moons, by which nonconformity has arisen between Babylon and
Palestine.” “So did Rabbi Akiba,” said Hananiah, “when in Babylon.”
“Akiba,” they replied, “left not his like in Palestine.” “Neither,” cried
Hananiah, “have I left my equal in Palestine.” The legates then produced
their second letter, in which it was written, “That which thou hast left a
kid is grown up a strong horned goat.” Hananiah was struck dumb. Rabbi
Isaac, one of the legates, ran, and mounted the reading desk. “These,”
said he, calling them out aloud, “are the holy days of God, and these the
holy days of Hananiah.”

The people began to murmur. Rabbi Nathan, the second legate, arose, and
read the verse of Isaiah, “Out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem.” Then in a mocking voice, “Out of Babylon
shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Nahor-pakod.” The
congregation was in an uproar. “Alter not the word of God” was the
universal shout. The legates then produced the third letter, threatening
excommunication to all who would not obey their decrees. They further
said, “The learned have sent us, and commanded us to say, if he will
submit, well; if not, utter at once the Cherem.(3) Also set the choice
before our brethren in foreign parts. If they will stand by us, well; if
not, let them ascend their high places. Let Ahia build them an altar, and
Hananiah (a Levite) sing at the sacrifice, and let them at once set
themselves apart, and say, ‘We have no portion in the God of Israel.’ ”
From every side the cry arose, “Heaven preserve us from heresy; we have
still a portion in the Israel of God.” The authority of Tiberias was then
recognized as supreme. But when Babylon was afterward politically severed
from the Roman power in the West, and fell to the Persians, the Prince of
the Captivity represented the Jews of the East as their independent head.

The canon of the Talmud was closed in a season of opulence and repose.
This scene, however, speedily changed. Gloomy and dark days were followed
by a storm of persecution from the Persian kings, Yesdigird and Firuz “the
tyrant.” When their schools were closed, the Jews clung more closely to
the Talmud than before. Although never formally adopted by any general
council, all orthodox Jews embraced it as supplying a want which they
felt. And they have adhered to it through long and dreary centuries,
despite the rack and fire of the Inquisitor, and the contempt and scorn of
a hostile world. The Talmud has been periodically banned, and often
publicly burned, from the age of the Emperor Justinian till the time of
Pope Clement VIII. In the year 1569 the famous Jewish library in Cremona
was plundered, and 12,000 copies of the Talmud and other Jewish writings
were committed to the flames. The first to demand for it toleration and
free inquiry was Reuchlin. He declared that he must oppose the destruction
of “a book written by Christ’s nearest relations.” Before him, Haschim II,
Caliph of Cordova in the close of the tenth century, had ordered it to be
translated into Arabic. This was done by Rabbi Joseph, the son of Rabbi
Moses, surnamed “clad in a sack,” because he was thus meanly clad when his
great talents were discovered.

The study of the Talmud has the most fascinating influence over the Jewish
mind, and if the latter is to be comprehended, the teaching which moulds
it must be clearly understood. “Everyone,” say the Jews, “is bound to
divide the time of his study into three parts—one-third is to be devoted
to the written law, one-third to the Mishna, and one-third to Gemara.” To
understand it in accordance with the thirteen rules of interpretation, it
takes a study of seven hours a day for seven years. They also say that it
is lawful to rend a man ignorant of the Talmud “like a fish.” Israelites
are forbidden to marry the daughter of such a one, as “she is no better
than a beast.”

To obviate arguments furnished by its own statements against itself, its
adherents make a distinction between its decisions, its directions, and
its legendary or romance part,—a distinction fatal to its claim of
equality with Holy Scripture. For this legendary part some of the ancient
Rabbis had but little respect. Rabbi Joshua, son of Levi, says, “He who
writes it down will have no part in the world to come; he who explains it
will be scorched.” Maimonides also says, “If one of the many foolish
rabbis reads these histories and proverbs, he will find an explanation
unnecessary, for to a fool everything is right, and he finds no difficulty
anywhere. And if a really wise man reads them, there will be but two ways
in which he will consider them. If he takes them in their literal sense
and thinks them bad, he will say, This is foolishness, and in so doing he
says nothing at all against the foundation of the faith.” The School of
Shammai, who lived before Christ, and the School of Hillel, who lived till
eight(4) years after His birth, are brought forward as contradictory in
their decisions. Like Christian leaders in later times, they strove to
exceed each other in learning and pride. Hillel, called also the second
Ezra, was born in Babylon. His thirst for learning drove him to Jerusalem.
He was so poor he could not fee the porter of the college. So he used to
listen at the window. One bitter winter’s night he became insensible from
cold, and the snow falling fast covered him up. The darkened window called
the attention of those inside to his form without. He was then brought in,
and soon restored to life. It is said that afterward “he had eighty
scholars: thirty of them were fit that the divine glory should rest upon
them, as it did upon Moses—thirty others were worthy that the sun should
stand still for them, as it did for Joshua—and twenty were of a form
between.”

By a sort of legal fiction both schools are supposed to be of equal
authority. A Bath Kol(5) or holy echo, supplying the place of departed
Urim and Thummim, and of oracles long since silent, is related to have
established it. “There came forth a divine voice at Jabneh and said, The
words of the one and of the other are the words of the living God, but the
certain determination of the thing is according to the School of Hillel,
and whosoever transgresseth against the words of the School of Hillel
deserves death.” Both schools were Pharisees, but the School of Shammai
was the straiter sect. Seven different shades of character have been
attributed to the Pharisees of that age: there were those who served God
from selfishness—those who did it gradually—those who avoided the sight of
women—saints in office—those who asked you to name some duty which they
ought to perform—those who were pious from fear of God—and those who were
pious from love of Him. Popular opinion differed with regard to them. Some
said, “If only two men be saved, one must be a Pharisee”; while others
defined a Pharisee to be “one who wished to play the part of Zimri, and to
claim the reward of Phinehas.” The great opponents of the Pharisees were
the Sadducees, who arose B.C. 300, and were followers of Baithos and
Sadok. Their rivals on the other side were the Mehestanites, who returned
from the Captivity versed in the doctrines of Zoroaster—in astrology, and
in the influences of good and bad spirits. To these might be added the
Misraimites, who studied the Kabbala, specially in reference to the forms
of letters. The letter Koph, for example, has its curved part severed from
its stem, and thus teaches that “the door of mercy is always open to the
penitent.” The numerical value of the letters of Messiah and Nachash
(serpent) is the same, and this teaches that “the Messiah will overcome
the Serpent.”

The Kabbalists believed nothing but what they “received.” Their teachers
received from the prophets—the prophets received from angels—David from
the Angel Michael, Moses from Metatron, Isaac from Raphael, Shem from
Yophiel—and the angels themselves from God. The Metatron is the connecting
link between the Divine Spirit and the world of matter. It resembles the
Demiurgos of the Gnostics. It is the mystical expression for the Being
that forms a union between God and nature, or, as the Zohar puts it,
between the “King and the Queen.” There were also the Essenes, who
allegorized the Law; the Hellenists, who mixed it up with Greek
philosophy; the Therapeutists, who thought supreme happiness to be
meditation; the political Herodians; the Zealots; and other petty sects
who formed the great mass of the people, and held either with or against
the two great schools. The decisions of both schools are remarkable for
their concise brevity. A phrase suggests many thoughts—a single word
awakes a whole train of reasoning. A German writer has said of the Mishna,
that “it is a firmament of telescopic stars, containing many a cluster of
light, which no unaided eye has ever resolved.” Some of its sayings are of
touching beauty. Such are the words of Rabbi Tarphon, “The day is
short—the labor vast;—but the laborers are slothful, though the reward is
great, and the Master of the house presseth for despatch.” Some of its
sayings are extravagant—some are loathsome—and some are blasphemous. But
mixed up as they are together, they form an extraordinary monument of
“human industry, human wisdom, and human folly.”

The Talmud contains a system of casuistry in reference to the doctrines of
intention and legal uncleanness. It proportions responsibility to the
amount of intention, and thereby hands over tender consciences to the
control of the Rabbis. It proportions legal uncleanness to every degree of
approach to the source, or, as it is called, “the father” of uncleanness;
and this again renders necessary continual appeals to the decision of the
Rabbis.

Predestination and free will are both taught. “Everything is in the hands
of heaven, except the fear of heaven.” “All things are ordained of God,
but men’s actions are their own.” When men wish to sin they are enjoined
to go to a place where they are unknown, and to clothe themselves in black
so as not to dishonor God openly. Hereditary sin was denied by the early
Kabbalists, but the later ones allow it. They believe that all souls were
created in Adam, and therefore partake of his fall. Every kind of
philosophy known at the time of its compilation is more or less introduced
into the Talmud, and all more or less tinged with Magian superstition.
From this superstition grew the mysticism of the Jewish schools. All the
arts and sciences, under some form or other, are alluded to, and
references to historical events abound in its pages. When it is dangerous
to speak of them openly they are veiled under some figure known only to
the initiated. Some observations seem to anticipate future discoveries.
The Antipodes are hinted at. And the Jerusalem Gemara says that Alexander
the Great was represented as carrying a ball in his hand because he
believed the figure of the earth to be a sphere. Astronomy is fully
discussed. The planets are “moving stars.” Mercury is “the star”; Venus,
“splendor”; Mars, “redness”; Jupiter, “rightness”; Saturn, “the Sabbath
star.” The signs of the Zodiac have the same names as are now used. The
Galaxy is “the river of light.” Comets are “burning arrows.” And it is
said that when a comet passes through Orion it will destroy the world. A
certain Ishmaelite merchant is related to have invited Rabba to come and
see where the heavens and the earth touched. Rabba took his bread basket
and placed it on the window while he prayed. He afterward looked for it,
but it was gone. He asked the Ishmaelite, “Are there thieves here?” “No,”
he replied, “but your basket has gone up in the revolving of the
firmament. It will return if you wait till morning when the revolving of
the firmament returns where it was before.”

Astrology is treated as a science which governs the life of man. The stars
make men wise. The stars make them rich. “A man born on the first day of
the week will excel in only one quality. He that is born on the second day
will be an angry man, because on that day the waters were divided. He that
is born on the third day of the week will be rich and licentious, because
on it the herbs were created. He that is born on the fourth day will be
wise and of good memory, because on that day the lights were hung up. He
that is born on the fifth day will be charitable, because on that day the
fishes and fowls were created. He that is born on the Sabbath, on the
Sabbath he also shall die, because on his account they profaned the great
Sabbath day.” Rabba bar Shila says, “He shall be eminently holy.” Rabbi
Chanina says, “The influence of the stars makes wise, the influence of the
stars makes rich, and Israel is under the influence of the stars.” Rabbi
Jochanan says, “Israel is not under the influence of the stars. Whence is
it proved? ‘Thus saith the Lord, Learn not the way of the heathen, and be
not dismayed at the signs of heaven, for the heathen are dismayed at them’
(Jer. x. 2). The heathen, but not Israel.” “An eclipse of the sun is an
evil sign to the nations of the world; an eclipse of the moon is an evil
sign to Israel, for Israel reckons by the moon, the nations of the world
by the sun.” It is also said that Saturn and Mars are the baleful stars,
and whosoever begins a work, or walks in the way, when either of these two
is in the ascendant, will come to sorrow. Astrology naturally leads to
amulets and charms. Amulets are divided into two classes, approved and
disapproved. An approved amulet is “one that has cured three persons, or
has been made by a man who has cured three persons with other amulets.”

Charms are abundantly provided against accidents. “For bleeding of the
nose let a man be brought to a priest named Levi, and let the name Levi be
written backward. If there be not a priest, get a layman, who is to write
backward ‘Ana pipi Shila bar Sumki,’ or ‘Taam dli bemi ceseph, taam dli
bemi pagam’; or let him take a root of grass, and the cord of an old bed,
and paper, and saffron, and the red part of the inside of a palm tree, and
let him burn them together, and let him take some wool, and twist two
threads, and dip them in vinegar, and roll them in ashes, and put them
into his nose; or let him look out for a stream of water which flows from
east to west, and let him go and stand with one leg on each side of it,
and let him take with his right hand some mud from under his left foot,
and with his left hand from under his right foot, and let him twist two
threads of wool, and dip them in the mud, and put them into his nose.” If
a man be bitten by a mad dog he must die, unless some remedy be found for
him. “Abai says he must take the skin of a male adder, and write upon it,
‘I, M, the son of the woman N, upon the skin of a male adder, write
against thee, Kanti Kanti Klirus, but some say, Kandi Kandi Klurus, Lord
of Hosts. Amen. Selah.’ Let him also cast off his clothes, and bury them
in a graveyard for twelve months of a year; then let him take them up, and
burn them in a furnace, and let him strew the ashes at the parting of the
roads. And during these twelve months let him only drink out of a brass
tube, lest he see the phantom form of the demon, and he be endangered.
This was done by Abba, the son of Martha—he is Abba, the son of Manjumi.
His mother made him a tube of gold.”

Magic naturally follows from such teaching. Abba Benjamin says, “If leave
had been given to see the hurtful demons, no creature could stand before
them.” Abbai says, “They are more than we are, and stand against us, like
the trench round a garden bed.” Rav Huni says, “Everyone has a thousand on
his left hand, and ten thousand on his right hand.” Rabba says, “The want
of room at the sermon is from them, the wearing out of the Rabbis’ clothes
is from their rubbing against them, bruised legs are from them.”
“Whosoever wishes to know their existence, let him take ashes passed
through a sieve, and strew them in his bed, and in the morning he will see
the marks of a cock’s claws. Whosoever wishes to see them, let him take
the inner covering of a black cat, the kitten of a first-born black cat,
which is also the kitten of a first-born, and let him burn it in the fire,
and powder it, and fill his eyes with it, and he will see them. And let
him pour the powder into an iron tube, and seal it with an iron signet,
lest they steal any of it, and let him seal the mouth of it, lest any harm
ensue. Rav Bibi bar Abbai did thus, and he was harmed, but the Rabbis
prayed for mercy, and he was healed.” Arts of sorcery are attributed to
the Rabbis. They are represented as having the power to create both men
and melons. One of them is said to have changed a woman into an ass, and
ridden the ass to market, when another sorcerer changed the ass again into
a woman.

This sorcery is traced to Abraham, who is said (Gen. xxv. 6) to have given
his sons gifts. These gifts are stated to have been the arts of sorcery.
Legends abound everywhere throughout the Talmud. Rabbi Judah said, Rav
said, “Everything that God created in the world, He created male and
female. And thus he did with leviathan, the piercing serpent, and
leviathan the crooked serpent. He created them male and female; but if
they had been joined together they would have desolated the whole world.
What then did the Holy One do? He enervated the male leviathan, and slew
the female, and salted her for the righteous in the time to come, for it
is said, ‘And He shall slay the dragon that is in the sea’ (Isa. xxvii.
1). Likewise, with regard to behemoth upon a thousand mountains, He
created them male and female; but if they had been joined together they
would have desolated the whole world. What then did the Holy One do? He
enervated the male behemoth, and made the female barren, and preserved her
for the righteous in the time to come. That period is to be a season of
great feasting. The liquor to be drunk will be apple-wine of more than
seventy years old. The cup of David alone will hold one hundred and
twenty-one logs. It is related that a Rabbi once saw in a desert a flock
of geese so fat that their feathers fell off, and the rivers flowed in
fat. He said to them, ‘Shall we have part of you in the world to come?’
One of them lifted up a wing and another a leg, to signify the parts we
shall have. We should otherwise have had all parts of these geese, but
that their sufferings are owing to us. It is our iniquities that have
delayed the coming of the Messiah, and these geese suffer greatly by
reason of their excessive fat, which daily increases, and will increase
till the Messiah comes.”

Rabba bar Chama says that he once saw “a bird so tall, that its head
reached to the sky and its legs to the bottom of the ocean.” The water in
which it stood was so deep that a carpenter’s axe which had fallen in
seven years before had not then reached the bottom. He also saw “a frog as
large as a village containing sixty houses.” This frog was swallowed up by
a serpent, and this serpent in turn by a crow; this crow flew, and perched
upon a cedar, and this cedar was as broad as sixteen wagons abreast. There
is also an account of a fish which was killed by a worm. This fish, when
driven ashore, destroyed sixty cities, and sixty cities ate of it, and
sixty cities salted it, and with its bones the ruined cities were rebuilt.
Stories are also told of fishes with eyes like the moon, and of horned
fishes three hundred miles in length. These stories are intended to
confirm the text, “They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business
in great waters; these see the works of the Lord and his wonders in the
deep” (Ps. cvii. 23, 24). To illustrate the statement of Amos (iii. 8), a
story is told of a lion which one of the Cæsars wished to see. At 400
miles distance he roared, and the walls of Rome fell. At 300 miles he
again roared, and all the people fell on their backs, and their teeth fell
out, and Cæsar fell off his throne. Cæsar then prayed for his removal to a
safer distance.

The Talmud informs us that “a young unicorn, one day old, is as large as
Mount Tabor.” Consequently Noah had great difficulty in saving an old one
alive. He could not get it into the ark, so he bound it by its horn to the
side of the ark. At the same time Og, King of Bashan (being one of the
antediluvians), was saved by riding on its back. We are further informed
that he was one of the giants who came from the intermarriage of angels
with the daughters of men. His footsteps were forty miles long, and one of
his teeth served to make a couch for Abraham. When the Israelites came
against him under the command of Moses, he inquired the size of their
camp, and hearing that it was three miles in extent he tore up a mountain
of that size, to hurl it upon them. Grasshoppers were, however, sent to
bore holes in it, so that it fell over his head on to his neck. His teeth
also grew and were entangled in the rocks, as the Psalmist says, “Thou
hast broken the teeth of the ungodly” (Ps. iii. 7). He is also said to be
identical with Eliezer the servant of Abraham, and to have been, like
Enoch, translated to Paradise. This account, however, differs widely from
the statements of the Jerusalem Targum on the Book of Numbers (xxi. 34).

The Talmud affirms that Adam was made from dust of all parts of the earth;
and that he was created with two faces, as it is written, “Thou hast beset
me behind and before” (Ps. cxxxix. 5). The Rabbis further state that he
was formed in two parts, one male and one female. His height before his
fall reached to the firmament, but after his fall God put his hand upon
him, and compressed him small. In the tenth hour after he was made, he
sinned; and in the twelfth he was driven out of Paradise. Abraham is said
to have put Sarah into a box when he brought her into Egypt, that none
should see her beauty. At the custom-house toll was demanded. Abraham said
he was ready to pay. The custom-house officers said, “Thou bringest
clothes.” He said, “I will pay for clothes.” They said, “Thou bringest
gold.” He said, “I will pay for gold.” They said, “Thou bringest silk.” He
said, “I will pay for silk.” They said, “Thou bringest pearls.” He said,
“I will pay for pearls.” They said, “Thou must open the box,” whereupon
her splendor shone over the whole land of Egypt.

Abraham, it is also said, had a precious stone hung around his throat, on
which when the sick looked they were healed. Some of the laws of Sodom are
also recorded: “Whosoever cut off the ears of another’s ass received the
ass till his ears grew again.” “Whosoever wounded another, the man wounded
was obliged to pay him for letting his blood.” When the judges of Sodom
attempted to fine Eliezer, the servant of Abraham, because another man had
wounded him, he took up a stone and flung it at the judge. He then bid the
judge to pay the fine, which was now due to him for letting his blood, to
the man who had first wounded him. There was a public bed in Sodom, and
every stranger was obliged to lie in it. If his legs were too long for it,
they were cut off; and if too short, they were racked out to the proper
length. When a traveller came, each citizen, to show his hospitality, was
obliged to give him a coin with his name written upon it. The traveller
was then deprived of bread; and when he had died of starvation, the
citizens came, and each one took back his own money. The Sodomites thus
kept up their character for liberality.

At the giving of the Law the Israelites stood at the lower part of the
mount (Exod. xix. 17). Rabbi Avidmi says, “these words teach us that the
Holy One, blessed be He, turned the mountain over them like a tub, and
said to them, ‘If ye will receive the Law, well; but if not, there shall
be your grave.’ ” Rabbi Joshua says, “As each commandment proceeded from
the mouth of the Holy One, Israel retreated twelve miles, and the
ministering angels led them back, as it is said, ‘The angels of the host
did flee apace’(6) (Ps. lxviii. 13). Do not read ‘they fled’ but ‘they
led.’ ” Rabbi Eliezer, the Modite, says, that Jethro “heard the giving of
the Law; for when the Law was given to Israel His voice went from one end
of the world to the other, and all the nations of the world were seized
with trembling in their temples, and they repeated a hymn, as it is said,
‘In His temple doth everyone speak of His glory’ ” (Ps. xxix. 9). The
question is asked, “Why are the Gentiles defiled?” “Because they did not
stand on Mount Sinai, for in the hour the serpent came to Eve he
communicated defilement, which was removed from Israel when they stood on
Mount Sinai.” Rav Acha, the son of Rabbi, said to Rav Ashai, “How then is
it with proselytes?” He answered, “Although they went not there, their
lucky star was there, as it is written, ‘With _him_ that standeth here
with us this day before the Lord our God, and also with _him_ that _is_
not here with us this day’ ” (Deut. xxix. 15).

In the hour that Moses ascended up on high the ministering angels said
before God, “O Lord of the world, what business has he that is born of
woman amongst us?” He answered, “He is come to receive the Law.” They
replied, “This desirable treasure, which has been treasured up from the
six days of creation, six hundred and seventy-four generations before the
world was created, dost Thou now wish to give it to flesh and blood? what
is man that Thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that Thou visitest
him? O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is Thy name in all the earth, Who
hast set Thy glory above the heavens.” The Holy One said to Moses, “Return
them an answer.” He said, “O Lord of the world, I fear, lest they burn me
with the breath of their mouth.” God said, “Lay hold on the throne of my
glory, and return them an answer; for it is said, ‘He that holdeth the
face of His throne, He spreadeth His cloud over him’ ” (Job xxvi. 9).
Rabbi Nahum says, “This means that the Almighty spread some of the glory
of the Shechinah and His cloud over him.” He then said, “Lord of the
world, what is written in the Law that Thou art about to give me?” “I am
the Lord thy God, that brought thee out of Egypt.” He then said, “Did ye
(angels) ever go down into Egypt and serve Pharaoh? why then should ye
have the Law?” Again, “What is written therein?” “Thou shalt have none
other God.” He then asked them, “Do ye then dwell among the uncircumcised,
that ye should commit idolatry?” Again, “What is written?” “Remember the
Sabbath day to sanctify it.” “Do ye then do any work so as to need rest?”
Again, “What is written?” “Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord in
vain.” “Have ye then any work that would lead to this sin?” Again, “What
is written?” “Honor thy father and mother.” “Have ye then got any father
or mother?” Again, “What is written?” “Thou shalt do no murder.” “Thou
shalt not commit adultery.” “Thou shalt not steal.” “Have ye then envy or
the principle of evil amongst you?” Immediately they praised the Holy One,
“Blessed be He.”

Wonderful stories are told of the manna. The manna is said to have fallen
from heaven, accompanied by showers of pearls and precious stones. It
tasted to everyone according to his desire. If one wished for fat fowl, so
it tasted. If another other wished for honey, so it tasted, as it is
written, “Thou hast lacked nothing” (Deut. xi. 7). The Targum of Jonathan
goes on to inform us, “At the fourth hour, when the sun had waxed hot upon
it, it melted and became streams of water, which flowed away into the
great sea, and wild animals that were clean, and cattle, came to drink of
it, and the children of Israel hunted and ate them” (Exod. xvi. 21). It is
further related that the Queen of Sheba (whom the Rabbis labor to prove to
have been the King of Sheba) wished to test the knowledge of Solomon who
had written on botany “from the cedar to the hyssop.” She once stood at a
distance from him with two exquisite wreaths of flowers—one artificial,
one natural. They were so much alike that the King looked perplexed, and
the courtiers looked melancholy. Observing a swarm of bees on the window,
he commanded it to be opened. All the bees lighted on the natural and not
one on the artificial wreath. Solomon is also said to have sent Benaiah,
the son of Jehoiada, to bind Aschmedai, the king of the devils. After
deceiving the devil with wine he made him reveal the secret of the
Schamir, or little worm, which can cleave the hardest stone. And by the
aid of this worm Solomon built the Temple. The devil afterward asked
Solomon for his signet ring, and when he had given it to him the devil
stretched one wing up to the firmament and the other to the earth, and
jerked Solomon four hundred miles away. Then assuming the aspect of
Solomon, he seated himself on his throne. After Solomon had again obtained
it, he wrote, “What profit hath a man of all his labor which he taketh
under the sun?” (Eccles. i. 3).

A story is told of Nebuzaradan, that he saw the blood of Zecharias
bubbling in the court of the priests. When he asked what it meant, he was
informed that it was the blood of bullocks and lambs. When he had ordered
bullocks and lambs to be slain, the blood of Zecharias still bubbled and
reeked above theirs. The priests then confessed that it was the blood of a
priest and prophet and judge, whom they had slain. He then commanded
eighty thousand priests to be put to death. The blood, however, still
continued to bubble. God then said, “Is this man, who is but flesh and
blood, filled with pity toward my children, and shall not I be much more?”
So he gave a sign to the blood, and it was swallowed up in the place. Of
the eighty thousand priests slain none was left but Joshua the son of
Jozedek, of whom it is written, “Is not this a brand plucked out of the
fire?” (Zech. iii. 2). Of Titus it is said that he was unclean in the
Temple, and with a blow of his sword rent the veil, which flowed with
blood. To punish him a gnat was sent into his brain, which grew as large
as a dove. When his skull was opened, the gnat was found to have a mouth
of copper, and claws of iron.

The Talmud teaches that evil spirits, devils, and goblins are the
offspring of Adam. They are said to fly about in all directions. They know
from eavesdropping what is to come in the future. Like men, they eat,
drink, and multiply. They are represented as playing men awkward tricks.
One is stated to have broken a vessel of wine, and to have spilled it on
the ground. The Rabbis, however, afterward compelled him to pay for it.
People are forbidden to ride oxen fresh from the stall, as Satan dances
between their horns. Men are forbidden to salute their companions by
night, lest they may turn out to be devils. It is also commanded to shake
out, before drinking, some water from the vessel, to get rid of what is
sipped by the evil spirits. It is, however, permitted to consult Satan on
week-days. He is considered identical with the Angel of Death. But he is
described as having no power over those engaged in reading the law. Many
of his devices are related in the Talmud, whereby he made learned men
leave off reading, and then he snatched away their souls. A story is told
of the attempt of Rabbi Joshua, the son of Levi, and Satan to deceive each
other about the Rabbi’s place in paradise. Finally, however, Satan managed
to take away his life, whereupon the voice of Elijah is heard shouting in
heaven, “Make room for the son of Levi,”—“Make room for the son of Levi.”
The Angel of Death is represented as standing at the head of the dying
man. He has a drawn sword in his hand, on which is a drop of gall. When
the dying man sees it, he shudders and opens his mouth. The Angel of Death
then lets it fall into his mouth. The sick man dies, corrupts, and becomes
pale. Three days the soul flies about the body, thinking to return to it,
but after it sees the appearance of the face changed, it leaves it and
goes away.

Rabbi Isaac moreover asserts, that a worm in a dead body is as painful as
a needle in a living one. The Talmud still further states that there are
three voices continually heard—the voice of the sun as he rolls in his
orbit—the voice of the multitudes of Rome—and the voice of the soul as it
leaves the body. The Rabbis, however, prayed for mercy on the soul, and
this voice has ceased. Instances are also given of men overhearing the
conversations of the dead, and receiving profit from them. A man is said
to have heard one girl tell another in the grave, that those who sowed
their crops at a particular time would find their harvests fail. So he
took care to sow at another time, and he had an abundant yield. It is also
said that every Friday evening a second soul enters into the bodies of
men, and that it remains to the end of the Sabbath, when it departs. The
evidence of this second soul is shown by an increased appetite for eating
and drinking.

Good angels are stated to be daily created out of the stream of glory
which flows from the throne of God, and they sing a new song, and vanish;
as it is said, “They are new every morning: great is thy faithfulness”
(Lam. iii. 23). The Rabbis also say that angels are created out of every
word which proceeds from the mouth of God; as it is said, “By the word of
the LORD were the heavens made; and all the host of them by the breath of
His mouth” (Ps. xxxiii. 6). The following story is also told: In the hour
when Nimrod, the impious, cast Abraham into the midst of the fiery
furnace, Gabriel said before the blessed God, “Lord of the world, I will
go down and cool the flame, and deliver the righteous One from the furnace
of fire.” The blessed God said to him, “I am the ONE in this world, and he
is the one in his world. It becomes the ONE to deliver the one.” But as
the blessed God deprives no one of his reward, He said, “Thou shalt be
deemed worthy to deliver three of his posterity.” Rabbi Simon, the
Shilonite, taught, “In the hour that Nebuchadnezzar, the impious, cast
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah into the midst of the fiery furnace,
Jorkemo, the prince of hail, stood up before the blessed God, and said, ‘I
will go down and cool the flame, and deliver the righteous ones from the
furnace of fire.’ To him said Gabriel, ‘The power of the blessed One is
not so, since thou art the prince of hail, and everyone knows that waters
quench fire; but I, the prince of fire, will go down and cool inwardly,
and heat outwardly, and I will make a wonder within a wonder.’ ” To him
said the blessed God, “Go down.” In the same hour Gabriel began and said,
“And the truth of the Lord _endureth_ for ever” (Ps. cxvii. 2).

Israelites are forbidden to pray in the Syriac language, as the angels do
not understand it, and consequently cannot carry their petitions to God.
Gabriel, however, is acquainted with it, as he taught Joseph the seventy
languages. The chief of all the angels is said to be the Metatron, who
once received fiery blows from another angel called Ampiel. With regard to
heaven, the Rabbis teach that Egypt is four hundred miles long and broad,
the Morians’ land is sixty times larger than Egypt, and the world is sixty
times larger than the Morians’ land; heaven is sixty times larger than the
world, and hell is sixty times larger than heaven. It follows that the
“whole world is but a pot-lid to hell.” Yet some say that hell is
immeasurable, and some say heaven is immeasurable. It was a pearl amongst
the sayings of a Rabbi. “Heaven is not like this world, for in it there is
neither eating, nor drinking, nor marriage, nor increasing, nor
trafficking, nor hate, nor envy, nor heart-burnings; but the just shall
sit with their crowns on their heads, and enjoy the splendors of the
Shechinah.”

Hell is said to have three doors,—one in the wilderness, one in the sea,
and one in Jerusalem. In the wilderness, as it is written, “They, and all
that appertained to them, went down alive into the pit” (Num. xvi. 33). In
the sea, as it is written, “Out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou
heardest my voice” (Jonah ii. 3). In Jerusalem, as it is written, “Saith
the Lord whose fire is in Zion, and His furnace in Jerusalem” (Is. xxxi.
9). The school of Rabbi Ishmael teaches that the “fire in Zion” is hell
and “His furnace in Jerusalem” is the gate of hell. It is also taught that
the fire of hell has no power over the sinners in Israel, and that the
fire of hell has no power over the disciples of the wise. It is again,
however, stated that the Israelites who sin with their bodies, and the
Gentiles who sin with their bodies, go to hell, and are punished there
twelve months. After their body is wasted, and their soul is burned, the
wind scatters them beneath the soles of the righteous, as it is said, “And
ye shall tread down the wicked: for they shall be ashes under the soles of
your feet” (Mal. iv. 3). Heretics—deniers of the resurrection—Epicureans,
and other sinners, shall be perpetually tormented “where their worm dieth
not and their fire is not quenched.”

The doctrine of the resurrection is clearly taught in the Talmud. As for
the last judgment, the following story is told: “Said Antoninus to Rabbi,
The body and soul can free themselves from judgment. How? The body can
say, The soul sinned from the time it separated from me, while I lay as a
stone in the grave. And the soul can say, The body sinned from the time it
separated from me, while I flew in the air as a bird.” He replied, “I will
give you an example to which it is like. It is like a king of flesh and
blood, who has a beautiful garden, and in which are pleasant fruits, and
he placed two watchmen therein, of whom one was lame and the other was
blind. Said the lame to the blind, ‘I see pleasant fruits in the garden;
come, and let me sit upon thee, and let us go and eat.’ ” The lame sat
upon the blind, and they went and ate. After some days the lord of the
garden came, and said, “Where are my pleasant fruits?” The lame said, “I
have no legs to go to them.” The blind said, “I have no eyes to see them.”
What did he do? He set the lame upon the blind, and judged them as one. So
the blessed God will return the soul into the body, and judge them as one,
as it is said, “He shall call to the heavens from above and to the earth,
that he may judge his people” (Ps. iv. 4). He shall call to the heavens
from above, that is the soul; and to the earth that he may judge his
people, that is, the body. After the resurrection men will live without
work or weariness of body, their houses shall be of precious stones, and
their beds of silk, and the rivers shall run with wine and perfumed oil.

The Talmud often contradicts Holy Scripture. It says that they are in
error who believe the Bible account of the sons of Reuben, of the sons of
Eli, and of the sons of Samuel. It allows usury, and the passing of
children through the fire to Moloch. It permits deceit, and supports it
with the text, “With the pure thou wilt show thyself pure, and with the
froward thou wilt show thyself unsavory” (2 Sam. xxii. 27). The Rabbis
teach hatred of Christians and Gentiles. Instead of saying, “In the
presence of the king,” they are taught to say, “In the presence of the
dog.” A Jew who bears witness against another Jew before a Gentile is
publicly cursed. A Jew is also released from any oath he may swear to a
Gentile. It is only permitted a Jewish physician to heal Gentiles for the
sake of the fee, or for the practice of medicine, but it is not allowed to
save their lives in seasons of danger. Their marriage is no marriage; and
their butchers’ meat is only carrion. It is wrong to invite them into a
Jewish house; and it is not needful to restore what they have lost. When
the ox of a Jew gores the ox of a Gentile, the Jew is free; but if the ox
of a Gentile gores the ox of a Jew, the Gentile must pay the full cost. A
story is told of a Rabbi who sold a number of palm-trees to a Gentile, and
afterward ordered his servant to cut off some pieces from them. “For,” he
said, “the Gentile knows their number, but he does not know whether they
be thick or thin.”

The precepts binding on the sons of Noah are stated to be seven: to do
justice; to bless the name of God; to avoid idolatry; to flee from
fornication and adultery; to abstain from blood-shedding; not to rob; and
not to eat a member of a living animal. An account is given of the river
Sambation, which flows with stones all the six days of the week, but rests
on the Sabbath day. Examples are also furnished of gluttony and
drunkenness. The paunches of some Rabbis grew so big, that, when put
together, a pair of oxen might go between them. A story is also related of
one Rabbi killing another in a drunken fit, and then working a miracle
which restored him to life. In the following year he again invited the
Rabbi to drink with him, but he declined, on the ground that “miracles are
not wrought every day.” Instances are also given of the anguish of Rabbis
in the prospect of death. They express themselves as being without hope of
salvation, and as having the fear of hell before them.

Proverbs everywhere abound in the Talmud, and they are generally replete
with shrewd observation. “The world subsists through the breath of school
children. Whosoever transgresses the words of the Scribes is guilty of
death. Whosoever teaches a statute before his teachers ought to be bitten
by a serpent. There is no likeness between him who has bread in his basket
and him who has none. Rather be the head of foxes than the tail of lions.”
This, however, again appears as “Rather be the tail of lions than the head
of foxes.” “The righteous in the city is its splendor, its profit, its
glory: when he is departed, there is also departed the splendor, the
profit, and the glory.” “Licentiousness in a house is as a worm in a
pumpkin.” This reappears as “Violence in a house is as a worm in a
pumpkin.” “Thy friend has an acquaintance, and the acquaintance of thy
friend has also an acquaintance; be discreet.” The unworthy child of a
good father is called “vinegar, the son of wine.” “If the opportunity
fails the thief, he deems himself honest. The cock and owl await together
the morning dawn. Says the cock to the owl, ‘Light profits me, but how
does it profit thee?’ Youth is a crown of roses, old age a crown of
thorns. Many preach well, but do not practise well. It is the punishment
of liars, that men don’t listen to them when they speak truth. Every man
who is proud is an idolater. To slander is to murder. Whosoever humbles
himself, God exalts him; whosoever exalts himself, God humbles him. Men
see every leprosy except their own. He who daily looks after his property
finds a coin. The post does not honor the man; but the man the post. Every
man is not so lucky as to have two tables. Not what thou sayest about
thyself, but what thy companions say. The whole and broken tables of the
Law lie in the ark. The salt of money is almsgiving. He who walks four
cubits in the land of Israel is sure of being a child of the world to
come. The plague lasted seven years, and no man died before his time. Let
the drunkard only go, he will fall of himself. Be rather the one cursed
than the one cursing. The world is like an inn, but the world to come is
the real home. The child loves its mother more than its father: it fears
its father more than its mother. Repent one day before thy death. If your
God is a friend of the poor, why does He not support them? A wise man
answered, ‘Their case is left in our hands, that we may thereby acquire
merits and forgiveness of sin.’ The house that does not open to the poor
shall open to the physician. He who visits the sick takes away
one-sixtieth part of their pain. Descend a step in choosing a wife; mount
a step in choosing a friend. An old woman in a house is a treasure.
Whosoever does not persecute them that persecute him, whosoever takes an
offence in silence, whosoever does good from love, whosoever is cheerful
under his sufferings, they are friends of God, and of them says the
Scripture, ‘they shall shine forth as the sun at noonday.’ ” R. Phineas,
son of Jair, said, “Industry brings purity—purity, cleanness—cleanness,
holiness—holiness, humbleness—humbleness, fear of sin—and fear of sin,
partaking of the Holy Ghost.”

Ideas of God are gathered from the occupations which the authors of the
Talmud assign to him. “The day contains twelve hours. The first three
hours the Holy One, blessed be He, sits and studies the Law. The second
three hours He sits and judges the whole world. When He sees that the
world deserves destruction, He stands up from the throne of judgment, and
sits on the throne of mercy. The third three hours He sits and feeds all
the world, from the horns of the unicorns to the eggs of the vermin. In
the fourth three hours He sits and plays with leviathan, for it is said,
‘The leviathan, whom thou hast formed to play therein’ ” (Ps. civ. 26).
Rabbi Eliezer says, “The night has three watches, and at every watch the
Holy One, blessed be He, sits and roars like a lion; for it is said, ‘The
Lord shall roar from on high and utter His voice from His holy habitation;
He shall mightily roar upon His habitation’ ” (Jer. xxv. 30). Rabbi Isaac,
the son of Samuel, says in the name of Rav, “The night has three watches,
and at every watch the Holy One, blessed be He, sits and roars like a
lion, and says, ‘Woe is me, that I have laid desolate my house, and burned
my sanctuary, and sent my children into captivity among the nations of the
world!’ ” He is described as praying, and wearing phylacteries, and as
having a special place for weeping. “Before the destruction of the Temple
the Holy One played with leviathan, but since the destruction of the
Temple, He plays with it no more. In the hour that the Holy One remembers
His children who are dwelling with suffering among the nations, He lets
two tears fall into the Great Ocean, the noise of which is heard from one
end of the world to the other, and this is an earthquake.” It is further
said that He “braided the hair of Eve,” and “shaved the head of
Sennacherib.” He is represented as keeping school, and teaching the sages.
To this school the devils come, especially Aschmedai, the king of the
devils. In the discussions that take place, God is said to be sometimes
overcome by the wiser Rabbis.

The question of the Messiah is often brought forward. “The tradition of
the school of Elijah is, that the world is to stand six thousand years,
two thousand years confusion, two thousand years the Law, and two thousand
years the days of the Messiah.” It is further said that the time for the
coming of the Messiah is expired. “Rav says the appointed times are long
since past.” The Jerusalem Talmud relates that “it happened once to a Jew,
who was standing ploughing, that his ox lowed before him. An Arab was
passing, and heard its voice. He said ‘O Jew! O Jew! unyoke thine ox, and
loose thy ploughshare, for the Temple is desolate.’ It lowed a second
time, and he said, ‘O Jew! O Jew! yoke thine ox and bind thy ploughshare,
for King Messiah is born.’ The Jew said, ‘What is His name?’ He answered
‘Menachem.’ He asked again, ‘What is His father’s name?’ He said,
‘Hezekiah.’ He asked, ‘From whence is He?’ He replied, ‘From the royal
palace of Bethlehem Judah.’ The Jew then went and saw him; but when he
went again, the mother told him ‘that the winds had borne the child
away.’ ” The Babylon Talmud further states that “Rabbi Joshua, the son of
Levi, found Elijah standing at the door of the cave of Rabbi Simeon ben
Yochai, and said to him, ‘Shall I reach the world to come?’ He answered,
‘If the Lord will.’ Rabbi Joshua, the son of Levi, said, ‘I see two, but I
hear the voice of three.’ He also asked, ‘When will Messiah come?’ Elijah
answered, ‘Go and ask Himself.’ Rabbi Joshua then said, ‘Where does he
sit?’ ‘At the gate of Rome.’ ‘And how is he known?’ ‘He is sitting among
the poor and sick, and they open their wounds, and bind them up again all
at once: but he opens only one, and then he opens another, for he thinks,
Perhaps I may be wanted, and then I must not be delayed.’ Rabbi Joshua
went to him, and said, ‘Peace be upon thee, my Master, and my Lord.’ He
answered, ‘Peace be upon thee, son of Levi.’ The Rabbi then asked him,
‘When will my Lord come?’ He answered, ‘To-day’ ” (Ps. xcv. 7). It is said
that “the bones of those who reckon the appointed time of the Messiah must
burst asunder.” Again, however, it is said that “Elias told Rabbi Judah,
the brother of the pious Rabbi Salah, that the world would not stand less
than eighty-five years of Jubilee, and in the last year of Jubilee the son
of David will come.” It is further stated that there are first to be the
wars of the Dragon, and of Gog and Magog; and that God will not renew the
earth until seven thousand years are completed. The Rabbis also say that
when the Messiah comes to fulfil the prophecy of riding upon an ass (Zech.
ix. 9), the ass shall be one of “an hundred colors.” As for the return of
the ten tribes to their own land, the Talmud in some places asserts it,
and in some places denies it. But it is said that in the days of the
Messiah all the Gentiles shall become proselytes to the Jewish faith. The
Rabbis are divided as to the continuance of the Messiah; some say forty
years, some seventy years, some three generations, and some say that He
will continue as long as from the creation of the world or the time of
Noah “up to the present time.” Others say that the kingdom of the Messiah
will endure for thousands of years, as “when there is a good government it
is not quickly dissolved.” It is also said that He shall die, and His
kingdom descend to His son and grandson. In proof of this opinion Isaiah
xlii. 4 is quoted: “He shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till He have
set judgment in the earth.” The lives of men will be prolonged for
centuries: “He will swallow up death in victory” (Is. xxv. 8); and “the
child shall die an hundred years old” (Is. lxv. 20). The Talmud applies
the former verse to Israel, the latter verse to the Gentiles. The men of
that time will be two hundred ells high. This is said to be proved by the
word “upright” (Lev. xxvi. 13), “upright” being applied to the supposed
height of man before the fall. “Moreover the light of the moon shall be as
the light of the sun; and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the
light of seven days” (Is. xxx. 26). The land of Israel will produce cakes
and clothes of the finest wool. The wheat will grow on Lebanon as high as
palm-trees; and a wind will be sent from God to reduce it to fine flour
for the support of those who gather it; as it is said “with the fat of
kidneys of wheat” (Deut. xxxii. 14). Each kidney will be as large as “the
kidneys of the fattest oxen.” To prove that this is nothing wonderful, an
account is given of a rape seed in which a fox once brought forth young.
These young ones were weighed, and found to be as heavy as sixty pounds of
Cyprus weight. Lest these statements should be thought a contradiction of
the verse “_There_ is no new _thing_ under the sun” (Eccles. i. 9), the
Rabbis say that it is just like the growth of mushrooms, toadstools, and
the delicate mosses on the branches of trees. Grapes will also grow most
luxuriantly; and in every cluster there will be thirty jars of wine.
Jerusalem will be built three miles high; as it is written, “It shall be
lifted up” (Zech. xiv. 10). The gates of the city will be made of pearls
and precious stones, thirty ells high and thirty ells broad. A disciple of
the Rabbis once doubted whether precious stones could be found so large;
and shortly afterward, he saw an angel with similar stones, as he was out
at sea. On his return to land he related what he had seen to Rabbi
Jochanan. Whereupon the Rabbi said, “Thou fool, if thou hadst not seen,
thou hadst not believed; thou mockest the words of the wise.” He then
“lifted up his eyes upon him, and he was made an heap of bones.”

Said R. Samuel, the son of Nachman, R. Jochanan said, “Three shall be
called by the name of the Holy One; blessed be He.” And these are the
Righteous, the Messiah, and Jerusalem. The Righteous, as is said (Is.
xliii. 7). The Messiah, as it is written (Jer. xxiii. 6): “And this is His
name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.” Jerusalem,
as it is written (Ezek. xlviii. 35): “It was round about eighteen thousand
measures: and the name of the city from that day shall be The LORD is
THERE.”

In the later editions of the Talmud the allusions to Christ and
Christianity are few and cautious, compared with the earlier or
unexpurgated copies. The last of these was published at Amsterdam in 1645.
In them our Lord and Saviour is “that one,” “such an one,” “a fool,” “the
leper,” “the deceiver of Israel,” etc. Efforts are made to prove that He
is the son of Joseph Pandira before his marriage with Mary. His miracles
are attributed to sorcery, the secret of which He brought in a slit in His
flesh out of Egypt. His teacher is said to have been Joshua, the son of
Perachiah. This Joshua is said to have afterward excommunicated him to the
blast of 400 rams’ horns, though he must have lived seventy years before
His time. Forty days before the death of Jesus a witness was summoned by
public proclamation to attest His innocence, but none appeared. He is said
to have been first stoned, and then hanged on the eve of the Passover. His
disciples are called heretics, and opprobrious names. They are accused of
immoral practices; and the New Testament is called a sinful book. The
references to these subjects manifest the most bitter aversion and hatred.

The Rabbis have laid down thirteen rules for the interpretation of the
Talmud. These rules form their system of logic. They are as follows:

(1.) “Light and heavy,” an argument from the less to the greater. An
example is furnished in the case of Miriam (Num. xii. 14). “If her father
had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days? let her be
shut out from the camp seven days, and after that let her be received in
again.” The argument is here drawn from the conduct of man, the less, to
that of God, the greater. The owner of an ox is also fined more for his
beast if it gores his neighbor’s beast than if it eats his neighbor’s
corn; since the tooth only means sustenance for the stomach, but the horn
means mischief.

(2.) “Equality,” an argument from the similarity or identity of words and
impressions. An example is furnished in Deut. xv. 12: “If thy brother, an
Hebrew man, or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six
years, then in the seventh year thou shalt let him free from thee.” In the
18th verse, when this law is again referred to, the man only is mentioned;
but as the woman was mentioned in the former verse, it is concluded that
the law applies equally to both.

(3.) “The building of the father,” an argument from the statements in (a)
one place in the Law to other passages, which are similar. An example is
furnished in Exod. xii. 16, where servile work is forbidden during the
feast of unleavened bread, and the conclusion is drawn that servile work
is equally forbidden in all festivals of the same nature. This mode of
argument is also applied to (b) two places in the Law, where one place
refers to the general proposition, and another to particulars arising out
of it. An example is furnished in Lev. xv. 1, where a man with an issue is
unclean, but in the 4th verse this uncleanness is limited to his bed and
his seat.

(4.) “Universal and particular.” Where there is a general and a special
statement, the special binds the general. An example is furnished in Lev.
i. 2: “If any man of you bring an offering unto the Lord, ye shall bring
your offering of the cattle, even of the herd and of the flock.” Cattle
(in the Hebrew Behemah) includes both wild and tame. The special terms
“herd” and “flock” limit the offering to domesticated animals.

(5.) “Particular and universal,” or argument from the special to the
general. An example is furnished in Deut. xxii. 1: “Thou shalt not see thy
brother’s ox or his sheep go astray: thou shalt in any case bring them
again unto thy brother.” In the 3d verse, it is further commanded to
restore “all lost things of thy brother’s.” Hence it is concluded, not
only his ox or his sheep, but that everything, which he has lost is to be
restored to him.

(6.) “Universal, particular and universal.” Where there are two universal
statements with a particular statement between, the particular limits the
universals. An example is furnished in Deut. xiv. 26, where, speaking of
the application of the second tithe, it is said, “Thou shalt bestow that
money for whatsoever thy soul lusteth after; for oxen, or for sheep, or
for wine, or for strong drink, or for whatsoever thy soul desireth.” The
special limitation, between the two universal permissions, is to
productions of the land of Canaan.

(7.) “The general that requires the special, and the special that requires
the general.” An example is furnished in Lev. xvii. 13: “Whatsoever man
... hunteth and catcheth any beast or fowl that may be eaten, he shall
even pour out the blood thereof, and cover it with dust.” The word “cover”
or “hide” is again used in Gen. xviii. 17: “Shall I hide from Abraham that
thing which I shall do?” The conclusion is drawn, that cover is restricted
to the blood being hidden under dust, and not put in any vessel. Again
(Exod. xiii. 2): “Sanctify unto me all the first-born; whatever openeth
the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and beast, it is mine.”
From this verse females might be included with males. Reference is made to
Deut. xv. 19, where it is found “All the firstling males.” Still it is
obscure, when there are firstling females, about the males born afterward.
Reference is made to Exod. xxxiv. 19: “All that openeth the matrix is
mine.” Here all first-born are allowed. This, however, is too general, and
it is again restricted by the word males. And as this is too general, it
is again restricted by “all that openeth the matrix.”

(8.) “Whatsoever is taught in general and something special is
mentioned—it is mentioned to strengthen the general rule.” An example is
furnished in Lev. xx. 2, where the worship of Moloch is forbidden, and the
penalty for the sin is death. The conclusion drawn is, that such mention
of a special form of idolatry confirms the prohibition of all idolatry.

(9.) “When there is a general rule and also an exception—the exception
lightens and does not aggravate.” An example is furnished in the command
(Exod. xxi. 12), “He that smiteth a man so that he die, he shall surely be
put to death.” The exception is, “Whoso killeth his neighbor ignorantly”
(Deut. xix. 4, 5), “he can flee to one of the cities of refuge.”

(10.) “When there is a general rule, and an exception not agreeing with
the general rule, the exception both lightens and aggravates.” An example
is furnished from the plague of leprosy (Lev. xiii. 3) when the hair is
turned white. The head and beard are excepted (29th verse) lest there be
gray hairs—this lightens. But if on the head and beard there be “yellow
thin hair,” it is a dry scall—this aggravates.

(11.) “When there is an exception from a general rule to establish a new
matter—the new matter cannot be brought under the general rule again,
unless it be mentioned in the text.” An example is furnished from the
eating of holy things (Lev. xxii. 10-13). The priest, any soul bought with
his money, and he that is born in his house, may eat of it. This is the
general rule. If the priest’s daughter be married to a stranger, she may
not eat of them. This is the exception. This exception would have remained
if she continued married to a stranger, or had a child, or had not
returned to her father’s house. Therefore a new law is provided, that in
the event of none of these things happening, she may again eat of the holy
things.

(12.) “Things that teach from the subject, and things that teach from the
end.” An example is furnished from the eighth commandment, “Thou shalt not
steal.” This law, if applied to man-stealing or kidnapping, implies
capital punishment. The reason given is from its following “Thou shalt do
no murder,” and “Thou shalt not commit adultery”—two laws which, if
violated, entailed death. The second part of this rule applies to things
that teach from the end. What is meant by the end is a matter of dispute.
Some say it means the final cause of logicians. Others say it means
something in the end or conclusion of the law itself. If it be the latter,
an example is furnished from the case of the leprous house (Lev. xiv. 45):
“And he shall break down the house, the stones of it, and the timber
thereof, and all the mortar of the house.” These directions teach that
houses made of mud are excepted.

(13.) “When two texts contradict each other, until a third be found to
decide between them.” An example is furnished in Gen. i. 1: “In the
beginning God created the heaven and the earth.” It is again written, Gen.
ii. 4, “In the day that the Lord made the earth and the heavens.” The
question now arises, Which did He make first? The answer is found in
Isaiah xlviii. 13: “Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth,
and My right hand hath spanned the heavens.” The conclusion is drawn that
He made both at once. Another instance is the discrepancy in the census of
Israel. In 2 Sam. xxiv. 9, the number stated is eight hundred thousand. In
1 Chron. xxi. 5, the number is said to have been “eleven hundred
thousand.” The difference of three hundred thousand is accounted for by
referring to 1 Chron. xxvii. 1, where it is said that twenty-four thousand
served the king every month. These men, when multiplied by the months,
make two hundred and eighty-eight thousand. And the twelve thousand which
waited upon the twelve captains raise the number to three hundred
thousand, the amount required to reconcile the two statements.

In reading the following tracts it should be borne in mind that the
meaning in many places is more implied than expressed.(7) Often an idea is
taken for granted, which patient continuance in reading can alone bring to
light. The subjects to which these tracts refer should first be studied in
the Bible; because after such study the restless subtlety of the Rabbis in
“binding heavy burdens on men’s shoulders” can be more fully discerned. It
is desirable to look on these writings from this point of observation;
just as on some mountain top one looks not only at the gold which the
morning sun pours on grass and flower, but also on the deep valley where
the shadows still rest, that one may the more sensibly feel how glorious
the sun is. The whole theory of this second, or Oral Law, has arisen from
inattention to the express statement of Moses: “These words (the ten
commandments) the Lord spake unto all your assembly in the mount out of
the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness, with a
great voice: AND HE ADDED NO MORE” (Deut. v. 22). And it tends to nullify
the declaration of the Targum of Jonathan Ben Uzziel, “For unto us a child
is born, unto us a son is given; and he has taken the law upon himself to
keep it” (Isaiah ix. 6).

In concluding this introduction it is perhaps well to glance briefly at
the age in which the Talmud grew to its present state. It was a period of
great activity and thought. Old systems of debasing superstition were
breaking up and passing away. A new faith had arisen to regenerate man.
The five centuries which followed the appearing of our Saviour in this
world were filled with religious and political events which still make
their vibrations felt. From the destruction of Jerusalem and the overthrow
of the Jewish polity, an impulse was given to those political changes
which have since gone on without intermission among the nations of the
earth. From the overthrow of the Jewish Temple an impulse was given to
religious earnestness which, often from wrong, often from right motives,
has increased, and will increase, as the great consummation draws nigh.

While the Rabbis were laboring at their gigantic mental structure, while
generation after generation of their wisest and most patriotic men were
accumulating materials to build the tower which became a beacon to their
countrymen for all time, the Christian Church was not idle. By their
writings and eloquence the Fathers were gathering the treasures of
patristic lore which have descended to us. While Rabbis were discoursing
in the synagogues of Tiberias and Babylon, Christian orators were
preaching in the basilicas of Constantinople and Rome. They have all gone
from this mortal scene. But their thoughts are handed down, so that we may
converse with them, though they are no longer on earth. We can hear their
wisdom—we can see their errors—we can almost fancy we behold their
forms—so that, being dead, they yet speak. Since they ceased from their
labors empires have risen and fallen, countless millions of our race have
vanished into eternity, and left their bodies to moulder into dust. But
their teachings still live on, to influence immortal souls for weal or
woe. Doubtless their departures from the Word of God prepared a way and
furnished matter for the numerous heresies and lawless deeds which form a
great portion of the history of mankind. From their errors sprang at least
in part the Koran. This and kindred themes, however, open up an
interminable vista, leading us away from the Talmud itself. It is better
now to conclude this introduction. And with what more suitable words can I
close than with those drawn from the wisdom of the Fathers? “It is not
incumbent upon thee to complete the work: neither art thou free to cease
from it. If thou hast studied the law, great shall be thy reward; for the
Master of thy work is faithful to pay the reward of thy labor: but know
that the reward of the righteous is in the world to come.”

[Transcriber’s Note: What follows is actually only extracts from the
Mishna, and not the Gemara; as explained above, what is considered the
Talmud is the Mishna and the Gemara together.]




On Blessings


    Recitation of the Shemah—Blessings—Rabbi Gamaliel—Exemptions from
    the Recitation—Prayers—Differences Between the Schools of Shammai
    and Hillel—Reverence for the Temple.



