Chapter IX


1. The rue, and the sorrel with spreading leaves, and the wild savory, the
coriander of the mountains, and the parsley of the marshes, and the rocket
of the desert, are free from tithes; and they may be bought from all men
in the Sabbatical year, because nothing like them is legally guarded.
Rabbi Judah said, “the sprouts of the mustard are allowed, because
transgressors are not suspected for taking them from a guarded place.”
Rabbi Simon said, “all vegetables that sprout again are allowed, excepting
the sprouts of cabbage, because there is not their like among the greens
of the field.” But the Sages say, “whatever sprouts again is forbidden.”

2. There are three countries to be public property in the Sabbatical year:
Judah and beyond Jordan and Galilee; and each is divided into three parts:
Upper Galilee, Lower Galilee, and the Vale. From the village of Hananiah
and upward, every part in which the sycamore tree does not grow is Upper
Galilee. And from the village of Hananiah and lower down, where any
sycamore tree grows, is Lower Galilee. And the neighborhood of Tiberias is
the Vale. And in Judah, the mountains, the plain, and the vale, and the
plain of Lydda is as the plain of the south. And its mountains are as the
King’s mountain.(79) From Bethhorn and to the sea is one province.

3. “And wherefore did the Sages say three countries?” “That men might eat
during the Sabbatical year in every one of them, till the last fruits be
finished in it.” R. Simon said, “they did not say three countries, they
said only in Judah.” And all the other countries are reckoned as the
King’s mountain; and all countries are reckoned the same for olives and
dates.

4. Men may eat so long as there is any fruit legally free, but they must
not eat of that which is legally guarded. Rabbi José “allowed it, even
when guarded.” They may eat fruit so long as it is found in birds’ nests,
and such fruit as is twice produced in each year, but they must not eat of
winter fruit. R. Judah “allowed it at all times, if it ripened before the
summer ended.”

5. “If men pressed three sorts of fruit in one barrel?” R. Eliezer said,
“they may eat of the first.” R. Joshua said, “even of the last.” Rabban
Gamaliel said, “everything, the species of which is finished growing in
the field, its species is to be removed from the barrel.”(80) Rabbi Simon
said, “all greens are reckoned as one. They are to be cleared away from
the house.” They may eat of the leeks till the teasels have ceased growing
in the valley of Beth-Netopha.

6. “He who gathers fresh herbs?” “He may use them till their sap dry out.”
“And he who binds the dry in bundles?” “He may use them till the second
rain descends.”(81) “The leaves of reeds and the leaves of vines?” “They
may be used till they fall from their stems.” “And he who binds the dry in
bundles?” “He may use them till the second rain descends.” Rabbi Akiba
said, “they may be used by all persons till the second rain descends.”

7. “Like to this rule is his case who rented a house to his neighbor till
the rains?” “This means till the second rain descends.” “He who by his vow
cannot get assistance from his neighbor till the rains?” “This means till
the second rain descends.” “When may the poor enter into the gardens?”(82)
“When the second rain descends.” “When may they use and burn the stubble
and straw of the Sabbatical year?” “When the second rain descends.”

8. “A man had fruit of the Sabbatical year, and the time came for clearing
it out from his house?” “He may divide to everyone victuals for three
meals; and the poor may eat the fruit after the clearing of it out, but
not the rich.” The words of Rabbi Judah. Rabbi José said, “the poor and
the rich are alike, they may eat it after it is cleared out.”

9. “A man had fruits of the Sabbatical year, whether they fell to him by
inheritance, or were given to him by gift?” R. Eliezer said, “let them be
given to those who may eat them.” But the Sages say, “the transgressor
must not profit, but let them be sold to those who may eat them, and let
their price be divided to every man.” “He who eats dough of the Sabbatical
year before the heave-offering be separated from it?” “He is guilty of
death.”



Chapter X


1. The Sabbatical year releases(83) a loan, whether it be with or without
a bill. The credit of a shop is not released. But if one made it as a
loan, it is released. Rabbi Judah said, “all the first credit is released,
the wages of an hireling is not released.” “But if one made it as a loan?”
“It is released.” Rabbi José said, “every work which ceases on the
Sabbatical year is released; but that which does not cease on the
Sabbatical year is not released from payment.”

2. The butcher who slaughtered a heifer (at the end of the Sabbatical
year), and divided her head (for sale on the first of the two feast days
of the new year), remains a debtor; but if he did so in an intercalary
month,(84) he is released (Deut. xv. 1). But if it be not an intercalary
month, he is not released. He who forced, or enticed, or uttered a
slander, and every act of the tribunal, have no release. “He who lent on
security, or delivered his bills to the tribunal?” “There is no release
for him.”

3. The Defence(85) (for the poor) has no release. This is one of the
things which the old Hillel ruled. When he saw that the people refrained
from mutual loans, and transgressed what is written in the law, “Beware
that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart,”(86) etc., Hillel ruled
the Defence.

4. This is the substance of the Defence, “I hand over to you judges such
and such men in such a place, that every debt which belongs to me I may
collect, whenever I please.” And the judges or witnesses sealed it below.

5. The Defence written before the Sabbatical year is valid, but afterward
it is disallowed. Bills written before the Sabbatical year are disallowed,
but afterward they are valid. He who borrows from five persons must write
a Defence for each of them. If five persons borrow from one, he writes but
one Defence for all of them.

6. Men must not write a Defence save only on ground. “If he have none?”
“The lender may present him with however little from his own field.” “If
he had a field in pledge in a city?” “He may write on it the Defence.”
Rabbi Huzpith said, “a man may write it on the property of his wife; and
for orphans on the property of their guardians.”

7. “Beehives?” R. Eliezer said, “they are as ground, and men may write on
them a Defence, and they contract no legal uncleanness in their proper
place, but he who takes honey out of them on the Sabbath is liable (for a
sin-offering). The Sages, however, say they are not as ground, and men
must not write on them a Defence, and they do contract legal defilement in
their place, and he who takes honey out of them on the Sabbath is free.”

8. “He who paid his debt on the Sabbatical year?” “The lender must say to
him, ‘I release thee.’ ” “When he said it to him?” “Even so, he may
receive it from him, as is said, and this is the manner of the
release.”(87) It is like the slayer who was banished to the city of
refuge, and the men of the city wished to honor him. He must say to them,
“I am a murderer.” They say to him, “Even so.” He may receive the honor
from them, as is said, “and this is the case of the slayer.”(88)

9. “He who pays a debt in the Sabbatical year?” “The spirit of the Sages
reposes on him.”(89) “He who borrowed from a proselyte, when his
children(90) became proselytes with him?” “He need not repay his
children.” “But if he repay them?” “The spirit of the Sages reposes on
him.” All movables become property by acquisition; but everyone who keeps
his word,

THE SPIRIT
OF THE SAGES
REPOSES
ON
HIM.

NOTE.—At the Feast of Tabernacles in the Sabbatical year, the following
portions of Scripture were appointed to be read: Deut. i. 1-6; vi. 4-8;
xi. 13-22; xiv. 22; xv. 23; xvii. 14; xxvi. 12-19; xxvii.; xxviii. These
portions were read by the king or high priest from a wooden platform
erected in the Temple. The king or the high priest usually read them
sitting. King Agrippa, however, read them standing, and when he came to
the words “Thou mayst not set a stranger over thee, which is not thy
brother” (Deut. xvii. 15), “tears dropped from his eyes.” The people then
cried out to encourage him, “Thou art our brother—thou art our brother.”
(Sotah, vii. 8).




On The Sabbath


    Removals—Work to be Avoided—Discussion Between the Schools of
    Shammai and Hillel as to What Constitutes Work—Work
    Allowed—Lighting—Eve of the Sabbath—Cooking and Hot
    Water—Retention of Heat—Burdens—Ornaments—Principal and Secondary
    Work.



