Chapter III


1. The altar was thirty-two cubits square. It ascended a cubit and receded
a cubit. This was the foundation. It remains thirty cubits square. It
ascended five cubits, and receded one cubit. This is the circumference. It
remains twenty-eight cubits square. The place for the horns was a cubit on
each side. It remains twenty-six cubits square. The place of the path for
the feet of the priests was a cubit on each side. The hearth remains
twenty-four cubits square. Rabbi José said, “at first it was only
twenty-eight cubits square.” It receded and ascended until the hearth
remained twenty cubits square; but when the children of the captivity came
up, they added to it four cubits on the north, and four cubits on the
west, like a gamma it is said; and the altar was twelve cubits long by
twelve broad, being a square. One might say it was only “a square of
twelve,”(577) as is said. Upon its four sides we learn that it measured
from the middle twelve cubits to every side. And a line of red paint
girdled it in the midst to separate the blood sprinkled above from the
blood sprinkled below. And the foundation was a perfect walk along on the
north side; and all along on the west, but it wanted in the south one
cubit, and in the east one cubit.(578)

2. And in the southwestern corner were two holes as two thin nostrils,
that the blood poured upon the western and southern foundation should run
into them; and it commingled in a canal and flowed out into the Kidron.

3. Below in the plaster in the same corner there was a place a cubit
square, with a marble tablet, and a ring fastened in it. Through it they
descended to the sewer and cleansed it. And there was a sloping
ascent(579) to the south of the altar, thirty-two cubits long by sixteen
broad. In its western side was a closet, where they put the birds unmeet
for the sin-offering.

4. Either the stones of the sloping ascent, or the stones of the altar
were from the valley of Bethcerem.(580) And they digged deeper than virgin
soil, and brought from thence perfect stones over which iron(581) was not
waved. For the iron defiles by touching. And a scratch defiles everything.
In any of them a scratch defiled, but the others were lawful. And they
whitewashed them twice in the year; once at the passover, and once at the
feast of Tabernacles. And the Sanctuary (was whitewashed) once at the
passover. The Rabbi said, “every Friday evening they whitewashed them with
a mop on account of the blood.” They did not plaster it with an iron
trowel, “mayhap it will touch and defile.” Since iron is made to shorten
the days of man, and the altar is made to lengthen the days of man, it is
not lawful, that what shortens should be waved over what lengthens.

5. And there were rings to the northern side of the altar, six rows of
four each: though some say four rows of six each. Upon them the priests
slaughtered the holy beasts. The slaughter-house was at the north side of
the altar. And in it were eight dwarf pillars with a beam of cedar-wood
over them. And in them were fastened iron hooks—three rows to each pillar.
Upon them they hung up (the bodies), and skinned them upon marble tables
between the pillars.

6. The laver was between the porch and the altar, but inclined more to the
south. Between the porch and the altar were twenty-two cubits, and there
were twelve steps. The height of each step was half a cubit, and its
breadth a cubit—a cubit—a cubit—a landing three cubits—a cubit—a cubit and
a landing three cubits. And the upper one a cubit—a cubit, and the landing
four cubits. Rabbi Jehudah said, “the upper one a cubit—a cubit, and the
landing five cubits.”

7. The doorway of the porch was forty cubits high, and twenty broad. Over
it were five carved oak beams. The lower one extended beyond the doorway a
cubit on either side. The one over it extended a cubit on either side. It
follows that the uppermost was thirty cubits; and between each one there
was a row of stones.

8. And stone buttresses were joined from the wall of the sanctuary to the
wall of the porch, lest it should bulge. And in the roof of the porch were
fastened golden chains, upon which the young priests climbed up, and saw
the crowns. As it is said, “And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to
Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen, the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial
in the temple of the Lord.”(582) And over the doorway of the sanctuary was
a golden vine supported upon the buttresses. Everyone who vowed a leaf, or
a berry, or a cluster, he brought it and hung it upon it. Said Rabbi
Eleazar, the son of Zadok, “it is a fact, and there were numbered 300
priests to keep it bright.”

OUR BEAUTY BE UPON THEE, O ALTAR.



Chapter IV


1. The doorway of the Sanctuary(583) was twenty cubits in height, and ten
in breadth. And it had four doors, two within and two without, as is said,
“Two doors to the temple and the holy place.”(584) The outside (doors)
opened into the doorway to cover the thickness of the wall, and the inside
doors opened into the Sanctuary to cover (the space) behind the doors,
because the whole house was overlaid with gold excepting behind the doors.
Rabbi Judah said, “they stood in the middle of the doorway, and like a
pivot these folded behind them two cubits and a half; and those two cubits
and a half, half a cubit and a jamb on this side, and half a cubit and a
jamb on the other side.” It is said, “two doors to two doors folding back,
two leaves to one door and two leaves to the other.”(585)

2. And the great gate had two wickets, one in the north, and one in the
south. Through the one in the south no man ever entered. And with regard
to it Ezekiel declared, as is said, “The Lord said unto me; this gate
shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it;
because the Lord, the God of Israel, hath entered in by it, therefore it
shall be shut.”(586) The priest took the key, and opened the wicket, and
went into the little chamber, and from the chamber to the Sanctuary. Rabbi
Judah said, “he went in the thickness of the wall, until he found himself
standing between the two gates, and he opened the outside gates from
inside, and the inside from outside.”

3. And there were thirty-eight little chambers, fifteen in the north,
fifteen in the south, and eight in the west. The northern and southern
ones were (placed) five over five, and five over them; and in the west
three over three, and two over them. To each were three doors: one to the
little chamber on the right, one to the little chamber on the left, and
one to the little chamber over it. And in the northeastern corner were
five gates: one to the little chamber on the right, and one to the little
chamber over, and one to the gallery, and one to the wicket, and one to
the Sanctuary.

4. The lowest row was five cubits, and the roofing six cubits, and the
middle row six, and the roofing seven, and the upper was seven, as is
said, “the nethermost chamber was five cubits broad, and the middle six
cubits broad, and the third seven cubits broad.”(587)

5. And a gallery ascended from the northeastern corner to the southwestern
corner. Through it they went up to the roofs of the little chambers. One
went up in the gallery with his face to the west. So he proceeded all
along the northern side, till he reached the west. On reaching the west,
he turned his face southward, going along the west side, till he reached
the south. On reaching the south, with his face to the east, he went along
the south side till he arrived at the door of the upper story, because the
door of the upper story opened in the south side. And at the door of the
upper story were two cedar beams. By them they went up to the roof of the
upper story, and on its summit rails separated between the Holy and the
Holy of Holies. And in the attic, trap-doors opened to the Holy of Holies.
Through them they let down the workmen in boxes, lest they should feast
their eyes in the Holy of Holies.

6. The Sanctuary was a square of 100 cubits, and its height 100. The
foundation six cubits, and the height (of the wall) forty cubits, and the
string course(588) one cubit, and the rain channel two cubits, and the
beams one cubit, and the covering plaster one cubit; and the height of the
upper story was forty cubits, and the string course one cubit, and the
rain channel two cubits, and the beams one cubit, and the covering plaster
one cubit, and the battlement three cubits, and the scarecrow one cubit.
Rabbi Judah said, “the scarecrow was not counted in the measurement; but
the battlement was four cubits.”

7. From east to west there were 100 cubits, the wall of the porch five,
and the porch eleven, and the wall of the Sanctuary six, and the interior
forty, and the partition space (between the Vails) one, and the Holy of
Holies twenty cubits. The wall of the Sanctuary was six, and the little
chamber six, and the wall of the little chamber five. From north to south
there were seventy (cubits). The wall of the gallery five, the gallery
three, the wall of the little chamber five, the little chamber six, the
wall of the Sanctuary six, its interior twenty, the wall of the Sanctuary
six, the little chamber six, the wall of the little chamber five, the
place of the descent of the water three, and the wall five cubits. The
porch was extended beyond it fifteen cubits in the north, and fifteen in
the south; and this space was called, “the house of the instruments of
slaughter,” because the knives were there deposited. And the Sanctuary was
narrow behind and broad in the front, and it was like a lion, as is said,
“Ho! Ariel, the city where David dwelt,(589) as a lion is narrow behind
and broad in front, so the Sanctuary is narrow behind and broad in front.”

OUR BEAUTY BE UPON THEE, DOOR OF THE SANCTUARY.



