Chapter X


1. Everything suited for causing legal uncleanness in that which is
trodden must be expelled from the ceremony of purification, whether it be
unclean or clean, and man likewise. “Everything suited for producing
defilement of the dead, whether it be unclean or clean?” R. Eliezer said,
“it is not expelled.” R. Joshua said, “it is expelled.” But the Sages say,
“if unclean it is expelled, but the clean thing is not expelled.”

2. He who is cleansed for purification, when he touches that which is
expelled, is unclean. A jug for purification, when it touches that which
is expelled, is unclean. He who is cleansed for purification, when he
touches eatable or drinkable things with his hand, is unclean. “But with
his foot?” “He is clean.” “The thing was moved with his hand?” R. Joshua
pronounces him “unclean”; but the Sages pronounce him “clean.”

3. “An earthen vessel for purification, which touched a creeping thing?”
“It is clean.” “It was placed upon it?” R. Eleazar pronounces it “clean”;
but the Sages pronounce it “unclean.” “It touched eatable or drinkable
things or holy writings?” “It is clean.” “It was placed upon them?” R.
José pronounced it “clean”; but the Sages pronounced it “unclean.”

4. “When he who was cleansed for purification touched a fireplace(752)
with his hand?” “He is unclean.” “But with his foot?” “He is clean.” “He
stood on the fireplace, and stretched his hand with the jug, and the water
and ashes in it beyond the fireplace, and also the shoulder-pole, which he
placed over the fireplace, and on it were two earthen vessels, one on
either side?” R. Akiba pronounces him “clean”;(753) but the Sages
pronounce him “unclean.”

5. “He stood outside the fireplace, and stretched his hand to the window,
and took the jug (with water and ashes) and passed it over the fireplace?”
R. Akiba pronounces him “unclean,” but the Sages pronounce him “clean.”
But he who was cleansed for purification, may stand over the fireplace,
and in his hand an empty vessel cleansed for purification or (one) with
water without ashes.

6. “When a jug for purification touched (one) in which there were holy
things, or one in which there was a heave-offering?” “The one for
purification is unclean; but those of the holy things and the
heave-offering are clean.” “If both be in his two hands?” “Both are
unclean.” “If both be in two papers?” “Both are clean.” “If the one for
purification be in paper, and the one for the heave-offering be in his
hand?” “Both are unclean.” “If the one for the heave-offering be in paper,
and the one for purification be in his hand?” “Both are clean.” R. Joshua
said, “the one for the purification is unclean.” “They were placed on the
ground and one touched them?” “The one for purification is unclean, the
one containing the holy things, and the one with the heave-offering are
clean.” “He moved them?” R. Joshua pronounces them “unclean,” but the
Sages pronounce them “clean.”



Chapter XI


1. “A pan for purification which one left open, and he found it covered?”
“It is disallowed.” “He left it open and found a covering on it?” “If a
weasel could drink of it, or a serpent, according to the words of Rabban
Gamaliel, or there fell in it dew by night, it is disallowed.” Water with
ashes cannot be saved (from legal impurity) by the covering(754) bound
upon it. And water in which there are no ashes, is saved by the covering
bound upon it.

2. Every doubt implies cleanness in the heave-offering and cleanness in
purification. Every reason for suspense in the heave-offering causes
pouring away of the water in purification. If acts requiring legal
cleanness be afterward performed, they are in suspense. Shallow water(755)
is clean for holy things, and the heave-offering and purification. R.
Eleazar said, “trickling water(756) is unclean for purification.”

3. “A dried fig of the heave-offering which has fallen into water for
purification, and one has taken it out and eaten it?” “If it be the size
of an egg, whether it be unclean or clean, the water is unclean, and he
who ate it is guilty of death.” R. José said, “if it be clean the water is
clean.” He who was cleansed for the sin-offering, and afterward put his
head and the greater part of his body into water of purification, is
unclean.

4. Everyone charged by the words of the Law to enter water, renders
unclean holy things, and the heave-offering and ordinary things and the
tithe, and is prevented from entering the temple. “After entering (the
water) he renders unclean holy things, and disallows the heave-offering,”
the words of R. Meier, but the Sages say, “he disallows holy things and
the heave-offering, but he is permitted in ordinary things and tithes, and
if he came to the temple, whether before or after entering (water), he is
a debtor (to the Law).”

5. “Everyone charged by the words of the Scribes to enter water, renders
unclean holy things, and disallows the heave-offering, but allows ordinary
things and the tithes,” the words of R. Meier; but the Sages “disallow him
in tithes.” After his entering (water) he is permitted in all these. And
if he come to the temple whether before or after entering water, he is
free.

6. Everyone charged to enter water, whether by the words of the Law or the
words of the Scribes, renders unclean the water for purification and the
ashes for purification, and the sprinkler of the water of purification, by
touching or lifting. “The hyssop, and the water without ashes, and empty
vessels cleansed for purification (render unclean), by touching or
lifting,” the words of R. Meier; but the Sages say, “by touching, but not
by lifting.”

7. All hyssop which has a distinctive name is forbidden, simple hyssop is
allowed; Grecian hyssop, colored hyssop, Roman hyssop, desert hyssop, are
forbidden, and that of the unclean heave-offering is forbidden, but if it
were of the clean (heave-offering) one should not sprinkle with it, but if
one sprinkled with it, it is allowed. Men must not sprinkle with the
sprouts or the berries of hyssop. When sprinkled with the sprouts, they
are not prevented from entering the temple. R. Eliezer said, “not even
with the berries.” These are sprouts—stalks which have not ripened.

8. Hyssop used for sprinkling is allowed to cleanse the leper. “If one
gathered it for wood, and fluid fell on it?” “He may dry it, and it is
allowed.” “If one gathered it for food, and fluid fell on it?” “Even
though he dried it, it is disallowed.” “If one gathered it for
purification?” “It is reckoned as food,” the words of R. Meier. R. Judah
and R. José and R. Simon say, “it is reckoned as wood.”

9. The order of the hyssop (requires) three roots, and in them three
stalks. R. Judah said, “to every root three stalks.” Hyssop which has
three roots is to be separated and bound; if separated and not bound, if
bound and not separated, if neither separated nor bound, it is allowed. R.
José said, “the order of the hyssop is three roots and in them three
stalks, and if there remain over from sprinkling two, and their fibres
however small, they are allowed.”



