Chapter I


1. Moses received the Oral Law from Sinai and delivered it to Joshua, and
Joshua delivered it to the elders, and the elders to the prophets, and the
prophets to the men of the great synagogue.(467) They said three things,
“be deliberate in judgment, raise up many disciples, and make a fence for
the law.”

2. Simon the Just was one of the last of the men of the great synagogue.
He used to say that the world stood on three things—“on the law, the
service, and the acts of the pious.”

3. Antigonus of Soco received (the law) from Simon the Just. He used to
say, “be not as servants, who serve their master for the sake of receiving
a reward, but be like servants who serve their master without the view of
receiving a reward; and let the fear of heaven be upon you.”

4. José, son of Joezer of Zeredah, and José, son of Jochanan of Jerusalem,
received (the oral law) from him. José, son of Joezer of Zeredah, said,
“let thy house be a house of assembly for the wise, and dust thyself with
the dust of their feet, and drink their words in thirstiness.”

5. José, son of Jochanan of Jerusalem, said, “let thy house be wide open,
and let the poor be thy children. Discourse not much with women, not even
with thy wife, much less with thy neighbor’s wife.” Hence the wise men
say, “whoever converses much with women brings evil on himself, neglects
the study of the law, and at last will inherit hell.”

6. Joshua, son of Perechiah, and Natai the Arbelite received the oral law
from them. Joshua, son of Perechiah, said, “get thyself a master, and
obtain a companion, and judge all mankind with favor.”

7. Natai the Arbelite said, “withdraw from an evil neighbor, and associate
not with the wicked, neither flatter thyself to escape punishment.”

8. Judah, son of Tabai, and Simon, son of Shetach, received it of them.
Judah, son of Tabai, said, “consider not thyself as the arranger of the
law, and when the parties are before thee in judgment, consider them as
guilty; but when they are departed from thee, consider them as innocent,
when they have acquiesced in the sentence.”

9. Simon, son of Shetach, said, “be extremely careful in the examination
of witnesses, and be cautious in thy words, lest they from thence should
learn to utter a falsehood.”

10. Shemaiah and Abtalyon(468) received it from them. Shemaiah said, “love
thy business and hate dominion, and be unknown to government.”

11. Abtalyon said, “ye Sages, be cautious of your words, lest ye be doomed
to captivity, and carried captive to a place of bad waters, and the
disciples who follow you should drink of them, by which means the name of
God may be profaned.”

12. Hillel and Shammai received it of them. Hillel said, “be thou of the
disciples of Aaron, who loved peace, and pursued peace, so that thou love
mankind, and allure them to the study of the law.”

13. He used to say, “whoever aggrandizes his name, destroys his name, and
he who does not increase his knowledge in the law, shall be cut off, and
he who does not study the law, is deserving of death, and he who serves
himself with the crown of the law, will perish.”

14. He also said, “if I perform not good works myself, who can do them for
me?” and “when I consider myself, what am I?” and “if not now, when shall
I?”

15. Shammai said, “let thy study of the law be fixed, say little and do
much, and receive all men with an open, pleasant face.”

16. Rabban Gamaliel said, “procure thyself an instructor, that thou mayest
not be in doubt, and accustom not thyself to give tithes by conjecture.”

17. Simon, his son, said, “I have all my life been brought up among wise
men, and never found anything so good for the body as silence, neither is
the study of the law the principal thing, but its practice,” and “whoever
multiplies words causes sin.”

18. Rabban Simon, son of Gamaliel, said the duration of the world depends
on three things, justice, truth, and peace, as is said, “judge truth, and
justice, and peace in your gates.”



Chapter II


1. Rabbi Judah said, “which are the most eligible paths for man to choose?
All such as are an ornament to those who tread therein; and get them honor
from man. Be also as careful of the observance of a light precept, as of a
weighty one; because thou knowest not the due reward of the precepts, and
balance the loss sustained by the omission of a precept against its
recompense, and the reward of sin against its loss of happiness. Consider
also three things, and thou wilt not transgress. Understand what is above
thee: an All-seeing Eye and a Hearing Ear; and that all thy actions are
written in a Book.”

2. Rabban Gamaliel, the son of Rabban Judah the Prince, said, “that the
study of the law and intercourse with the world are commendable together,
as the joining of these two annihilates sin; and all the study of the law,
that is not supported by business, will become of none effect, and will be
the cause of sin; and whoever is engaged in the service of the
congregation, ought to act for God’s sake, then will the merit of their
ancestors support them, and their charitable deeds exist to eternity; and
I (God) shall account you deserving of a great recompense, as if ye had
actually done it.”

3. “Be ye warned of following princes, as they only bestow favors on men
for their own interest. They show themselves as friends while men are
useful to them; but they will not support a man in time of need.”

4. He used to say, “do His will as if it were thine own will, that He may
accomplish thy will as if it were His will; abolish thy will for the sake
of His will, that He may abolish the will of others for the sake of thy
will.” Hillel said, “separate not thyself from the congregation, nor have
confidence in thyself, until the day of thy death. Judge not thy neighbor
till thou art in his situation, neither utter a sentence as if it were
incomprehensible, that afterward may be comprehended, nor say, when I
shall have leisure I shall study; mayhap thou wilt not have leisure.”

5. He also said, “a boor cannot be fearful of sin, nor can a rustic be a
saint; the bashful will not become learned, nor the passionate man a
teacher; neither will he, who is much engaged in traffic, become wise; and
where there are no men, strive thou to be a man.”

6. He having also seen a skull floating on the water, said, “because thou
didst make others float, have they floated thee! and the end of those who
made thee float will be that they will float.”

7. He also said, “he who increases flesh, increases worms; he who
increases riches, increases care; he who increases wives, increases
witchcraft; he who increases female servants, increases lewdness; he who
increases men servants, increases robbery; but he who increases his
knowledge of the law, increases life; he who increases his study in
college, increases wisdom; he who increases counsel, increases prudence;
he who increases justice, increases peace; if a man have gained a good
name, he has gained it for himself; if he have gained the words of the
law, he has gained for himself everlasting life in the world to come.”

8. Rabbi Jochanan, son of Zaccai, received the oral law from Hillel and
Shammai. He used to say, “if thou hast spent much time in the study of the
law, yet pride not thyself thereon, because for that wast thou created.”
Rabbi Jochanan, son of Zaccai, had five disciples, and these are they:
Rabbi Eleazar, son of Hyrcanus, Rabbi Joshua, son of Chananya, Rabbi José
the priest, Rabbi Simon, son of Nathanael, Rabbi Eleazar, son of Arach. He
used thus to estimate their merits: “R. Eleazar, son of Hyrcanus, is as a
well-plastered cistern which loses not a drop; Joshua, son of Chananya,
happy are his parents; José the priest is a saint; Simon, son of
Nathanael, fears sin; Eleazar, son of Arach, is a mighty spring.” He used
to say, “if all the Sages of Israel were in one scale of the balance, and
R. Eleazar, son of Hyrcanus, in the other, he would outweigh them all.”
Abba Saul said in his name, “if all the Sages of Israel were in one scale,
and even R. Eleazar, son of Hyrcanus, with them, and R. Eleazar, son of
Arach, in the other, he would outweigh them all.”

9. He also said to them, “go forth and consider which is the good path for
man to cleave to?” To this R. Eleazar answered, “a good eye.” R. Joshua
said, “a good companion.” R. José said, “a good neighbor.” R. Simon said,
“he who foresees the future.” R. Eleazar said, “a good heart.” He then
said to them, “I prefer the words of R. Eleazar, son of Arach, above
yours, as his words include yours.” He also said to them, “go forth and
consider which is the bad way that man should shun”; to which R. Eleazar
said, “a bad eye.” R. Joshua said, “a bad companion.” R. José said, “a bad
neighbor.” R. Simon said, “he who borrows and pays not; for when one
borrows from man, it is as if he borrows from God, as is said, ‘The wicked
borroweth and payeth not again; but the righteous showeth mercy and
giveth.’ ”(469) R. Eleazar said, “a bad heart.” He then said to them, “I
prefer the words of R. Eleazar, son of Arach, above yours, as his words
include yours.”

10. They also said three things. R. Eleazar said, “let the honor of thy
companion be as dear to thee as thine own; and be not easily moved to
anger; and repent one day before thy death; and warm thyself by the fire
of the Sages, and be careful that their coal does not burn thee, for their
bite is as a bite of a fox, and their sting is as the sting of a scorpion,
and their burn is the burn of a fiery serpent, and all their words are as
fiery coals.”

11. R. Joshua said, “the bad eye, the bad thought, and envy of companions,
cause the death of man.”

12. R. José said, “let thy companion’s property be as dear to thee as
thine own; and prepare thyself to study the law, as it cometh not to thee
by inheritance; and let all thine actions be in the name of God.”

13. R. Simon said, “be careful of reading the ‘Hear,’(470) etc., and the
other prayers; and when thou art praying consider not thy prayer as fixed,
but as supplicating mercy in the presence of the Supreme, as is said, ‘For
He is gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great kindness, and
repenteth Him of the evil’;(471) and be not impious in thine own sight.”

14. R. Eleazar said, “be diligent to study the law, that thou mayest know
how to confute the Epicurean; consider also in whose presence thou art
laboring, for the Master of thy work is faithful to pay thee the reward of
thy labor.”

15. R. Tarphon said, “the day is short, the labor vast, but the laborers
are slothful, though the reward is great, and the Master of the house
presseth for despatch.”

16. He used to say, “it is not incumbent upon thee to complete the work,
neither art thou free to cease from it. If thou hast studied the law,
great shall be thy reward; for the Master of thy work is faithful to pay
the reward of thy labor; but know that the reward of the righteous is in
the world to come.”



