Chapter I


1. “From what time do we recite the Shemah(8) in the evening?” “From the
hour the priests(9) enter (the temple) to eat their heave offerings, until
the end of the first watch.”(10) The words of R. Eleazar; but the Sages
say “until midnight.” Rabban Gamaliel says, “until the pillar of the morn
ascend.” It happened that his sons came from a banquet. They said to him,
“we have not yet said the Shemah.” He said to them, “if the pillar of the
morn be not yet ascended, you are bound to say it; and not only this, but
all that the Sages say, ‘till midnight,’ they command till the pillar of
the morn ascend.” The burning of the fat and members they command “till
the pillar of the morn ascend.” And all offerings, which must be eaten the
same day, they command “till the pillar of the morn ascend.” If so, why do
the Sages say “until midnight”? “To withhold man from transgression.”

2. “From what time do we recite the Shemah in the morning?” When one can
discern betwixt “blue and white.” R. Eleazar says “betwixt blue and leek
green.” And it may be finished “until the sun shine forth.” R. Joshua says
“until the third hour.”(11) For such is the way of royal princes to rise
at the third hour. He who recites Shemah afterward loses nothing. He is
like a man reading the Law.

3. The school of Shammai say that in the evening all men are to recline
when they recite the Shemah; and in the morning they are to stand up; for
it is said, “when thou liest down and when thou risest up.”(12) But the
school of Hillel say, that every man is to recite it in his own way; for
it is said, “when thou walkest by the way.”(13) If so, why is it said,
“when thou liest down and when thou risest up”? “When mankind usually lie
down, and when mankind usually rise up.” R. Tarphon said, “I came on the
road, and reclined to recite the Shemah according to the words of the
school of Shammai, and I was in danger of robbers.” The Sages said to him,
“thou wast guilty against thyself, because thou didst transgress the words
of the school of Hillel.”

4. In the morning two blessings are said before (the Shemah), and one
after it; and in the evening two blessings before and two after it, one
long and one short.(14) Where the (Sages) have said to lengthen, none is
allowed to shorten; and to shorten none is allowed to lengthen: to close,
none is allowed not to close; not to close, none is allowed to close.

5. We commemorate the departure from Egypt at night; said R. Eleazar, son
of Azariah, “truly I am a son of seventy years, and was not clear that
thou shouldst say the departure from Egypt at night until the son of Zoma
expounded, ‘that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out
of the land of Egypt all the days of thy life;’(15) the days of thy life
(are) days; all the days of thy life (include) the nights.” But the Sages
say, “the days of thy life (are) this world; all the days of thy life
(include) the days of the Messiah.”



Chapter II


1. “If one who is reading in the Law when the time comes for praying
intends it in his heart?” “He is free.” “But if not?” “He is not free.”
“At the end of the sections one salutes out of respect, and responds; but
in the middle of a section he salutes from fear, and responds.” Such are
the words of R. Mair. R. Judah says, “in the middle he salutes from fear,
and responds out of respect; at the end he salutes out of respect, and
repeats peace to every man.”

2. The intervals of the sections are between the first blessing and the
second—between the second and “Hear, O Israel;” between “Hear” and “it
shall come to pass;”(16) between “and it shall come to pass” and “and he
said;”(17) between “and he said” and “it is true and certain.”(18) Said R.
Judah, “between ‘and he said’ and ‘it is true and certain,’ none is to
pause.” R. Joshua, the son of Korcha, said, “Why does the (section)
‘Hear,’ etc., precede ‘and it shall come to pass’? ‘That one may take on
himself the kingdom of heaven, before he take on himself the yoke of the
commandments.’ Why does (the section) ‘and it shall come to pass’ precede
‘and he said’? Because ‘and it shall come to pass’ may be practised by day
and by night;(19) but ‘and he said,’ etc., only by day.”(20)

3. He who recites the Shemah so as not to be audible to his own ears, is
legally free.(21) R. José says “he is not legally free.” “If he has said
it without grammar and pronunciation?” R. José says “he is legally free.”
R. Judah says “he is not legally free.” “If he said it irregularly?” “He
is not legally free.” “In recitation he mistook?” “He must recommence from
the place where he mistook.”

4. Laborers may recite the Shemah on the top of a tree, or of a wall, but
they are not allowed to do so with the prayer.(22)

5. A bridegroom is exempted from reciting the Shemah on the first night of
marriage, and, even until the expiration of the Sabbath if the marriage be
not complete. It happened that Rabban Gamaliel recited on the first night.
His disciples said to him, “hast thou not taught us, our master, that a
bridegroom is exempted from reciting Shemah on the first night?” He said
to them, “I will not hear you, to deprive myself of the yoke of the
kingdom of heaven even one hour.”

6. He (R. Gamaliel) bathed on the first night of his wife’s death. His
disciples said to him, “hast thou not taught us, our master, that a
mourner is forbidden to bathe?” He said to them, “I am not like all other
men; I am infirm.”

7. When his slave Tabbi died, he received visits of condolence. His
disciples said to him, “hast thou not taught us, our master, that visits
of condolence are not to be received for slaves?” He said to them, “my
slave Tabbi was not like all other slaves, he was upright.”

8. The bridegroom who wishes to recite the Shemah on the first night may
recite it. R. Simeon, the son of Gamaliel, said, “not every one who wishes
to affect the pious reputation can affect it.”



