Chapter I


1. A quarter-log(760) of water is poured on the hands of one person; also
on the hands of two persons. Half a log on three or four. From a log for
five, ten, or even 100 (persons). R. José says, “provided there be not
less for the last than a quarter-log.” Men may add (water) for the second
washing,(761) but they must not add it for the first.

2. They may put water for hands in all vessels, even in vessels of dung or
vessels of stone or vessels of earth. But they must not pour it on hands
out of the (broken) sides of vessels or the bottom of a tub or the bung of
a cask. Nor may one give it to his neighbor out of the hollow of his hand:
because they must not draw or consecrate, or sprinkle the water of
purification, or put it on hands, except it be in a vessel. They can only
preserve vessels by the covering bound(762) upon them. Nor can they
preserve from uncleanness water in open earthen vessels,(763) only in
(covered) vessels.

3. Water which is unfit for animals to drink, is unfit (for washing) in
vessels; but on the ground it is fit. If ink, gum, or vitriol black drop
into it, and its color be changed, it is unfit. If one made use of it, or
soaked his bread in it, it is unfit. Simeon the Temanite said, “even if he
intended to soak it in one vessel and it dropped into another, it is fit.”

4. If one rinsed vessels in it, or rinsed out measures, it is unfit. If
one rinsed in it vessels already washed, or new ones, it is fit. R. José
“disallows it for new vessels.”

5. Water in which the baker had dipped rolls, is unfit; but if he only
dipped in his hands, it is fit. All are allowed to pour water on hands,
even one deaf, an idiot, or a minor. A man may rest a cask between his
knees and pour it. He may incline the barrel on its side and pour it. An
ape may pour water on hands. R. José “disallows these two cases.”



Chapter II


1. “If one poured on his hand one gush?” “His hand is clean.” “If on both
hands one gush?” R. Meier pronounces them “unclean, until one poured out
of a quarter-log (vessel) upon them.” “If a heave-loaf fall (on the
water)?” “It is clean.” R. José “pronounces it unclean.”

2. “If one poured out his first (ablution) in one place, and his second in
another place, and a heave-loaf fall on the first?” “It is unclean.” “If
on the second?” “It is clean.” “If one poured out both the first and
second (ablutions) into one place, and a heave-loaf fall on them?” “It is
unclean.” “If one poured out his first ablution, and find on his hand a
splinter or small stone?” “His hands are unclean, as the second water only
purifies the first washing on the hand.”(764) R. Simon, the son of
Gamaliel, says, “whatsoever is a creation of the water is clean.”

3. The hands become legally unclean, or legally clean up to the wrist.
“How?” “If one poured the first (ablution) up to the wrist, and the second
above the wrist, and the water ran back into the hand?” “It is clean.” “If
one poured the first and second (ablutions) above the wrist, and the water
ran back into the hand?” “It is unclean.” “If one poured the first
(ablution) over one hand, and afterward the second over both hands?” “They
are unclean.” “If one poured the first (ablution) over both hands, and
afterward the second over one hand?” “His hand is clean.” “If one poured
water on one hand and then rubbed it against its fellow?” “It is unclean.”
“If he rubbed it against his head, or against the wall?” “It is clean.”
Men may pour water over four or five persons alongside of each other, or
above each other, provided they be separated, so that the water can come
on them.

4. “There is a doubt if the water has been used, there is a doubt if it
has not been used; there is a doubt if it be the prescribed quantity,
there is a doubt if it be not the prescribed quantity: there is a doubt if
it be (legally) unclean, there is a doubt if it be (legally) clean?” “In
doubting he is clean,” because the Sages said, “if there be a doubt of his
hands being unclean, or imparting uncleanness, or being clean, he is
clean.” R. José said, “if there be a doubt of cleanness it is
uncleanness.” “How?” “His hands are clean, and before him are two unclean
loaves, it is doubtful if he touched them, it is doubtful if he did not
touch them: his hands are unclean, and before him are two clean loaves, it
is doubtful if he touched them, it is doubtful if he did not touch them?”
“His hands are one unclean and one clean.” “And before him are two clean
loaves: he touched one of them, it is doubtful if he touched the unclean,
it is doubtful if he touched the clean?” “His hands are clean.” “And
before him are two loaves, one unclean and one clean, he touched one of
them, it is doubtful if he touched the unclean, it is doubtful if he
touched the clean?” “His hands are one unclean and one clean.” “And before
him are two loaves, one unclean and one clean, he touched both of them, it
is doubtful if it were the unclean (loaf) with the unclean (hand), or the
clean (loaf) with the clean (hand), or the clean loaf with the unclean
(hand), or the unclean loaf with the clean hand?” “The hands remain as
they were, and the loaves as they were.”(765)



Chapter III


1. “Whosoever puts his hands into a house smitten with leprosy?” “His
hands are unclean in a primary degree.”(766) The words of R. Akiba. But
the Sages say, “his hands are unclean in a secondary degree.”(767)
“Whatever renders garments unclean at the time of contact, renders hands
unclean in a primary degree.” The words of R. Akiba. But the Sages say,
“in a secondary degree.” They said to R. Akiba, “where do we find the
hands (unclean) in a primary degree?” “Everywhere,” he said to them; “and
how is it possible for them to be unclean in a primary degree, unless his
body is unclean, excepting this.”(768) “Victuals, and vessels which are
unclean through liquids, render hands unclean in a secondary degree.” The
words of R. Joshua. But the Sages say, “that which is unclean through a
source of uncleanness,(769) renders the hands unclean; but derived
uncleanness(770) does not render the hands unclean.” Rabban Simeon, the
son of Gamaliel, said, “it happened that a woman came before my father.
She said to him, ‘my hands entered into the hollow of an earthen vessel.’
He said to her, ‘my daughter, from what was its uncleanness?’ But I did
not hear what she said to him.” The Sages said, “the thing is clear, that
which is unclean through a source of uncleanness renders the hands
unclean; but derived uncleanness does not render the hands unclean.”

2. “Whatever disallows the heave-offering, renders the hands unclean in a
secondary degree. One hand can render the other hand unclean.” The words
of R. Joshua. But the Sages say, “a secondary cannot make a
secondary.”(771) He said to them, “and are not Holy Scriptures
secondaries, and they render the hands unclean?” They said to him, “we
cannot judge the words of the Law from the words of the scribes, nor the
words of the scribes from the words of the Law, nor the words of the
scribes from other words of the scribes.”

3. Straps of phylacteries with the phylacteries, render the hands unclean.
R. Simeon says, “the straps of phylacteries do not render the hands
unclean.”

4. The margin in a book of the Law, at the top and bottom, at the
beginning and end, renders the hands unclean. R. José says, “in the end it
does not render the hands unclean, until the roller be attached.”

5. A book of the Law which is erased, but in which there remain
eighty-five letters like the portion, “And it came to pass when the Ark
set forward,”(772) renders the hands unclean. Any roll in which there are
written eighty-five letters like the portion, “And it came to pass when
the Ark set forward,” renders the hands unclean. All sacred Scriptures
render the hands unclean. The Canticles and Ecclesiastes render the hands
unclean. R. Judah says, “Canticles render the hands unclean, but
Ecclesiastes is in dispute.” R. José says, “Ecclesiastes does not render
the hands unclean, but the Canticles are in dispute.” R. Simeon says,
“Ecclesiastes is one in which the school of Shammai is less strict, and
the school of Hillel more rigid.” R. Simeon, the son of Azai, said, “I
received by tradition from the mouths of the seventy-two elders, on the
day they inducted R. Eleazar, the son of Azariah, into the president’s
seat, that Canticles and Ecclesiastes render the hands unclean.” R. Akiba
said, “God forbid! no man in Israel ever questioned that the Canticles
render the hands unclean, as the whole world is not equal to the day on
which the Canticles were given to Israel; for all the Scriptures are holy,
but the Canticles are Holy of Holies. They only disputed in reference to
Ecclesiastes.” R. Jochanan, the son of Joshua, the son of R. Akiba’s
father-in-law, said, “according to the words of the son of Azai, thus they
disputed, and thus they decided.”



