Chapter XII


Moses made one LAVER, as is said, “Thou shalt also make a laver of
brass.”(686) Solomon made ten lavers, as is said, “He made also ten
lavers, and put five on the right hand, and five on the left, to
wash.”(687) “There is no meaning in saying ‘five on the right hand, and
five on the left,’ and what is the meaning of saying ‘five on the right
hand, and five on the left’?” “Five on the right of the laver of Moses,
and five on the left of the laver of Moses.” Solomon added to it when he
made the sea, as is said, “And he made a molten sea, ten cubits from the
one brim to the other; it was round all about, and his height was five
cubits; and a line of thirty cubits did compass it round about. And it was
an hand-breadth thick, and the brim thereof was wrought like the brim of a
cup, with flowers of lilies, it contained two thousand baths.”(688) It is
not possible to say “two thousand,” since before it is said “three
thousand,”(689) and it is not possible to say “three thousand,” since
before it is said “two thousand.” “How can it be?” “Two thousand liquid
make three thousand dry measure.” But you don’t know how much is the bath
until it be said, “The ephah and the bath contain one measure,”(690) “for
ten baths are a homer.” “Allow ten baths for every cur—there are 200 curs.
Subtract from them fifty curs, and allow fifty square, there are 150
cleansing-pools; since every pool contains forty seahs.” “And from whence
do we know that every pool contains forty seahs?” “As is said, ‘And bathe
his flesh in water,’(691) water to cover all his flesh.” “And how much is
it?” “A square cubit, in height three cubits.” From thence the Sages
judged the measure of a pool to be forty seahs. “And how can it contain
150 cleansing-pools, if thou shalt say it was all round?” “It could not
contain them.” “If thou shalt say it was all square?” “It therefore
contained more.” But the three lowest cubits were square; allow for ten
cubits square, there are 100 cubits. Allow for a hundred square; there are
100 cleansing-pools. The two highest cubits were round. Allow for ten
cubits square; there are seventy-five cubits. Allow for seventy-five
square; there are 150. Allow for fifty square; there are fifty
cleansing-pools; since the square exceeds the round by a fourth. “And
whence do we know that the square exceeds the round by a fourth?” “As is
said, ‘Ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, and a line of
thirty cubits did compass it round about.’ ”(692) This teaches that the
square exceeds the round by a fourth. “And whence do we know that it was
round above?” “As is said, ‘And it was an hand-breadth thick, and the brim
thereof was wrought like the brim of a cup.’ ” “And whence know we that it
was square below?” “As is said, ‘It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking
toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking
toward the south, and three looking toward the east.’ ”(693) And what is
meant by saying “looking toward” four times; but that when one entered the
temple he looked toward the right; when he entered into the court, he
looked toward the right; when he entered the Mountain of the House, he
looked toward the right; when the priest went up to the top of the altar,
he looked toward the right. “And under it was the similitude of oxen,
which did compass it round about, ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round
about. Two rows of oxen.”(694) It follows that (there were) four rows of
the heads of oxen, which served for the four sides, as is said, “And the
similitude of oxen, two rows of oxen were cast when it was cast.”(695) And
it was all cast even from the feet of the ox.



Chapter XIII


“How did the Levites guard the tabernacle?” “The family of Kohath watched
on the south, as is said, ‘The families of the sons of Kohath shall pitch
on the side of the tabernacle southward.’(696) And they were overseers of
the vessels of the ark, as is said, ‘And their charge shall be the ark,
and the table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the
sanctuary wherewith they minister, and the hanging and all the service
thereof.’(697) Outside of them were the three tribes of Reuben, Simeon,
Levi. The family of Gershon watched in the west, as is said, ‘The families
of the Gershonites shall pitch behind the tabernacle westward.’(698) And
they were intrusted with all the vessels of the tabernacle, as is said,
‘And they shall bear the curtains of the tabernacle, and the tabernacle of
the congregation.’(699) Outside of them were the three tribes of Ephraim,
and Manasseh, and Benjamin. The family of Merari watched on the north, as
is said, ‘And the chief of the house of the father of the families of
Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail: these shall pitch on the side of the
tabernacle northward.’(700) And they were intrusted with the taches, and
boards, and bars, and pillars, and the sockets of the tabernacle, as is
said, ‘And under the custody and charge of the sons of Merari shall be the
boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof,
and the sockets thereof.’(701) And outside of them were the three tribes
of Dan, Asher, and Naphtali. On the east were Moses, Aaron, and their
families, as is said, ‘But those that encamp before the tabernacle toward
the east, even before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward, shall
be Moses and Aaron and his sons.’(702) And outside of them were the three
tribes of Judah, Yissachar, and Zebulon. The whole encampment of Israel
was twelve miles. The standard of Judah was four miles, and the encampment
of the Levites, and the encampment of the SHECHINAH, four miles. The
standard of Reuben was four miles. The standard of Ephraim was four miles.
The encampment of the Levites and the encampment of the SHECHINAH was four
miles. And the encampment of Dan was four miles. It follows _that_ the
four corners of the tabernacle were four encampments for service on every
side, as is said, ‘Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set
forward with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp; as they
encamp so shall they set forward, every man in his place by their
standards.’(703) So soon as Israel set forward, the pillar of cloud which
was standing still rolled up and spread out over the children of Judah
like a kind of beam. The (trumpet) sounded, and blew an alarm, and
sounded, and the standard of Judah moved forward first, as is said, ‘In
the first place went the standard of the camp of the children of Judah
according to their armies.’(704) At once Aaron and his sons entered (the
Tabernacle) and took down the vail, and with it they covered the ark, as
is said, ‘And when the camp setteth forward, Aaron shall come and his
sons, and they shall take down the covering vail, and cover the ark of
testimony with it.’(705) The (trumpet) sounded, and blew an alarm, and
sounded, and the standard of the encampment of Reuben set forward. At once
the sons of Gershon, and the sons of Merari entered, and took down the
tabernacle, and loaded it on the wagon. And they set up the tabernacle
before the sons of Kohath came, as is said, ‘And the Kohathites set
forward, bearing the sanctuary; and the other did set up the tabernacle
against they came.’(706) And the trumpet sounded, and blew an alarm, and
sounded, and the standard of Ephraim moved forward; the children of Kohath
entered and took down the holy vessels, and loaded them on their
shoulders, as is said, ‘And when Aaron and his sons have made an end of
covering the sanctuary and all the vessels of the sanctuary, as the camp
is to set forward; after that the sons of Kohath shall come to bear
it.’(707) The (trumpet) sounded, and blew an alarm, and sounded. And the
standard of Dan moved forward, as is said, ‘And the standard of the camp
of the children of Dan set forward.’(708) It follows that two standards
were in front, and two standards were in the rear, and the encampment of
the Levites, and the encampment of the SHECHINAH was in the middle, as is
said, ‘Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with the
camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp.’(709) And as they encamped,
so they set forward, as is said, ‘As they encamp, so shall they set
forward.’ Israel set forward by three commands, by command of the HOLY
BLESSED ONE, by command of Moses, and by command of the trumpets.” “Whence
know we the command of the HOLY BLESSED ONE?” “As is said, ‘At the
commandment of the Lord, the children of Israel journeyed, and at the
commandment of the Lord they pitched,’ ”(710) etc. “By the commandment of
the Lord by the hand of Moses.”(711) “By commandment of Moses—how?” “Moses
said in the evening, ‘early in the morning you must go forward.’ ” At once
the Israelites began to gather their cattle, and prepared their furniture
for the march. “By commandment of the trumpets whence know we it?” “As is
said, ‘Make thee two trumpets of silver, etc., that thou mayest use them
for the calling of the assembly, and for the journeying of the
camps.’ ”(712) “How?” “The trumpets sounded, blew an alarm, and sounded
three blasts for every standard.” Rabbi Judah said, “there were three
blasts for every tribe.”



