Chapter I


1. “When do we remember in prayer the heavy rain?” Rabbi Eleazar said,
“from the first holiday of the feast (of tabernacles),” Rabbi Joshua said,
“from the last holiday of the feast.” To him said Rabbi Joshua, “when the
rain is no mark of blessing in the feast, why should one remember it?”
Said Rabbi Eleazar to him, “even I did not say to ask for it, but to
remember the blowing of the wind, and the descent of the rain in its
season.” He replied to him, “if so, one can remember it always.”

2. We ask for rain only near to the season of rains. Rabbi Judah
said,(315) “he who passes last before the ark on the last holiday of the
feast of tabernacles remembers it; the first does not remember it. On the
first holiday of the passover the first remembers it, the last does not
remember it.” How long do we ask for rain? Rabbi Judah said, “till the
passover be ended.” Rabbi Meier said, “till Nisan depart,(316) as is
said,(317) ‘And He will cause to come down for you the rain, the former
rain, and the latter rain in the first month.’ ”

3. On the third day of Marchesvan(318) we ask for the rain. Rabban
Gamaliel said, “on the seventh, fifteen days after the feast, that the
last Israelite returning home from the feast may reach the river
Euphrates.”

4. “If the seventeenth day of Marchesvan arrive, and the rain does not
come down?” “Men of eminence begin to fast for three days. They may eat
and drink by night. And they may work, and wash, and anoint themselves,
and put on their sandals, and use their couches.”

5. “If the first day of the month Chislev(319) arrive, and the rain does
not come down?” “The tribunal proclaims three fast-days(320) for the
congregation. Persons may, however, eat and drink by night. And they may
work, and wash, and anoint themselves, and put on their sandals, and use
their couches.”

6. “If these days pass over, and there be no answer?” “The tribunal
proclaims three other fast-days for the congregation. Persons may,
however, eat and drink while it is still day. But they are forbidden work,
and washing, and anointing, and putting on sandals, and the use of the
couch. And the baths are locked up.” “If these days pass over, and there
be no answer?” “The tribunal proclaims for them seven more; these are
altogether thirteen fast-days for the congregation.” “And what are these
fast-days more than the first six?” “Because during them men blow with the
trumpets and lock up their shops.” On Monday they can half open them at
dark. But on Thursday they may open them for honor to the approaching
Sabbath.

7. “If these days pass over, and there be no answer?” “People diminish
business, building, planting, betrothals and marriages, and salutations of
peace between man and his friend, as children of men ashamed before
OMNIPRESENCE.” The men of eminence have again recourse to fasting, till
Nisan be ended. If Nisan be ended, and the rain comes down, it is a mark
of cursing, as is said,(321) “Is it not wheat harvest to-day?” etc.



Chapter II


1. “What is the order of the fast-days?” “Men draw out the ark containing
the rolls of the Law to the public street of the city, and they put burnt
ashes on the top of the ark, and on the head of the prince, and on the
head of the president of the tribunal, and everyone takes and puts ashes
on his own head.” The most aged of them says before them touching words,
“Brethren, it is not said for the men of Nineveh, ‘And God saw their
sackcloth and their fasting,’(322) but ‘God saw their works, that they
returned from their evil way.’ And in the tradition (of the prophet) he
says,(323) ‘Rend your hearts and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord
your God.’ ”

2. When they stood in prayer, they placed before the ark an aged man and
full of experience, one who had children and an unblemished house, that
his heart be not distracted in prayer, and he says before them twenty-four
blessings, the usual eighteen for every day, and he adds to them six more.

3. These are they, “remembrances,”(324) and “blowing of the
trumpets,”(325) “In my distress I cried unto the Lord, and He heard
me,”(326) “I will lift up my eyes unto the hills,”(327) “out of the depths
have I cried unto Thee, O Lord,”(328) “A prayer of the afflicted when he
is overwhelmed.”(329) Rabbi Judah says, “it was not necessary to say the
‘remembrances,’ and ‘the trumpets,’ but he said instead of them, ‘If there
be in the land famine, if there be pestilence,’ ”(330) etc. “The word of
the Lord that came to Jeremiah concerning the dearth.”(331) And he said
their closing benediction.

4. For the first additional prayer he said, “He who answered Abraham our
father on Mount Moriah, He shall answer you, and hear the voice of your
cry this day. Blessed be Thou, Lord, the Redeemer of Israel.” For the
second he said, “He who answered our fathers by the Red Sea, He will
answer you, and hear the voice of your cry this day. Blessed be Thou,
Lord, who rememberest those forgotten by man.” For the third he said, “He
who answered Joshua in Gilgal, He will answer you, and hear the voice of
your cry this day. Blessed be Thou, Lord, who hearest the blowing of the
trumpet.” For the fourth he said, “He who answered Samuel in Mizpah, He
will answer you, and hear the voice of your cry this day. Blessed be Thou,
Lord, who hearest the cry of distress.” For the fifth he said, “He who
answered Elijah on Mount Carmel, He will answer you, and hear the voice of
your cry this day. Blessed be Thou, Lord, who hearest prayer.” For the
sixth he said, “He who answered Jonah from the fish’s belly, He will
answer you, and hear the voice of your cry this day. Blessed be Thou,
Lord, who art ever answering prayer in the time of need.” For the seventh
he said, “He who answered David and Solomon his son in Jerusalem, He will
answer you, and will hear the voice of your cry this day. Blessed be Thou,
Lord, who hast pity on the earth.”

5. It happened in the days of Rabbi Chelpatha and R. Chanania, son of
Teradion, that a minister passed before the ark, and finished the whole
blessing, and the congregation did not answer after him, Amen. One cried
out, “Let the priests blow the trumpets”; they blew. (The minister
prayed,) “May He who answered Abraham our Father on Mount Moriah answer
you, and hear the voice of your cry this day.” (One cried out,) “Let the
sons of Aaron blow an alarm”; they blew an alarm. (The minister prayed,)
“May He who answered our fathers by the Red Sea, answer you, and hear the
voice of your cry this day.” And when the matter came before the Sages
they said it was not customary to do so, save in the Eastern gate and on
the Mountain of the House.

6. These are the first three fasts. The priests of the weekly Watch of the
Temple fasted, but not completely. And the priests of their “Father’s
House”(332) did not fast at all. In the second three fasts the men of the
Watch fasted completely. And the men of their “Father’s House” fasted, but
not completely. “In the seven last fasts both of them fasted completely.”
The words of Rabbi Joshua. But the Sages say, “in the three first fasts
neither one nor other fasted at all. In the second three fasts the priests
of the Watch fasted, but not completely. And the priests of their
‘Father’s House’ did not fast at all. In the seven last fasts the priests
of the Watch fasted completely, and the priests of their ‘Father’s House’
fasted, but not completely.”

7. The men of the Watch are allowed to drink wine by night, but not by
day, and the men who inherit the patrimony of their fathers(333) may not
drink it neither by day nor night. The men of the Watch and the
Delegates(334) are not allowed to shave, nor wash, except on Thursdays for
the honor of the approaching Sabbath.

8. That which is written in “The Roll of Fasting,”(335) “not to mourn” on
certain days—the day before them it is not allowed—the day after them it
is allowed to mourn. Rabbi José said, “both before and after the day it is
not allowed.” But when it is written, “not to fast,” both the day before
and the day after the fast, it is allowed to fast. Rabbi José said,
“before the fast it is not allowed—after the fast it is allowed.”

9. The rulers must not proclaim fasts for the congregation to begin on
Thursday, so as not to raise the market. But the three first fasts are
Monday, Thursday, and Monday. And the three second, Thursday, Monday, and
Thursday. Rabbi José said, “as the first fasts are not to begin on
Thursday, so likewise the second and the last are not to begin on that
day.”

10. “The rulers must not proclaim fasting for the congregation on the
feast of New Moon, and on the feasts of Dedication, and Purim; but if they
have already begun, they need not cease.” The words of Rabbi Gamaliel.
Said R. Meier, “even though Rabbi Gamaliel said they need not cease, he
admits that the congregation do not fast the whole day; and so also on the
ninth of Ab, the fast for the burning of the Temple, if it happen on the
eve of the Sabbath.”



