Chapter VIII


1. These are the controversies relating to meals between the schools of
Shammai and Hillel. The school of Shammai say, “one must say the blessing
of the day, and then bless the wine;” but the school of Hillel say, “one
must say the blessing on the wine, and then bless the day.”

2. The school of Shammai say, “men must pour water on the hands, and then
mix the goblet;” but the school of Hillel say, “the goblet must be mixed,
and then water poured on the hands.”

3. The school of Shammai say, “one is to wipe his hands on the napkin, and
lay it on the table;” but the school of Hillel say, “on the cushion.”

4. The school of Shammai bless “the light, the food, the spices, and the
distinction of the day;” but the school of Hillel bless “the light, the
spices, the food, and the distinction of the day.” The school of Shammai
say, “who created the light of fire;” but the school of Hillel say,
“Creator of the lights of fire.”

6. Men must not bless light and spices of idolatrous Gentiles, nor light
and spices of corpses, nor light and spices before an idol. They must not
bless the light until they have enjoyed the light.

7. “If one have eaten, and forgotten, and not blessed?” The school of
Shammai say, “he must return to his place and bless.” But the school of
Hillel say, “he may bless in the place where he recollects.” “How long is
one obliged to bless?” “Until the food in his stomach be digested.”

8. “If wine came to the company, and there is but one goblet?” The school
of Shammai say “that one must bless the wine and then bless the food.” But
the school of Hillel say “that one must bless the food and then bless the
wine.” Men must answer “Amen” when an Israelite blesses; but they must not
answer “Amen” when a Samaritan blesses, until the whole(32) blessing be
heard.



Chapter IX


1. He who sees a place where signs were wrought for Israel, says, “Blessed
be He who wrought signs for our fathers in this place;” a place where
idolatry has been rooted out,—says, “Blessed be He who hath rooted
idolatry out of our land.”

2. On comets, earthquakes, lightnings, thunder, and tempests, say,
“Blessed be He whose strength and might fill the world.” On mountains,
hills, seas, rivers, and deserts, say, “Blessed be He who made the
creation.” R. Judah says, when a man sees the great sea he is to say,
“Blessed be He who made the great sea,”—when he sees it at intervals. On
rains, and on good news say, “Blessed be He who is good and beneficent.”
On bad news say, “Blessed be the true Judge.”

3. He who has built a new house, or bought new furniture, says, “Blessed
be He who has kept us alive,” etc. One must bless for evil the source of
good; and for good the source of evil. “He who supplicates for what is
past?” “Such prayer is vain.” “How?” His wife is pregnant, and he says,
“God grant that my wife may bring forth a male child.” Such prayer is
vain. Or if one on the road hear the voice of lamentation in the city, and
say, “God grant that it may not be my son, my house,” etc., such prayer is
vain.

4. Whoever enters a fortified town must say two prayers, one at his
entrance, and one at his departure. Ben Azai says, “four, two at his
entrance, and two at his departure; he returns thanks for the past, and
supplicates for the future.”

5. Man is bound to bless God for evil, as he is bound to bless Him for
good. For it is said, “And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.”(33) “With all thy
heart” means, with both thy inclinations, the evil as well as the good.
“With all thy soul” means, even should He deprive thee of life; and “with
all thy might” means with all thy wealth. Another opinion is, that “with
all thy might” means whatever measure He metes out unto thee, do thou
thank Him with thy entire might. No man is to be irreverent opposite the
eastern gate of the Temple, for it is opposite the Holy of Holies. No man
is to go on the mountain of the house with his staff, shoes, or purse, nor
with dust on his feet, nor is he to make it a short cut, nor is he to spit
at all. All the seals of the blessings in the sanctuary used to say, “from
eternity.” But since the Epicureans perversely taught there is but one
world, it was directed that man should say, “from eternity to eternity.”
It was also directed that every man should greet his friend in THE NAME,
as it is said, “And behold Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the
reapers, The Lord (be) with you: and they answered him, The Lord bless
thee.”(34) And it is also said, “The Lord _is_ with thee, thou mighty man
of valor.”(35) And it is said, “Despise not thy mother when she is
old.”(36) And it is also said, “(It is) time for (thee), Lord, to work,
for they have made void thy law.”(37) R. Nathan says, “They have made void
thy law because (it is) time for (thee), Lord, to work.”




On The Sabbatical Year


    Ploughing—Gardening—Dunging—Removing Stones—Sowing—Cutting Down
    Trees—Fruits—Buying and Selling—Territory Included in the
    Sabbatical Year—Produce Governed by Its Laws—Debts and Payments.



