Chapter VI


1. “When one wishes to purify, and the ashes of purification have fallen
on his hand or upon the side (of the vessel), and they afterward fell on a
drinking-trough?” “They are disallowed.” “If water of purification fell
from a pipe on the trough?” “It is disallowed.” “He took the water of
purification out of the pipe, and covered the pipe or shut the door with
it?” “The ashes of purification are allowed, but the water is disallowed.”
“He laid it on the ground?” “It is disallowed.” “He laid it in his hand?”
“It is allowed, because it is not otherwise possible.”

2. “If the ashes swam on the surface of the water?” R. Meier and Rabbi
Simon said, “one may take them and purify”; but the Sages say, “all ashes
which have once touched water, cannot purify.” “If one have sprinkled the
water, and the ashes be found at the bottom?” R. Meier and R. Simon said,
“He may dry them and purify”; but the Sages say, “all ashes which have
(once) touched water, cannot purify.”

3. “If one prepare water for purification in a trough, and there be a jug
in it?” “Though its mouth be ever so narrow, the water therein can
purify.” “If there be a sponge?” “The water in it is disallowed.” “How is
one to act?” “He is to sprinkle till he come to the sponge. When he has
touched the sponge, even if the water swim over it ever so little, it is
disallowed.”

4. “One has put in his hand or his foot, or leaves of vegetables, so that
the water of purification has run over to another vessel?” “It is
disallowed.” If they were leaves of reeds or leaves of nuts, they are
allowed. This is the rule: The thing which contracts uncleanness is
disallowed; and the thing which does not contract uncleanness is allowed.

5. “If one divert a well into a vat-shaped pool or into a marsh?” “The
water in them is disallowed for issues and leprosies, or to purify with it
as with the water of the ashes of the heifer, since it is not filled in a
vessel.”



Chapter VII


1. “When five persons filled five barrels with water of purification, to
purify five persons requiring purification, and they changed their mind
for one purification, or they prepared for one purification, and they
changed their mind for five?” “They are all allowed.” “One person who
filled five barrels to purify five persons requiring purification, and
changed his mind for one purification?” “None is allowed but the last.”
“Or he made ready for one purification, and changed his mind for five
purifications?” “None is allowed but the first purification.” “If he said
to one, ‘purify all those for thee?’ ” “None is allowed but the first.”
“Purify all those for me?” “They are all allowed.”

2. “He who fills (water of purification) with one hand, and does work with
the other hand, if he fill for himself or for another person, or if he
fill for both at once?” “Both are disallowed, since work disallows in
filling (water of purification) whether for himself or for another.”

3. “He who puts in ashes with one hand, and does work with the other
hand?” “If it be for himself, it is disallowed; but if it be for another
person, it is allowed.” “He who while doing work puts in ashes for himself
and for another?” “His own is disallowed, and the other’s is allowed.” “He
who puts in ashes for two persons at once?” “Both are allowed.”

4. “Put in ashes for me; and I will put in ashes for thee?” “The first
case is allowed.” “Fill water for me; and I will fill water for thee?”
“The latter case is allowed.” “Put in ashes for me, and I will fill water
for thee?” “Both cases are allowed.” “Fill water for me; and I will put in
ashes for thee?” “Both cases are disallowed.”

5. “A person filled water for his own use, and (also) for purification?”
“He fills first for himself and binds it on the shoulder-pole; and
afterward he fills that for purification.” “And if he fill that for
purification first, and afterward fill for himself?” “It is disallowed.”
He must put his own water behind him, and the water for purification
before him. “And if he put that for purification behind him?” “It is
disallowed.” “Both are water for purification, he put one in front and one
behind him?” “It is allowed, because it is not otherwise possible.”

6. “If one carry a rope in his hand?”(738) “If he go in the (straight)
way, it is allowed.” “If he go out of his way?” “It is disallowed.” One
went to Jabneth(739) during three feasts, about this matter, and in the
third feast it was allowed to him as a decision for the time.

7. “If one rolled the rope round his hand?” “It is allowed; but if he
rolled it after (drawing the water), it is disallowed.” Said R. José,
“this act they allowed as a decision for the time.”

8. “If one put aside the barrel lest it be broken, or turned it on its
mouth for the purpose of drying it, intending to fill it with water?” “It
is allowed.” “But if he did so to carry in it ashes?” “It is disallowed.”
If one turned out potsherds from the trough, that it might contain more
water, it is allowed; but if they would be no hindrance to him in the time
of sprinkling, it is disallowed.

9. “One who had water on his shoulder, and he taught a decision in the law
or he showed the way to others or he killed a serpent or a scorpion or he
took food to put it aside?” “It is disallowed.” “The food was for eating?”
“It is allowed.” “The serpent or scorpion hindered him?” “It is allowed.”
Said Rabbi Judah, “this is the rule: An act for work, whether a man stood
or did not stand, is disallowed; and an act which is not for work, if he
stood, is disallowed; but if he did not stand, it is allowed.”

10. “He who handed over his water of purification to an unclean (person)?”
“It is disallowed.” “But if he handed it to a legally clean person?” “It
is allowed.” R. Eleazar said, “even to a (person legally) unclean it is
allowed, if its owner did no work.”

11. “Two persons drew water for purification, and each helped the other,
or each took a thorn from the other?” “For one purification it is allowed,
for two purifications, it is disallowed.” R. José said, “even for two
purifications it is allowed, if it were made a condition between them.”

12. “He who has broken (something) during drawing water for purification
with the view of preparing it afterward?” “The water is allowed.” “But if
he prepared it?” “The water is disallowed.”(740) “He ate with the view of
drying the remainder of his food?” “The water is allowed.” “But if he
dried it?” “The water is disallowed.” “He ate and left some, and he threw
away what was left in his hand under a fig-tree, or into the place of
drying, that it might not be lost?” “The water is disallowed.”



