Chapter XI: Concerning the Brain of Microprosopus and Its Connections


And when both can be conjoined and bound together mutually (_i.e._, the
Father and the Mother), there proceedeth thenceforth a certain hard Skull.

And it is extended on its sides, so that there may be one part on one
side, and another one on another side.

For as the Most Holy Ancient One is found to include equally in Himself
the Three Heads,(847) so all things are symbolized under the form of the
Three Heads, as we have stated.

Into this skull (of Microprosopus) distilleth the dew from the White Head
(of Macroprosopus), and covereth it.

And that dew appeareth to be of two colors, and by it is nourished the
field of the holy apple trees.

And from this dew of this Skull is the manna prepared for the just in the
world to come.(848)

And by it shall the dead be raised to life.

But that manna hath not at any other time been prepared so that it might
descend from this dew, save at that time when the Israelites were
wandering in the wilderness, and the Ancient One supplied them with food
from this place; because that afterward it did not fall out so more fully.

This is the same which is said, Exod. xvi. 4, “Behold I rain upon you
bread from heaven.” And also that passage where it is thus written, Gen.
xxvii. 28, “And the Elohim shall give unto thee of the dew of heaven.”

These things occur in that time. Concerning another time it is written,
“The food of man is from God the Most Holy One—blessed be He!”—and that
dependeth from MZLA, _Mezla_, the Influence; assuredly from the Influence
rightly so called.

And therefore is it customary to say, “Concerning children, life, and
nourishment, the matter dependeth not from merit, but from the Influence.”
For all these things depend from this Influence, as we have already shown.

Nine thousand myriads of worlds receive influence from and are upheld by
that GVLGLTHA, _Golgeltha_, Skull.

And in all things is that subtle AVIRA, _Auira_, Ether,(849) contained, as
It Itself containeth all things, and as in It all things are comprehended.

His countenance is extended in two sides,(850) in two lights, which in
themselves contain all things.

And when His countenance (_i.e._, that of Microprosopus) looketh back upon
the countenance of the Most Holy Ancient One, all things are called ARK
APIM, _Arikh Aphim_, Vastness of Countenance.

What is ARK APIM, or Vastness of Countenance? Also it should rather be
called ARVK APIM, _Arokh Aphim_, Vast in Countenance.

Assuredly thus is the tradition, since also He prolongeth His wrath
against the wicked. But the phrase ARK APIM, _Arikh Aphim_, also implies
the same as “healing power of countenance.”

Seeing that health is never found in the world save when the countenances
(of Macroprosopus and Microprosopus) mutually behold each other.

In the hollow of the Skull (of Microprosopus) shine three lights. And
although thou canst call them three, yet notwithstanding are there
four,(851) as we have before said.

He (Microprosopus) is the heir of His Father and of His Mother, and there
are two inheritances from Them; all which things are bound together under
the symbol of the Crown of His Head. And they are the phylacteries of His
Head.

After that these are united together after a certain manner they shine,
and go forth into the Three Cavities of the Skull.

(And then) singly they are developed each after its own manner, and they
are extended through the whole body.

But they are associated together in two Brains, and the third Brain
containeth the others in itself.(852)

And it adhereth as well to the one side as to the other, and is expanded
throughout the whole body.

And therefrom are formed two colors mixed together in one, and His
countenance shineth.

And the colors of His countenance are symbols of Ab (the Father) and Aima
(the Mother), and are called Däath (Knowledge) in Däath.

As it is written, 1 Sam. ii. 3, “Since El Daoth (plural) is
Tetragrammaton,” because in Him there are two colors.

Unto Him (Microprosopus) are works ascribed diversely; but to the Most
Holy Ancient One (operations) are not ascribed diversely.

For what reason doth He (Microprosopus) admit of variable disposition?
Because He is the heir of two inheritances (_i.e._, from Chokmah and
Binah).

Also it is written, Ps. xviii. 26, “With the merciful man thou shalt show
thyself merciful.”

But also truly and rightly have the Companions decided concerning that
saying where it is written, Gen. xxix. 12, “And Jacob declared unto Rachel
that he was her father’s brother, and that he was Rebekah’s son.”

It is written “Rebekah’s son,” and not “the son of Isaac.” And all the
mysteries are in Chokmah.(853)

And therefore is (Chokmah) called the Perfection of all; and to it is
ascribed the name of Truth.

And therefore is it written, “And Jacob declared,” and not written, “and
Jacob said.”

Those (two) colors are extended throughout the whole Body (of
Microprosopus), and His Body cohereth with them.

In the Most Holy Ancient One, the Concealed with all Concealments,
(things) are not ascribed diversely, and unto Him do they not tend
(diversely), since the whole is the same (with itself) and (thus is) life
unto all (things); and from Him judgment dependeth not (directly).

But concerning Him (Microprosopus) it is written, that unto Him are
ascribed (diverse) works, properly speaking.




