Chapter IV


1. Rabbi Ishmael said, “three stones(458) beside each other at the side of
the image of Mercury are forbidden, but two are allowed.” But the Sages
say, “when they are within his view they are forbidden, but when they are
not within his view they are allowed.”

2. “Has one found money on his head, a garment, or implements which are
not offerings?” “They are allowed.” Festoons of grapes, wreaths of ears of
corn, and wines, and oils, and fine flour, and everything similar offered
on his altar are forbidden.

3. A garden or a bath for idolatry is permitted for use when it is
gratuitous. But neither is to be used if a present for the worship of the
idol be expected. If it be in partnership with others that are not so
employed, either can be used, whether it be with the expectation of a
present or gratuitous. The idol of idolaters is at once forbidden, but the
idol of Israel is not forbidden until it be served.

4. An idolater may desecrate his own idol, or the idol of his companion.
But Israel must not desecrate the idol of an idolater. In desecrating the
idol he desecrates what appertains to it. “Has he desecrated what
appertains to it?” “What appertains to it is allowed, but the idol itself
is forbidden.”

5. “How is it to be desecrated?” “He cuts off the lobe of its ear, the tip
of its nose, the end of its finger—he deforms even though he does not
diminish it—it is desecrated.” “He spits before it, he drags it, and
throws dirt upon it?” “It is not desecrated.” “Has he sold it or pledged
it?” Rabbi says, “it is desecrated.” But the Sages say, “it is not
desecrated.”

6. The idol, the service of which is abandoned in the time of peace, is
allowed. “But if its service be abandoned in time of war?” “It is
forbidden.”(459) The royal pedestals(460) are forbidden, because they are
erected at the time when kings are travelling.

7. The elders were asked in Rome, “If God has no pleasure in idolatry, why
does He not destroy it?” They replied to the Romans, “If the idolaters
were serving a thing which was not necessary to the world, He would
destroy it, but they serve the sun-disk, and the moon, and the stars, and
the signs of the zodiac. Shall he destroy his world on account of the
fools?” They replied to them, “If so He can destroy the object which is
not wanted for the world, and leave that which the world wants.” They
replied to them, “even we should be strengthening the hands of the
worshippers of such objects; they would say, there is a proof that they
are gods, because they are not destroyed.”

8. One may buy a wine-press pressed by an idolater, even though he take
_grapes_ with his hand and lay them on the heap of grapes, as it is not
made the wine of idolatrous libation till it runs into the vat. “Has it
run into the vat?” “That which is in the vat is forbidden, but the
remainder is allowed.” One may tread with an idolater in the wine-press,
but one must not gather grapes with him. One must not tread or gather
grapes with an Israelite who works in a state of defilement. But one may
carry with him empty barrels to the press and bring them away with him
from the press. One must not knead nor prepare with the baker who works in
(a state of) legal defilement, but one may carry the bread with him to the
dealer in bread.

9. “If an idolater be found standing by the side of a wine vat, and if he
have any loan upon it?” “It is forbidden.” “If he have no loan on it?” “It
is allowed.” “Has he fallen into the vat and come out again, or measured
it with a cane; has he driven away a hornet with a cane; or has he given a
slap to the fermentation on the top of the barrel?” All these things once
happened, and the (Sages) decided, “Let it be sold.” But R. Simon “allowed
it.” He took the barrel and flung it in a rage into the vat. This once
happened, and the Sages allowed it.

10. “Has one made the wine of an idolater without legal defilement, and
left it in his possession in a house open to public concourse—in a city in
which there are idolaters and Israelites?” “It is allowed.” “In a city in
which all are idolaters?” “It is forbidden till he leave a watchman, and
it is not needful that the watchman sit and watch. Even though he goes in
and out it is allowed.” R. Simon, the son of Eleazar, said, “all
possession of wine by idolaters is alike.” “Has one made the wine of a
heathen without legal defilement, and left it in his possession, and the
idolater afterward wrote to him, I have received from you the money for
the wine?” “It is allowed.” “But if the Israelite wish to withdraw it, and
the idolater do not permit him, till he shall give him his money for it?”
This once happened in Bethshan, and the Sages “forbade it.”



Chapter V


1. “Has an idolater hired an Israelite to make with him wine of idolatrous
libation?” “His wages are forbidden.” “But if he hired him to do with him
another work, even though he say to him, ‘carry for me a barrel of wine of
libation from place to place?’ ” “His wages are allowed.” “Has one hired
an ass to bring on him wine of idolatrous libation?” “The hire is not
allowed.” “Has one hired out the ass for riding, even though the idolater
put his wine flask upon him?” “The hire is allowed.”

2. Wine of idolatrous libation which fell on grapes must be cleansed away,
and they are allowed. But if the grapes be crushed, they are forbidden.
“Has the idolatrous wine fallen on figs or on dates?” “If it convey to
them a taste, they are forbidden.” It happened once with Baithus, son of
Zonan, that he brought dried figs in a boat, and a barrel of wine of
idolatrous libation was broken, and it fell upon them, and he consulted
the Sages and they allowed them. This is the rule: In every use where the
taste is conveyed, it is forbidden. But where in its use no taste is
conveyed, it is allowed. It is like vinegar which has fallen on peas.

3. “An idolater who was carrying with an Israelite pitchers of wine from
place to place?” “If it be certain that the idolater is watched, it is
allowed.” “If the Israelite let him know that he is departing—if there be
time to bore, to close, and to seal the pitcher?” R. Simon, son of
Gamaliel, said, “it is not allowed if there be time to open, to cork, and
to seal it again.” “And an Israelite put his wine into a carriage, or into
a boat, and he has gone a near cut—he entered the city and washed?” “It is
allowed.” “But if he let the idolater know that he is departing, if there
be time to bore, and cork, and seal it again?” R. Simon, son of Gamaliel,
said, “it is not allowed if there be time to open the barrel and cork and
seal it again.” “If he leave the idolater in the wine-shop, even though he
go in and out?” “It is allowed.” “But if he let the idolater know that he
departs, if there be time to bore, and cork, and seal it again?” R. Simon
ben Gamaliel said, “it is not allowed if there be time to open, and to
cork, and to seal it again.” “Did he dine with the idolater at table, and
he left a flask on the table, and a flask on the sideboard, and he left
them and went out?” “That one which is on the table is forbidden, but that
one on the sideboard is allowed.” “But if he said to him, ‘you may mix and
drink wine, even that one on the sideboard is forbidden?’ ”(461) “Open
barrels are forbidden, also sealed ones, when there is time to open, and
cork, and seal them up again.”

4. If foreign banditti have entered into a city in time of peace, open
barrels are forbidden—closed ones are allowed. If the banditti have
entered in time of war, both are equally allowed, because there is no time
for idolatrous libation.

5. When an idolater has sent to workmen of Israel a barrel of wine of
idolatrous libation for wages, it is allowed to say, “give us its value.”
“But if it has come into their possession?” “It is forbidden.”

6. “Has one sold wine to an idolater?” “If he agreed for the price before
it is measured, its payment is allowed.” “Has he measured it before he
agreed for the price?” “Its payment is forbidden.”

7. “Has one taken a funnel and measured wine into the bottle of an
idolater, and he then turned round and measured wine into the bottle of an
Israelite?” “If the funnel retain a drop of the wine of the idolater, the
wine is forbidden.” “Has one poured the wine from vessel to vessel?” “That
vessel from which he poured it is allowed, and that one into which he
poured it is forbidden.”

8. Wine of idolatrous libation is forbidden, and even a little of it
renders forbidden—wine in wine, and water in water—how much soever they
be, and wine in water, and water in wine, in giving a taste. This is the
rule: If both be of one sort, however little; if they be of different
sorts, in giving a taste.

9. These things are forbidden, and even a little of them renders other
things forbidden. Wine of idolatrous libation, and idols, and skins of
beasts with the hearts torn out, and an ox that was stoned,(462) and a
heifer that is beheaded,(463) and the birds from the leprosy, and the hair
of the Nazarite,(464) and the first-born of the ass, and flesh in milk,
and the scapegoat, and the profane animals(465) which were slaughtered in
the Temple court. These are forbidden to be mixed with other things; and
if so mixed, even a little of them renders other things forbidden.

10. “Wine of idolatrous libation which has fallen into a vat?” “All its
use is forbidden.” R. Simon ben Gamaliel said, “it may all be sold to
heathens, excepting the value of the wine of idolatrous libation which is
in it.”

11. “A stone-press which an idolater has prepared with pitch?” “It must be
cleansed, and it is clean.” “And if of wood?” Rabbi said, “it should be
cleansed”; and the Sages said, “one must peel off the pitch; but if it be
made of earthenware, even though one peel off the pitch, it is forbidden.”

12. “If one buy culinary utensils from an idolater?” “That which it is
usual to dip (in water), one must dip; to scour, one must scour; to whiten
in the fire, one must whiten in fire. The spit and the fork, one must
whiten in the fire;(466) and the knife must be rubbed down, and it is
clean.”




The Fathers


    The Oral Law—Its Transmission—Names of the
    “Receivers”—Maxims—Apothegms—Wisdom of the Wise.



