Chapter I


1. All are bound to appear in the Temple, except the deaf, an idiot, and a
child, and a eunuch, and women, and slaves who are not free, and the lame,
and the blind, and the sick, and the aged, and the man who cannot go
afoot. “What is a child?” “Everyone who cannot ride on the shoulder of his
father, and go up from Jerusalem to the Mountain of the House.” The words
of the school of Shammai. But the school of Hillel say, “everyone who
cannot grasp his father’s hand, and go up from Jerusalem to the Mountain
of the House,” as is said, “three times.”(353)

2. The school of Shammai say, “the appearance in the Temple is with two
pieces of silver, and the peace-offering with a meah of silver.”(354) But
the school of Hillel say, “the appearance is with a meah of silver, and
the feast-offering with two pieces of silver.”

3. The burnt-offerings of the appointed feasts come from ordinary money;
but the peace-offering from tithes. “The offerings on the first holiday of
the passover?”(355) The school of Shammai say, “from ordinary money,” but
the school of Hillel say, “from tithes.”

4. Israelites discharge their duty with vows, with free-will offerings,
and with tithes of animals; and priests with sin-offerings, with
trespass-offerings, and with the breast and shoulder, and first-born, but
not with fowls, nor with meat-offerings.

5. “If one have a large family and small income?” “He must bring more
peace-offerings, and less burnt-offerings.” “If a small family and large
income?” “He must bring more burnt-offerings, and less peace-offerings.”
“If both be small?” “Of this they say, a silver meah, and two pieces of
silver are sufficient.” “If both be large?” “Of this it is said, every man
shall give as he is able according to the blessing of the Lord thy God
which He hath given thee.”(356)

6. When one did not bring his peace-offering on the first holiday of the
feast, he may bring it during the holidays, and even on the last day of
the feast. “If the feast passed over, and he did not bring the
peace-offering?” “He is not obliged to bring it.” For this it is said,
“that which is crooked cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting
cannot be numbered.”(357)

7. Rabbi Simon, the son of Menasia, said, “if thou shalt say, a thief or a
robber, he may return and become straight.” R. Simon, the son of Jochai,
said, “we do not call one crooked, save one straight at first, and he
became afterward crooked; and this is the disciple of the wise, who
departs from the Law.”

8. The remission of vows is like flying in the air, and it has no
foundation. The decisions for the Sabbath, peace-offerings, and
trespasses, are as mountains hanging on a hair; because the verse is
small, but the decisions are many. Jurisprudence, and the Temple service,
cleanness and uncleanness, and illegal connections, have their own
foundations; they, they are the body of the law.



Chapter II


1. Men may not discourse on illegal connections with three,(358) nor on
the work of creation with two,(359) nor on the cherubs with one,(360) save
when one is wise, and comprehends it of his own knowledge. Everyone who
considers four things, it were suitable for him that he did not come into
the world. What is in the height? what is in the depth? what is before?
and what is behind? And everyone who is not anxious for the honor of his
Creator, it were suitable for him that he did not come into the world.

2. José, the son of Joezar, said that “one is not to lay his hand on the
offering.” José, the son of Jochanan, said, “he is to lay his hand on the
offering.” Joshua, the son of Perachia, said, that he “is not to lay on
his hand.” Nittai, the Arbelite, said, “he is to lay on his hand.” Judah,
the son of Tabai, said, that “he is not to lay on his hand.” Simon, the
son of Shatach, said, “he is to lay on his hand.” Shemaiah, said, “he is
to lay on his hand.” Abtalion said, “he is not to lay on his hand.” Hillel
and Menachem did not dispute. Menachem went out and Shammai entered.
Shammai said, “he is not to lay on his hand.” Hillel said, “he is to lay
on his hand.”(361) The first were Princes, and the second were Presidents
of the Tribunal.

3. The school of Shammai said, “men may bring peace-offerings during the
feast, but they are not to lay their hands on them, and they are not to
bring burnt-offerings.” But the house of Hillel say, “they may bring
peace-offerings, and burnt-offerings, and lay their hands on them.”

4. “When Pentecost happens to be on the eve of the Sabbath?” The school of
Shammai say, “the day of slaughtering the offering is after the Sabbath.”
But the school of Hillel say, “there is no day of slaughtering after the
Sabbath.”

But they both acknowledge that if it happened to be on the Sabbath, the
day of slaughter is after the Sabbath. And the high priest must not robe
in his vestments, though they are allowed in seasons of mourning and
fasting, for fear of confirming the words of those who say that “Pentecost
is after the Sabbath.”(362)

5. Men must wash their hands for ordinary eating, but for tithes and for
the heave-offering they must be baptized. And for the sin-offering, if the
hands be unclean, the body is unclean.

6. He who baptized himself for ordinary eating, and indicated it to be for
ordinary eating, he is prohibited from (eating) the tithe. “If he baptized
for the tithe, and indicated it to be for the tithe?” “He is prohibited
from eating heave-offerings.” “If he baptized for heave-offerings, and
indicated it to be for heave-offerings?” “He is prohibited from eating the
holy flesh.” “If he baptized for the holy flesh, and indicated it to be
for the holy flesh?” “He is prohibited from the sin-offering.” “If he
baptized for the weighty?” “He is permitted the light.” “If he baptized,
and did not indicate his intention?” “It is as no baptism.”

7. Treading on the garments of an ordinary man defiled the Pharisees.
Treading on the garments of the Pharisees defiled those who eat the
heave-offering. Treading on the garments of those who eat the
heave-offering defiled for the holy flesh. Treading on the garments of
those who eat the holy flesh defiles for the sin-offering. Joseph, the son
of Joezer, was the most pious of the priesthood, and treading on his cloak
defiled for the holy flesh. Jochanan, the son of Gudgada, used to eat with
the purification for the holy flesh all his life; and treading on his
cloak defiled for the sin-offering.



