Chapter I


1. The Priests guarded the sanctuary in three places(534)—in the House
Abtinas, in the House Nitzus, and in the House Moked. The House Abtinas
and the House Nitzus had upper chambers, and the young priests guarded
there. The House Moked was arched, and its large chamber was surrounded
with stone divans, and the elders of the House of the Fathers slept there,
with the keys of the court in their hands; and the younger priests also
slept there, each with his cushion on the ground. They did not sleep in
the holy garments, but they undressed, and folded them, and put them under
their heads, and they covered themselves with their own dresses. If legal
defilement happened to one of them, he went out, and proceeded in the
circuit that went under the Temple, and candles flamed on either side,
until he arrived in the house of baptism. And the fire pile was there, and
the place of the seat of honor; and this was its honor, when he found it
closed, he knew that someone was there; when he found it open he knew that
no one was there. He descended and washed; he came up and wiped himself,
and warmed himself before the fire pile. He came and sat beside his
brethren the priests, till the doors were opened; then he went out on his
own way.

2. He who wished to take the ashes from the altar, rose up early and
bathed before the Captain of the Temple came. And in what hour did the
Captain come? All times were not equal; sometimes he came at cockcrow, or
near to it, before or after it. The Captain came, and knocked for them,
and they opened to him. He said to them, “let whoever is washed, come, and
cast lots.” They cast lots, and he gained who gained.

3. He took the key and opened the wicket door, and entered from the House
Moked to the court, and the priests went after him with two lighted
torches in their hands. And they divided themselves into two parties.
These went in the gallery eastward, and those went in the gallery
westward. They observed everything as they walked till they approached the
place of the pancake-makers. They arrived. Both parties said, peace! all
peace! The pancake-makers began to make pancakes.

4. He who gained the lot to take the ashes from the altar, took them; and
they said to him, “be careful that thou touch not the vessels, till thou
dost sanctify thy hands and thy feet from the laver.” And the ash dish was
placed in the corner between the ascent to the altar and the west of the
ascent. No man entered with the priest, and there was no candle in his
hand, but he walked toward the light of the fire on the altar. They did
not see him, and they did not hear his voice, till they heard the creaking
of the wheel, which the son of Kattin made for the laver, and they said,
“the time has come to sanctify his hands and feet from the laver.” He took
the silver ash dish, and he went up to the top of the altar, and he turned
the live coals on one side, and he piled up those that were well burned
inward, and he descended, and came on the pavement of the altar. He turned
his face northward, and went eastward of the ascent about ten cubits. He
packed the coals on the pavement three hand-breadths distant from the
ascent, at the place where they put the crops of the fowls, and the ashes
of the inner altar, and of the candlestick.



Chapter II


1. His brethren saw him come down, and they came running to him. They
hastened and sanctified their hands and their feet from the laver. They
took the brushes and the forks, and went up to the top of the altar. The
members and the cauls(535) (of the sacrifices) which were not consumed
over night, they moved to the side of the altar. If the sides could not
contain them, they laid them out in a closet at the ascent.

2. They commenced to bring up the ashes to the top of the heap,(536) and
the heap was on the middle of the altar. Sometimes there was on it about
300 cors;(537) but in the holidays they did not clear away the ashes,
since they were an honor for the altar. Never was the priest lazy in
removing the ashes.

3. The priests began bringing up the fagots to arrange the fire of
preparation on the altar. “Was, then, all wood allowed for preparation?”
“Yes, all wood was allowed for the fire of preparation, except that of the
olive and that of the vine. But these they preferred—branches of the
fig-tree, of the nut, and of the pine.”

4. The priests arranged the great fire of preparation eastward, and then
made an opening eastward, so that the heads of the inward fagots touched
the heap on the altar. And there was a division between the fagots, that
the priests might kindle the chips there.

5. The priest chose from the fagots the best figwood to arrange the second
fire of preparation for the incense opposite the western horn southward.
He prolonged it from the horn toward the north four cubits, reckoning for
five seahs(538) of live coals, and on the Sabbath he reckoned for eight
seahs of live coals. As they placed there the two cups of frankincense of
the showbread. The members and cauls (of the sacrifices) which were not
consumed by the fire overnight, were returned again by the priests to the
great fire of preparation. And they kindled both the preparations with
fire; and they came down, and entered into the chamber of hewn stone.(539)



Chapter III


1. The Captain of the Temple said to the priests, “come and cast lots.”
“Who is to slaughter?” “Who is to sprinkle?” “Who is to take the ashes
from the inner altar?” “Who is to take the ashes from the candlestick?”
“Who is to bring up the members to the ascent, the head and the right
foot, and the two hind feet, the chine, and the left foot, the breast, and
the throat, and the two sides, the inwards, and the fine flour, and the
pancakes and the wine?” They cast lots, and he gained who gained.

2. The Captain said to them, “go and see if the time for slaughter
approaches?” If it approached, the watchman said, “it brightens.” Matthia,
son of Samuel, said, “is it light in the whole east, even to Hebron?” and
he said, “yes.”

3. He said to them, “go and bring the lamb from the lamb-chamber.” The
lamb-chamber was in the northwest corner of the court, and there were four
chambers there, one the lamb-chamber, one the seal-chamber,(540) and one
chamber for the burning materials, and one chamber where they made
showbread.

4. The priests entered the chamber for the vessels, and they brought out
ninety-three vessels of silver and gold. They made the daily sacrifice
drink in a golden cup. Even though he was examined the night before, they
examined him again by torch-light.

5. He who gained the lot for the daily sacrifice, led the lamb to the
slaughter-house, and those who gained the lots for the members, went after
him. The slaughter-house was to the north of the altar, and in it were
eight dwarf pillars, and beams of cedar-wood were fastened upon them, and
iron hooks were fastened in them. And there were three rows of hooks to
each of them. Upon them the priests hung the sacrifices, and skinned them,
near the marble tables between the pillars.

6. Those who gained the lot for the removal of the ashes from the inner
altar, and the ashes from the candlestick, advanced with four vessels in
their hands, a flagon(541) and a cup(542) and two keys. The flagon
resembled a great golden measure containing two cabs and a half. And the
cup resembled a great golden jug. And the two keys to the sanctuary. One
key entered the lock up to the shoulder of the priest, and one opened
quickly.

7. The priest came to the wicket on the north, and there were two wickets
in the great gate, one in the north and one in the south. Through that in
the south man never entered, and Ezekiel explains it. “Then said the Lord
unto me: This gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall
enter in by it; because the Lord, the God of Israel, hath entered in by
it, therefore it shall be shut.”(543) He took the key and opened the
wicket; he entered the chamber, and he went from the chamber into the
sanctuary, until he came to the great gate. When he came to the great
gate, he took down the bar and the bolts and opened it. The slaughterer
did not slaughter till he heard the noise of the opening of the great
gate.

8. From Jericho(544) people heard the opening of the great gate. From
Jericho they heard the noise of the shovel.(545) From Jericho they heard
the noise of the wooden wheel which the son of Kattin made for the laver.
From Jericho they heard the voice of Gabini the herald. From Jericho they
heard the sound of the cornet. From Jericho they heard the sound of the
cymbal. From Jericho they heard the voice of the song. From Jericho they
heard the clang of the horn, and some say even the voice of the High
Priest at the time when he mentioned the Name on the Day of Atonement.
From Jericho they smelled the odor of the preparation of incense. Said R.
Eleazar, the son of Daglai, “the family of Aba had goats on the mountains
of Mikvor,(546) and they used to sneeze from the odor of the preparation
of the incense.”

9. The priest who gained the lot for removing the ashes from the inner
altar entered, and took the flagon and laid it before him, and he took
handfuls of ashes and filled them into the flagon, and at last he brushed
the remainder into it. And he left it and went out (of the holy place). He
who gained the lot for removing the snuff from the candlestick, entered
and found the two eastern lights burning. He snuffed the rest, and left
these burning in their place. If he found them extinguished, he snuffed
them, and lighted them again from those still burning, and afterward he
snuffed the rest. And there was a stone before the candlestick, and in it
were three steps, on which the priest stood and trimmed the lights. And he
placed the cup with the snuff on the second step, and went out.



