Chapter X


1. All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as is said, “Thy people
also shall be all righteous,”(412) etc. And these are they who have no
portion in the world to come: he who says there is no resurrection of the
dead in the law, and that there is no revealed law from heaven, and the
Epicurean. R. Akiba said, “even he who reads in forbidden(413) books, and
he who mutters over a wound”; and he said, “I will put none of these
diseases upon thee, which I have brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the
Lord that healeth thee.”(414) Aba Shaul said, “even to meditate the
NAME(415) in its letters.”

2. Three kings and four ordinary persons have no portion in the world to
come. Three kings, Jeroboam, Ahab, and Manasseh. R. Judah said, “Manasseh
had a portion in the world to come,” as is said, “And prayed unto him, and
he was entreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him again
to Jerusalem into his kingdom.”(416) The Sages said to him, “He brought
him back to his kingdom, but He did not bring him back to life in the
world to come.” Four ordinary persons, Balaam, and Doeg, and Ahitophel,
and Gehazi, have no portion in the world to come.

3. The generation of the deluge has no portion in the world to come, and
they stand not in judgment, as is said, “My Spirit shall not always strive
with man.”(417) (They have) neither judgment nor spirit. The generation of
the dispersion has no portion in the world to come, as is said, “So the
Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the
earth.”(418) And the Lord scattered them in this world, and from thence
the Lord scattered them in the world to come. The men of Sodom have no
portion in the world to come, as is said, “But the men of Sodom were
wicked and sinners before the Lord exceedingly,”(419) wicked in this
world, and sinners in the world to come. But they will stand in judgment.
R. Nehemiah said, “neither one nor other will stand in judgment,” as is
said, “Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners
in the congregation of the righteous.”(420) “Therefore the wicked shall
not stand in judgment;” this is the generation of the deluge: “Nor sinners
in the congregation of the righteous;” these are the men of Sodom. The
(Sages) said to him, “they do not stand in the congregation of the
righteous, but they stand in the congregation of the wicked.” The spies
have no portion in the world to come, as is said, “Even those men that did
bring up the evil report upon the land, died by the plague before the
Lord.”(421) And they died in this world. They also died in the plague in
the world to come. “The generation of the wilderness has no portion in the
world to come, and they will not stand in judgment, as is said, ‘In this
wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.’ ”(422) The
words of R. Akiba. R. Eliezer said, “of them He said, ‘Gather my saints
together unto me, those that have made a covenant with me by
sacrifice.’ ”(423) “The congregation of Korah will not come up, as is
said, ‘And the earth closed upon them’(424) in this world. ‘And they
perished from among the congregation’ in the world to come.” The words of
R. Akiba. R. Eliezer said, “of them he said, ‘The Lord killeth and maketh
alive; he bringeth down to the grave and bringeth up.’ ”(425) “The ten
tribes will not return, as is said, ‘And cast them into another land, as
it is this day’;(426) as the day departs and does not return, so they
depart and do not return.” The words of R. Akiba. R. Eliezer said, “as the
day darkens and brightens, so will it be with the ten tribes; as it was
dark for them, so will it be bright for them.”

4. The men of a city withdrawn to idolatry have no portion in the world to
come, as is said, “Certain men, the children of Belial, are gone out from
among you and have withdrawn the inhabitants of their city,”(427) and they
are not to be killed till the withdrawers be from the city itself and from
the tribe itself, and till it withdraw the majority, and till the
withdrawers be men. If the withdrawers be women, or children, or the
minority be withdrawn, or the withdrawers be outside it, they are to be
treated singly, and they need two witnesses, and a warning to each one of
them. It is more grievous for individuals than for the multitude, because
individuals must be stoned, though for that reason their money is safe for
their heirs; but the multitude are cut off with the sword, and for that
reason their money is lost.

5. “Thou shalt surely smite the inhabitants of that city,”(428) etc. A
caravan of asses or camels passing from place to place are delivered, as
is said, “Destroying it utterly and all that is therein,” etc. From thence
they said, “the property of the righteous in it is lost, out of the city
it is safe. But that of the wicked, whether inside or outside, is lost.”

6. “And thou shalt gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the street
thereof.”(429) If it have no street, they must make a street for it. If
there be a street outside of it, they bring it inside. “And shalt burn
with fire the city and all the spoil thereof,” its spoil but not the spoil
of heaven. From thence they say, the holy things therein are to be
redeemed, and the heave-offerings suffered to decay. The second tithes and
holy writings are to be concealed. “Every whit for the Lord thy God.” Said
R. Simon, “The Holy One, Blessed be He, said, If you execute judgment on
the withdrawn city, I count it for you as though you brought a
burnt-offering wholly before me.” “And it shall be a heap forever; it
shall not be built again.” “Thou shalt not make of it even gardens or
parks.” The words of R. José, the Galilean. R. Akiba said, “it shall not
be builded again. It must not be built as it was before, but it may be
made (into) gardens and parks.” “And there shall cleave naught of the
cursed thing to thine hand.”(430) Whilst the wicked are in the world,
wrath is in the world. When the wicked are destroyed from the world, wrath
retires from the world.



Chapter XI


1. These are to be strangled—he who beats his father or his mother, and he
who steals a soul from Israel, and an “elder” who is rebellious against
the judges, and a false prophet, and he who prophesies in the name of
idolatry, and false witnesses proved to be perjured against a priest’s
daughter and her paramour. He who beats father or mother is not guilty
till he make a bruise in them. It is more grievous to curse them than to
beat them. Because if he cursed them after their death, he is guilty; but
if he beat them after their death, he is free. He who stole a soul from
Israel is not guilty till he bring him on his property. R. Judah said,
“till he bring him on his property and obtain service by him,” as is said,
“And maketh merchandise of him, or selleth him.”(431) “If he steal his own
son?” R. Ishmael, the son of R. Jochanan, the son of Beroka, pronounces
him “guilty,” but the sages pronounce him “free.” “If he stole one, half a
servant and half free?” R. Judah pronounces him “guilty,” but the Sages
pronounce him “free.”

2. The elder rebellious against the decision of the judges? as it is said,
“If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment,”(432) etc. There
were three places of judgment. One place was by the door of the Mountain
of the House; and one was by the door of the court; and one was in the
chamber of hewn stone. The witnesses against the rebellious elder came to
the one by the door of the Mountain of the House, and each one said, “so I
expounded, and so my companions expounded; so I taught, and so my
companions taught.” If the judges listened to them, they told them: but if
not, they went to those at the door of the court, and each one said, “so I
expounded, and so my companions expounded; so I taught, and so my
companions taught.” If they listened to them, they told them; but if not,
both parties went to the supreme court in the chamber of hewn stone,
because from it the Law proceeded forth to all Israel, as is said, “Of
that place which the Lord shall choose.”(433) “If the rebellious elder
returned to his city, and taught as before?” “He is free.” “But if he
decided to practise false teaching?” “He is guilty,” as is said, “And the
man that will do presumptuously.”(434) He is not guilty till he decide to
practise his false teaching. A disciple who decided to practise false
teaching is free. It follows that what is a grave offence in the one is a
light offence in the other.

3. The burden in the words of the scribes is greater than the burden in
the words of the law. He who said, “There are no phylacteries, so as to
transgress the words of the law?” “He is free.” He who said, “There are
five frontlets, so as to add to the words of the scribes?” “He is guilty.”

4. “The judges do not put such an offender to death in the tribunal of his
city, nor in the tribunal of Jabneh,(435) but they bring him up to the
supreme court in Jerusalem, and they guard him till a holiday; and they
put him to death on a holiday, as is said, ‘And all the people shall hear
and fear, and do no more presumptuously.’ ”(436) The words of R. Akiba. R.
Judah said, “they do not cause him anguish in delaying his judgment, but
they execute him off-hand.” And they write and send messengers to all
places, “Such a man, the son of such a man, is condemned to death by the
tribunal.”

5. A false prophet, who prophesied what he did not hear, and what was not
told to him, is put to death by the hands of man. But he who suppressed
his prophecy, and he who added to the words of a prophet, and a prophet
who transgressed his own words, is put to death by the visitation of
heaven, as is said, “I will require it of him.”(437)

6. And he who prophesied in the name of idolatry and said, “so the idol
said,” even though its decision was exactly to pronounce unclean the
unclean, and to pronounce cleansed the clean, is to be strangled. And so
also the false witnesses against a priest’s daughter. Because all false
witnesses are condemned to the same death which they had intended (for the
accused), except false witnesses against the daughter of a priest, and
they are to be strangled.




On Idolatry(438)


    Dealings with Idolaters—Idolatrous Feasts—Things Not to be Sold to
    Idolaters—Labor with Idolaters—The Letting Out of Houses and
    Fields—Precautions—Things Forbidden and Things Allowed—Idols and
    Fragments of Idols—Hills and Groves—Houses Joined to an Idol
    Temple—Idolatrous Trees—Image of Mercury—Annulling Idolatry—Pagan
    Argument for Idolatry—Answer—Treading—Pressing—Baking—Wine of
    Libation—Culinary Utensils.



