Chapter VIII


1. On the day of atonement, food, and drink, and washing, and anointing,
and the sandal latchet,(242) and marriage duties, are restricted. “But the
king and bride are allowed to wash their face, and the woman after
childbirth may wear sandals.” The words of R. Eleazar, but the Sages
forbid them.

2. The person who eats the size of a big date and its grain, and drinks a
jawful, is liable to punishment. All edible things are united for the
measure of the date, and all drinkable things are united for the measure
of the jawful. Eating and drinking are not united.

3. He who eats and drinks unwittingly, is only liable for one
sin-offering. If he eat and work, he is liable for two sin-offerings. He
who eats what is disagreeable for food, and drinks what is disagreeable
for drinking, and he who drinks fish brine, or salt gravy, is free.

4. They do not afflict young children in the day of atonement, but they
coax them one or two years before, that they may be accustomed to the
commandments.

5. If the pregnant woman be affected by the odor, they give her food, till
her strength return. To the sick person they give food by order from the
physicians. If there be no physicians, they give him food at his own
demand until he say, “it is enough.”

6. Him who is affected with blindness, they fed even with unclean things,
till his eyes got the power of vision. Him who is bitten by a mad dog,
they fed not with the caul of his liver. But R. Mathia Ben Charash said,
“it is allowed”; and again said R. Mathia Ben Charash, “to him who had
throat complaint they administered medicine in his mouth on the Sabbath
day, since there is uncertainty of life, and all uncertainty of life
abrogates the Sabbath.”

7. “On whomsoever an old ruin falls, if there be a doubt, whether one be
under it or not; if there be doubt, whether he be alive or dead; if there
be a doubt, whether he be a foreigner or an Israelite?” “They open over
him the heap. If they find him alive, they open fully, but if dead, they
leave him.”

8. The sin-offering, and the offering for known transgression make
atonement. Death and the day of atonement with repentance make atonement.
Repentance atones for light transgressions, for commands positive and
negative. But grave offences are suspended, till the day of atonement
come, and it will atone.

9. He who said, “I will sin and repent—I will sin and repent?” “They did
not give him the opportunity of repentance.” “I will sin, and the day of
atonement shall atone?” “The day of atonement makes no atonement.”
Transgressions between man and The Place(243) the day of atonement
expiates. Transgressions between man and his neighbor, the day of
atonement does not expiate, until his companion be reconciled. This R.
Eleazar Ben Azariah explained “From all thy sins before the LORD thou
shalt be cleansed.” Transgressions between man and The Place, the day of
atonement expiated. Transgressions between man and his companion, the day
of atonement did not expiate, until his companion be reconciled. Said R.
Akiba, “Happy are ye, Israel! before whom are ye to be pure? Who will
purify you? Your Father in heaven, as is said, ‘I will sprinkle clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean.’ ” Then said the Fountain of
Israel, the LORD, “As the fountain purifies the defiled, so the Holy One,
blessed be He, purifies Israel.”




On Tabernacles(244)


    Size and Covering of Tabernacles—What Constitutes a
    Tabernacle—Exemptions—Palm Branches—Myrtle
    Boughs—Willows—Citrons—Reading and Blessing—Thrashing the
    Altar—Rejoicings—Pouring Out of the Water—The Lighting and
    Dancing—Singing and Music—Blowing the Trumpets—Offerings and
    Courses—The Course Bilgah.



Chapter I


1. A booth which is above twenty cubits high is disallowed. R. Judah
allows it. One which is not ten hands high, one which has not three walls,
or which has more sun than shade, is disallowed. “An old booth?” “The
school of Shammai disallow it; but the school of Hillel allow it.” “What
is an old booth?” “One that was made thirty days before the feast; but if
it were made with intention for the feast, even from the beginning of the
year, it is allowed.”

2. “If a man make his booth beneath a tree?” “It is as though he made it
in the house.” “If one booth be above another?” “The upper one is allowed;
but the lower one is disallowed.” R. Judah says, “if they cannot inhabit
the upper one, the lower one is allowed.”

3. “If one spread a cloth over (its roof)(245) on account of the sun; or
under (its roof) on account of the falling leaves; or if one spread a
canopy over his bed?” “It is disallowed. But he may spread a cloth over
two bedposts.”

4. “If one have trained a vine, or a gourd, or ivy, and covered it over?”
“It is disallowed. But if the covering be larger than these, or if they
have been trimmed, it is allowed.” The rule is, everything which contracts
uncleanness, and does not grow from the ground, must not be used for a
covering; but everything which does not contract uncleanness, and grows
from the ground, may be used for a covering.

5. Bundles of straw, and bundles of wood, and bundles of twigs, must not
be used for covering. But all of them, if untied, are allowed. And all of
them are allowed for side walls.

6. “They may cover it with laths.” The words of R. Judah; but R. Meier
forbids it. “If one put a board four hands wide over it?” “It is allowed,
provided he do not sleep under it.”

7. “Rafters over which there is no ceiling?” R. Judah says, “the school of
Shammai say, ‘let him loosen them, and remove the middle one out of
three.’ But the school of Hillel say, ‘he may either loosen them, or
remove the middle one out of every three.’ ” R. Meier says, “he must
remove the middle one out of every three, but he need not loosen them.”

8. “If one roof in his booth with spits, or bed-boards?” “If the
intermediate spaces be equal to them, it is allowed.” “If one pile up
loose sheaves to make a booth?” “It is no booth.”

9. “If one interweave the side walls from above downwards?” “If they be
three hand-breadths high from the ground, it is disallowed.” “If from the
ground upwards they be ten hand-breadths high?” “It is allowed.” R. José
says, “even as from the ground upward ten hand-breadths (are required), so
likewise from the roof downward, ten hand-breadths (are required).” “If
the covering be three hand-breadths above the side walls?” “It is
disallowed.”

10. “If a house be unroofed and covered over?” “If there be a space of
four cubits between the wall and the covering, it is disallowed: also a
court, in which there is an enclosed passage.” “If the large booth be
enclosed with covering, which must not be used, and if there be below it a
space of four cubits?” “It is disallowed.”

11. “If one make his booth like a pyramid; or lean it against a wall?” R.
Eleazar “disallows it, because it has no roof”; but the Sages “allow it.”
“A large reed mat, which has been made for sleeping purposes?” “It
contracts uncleanness, and they must not cover with it.” “If made for
covering purposes?” “They may use it; and it contracts no uncleanness.” R.
Eleazar says, “whether large or small, if made for sleeping, it contracts
uncleanness, and must not be used for covering; but if made for covering,
they may cover with it, and it contracts no uncleanness.”



