Chapter I


1. The priests guarded the sanctuary in three places, in the House
Abtinas,(567) in the House Nitzus,(568) and in the House Moked;(569) and
the Levites in twenty-one places, five at the five gates of the Mountain
of the House, four at its four corners inside, five at the five gates of
the Court, four at its four corners outside, and one in the chamber of the
Offering, and one in the chamber of the Vail, and one behind the House of
Atonement.

2. The Captain of the Mountain of the House went round to every Watch in
succession with torches flaming before him, and to every guard who did not
stand forth, the Captain said, “Peace be to thee.” If it appeared that he
slept, he beat him with his staff; and he had permission to set fire to
his cushion.(570) And they said, “what is the voice in the Court?” “It is
the voice of the Levite being beaten, and his garments burned, because he
slept on his guard.”(571) Rabbi Eliezer, the son of Jacob, said, “once
they found the brother of my mother asleep, and they burned his cushion.”

3. There were five gates to the Mountain of the House, two Huldah gates in
the south which served for going in and out, Kipunus in the west served
for going in and out; Tadi(572) in the north served for no (ordinary)
purpose. Upon the east gate was portrayed the city Shushan. Through it one
could see the High Priest who burned the heifer, and all his assistants
going out to the Mount of Olives.

4. In the court were seven gates—three in the north, and three in the
south, and one in the east. That in the south was called the gate of
Flaming, the second after it, the gate of Offering; the third after it the
Water-gate. That in the east was called the gate Nicanor. And this gate
had two chambers, one on the right, and one on the left; one the chamber
of Phineas, the vestment keeper, and the other the chamber of the pancake
maker.

5. And at the gate Nitzus on the north was a kind of cloister with a room
built over it, where the priests kept ward above, and the Levites below;
and it had a door into the Chel.(573) Second to it was the gate of the
offering. Third the House Moked.

6. In the House Moked were four chambers opening as small apartments into
a saloon—two in the Holy place, and two in the Unconsecrated place; and
pointed rails separated between the Holy and the Unconsecrated. And what
was their use? The southwest chamber was the chamber for offering. The
southeast was the chamber for the showbread. In the northeast chamber the
children of the Asmoneans deposited the stones of the altar which the
Greek Kings had defiled.(574) In the northwest chamber they descended to
the house of baptism.

7. To the House Moked were two doors; one open to the Chel, and one open
to the court. Said Rabbi Judah, “the one open to the court had a wicket,
through which they went in to sweep the court.”

8. The House Moked was arched, and spacious, and surrounded with stone
divans, and the elders of the Courses slept there with the keys of the
court in their hands; and also the young priests each with his pillow on
the ground.

9. And there was a place a cubit square with a tablet of marble, and to it
was fastened a ring, and a chain upon which the keys were suspended. When
the time approached for locking the gates, the priest lifted up the tablet
by the ring, and took the keys from the chain and locked inside, and the
Levites slept outside. When he had finished locking, he returned the keys
to the chain, and the tablet to its place, laid his pillow over it, and
fell asleep. If sudden defilement happened, he rose and went out in the
gallery that ran under the arch, and candles flamed on either side, until
he came to the house of baptism. Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Jacob, says,
“in the gallery that went under the Chel, he passed out through Tadi.”

OUR BEAUTY BE UPON THEE IN THREE PLACES.



Chapter II


1. The Mountain of the House was 500 cubits square. The largest space was
on the south, the second on the east, the third on the north, and the
least westward. In the place largest in measurement was held most service.

2. All who entered the Mountain of the House entered on the right-hand
side, and went round, and passed out on the left: except to whomsoever an
accident occurred, he turned to the left. “Why do you go to the left?” “I
am in mourning.” “He that dwelleth in this House comfort thee.” “I am
excommunicate.” “He that dwelleth in this House put in thy heart
(repentance), and they shall receive thee.” The words of Rabbi Meier. To
him said Rabbi José, “thou hast acted as though they had transgressed
against him in judgment; but, ‘may He that dwelleth in this House put it
in thy heart that thou hearken to the words of thy neighbors, and they
shall receive thee.’ ”

3. Inside of the (Mountain of the House) was a reticulated wall, ten
hand-breadths high; and in it were thirteen breaches, broken down by the
Greek kings. The (Jews) restored, and fenced them, and decreed before them
thirteen acts of obeisance. Inside of it was the Chel, ten cubits broad,
and twelve steps were there. The height of each step was half a cubit, and
the breadth half a cubit. All the steps there were in height half a cubit,
and in breadth half a cubit, except those of the porch. All the doors
there were in height twenty cubits, and in breadth ten cubits, except that
of the porch. All the gateways there had doors, except that of the porch.
All the gates there had lintels, except Tadi; there two stones inclined
one upon the other. All the gates there were transformed into gold, except
the gate Nicanor,(575) because to it happened a wonder, though some said
“because its brass glittered like gold.”

4. And all the walls there were high, except the eastern wall, that the
priest who burned the heifer, might stand on the top of the Mount of
Olives, and look straight into the door of the Sanctuary when he sprinkled
the blood.

5. The Court of the women was 135 cubits in length, by 135 in breadth. And
in its four corners were four chambers, each forty cubits square, and they
had no roofs; and so they will be in future, as is said, “Then he brought
me forth into the utter court, and caused me to pass by the four corners
of the court; and, behold, in every corner of the court there was a
court.”(576) In the four corners of the court there were courts smoking,
yet not smoking, since they were roofless. And what was their use? The
southeast one was the chamber of the Nazarites, for there the Nazarites
cooked their peace-offerings, and polled their hair, and cast it under the
pot. The northeast was the chamber for the wood, and there the priests
with blemishes gathered out the worm-eaten wood. And every stick in which
a worm was found, was unlawful for the altar. The northwest was the
chamber for the lepers. The southwest? Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Jacob,
said, “I forget for what it served.” Abashaul said, “there they put wine,
and oil.” It was called the chamber of the house of oil. And it was open
at first and surrounded with lattice-work, that the women might see from
above and the men from beneath, lest they should be mixed. And fifteen
steps corresponding to the fifteen steps in the Psalms, ascended from it
to the court of Israel; upon them the Levites chanted. They were not
angular, but deflected like the half of a round threshing-floor.

6. And under the court of Israel were chambers open to the court of the
women. There the Levites deposited their harps, and psalteries, and
cymbals, and all instruments of music. The court of Israel was 135 cubits
long, and eleven broad; and likewise the court of the priests was 135
cubits long, and eleven broad. And pointed rails separated the court of
Israel from the court of the priests. Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Jacob,
said, “there was a step a cubit high, and a dais placed over it. And in it
were three steps each half a cubit in height.” We find that the priests’
court was two and a half cubits higher than the court of Israel. The whole
court was 187 cubits in length, and 135 cubits in breadth, and the
thirteen places for bowing were there. Abajose, the son of Chanan, said,
“in front of the thirteen gates.” In the south near to the west were the
upper gate, the gate of flaming, the gate of the first-born, the water
gate. And why is it called the water gate? Because through it they bring
bottles of water for pouring out during the feast of Tabernacles. Rabbi
Eleazar, the son of Jacob, said, “through it the water returned out, and
in future it will issue from under the threshold of the house.” And there
were opposite to them in the north, near to the west, the gate of
Jochania, the gate of the offering, the gate of the women, the gate of
music. And “why was it called the gate of Jochania?” “Because through it
Jochania went out in his captivity.” In the east was the gate Nicanor, and
in it were two wickets, one on the right, and one on the left, and two in
the west which were nameless.

OUR BEAUTY BE UPON THEE, O MOUNTAIN OF THE HOUSE.



