The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hebrew Literature



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: Hebrew Literature



Release Date: March 20, 2009 [Ebook #28369]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEBREW LITERATURE***





                            Hebrew Literature

                                Comprising

                        Talmudic Treatises, Hebrew

                            Melodies, And The

                            Kabbalah Unveiled

                Edited And With A Special Introduction By

                         Epiphanius Wilson, A.M.

                             Revised Edition

                                 New York

                           P. F. Collier & Son

                              Copyright 1901

                          By The Colonial Press





CONTENTS


Special Introduction
Selections From The Talmud
   Translator’s Introduction
   On Blessings
   On The Sabbatical Year
   On The Sabbath
   On The Passover
   On The Day Of Atonement
   On Tabernacles
   The New Year
   On Fasting
   The Feast-Offering
   The Sanhedrin
   On Idolatry
   The Fathers
   The Daily Sacrifice
   On Measurements
   The Tabernacle
   The Heifer
   Hands
The Kabbalah Unveiled: The Lesser Holy Assembly
   Chapter I: Which Containeth the Introduction
   Chapter II: Concerning the Skull of the Ancient One, and Concerning His
   Brain; and Concerning the Three Heads, and the Hair, and the
   Discriminatory Paths
   Chapter III: Concerning the Forehead of the Most Holy Ancient One
   Chapter IV: Concerning the Eyes of the Most Holy Ancient One
   Chapter V: Concerning the Nose of the Most Holy Ancient One
   Chapter VI: Concerning the Beard of the Most Holy Ancient One
   Chapter VII: Concerning the Brain and the Wisdom in General
   Chapter VIII: Concerning the Father and the Mother in Special
   Chapter IX: Concerning Microprosopus and His Bride in General
   Chapter X: Concerning Microprosopus in Especial, with Certain
   Digressions; and Concerning the Edomite Kings
   Chapter XI: Concerning the Brain of Microprosopus and Its Connections
   Chapter XII: Concerning the Hair of Microprosopus
   Chapter XIII: Concerning the Forehead of Microprosopus
   Chapter XIV: Concerning the Eyes of Microprosopus
   Chapter XV: Concerning the Nose of Microprosopus
   Chapter XVI: Concerning the Ears of Microprosopus
   Chapter XVII: Concerning the Countenance of Microprosopus
   Chapter XVIII: Concerning the Beard of Microprosopus
   Chapter XIX: Concerning the Lips and Mouth of Microprosopus
   Chapter XX: Concerning the Body of Microprosopus
   Chapter XXI: Concerning the Bride of Microprosopus
Hebrew Melodies
   Ode To Zion
   God, Whom Shall I Compare To Thee?
   Servant Of God
   My King
   To The Soul
   Sabbath Hymn
   O Sleeper! Wake, Arise!
   The Land Of Peace
   The Heart’s Desire
   O Soul, With Storms Beset!
   Sanctification
   Hymn Of Praise
   Passover Hymn
   Morning Prayer
   Judgment And Mercy
   Grace After Meals
   Lord Of The Universe
   Hymn For The Conclusion Of The Sabbath
   God And Man
   Hymn For Tabernacles
   Hymn For Pentecost
   Hymn Of Glory
   Hymn Of Unity For The Seven Days Of The Week
   Penitential Prayer
   The Living God We Praise
Footnotes






SPECIAL INTRODUCTION


Hebrew literature contains some of the most profound and most influential
productions of the human spirit. It constitutes a potent factor in modern
civilization, and possesses merits which place it far above most other
literatures of the world. The common salutation of the Hebrew is “Peace,”
while that of the Greeks is “Grace,” and that of the Romans, “Safety.” The
Greek sought after grace, or intellectual and bodily perfection, and the
power of artistic accomplishment. The Roman’s ideal was strength and
security of life and property. The Hebrew sought after peace, peace in the
heart, as founded on a sense of Jehovah’s good providence, and a moral
conformity in conduct to His revealed will. While the Greek in art,
literature, and even in morals, made beauty his standard, the Roman stood
for power, domination and law, and the Hebrew for religion. The Hebrew,
indeed, introduced into Europe the first clear conception of religion, as
implied in monotheism, and a rigidly defined moral law, founded upon the
will of Jehovah. The basis of morals among the Latins was political, among
the Greeks æsthetic, and among the Hebrews it was the revealed will of
Jehovah.

While the most important remains of Hebrew literature are comprised in the
Scriptures known to us as the Bible, there exists also a voluminous mass
of Hebrew writings which are not included in the sacred canon. These
writings are of supreme importance and value, and the selections which we
have made from them in the present volume give a good idea of their
interest, beauty, and subtlety of thought.

From the very beginning of their history the Hebrews were a deeply poetic
race. They were fully alive to the beauties of external nature, and no
national poetry contains more vivid descriptions of the sea, sky, and the
panorama of forest, stream and mountain, peopled by the varied activities
of animated nature. The songs of Zion glow with poetic enthusiasm, but
their principal characteristic is their intense earnestness. They are no
idle lays of love and wine or warlike triumph. They depict the joy of
existence as dependent upon the smile and favor of Jehovah, and all the
happiness, plenty, victory and success of life are attributed, without
hesitation, to nothing else but “the loving-kindness of the Lord.” Yet
this religious fervor becomes the basis of sublimity, pathos, and
picturesqueness, such as can seldom be approached even by the finest
productions of the Attic muse.

But the Hebrews were also philosophers, and if they never attained to what
we may call the _netteté et clarté_ of the Greek metaphysician, they
excelled all other thinkers in the boldness and profound spirituality of
their philosophical mysticism. In proof of this assertion we may point to
that body of writings known as the Kabbalah.

The word “Kabbalah” means “doctrine received by oral tradition,” and is
applied to these remains to distinguish them from the canonical Hebrew
Scriptures, which were written by “the Finger of Jehovah.” Hebrew
speculation attempts in the Kabbalah to give a philosophical or
theosophistic basis to Hebrew belief, while at the same time it
supplements the doctrines of the Old Testament. For instance, it is a
disputed point whether the immortality of the soul is taught in the Hebrew
canon, but in the Kabbalah it is taken for granted, and a complete and
consistent psychology is propounded, in which is included the Oriental
theory of metempsychosis. This account of the human soul, as distinct from
the human body, treats of the origin and eternal destiny of man’s immortal
part. On the other hand God and Nature, and the connection between the
Creator and the creation, are most exactly treated of in detail. God is
the _En-Soph_, the boundless One, as in modern philosophy God is the
Absolute. He manifests Himself in the ten _Sephiroth_, or intelligences.
It would be easy on this point to show Dante’s indebtedness to the
Kabbalah in his description of the various heavens of his Paradise. These
intelligences control, in groups of three, the three worlds of intellect,
of soul, and of matter. The tenth of the _Sephiroth_ is called Kingdom,
_i.e._, the personal Deity, as seen in the workings of Providence, with
which conception we may compare Dante’s description of Fortune, in the
seventh book of the “Inferno.” This last of the _Sephiroth_ is manifested
visibly in the Shekinah. This is the barest and baldest outline of the
main features in this famous system.

The rise of Kabbalism is not very clearly known as regards authorship and
date; it is in turn, by different Jewish writers, ascribed to Adam,
Abraham, Moses and Ezra; but doubtless the work is an aggregation of
successive writings, and some critics believe that it was not compiled
before the Middle Ages, _i.e._, in the centuries between the conquest of
Gaul by the Franks and the period following the death of Dante.

There can be no doubt that the Kabbalah contains the ripest fruit of
spiritual and mystical speculation which the Jewish world produced on
subjects which had hitherto been obscured by the gross anthropomorphism of
such men as Maimonides and his school. We can understand the revolt of the
devout Hebrew mind from traditions like those which represented Jehovah as
wearing a phylactery, and as descending to earth for the purpose of taking
a razor and shaving the head and beard of Sennacherib. The theory of the
_Sephiroth_ was at least a noble and truly reverent guess at the mode of
God’s immanence in nature. This conception won the favor of Christian
philosophers in the Middle Ages, and, indeed, was adopted or adapted by
the angelic Doctor Aquinas himself, the foremost of ecclesiastical and
scholastic metaphysicians. The psychology of the Kabbalah, even its
treatment of the soul’s preëxistence before union with the body, found
many advocates among Gentile and even Christian philosophers.

We are therefore led to the conclusion that the Kabbalah is by far the
most exalted, the most profound and the most interesting of all that mass
of traditional literature which comprises, among other writings, such
remains as the Targums and the Talmud.

A study of Hebrew literature would indeed be incomplete unless it included
the Talmud.

“Talmud” in Hebrew means “Doctrine,” and this strange work must be looked
upon as a practical handbook, intended for the Jews who, after the
downfall of Jerusalem and the Dispersion, found that most of the Law had
to be adjusted to new circumstances, in which the institution of
sacrifices and propitiatory offerings had been practically abolished. The
Talmud contains the decisions of Jewish doctors of many generations on
almost every single question which might puzzle the conscience of a
punctilious Jew in keeping the Law under the altered conditions of the
nation. The basis of the Talmud is the Mishna, _i.e._, an explanation of
the text of the Mosaic laws, and their application to new cases and
circumstances. The Mishna has been well described by the illustrious
Spanish Jew, Maimonides, who in the twelfth century published it at
Cordova, with a preface, in which he says: “From Moses, our teacher, to
our holy rabbi, no one has united in a single body of doctrine what was
publicly taught as the oral law; but in every generation, the chief of the
tribunal, or the prophet of his day, made memoranda of what he had heard
from his predecessors and instructors, and communicated it orally to the
people. In like manner each individual committed to writing, for his own
use and according to the degree of his ability, the oral laws and the
information he had received respecting the interpretation of the Bible,
with the various decisions that had been pronounced in every age and
sanctified by the authority of the great tribunal. Such was the form of
proceeding until the coming of our Rabbi the Holy, who first collected all
the traditions, the judgments, the sentences, and the expositions of the
law, heard by Moses, our master, and taught in each generation.”

The Mishna itself in turn became the subject of a series of comments and
elucidations, which formed what was called the Gemara. The text of the
original Hebrew scripture was abandoned, and a new crop of casuistical
quibbles, opinions and decisions rose like mushrooms upon the text of the
Mishna, and from the combination of text and Gemaraic commentary was
formed that odd, rambling, and sometimes perplexing work, “wonderful
monument of human industry, human wisdom and human folly,” which we know
as the Talmud. The book is compounded of all materials, an encyclopædia of
history, antiquities and chronology, a story book, a code of laws and
conduct, a manual of ethics, a treatise on astronomy, and a medical
handbook; sometimes indelicate, sometimes irreverent, but always
completely and persistently in earnest. Its trifling frivolity, its
curious prying into topics which were better left alone, the occasional
beauty of its spiritual and imaginative fancies, make it one of the most
remarkable books that human wit and human industry have ever compiled.

The selections which we print in this volume are from the Mishna, and form
part of the Sedarim, or orders; in them are given minute directions as to
the ceremonial practice of the Jewish religion.

The treatise on “Blessings” speaks of daily prayers and thanksgiving. It
is most minute in prescribing the position of the body, and how the voice
is to be used in prayer. It specifies the prayers to be said on seeing
signs and wonders, on building a house, on entering or leaving a city; and
how to speak the name of God in social salutations. That on the
“Sabbatical Year” is a discourse on agriculture from a religious point of
view. The Sabbatical year among the Hebrews was every seventh year, in
which the land was to be left fallow and uncultivated, and all debts were
to be remitted or outlawed. Provision is made in this section for doing
certain necessary work, such as picking and using fruits which may have
grown without cultivation during the Sabbatical year, with some notes on
manuring the fields, pruning trees and pulling down walls. Very
interesting is the section which deals with “The Sabbath Day.” The most
minute and exhaustive account is given of what may and what may not be
done on the seventh day.

The treatise on “The Day of Atonement” deals with the preparation and
deportment of the high-priest on that day. That on “The Passover” treats
of the Lamb to be sacrificed, of the search for leaven, so that none be
found in the house, and of all the details of the festival. “Measurements”
is an interesting and valuable account of the dimensions of the Temple at
Jerusalem. “The Tabernacle” deals with the ritual worship of the Jews
under the new conditions of their exile from Palestine.

All of these treatises show the vitality of Jewish religion in Europe,
under the most adverse circumstances, and illustrate the place which the
Talmud must have occupied in Jewish history, as supplying a religious
literature and a code of ritual and worship which kept Judaism united,
even when it had become banished and dissociated from Palestine,
Jerusalem, and the Temple.





SELECTIONS FROM THE TALMUD


                   Translated by Joseph Barclay, LL.D.




Translator’s Introduction


The Talmud (teaching) comprises the Mishna and the Gemara. The Mishna
(“learning” or “second law”) was, according to Jewish tradition, delivered
to Moses on Mount Sinai. “Rabbi Levi, the son of Chama, says, Rabbi Simon,
the son of Lakish, says, what is that which is written, ‘I will give thee
tables of stone, and a law and commandments which I have written, that
thou mayest teach them’?(1) The Tables are the ten commandments; the Law
is the written law; and the commandment is the Mishna; ‘which I have
written’ means the prophets and sacred writings; ‘that thou mayest teach
them’ means the Gemara. It teaches us that they were all given to Moses
from Mount Sinai.” From Moses the Mishna was transmitted by oral tradition
through forty “Receivers,” until the time of Rabbi Judah the Holy. These
Receivers were qualified by ordination to hand it on from generation to
generation. Abarbanel and Maimonides disagree as to the names of these
Receivers. While the Temple still stood as a centre of unity to the
nation, it was considered unlawful to reduce these traditions to writing.
But when the Temple was burned, and the Jews were dispersed among other
peoples, it was considered politic to form them into a written code, which
should serve as a bond of union, and keep alive the spirit of patriotism.
The Jewish leaders saw the effect of Constitutions and Pandects in
consolidating nations—the advantage of written laws over arbitrary
decisions. Numberless precedents of case law, answering to our common law,
were already recorded: and the teachings of the Hebrew jurisconsults, or
“_Responsa prudentium_” which were held to be binding on the people, had
been preserved from former ages.

All these traditions Rabbi Judah the Holy undertook to reduce into one
digest. And this laborious work he completed about A.D. 190, or more than
a century after the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus. Rabbi Judah was
born on the day that Rabbi Akibah died. Solomon is said to have foretold
the event: “One sun ariseth, and one sun goeth down.” Akibah was the
setting and Judah the rising sun. The Mishna of Rabbi Judah, afterward
revised by Abba Areka in Sura, is the text of the Babylon Talmud. The
commentaries written on this text by various Rabbis in the neighborhood of
Babylon, until the close of the fifth century, are called the Gemara
(completion), and are published in twelve folio volumes, called the
Babylon Talmud—the Talmud most esteemed by the Jews. The Jerusalem Talmud
contains commentaries written partly by Rabbis in Jamnia and partly in
Tiberias, where they were completed by Rabbi Jochanan in the beginning of
the fourth century. As now published it has only four out of the six
orders or books of the Mishna, with the treatise Niddah from the sixth. In
the time of Maimonides it contained five orders. On twenty-six treatises
it has no Gemara, though in the treatise on shekels the Gemara of
Jerusalem is used for the Babylon Talmud. The six books of the Mishna are
subdivided into sixty-three treatises, in the following manner:

Book I

This book, called Order of Seeds, contains the following treatises:

1. “Blessings,” together with prayers and thanksgivings, with the times
and places in which they are to be used.

2. “A Corner of a Field” (Lev. xxiii. 22; Deut. xxiv. 19) treats of the
corners of the field to be left for the poor to glean them—the forgotten
sheaves, olives, and grapes—and of giving alms, etc.

3. “Doubtful” treats of the doubt about the tithes being paid, as the Jews
were not allowed to use anything without its being first tithed.

4. “Diversities” (Lev. xix. 19; Deut. xxii. 9-11) treats of the unlawful
mixing or joining together things of a different nature or kind—of sowing
seeds of a different species in one bed—grafting a scion on a stock of a
different kind, suffering cattle of different kinds to come together.

5. “The Sabbatical Year” (Exod. xxiii. 11; Lev. xxv. 4) treats of the laws
which regulated the land as it lay fallow and rested.

6. “Heave Offerings” (Num. xviii. 8) treats of separating the heave
offering—who may eat it, and who may not eat of it—of its pollutions, etc.

7. “The First Tithes” (Lev. xxvii. 30; Num. xviii. 28) treats of the law
of tithes for the priests.

8. “The Second Tithes” (Deut. xiv. 22; xxvi. 14) treats of those which
were to be carried to Jerusalem and there eaten, or to be redeemed and the
money spent in Jerusalem in peace offerings.

9. “Cake of Dough” (Num. xv. 20) treats of setting apart a cake of dough
for the priests; also, from what kind of dough the cake must be separated.

10. “Uncircumcised Fruit” (Lev. xix. 23) treats of the unlawfulness of
eating the fruit of any tree till the fifth year. The first three years it
is uncircumcised; the fourth year it is holy to the Lord; the fifth year
it may be eaten.

11. “First Fruits” (Exod. xxiii. 19; Deut. xxvi. 1) treats of what fruits
were to be offered in the Temple, and in what manner; also of the baskets
in which they were to be carried.

