Chapter VI


1. The Sages studied in the language of the Mishna; blessed be He who made
choice of them and their learning. R. Meier said, “he who is engaged in
the study of the law for its own sake merits many things, and not only so,
but the whole world is under the greatest obligation to him; he is called
a dear friend, dear to God and dear to mankind; he rejoices God and
rejoices His creatures. It clothes him with meekness and the fear of God,
and directs him to become just, pious, righteous, and faithful; it removes
him from sin, and brings him near to merit, and the world is benefited by
his counsel, sound wisdom, understanding, and strength; as is said,
‘Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom; I am understanding, I have
strength.’(503) It also bestows on him empire, dominion, and perception in
judgment. It reveals the secrets of the law to him, and he shall be an
increasing fountain, and a never-failing river; and it will cause him to
be modest, slow to anger, and ready to pardon an injury done to him; and
it will magnify and exalt him above all things.”

2. R. Joshua, son of Levi, said, “every day a Divine voice (_bath kol_)
proceeds from Mount Horeb, which proclaims and says, ‘Woe be to those who
contemn the law; for whoever is not engaged in the study of the law may be
considered as excommunicate’; for it is said, ‘as a jewel of gold in a
swine’s snout, so is a fair woman which is without discretion’;(504) and
it is said, ‘And the tables were the work of God, and the writing was the
writing of God, graven upon the tables.’(505) Read not graven but freedom;
for who are counted free but those engaged in the study of the law, and
whoever is engaged in the study of the law is exalted; as it is said, ‘And
from Mattanah to Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth.’ ”(506)

3. He who learns from his companion one chapter, sentence, verse, or
expression, ought to behave toward him with respect; for thus we find by
David, King of Israel, who having learned only two things from Ahitophel,
called him his teacher, guide, and acquaintance, as is said, “But it was
thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance.”(507) Hence it
may be deduced that if David, King of Israel, who having learned only two
things from Ahitophel, called him his “teacher, guide, and acquaintance,”
how much more ought he who learns from his companion a single chapter,
sentence, verse, or expression, to show him the utmost respect? And there
is no glory but the knowledge of the law; as is said, “The wise shall
inherit glory”;(508) and the perfect shall inherit the good; but nothing
is really good but the law, as is said, “For I give you good doctrine,
forsake ye not my law.”(509)

4. Thus is the law to be observed: Thou shalt eat bread and salt, and
water by measure shalt thou drink; on the earth shalt thou sleep, and a
life of trouble shalt thou live; and thou shalt labor in the study of the
law. If thou doest thus, thou shalt be happy, and it shall be well with
thee; thou shalt be happy in this world, and it shall be well with thee in
the world to come.

5. Seek not grandeur for thyself, neither covet more honor than thy
learning merits. Crave not after the tables of kings; for thy table is
greater than their table, and thy crown is greater than their crown; and
the Master who employs thee is faithful to pay thee the reward of thy
labor.

6. The law is more excellent than the priesthood and royalty; for royalty
is acquired by thirty properties, and the priesthood by twenty-four; but
the law is acquired by forty-eight things, and these are they—with study,
attention, eloquence; an understanding heart, an intelligent heart; with
dread and meekness, fear and joy; with attendance on the Sages, the
acuteness of companions, and disputations of the disciples; with
sedateness, the study of the Bible, and the Mishna; in purity, in taking
little sleep, in using little discourse, in being little engaged in
traffic, in taking little sport, in enjoying little delight and little
worldly manners; in being slow to anger, in having a good heart, in having
faith in the Sages, and in bearing chastisements; in being sensible of his
situation, and rejoicing in his portion; in being circumspect in his
language, in not pretending to pre-eminence, in sincerely loving God, and
loving His creatures; in loving admonition, and that which is right; in
avoiding honor, and in not priding himself on his acquired knowledge; not
rejoicing in pronouncing sentence, in bearing the burden equally with his
companion, and inclining him to merit, and confirming him in the truth and
in peace; is sedate in his study, inquires according to the subject, and
answers according to the constitution; is attentive to study, and extends
it; learns it with a view to the teaching of others, and also with a view
to perform the precepts; increases his teacher’s knowledge, and is
attentive to his instruction, and reports everything in the name of the
person who said it; hence it is inferred that whoever reports anything in
the name of the person who said it, procures redemption for the world, as
is said, “And Esther certified the king thereof in Mordecai’s name.”(510)

7. Great is the law, which bestows life on the doers of it, both in this
world and in the world to come; as is said, “For they are life unto those
that find them, and health to all their flesh.”(511) And it is said, “It
shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.”(512) And it is
said, “She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her; and happy is
everyone that retaineth her.”(513) And it is said, “For they shall be an
ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy neck.”(514) And it
is said, “She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace; a crown of
glory shall she deliver to thee.”(515) And it is said, “Length of days is
in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor.”(516) And it is
said, “For length of days and long life, and peace shall they add to
thee.”(517)

8. Rabbi Simeon, son of Judah, in the name of Rabbi Simeon, son of Jochai,
said, “beauty, strength, riches, honor, wisdom, age, hoariness, and many
children, are suitable for the righteous, and suitable for the world; as
is said, ‘The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness.’(518) And it is said, ‘Children’s children are the crown of
old men, and the glory of children are their fathers.’(519) And it is
said, ‘Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the
Lord of Hosts shall reign on Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem; and before his
ancients gloriously.’ ”(520)

9. Rabbi Simeon, son of Manasya, said, “those seven qualities which the
Sages counted as proper for the righteous, were all established in the
Rabbi (Judah) and his children.” Rabbi José, son of Kishma, said, “I was
once travelling along the road and met a certain person, who saluted me
with peace, and I returned his salutation. He then said to me, ‘Rabbi,
whence art thou?’ I answered him, ‘from a great city abounding in sages
and scribes:’ said he to me, ‘if thou be willing to dwell with us in our
city, then will I give thee a thousand thousand golden dinars, and
precious stones and pearls.’ To this I answered, ‘if thou wouldst give me
all the silver and gold, and precious stones and pearls in the world, I
would only dwell in a place where the law is studied; because at the time
of man’s departure from this world he is not accompanied either with
silver and gold, and precious stones and pearls, but with the law and good
deeds alone, as is said, “When thou goest it shall lead thee: when thou
sleepest it shall keep thee: and when thou awakest it shall talk with
thee.” ’ ”(521) “When thou goest it shall lead thee,” that is in this
world. “When thou sleepest it shall keep thee,” in the grave; “and when
thou awakest it shall talk with thee,” in the world to come. And thus it
is written in the book of Psalms by the hand of David, King of Israel,
“The law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and
silver.”(522) And it is said, “The silver is mine, and the gold is mine,
saith the Lord of Hosts.”(523)

10. Five possessions hath the Holy One, blessed be He, obtained in this
world, and these are they—the law is one possession; heaven and earth
another; Abraham another; Israel another; and the holy Temple another. Now
whence is it to be proved that the law is one possession? Because it is
written, “The LORD possessed me in the beginning of His way before His
works of old.”(524) And whence is it proved that heaven and earth is
another possession? Because it is said, “Thus saith the Lord, The heaven
is my throne and the earth is my footstool; where is the house that ye
build unto me? and where is the place of my rest?”(525) And it is said, “O
Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all; the
earth is full of thy riches.”(526) Whence is it proved that Abraham is one
possession? Because it is written, “And he blessed him, and said blessed
be Abraham of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth.”(527)
Whence is it proved that Israel is one possession? Because it is written,
“Till thy people pass over, O Lord, till the people pass over, which thou
hast purchased.”(528) And it is said, “But to the saints that are in the
earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight.”(529) Whence can
it be proved that the holy temple is one possession? Because it is said,
“The sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established.”(530) And it is
said, “And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary, even to this
mountain which his right hand hath purchased.”(531) Everything which God
created, he created but for his glory; as is said, “Everyone that is
called by my name; for I have created him for my glory, I have formed him;
yea, I have made him.”(532) And the Lord will reign forever and ever. R.
Chanina, son of Akasea, said, “the Holy One, Blessed be He, wished to
purify Israel, wherefore He magnified for them the Law and the
Commandments, as is said, ‘The Lord is well pleased for his righteousness’
sake; he will magnify the law and make it honorable.’ ”(533)




The Daily Sacrifice


    Guarding the Temple at Night—Taking the Ashes Off the
    Altar—Casting Lots—Opening the Temple in the Morning—Arranging the
    Fire on the Altar—The Wood-Kindling—Allotting Services—Examination
    of the Daily Sacrifice—Slaughter-house—Sounds Heard at
    Jericho—Snuffing the Candlestick—Position of the Lamb when
    Slain—Pouring Out its Blood—Preparations for Burning—Order of
    Carrying the Members to the Altar—Blessings—Cleansing the Vessels
    of the Holy Place—The High Priest on the Altar—Music and
    Psalm-Singing.



