CHAPTER VII

THE CASH BOY HAS AN ADVENTURE


Four weeks passed. The duties of a cash-boy are simple enough, and Frank
had no difficulty in discharging them satisfactorily. At first he found
it tiresome, being on his feet all day, for the cash-boys were not
allowed to sit down, but he got used to this, being young and strong.

All this was very satisfactory, but one thing gave Frank uneasiness. His
income was very inadequate to his wants.

“What makes you so glum, Frank?” asked Jasper Wheelock one evening.

“Do I look glum?” said Frank. “I was only thinking how I could earn more
money. You know how little I get. I can hardly take care of myself, much
less take care of Grace.”

“I can lend you some money, Frank. Thanks to your good advice, I have
got some laid up.”

“Thank you, Jasper, but that wouldn’t help matters. I should owe you the
money, and I don’t know how I could pay you.”

“About increasing your income, I really don’t know,” said Jasper. “I am
afraid Gilbert & Mack wouldn’t raise your wages.”

“I don’t expect it. All the rest of the cash-boys would ask the same
thing.”

“True; still I know they are very well pleased with you. Duncan told me
you did more work than any of the rest of the boys.”

“I try to do all I can.”

“He said you would make a good salesman, he thought. Of course you are
too young for that yet.”

“I suppose I am.”

“Frank, I am earning fifteen dollars a week, you know, and I can get
along on ten, but of the five I save let me give you two. I shall never
feel it, and by and by when you are promoted it won’t be necessary.”

“Jasper, you are a true friend,” said Frank, warmly; “but it wouldn’t be
right for me to accept your kind offer, though I shan’t forget it. You
have been a good friend to me.”

“And you to me, Frank. I’ll look out for you. Perhaps I may hear of
something for you.”

Small as Frank’s income was, he had managed to live within it. It will
be remembered that he had paid but fifty cents a week for a room. By
great economy he had made his meals cost but two dollars a week, so that
out of his three dollars he saved fifty cents. But this saving would not
be sufficient to pay for his clothes. However, he had had no occasion
to buy any as yet, and his little fund altogether amounted to twenty
dollars. Of this sum he inclosed {sic} eight dollars to Mr. Pomeroy to
pay for four weeks’ board for Grace.

“I hope I shall be able to keep it up,” he said to himself,
thoughtfully. “At any rate, I’ve got enough to pay for six weeks more.
Before that time something may turn up.”

Several days passed without showing Frank any way by which he could
increase his income. Jasper again offered to give him two dollars a week
out of his own wages, but this our hero steadily refused.

One Friday evening, just as the store was about to close, the head
salesman called Frank to him.

“Where do you live?” he asked.

“In Sixth avenue, near Twenty-fifth street.”

“There’s a bundle to go to Forty-sixth street. I’ll pay your fare upon
the stage if you’ll carry it. I promised to send it to-night, and I
don’t like to disappoint the lady.”

“I can carry it just as well as not.”

Frank took the bundle, and got on board a passing omnibus. There was
just one seat vacant beside an old gentleman of seventy, who appeared to
be quite feeble.

At Forty-fifth street he pulled the strap and prepared to descend,
leaning heavily on his cane as he did so. By some mischance the horses
started a little too soon and the old man, losing his footing, fell in
the street. Frank observed the accident and sprang out instantly to his
help.

“I hope you are not much hurt, sir?” he said, hastily.

“I have hurt my knee,” said the old gentleman.

“Let me assist you, sir,” said Frank, helping him up.

“Thank you, my boy. I live at number forty-five, close by. If you will
lead me to the door and into the house I shall be much indebted to you.”

“Certainly, sir. It is no trouble to me.”

With slow step, supported by our hero, the old gentleman walked to his
own door.

It was opened by a maid servant, who looked with some surprise at Frank.

“I fell, Mary,” explained her master, “and this young gentleman has
kindly helped me home.”

“Did you hurt yourself much, sir?”

“Not seriously.”

“Can I do anything more for you, sir?” asked Frank.

“Come in a moment.”

Our hero followed his new acquaintance into a handsomely furnished
parlor.

“Now, my young friend tell me if you have been taken out of your way by
your attention to me?”

“Oh, no, sir; I intended to get out at the next street.”

“My dinner is just ready. Won’t you stop and dine with me?”

“Thank you, sir,” he said, hesitatingly, “but I promised to carry this
bundle. I believe it is wanted at once.”

“So you shall. You say the house is in the next street. You can go and
return in five minutes. You have done me a service, and I may have it in
my power to do something for you in return.”

“Perhaps,” thought Frank, “he can help me to some employment for my
evenings.” Then, aloud:

“Thank you, sir; I will come.”

Five minutes later Frank was ushered into a handsome dining-room. The
dinner was already on the table, but chairs were only set for three.
The one at the head of the table was of course occupied by the old
gentleman, the one opposite by Mrs. Bradley, his housekeeper, and one at
the side was placed for Frank.

“Mrs. Bradley,” said the old gentleman, “this is a young gentleman who
was kind enough to help me home after the accident of which I just spoke
to you. I would mention his name, but I must leave that to him.”

“Frank Fowler, sir.”

“And my name is Wharton. Now that we are all introduced, we can talk
more freely.”

“Will you have some soup, Mr. Fowler?” asked the housekeeper.

She was a tall thin woman, with a reserved manner that was somewhat
repellant. She had only nodded slightly at the introduction, fixing her
eyes coldly and searchingly on the face of our hero. It was evident that
whatever impression the service rendered might have made upon the
mind of Mr. Wharton, it was not calculated to warm the housekeeper to
cordiality.

“Thank you,” he answered, but he could not help feeling at the same time
that Mrs. Bradley was not a very agreeable woman.

“You ought to have a good appetite,” said Mr. Wharton. “You have to work
hard during the day. Our young friend is a cash-boy at Gilbert & Mack’s,
Mrs. Bradley.

“Oh, indeed!” said Mrs. Bradley, arching her brows as much as to say:
“You have invited strange company to dinner.”

“Do your parents live in the city, Frank--I believe your name is Frank?”

“No, sir; they are dead. My mother died only a few weeks since.”

“And have you no brothers and sisters?”

“I have one sister--Grace.”

“I suppose she is in the city here with you?”

“No, sir. I left her in the country. I am here alone.”

“I will ask you more about yourself after dinner. If you have no
engagement, I should like to have you stay with me a part of the
evening.”

“Thank you, sir.”

Frank accepted the invitation, though he knew Jasper would wonder what
had become of him. He saw that the old gentleman was kindly disposed
toward him, and in his present circumstances he needed such a friend.

But in proportion as Mr. Wharton became more cordial, Mrs. Bradley
became more frosty, until at last the old gentleman noticed her manner.

“Don’t you feel well this evening, Mrs Bradley?” he asked.

“I have a little headache,” said the housekeeper, coldly.

“You had better do something for it.”

“It will pass away of itself, sir.”

They arose from the dinner table, and Mr. Wharton, followed by Frank,
ascended the staircase to the front room on the second floor, which was
handsomely fitted up as a library.

“What makes him take such notice of a mere cash-boy?” said Mrs. Bradley
to herself. “That boy reminds me of somebody. Who is it?”



