CHAPTER XIX

WHAT FRANK HEARD THROUGH THE CREVICE


Frank looked with some surprise at the woman who was looking through
the slide of his door. He had expected to see Nathan Graves. She also
regarded him with interest.

“I have brought you some supper,” she said.

Frank reached out and drew in a small waiter, containing a cup of tea
and a plate of toast.

“Thank you,” he said. “Where is the man who brought me here?”

“He has gone out.”

“Do you know why he keeps me here in confinement?”

“No,” said the woman, hastily. “I know nothing. I see much, but I know
nothing.”

“Are many prisoners brought here as I have been?” asked our hero, in
spite of the woman’s refusal to speak.

“No.”

“I can’t understand what object they can have in detaining me. If I were
rich, I might guess, but I am poor. I am compelled to work for my daily
bread, and have been out of a place for two weeks.”

“I don’t understand,” she said, in a low voice, rather to herself than
to him. “But I cannot wait. I must not stand here. I will come up in
fifteen minutes, and if you wish another cup of tea, or some toast, I
will bring them.”

His confinement did not affect his appetite, for he enjoyed his tea and
toast; and when, as she had promised, the woman came up, he told her he
would like another cup of tea, and some more toast.

“Will you answer one question?” asked our hero.

“I don’t know,” answered the woman in a flurried tone.

“You look like a good woman. Why do you stay in such a house as this?”

“I will tell you, though I should do better to be silent. But you won’t
betray me?”

“On no account.”

“I was poor, starving, when I had an application to come here. The man
who engaged me told me that it was to be a housekeeper, and I had no
suspicion of the character of the house--that it was a den of--”

She stopped short, but Frank understood what she would have said.

“When I discovered the character of the house, I would have left but for
two reasons. First, I had no other home; next, I had become acquainted
with the secrets of the house, and they would have feared that I would
reveal them. I should incur great risk. So I stayed.”

Here there was a sound below. The woman started.

“Some one has come,” she said. “I must go down I will come up as soon as
I can with the rest of your supper.”

“Thank you. You need not hurry.”

Our hero was left to ponder over what he had heard. There was evidently
a mystery connected with this lonely house a mystery which he very much
desired to solve. But there was one chance. Through the aperture in the
closet he might both see and hear something, provided any should meet
there that evening.

The remainder of his supper was brought him by the same woman, but she
was in haste, and he obtained no opportunity of exchanging another word
with her.

Frank did not learn who it was that had arrived. Listening intently, he
thought he heard some sounds in the next room. Opening the closet door,
and applying his eye to the aperture, he saw two men seated in the room,
one of whom was the man who had brought him there.

He applied his ear to the opening, and heard the following conversation:

“I hear you’ve brought a boy here, Nathan,” said the other, who was a
stout, low-browed man, with an evil look.

“Yes,” said Graves, with a smile; “I am going to board him here a
while.”

“What’s it all about? What are you going to gain by it?”

“I’ll tell you all I know. I’ve known something of the family for a long
time. John Wade employed me long ago. The old millionaire had a son
who went abroad and died there. His cousin, John Wade, brought home his
son--a mere baby--the old man’s grandson, of course, and sole heir, or
likely to be, to the old man’s wealth, if he had lived. In that case,
John Wade would have been left out in the cold, or put off with a small
bequest.”

“Yes. Did the boy live?”

“No; he died, very conveniently for John Wade, and thus removed the only
obstacle from his path.”

“Very convenient. Do you think there was any foul play?”

“There may have been.”

“But I should think the old man would have suspected.”

“He was away at the time. When he returned to the city, he heard from
his nephew that the boy was dead. It was a great blow to him, of course.
Now, I’ll tell you what,” said Graves, sinking his voice so that Frank
found it difficult to hear, “I’ll tell you what I’ve thought at times.”

“I think the grandson may have been spirited off somewhere. Nothing
more easy, you know. Murder is a risky operation, and John Wade is
respectable, and wouldn’t want to run the risk of a halter.”

“You may be right. You don’t connect this story of yours with the boy
you’ve brought here, do you?”

“I do,” answered Graves, emphatically. “I shouldn’t be surprised if this
was the very boy!”

“What makes you think so?”

“First, because there’s some resemblance between the boy and the old
man’s son, as I remember him. Next, it would explain John Wade’s anxiety
to get rid of him. It’s my belief that John Wade has recognized in this
boy the baby he got rid of fourteen years ago, and is afraid his uncle
will make the same discovery.”

Frank left the crevice through which he had received so much information
in a whirl of new and bewildering thoughts.

“Was it possible,” he asked himself, “that he could be the grandson of
Mr. Wharton, his kind benefactor?”



