CHAPTER XIII

THE SPIDER AND THE FLY


“Uncle,” said John Wade, “you spoke of inviting Frank Fowler to occupy
a room in the house. Why don’t you do it? It would be more convenient to
you and a very good chance for him.”

“I should like it,” said Mr. Wharton, “but Mrs. Bradley did not seem to
regard it favorably when I suggested it.”

“Oh, Mrs. Bradley is unused to boys, and she is afraid he would give her
trouble. I’ll undertake to bring her around.”

“I wish you would, John. I don’t think Frank would give any trouble, and
it would enliven the house to have a boy here. Besides, he reminds me of
George, as I told you the other day.”

“I agree with you, uncle,” he said. “He does remind me a little of
George.”

“Well, Mrs. Bradley, what do you think I have done?” asked John,
entering the housekeeper’s room directly after his interview with his
uncle.

“I don’t know, Mr. John,” she answered.

“I have asked him to give that boy a room in the house.”

“Are you carried away with him as well as your uncle?”

“Not quite. The fact is, I have a motive in what I am doing. I’ll tell
you.”

He bent over and whispered in her ear.

“I never should have thought of that.”

“You see, our purpose is to convince my uncle that he is unworthy of his
favor. At present that would be rather difficult, but once get him into
the house and we shall have no trouble.”

“I understand.”

In due time John Wade announced to his uncle that the housekeeper had
withdrawn her objections to his plan.

“Then I’ll tell him to-night,” said Mr. Wharton, brightening up.

Shortly after Frank entered the library that evening Mr. Wharton made
the proposal.

“You are very kind, Mr. Wharton,” he said. “I never thought of such a
thing.”

“Then it is settled that you are to come. You can choose your own time
for coming.”

“I will come to-morrow, sir.”

“Very well,” said Mr. Wharton, with satisfaction.

The next day, by special favor, Frank got off from the store two hours
earlier than usual. He bought at a Sixth Avenue basement store, a small,
second hand trunk for two dollars. He packed his scanty wardrobe into
the trunk, which, small as it was he was unable to fill, and had it
carried to Mr. Wharton’s house.

He asked to see Mrs. Bradley, and she came to the door.

“I am glad to see you,” she said graciously. “You may leave your trunk
in the hall and I will have it carried up by the servants.”

“Thank you,” said Frank, and he followed the housekeeper up the handsome
staircase.

“This is to be your room,” said the housekeeper, opening the door of a
small chamber on the third floor.

“It looks very nice and comfortable,” said Frank, looking about him with
satisfaction.

She left the room, and five minutes later our hero’s modest trunk was
brought up and deposited in the room.

That evening Frank read to Mr. Wharton as usual.

When nine o’clock came he said:

“You need not read aloud any more, but if you see any books in my
library which you would like to read to yourself you may do so. In fact,
Frank, you must consider yourself one of the family, and act as freely
as if you were at home.”

“How kind you are to me, Mr. Wharton,” said Frank.

The next morning after Frank had left the house for his daily task, John
Wade entered the housekeeper’s room.

“The boy is out of the way now, Mrs. Bradley,” he said. “You had better
see if you have a key that will unlock his trunk.”

The two conspirators went upstairs, and together entered Frank’s room.

Mrs. Bradley brought out a large bunch of keys, and successively tried
them, but one after another failed to open it.

“That’s awkward,” said John Wade. “I have a few keys in my pocket. One
may possibly answer.”

The housekeeper kneeled down, and made a trial of John Wade’s keys. The
last one was successful. The cover was lifted, and the contents were
disclosed. However, neither John nor Mrs. Bradley seemed particularly
interested in the articles for after turning them over they locked the
trunk once more.

“So far so good,” said John Wade. “We have found the means of opening
the trunk when we please.”

“When do you expect to carry out your plan, Mr. John?”

“Two weeks from this time my uncle is obliged to go to Washington for a
few days on business. While he is gone we will spring the trap, and when
he comes back he will find the boy gone in disgrace. We’ll make short
work of him.”



