CHAPTER IV.

CONSCIOUSNESS AND UNCONSCIOUSNESS.[211]


48. Science demands precision of terms; and in this sense Condillac
was justified in defining it, “_une langue bien faite_.” The sciences
of Measurement are exact because of the precision of their terms, and
are powerful because of their exactness. The sciences of Classification
cannot aspire to this precision, and therefore, although capable of
attaining to a fuller knowledge of phenomena than can be reached
by their rivals, this advantage of a wider range is accompanied by
the disadvantage of a less perfect exposition of results. While
physicists and chemists have only to settle the significance of the
facts observed, biologists and social theorists have over and above
this to settle the significance of the terms they employ in expressing
the facts observed. Hence more than half their disputes are at bottom
verbal.

This is markedly the case in the question of Automatism. One man
declares that animals are automata; another that they are conscious
automata; and while it is quite possible to hold these views and not
practically be in disagreement with the views of ordinary men, or
indeed with the views of spiritualist and materialist philosophers,
we can never be sure that the advocates of Automatism do not mean
what they are generally understood to mean. If a man says that by an
automaton he does not here mean a machine, such as a steam-engine or
a watch, but a vital mechanism which has its parts so adjusted that
its actions resemble those of a machine; and if he adds that this
automaton is also conscious of some of its actions, though unconscious
of others, we can only object to his using terms which have misleading
connotations. If he mean by “conscious automata,” that animals are
mechanisms moved on “purely mechanical principles,” their consciousness
having nothing whatever to do with the production of their actions,
then indeed our objection is not only to his use of terms, but to his
interpretation of the facts.

49. The questions of fact are two: Are animal mechanisms rightfully
classed beside machines? and, Is consciousness a coefficient in the
actions of animal mechanism? The first has already been answered; the
second demands a preliminary settlement of the terms “conscious,”
“unconscious,” “voluntary,” and “involuntary.” The aim of Physiology
is to ascertain the particular combinations of the elementary parts
involved in each particular function--in a word, the mechanism of
organic phenomena; and the modern Reflex Theory is an attempt to
explain this mechanism on purely mechanical principles, without the
co-operation of other principles, especially those of Sensation and
Volition. It is greatly aided by the ambiguity of current terms. We are
accustomed to speak of certain actions as being performed unconsciously
or involuntarily. We are also accustomed to say that Consciousness
is necessary to transform an impression into a sensation, and that
Volition is the equivalent of conscious effort. When, therefore,
unconscious and involuntary actions are recorded, they seem to be
actions of an insentient mechanism. The Reflex Theory once admitted, a
rigorous logic could not fail to extend it to all animal actions.

50. I reject the Reflex Theory, on grounds hereafter to be urged,
but at present call attention to the great ambiguity in the terms
“conscious” and “unconscious.” In one sense no definition of
Consciousness can be satisfactory, since it designates an ultimate
fact, which cannot therefore be made more intelligible than it is
already. In another sense no definition is needed, since every one
knows what is meant by saying, “I am conscious of such a change,
or such a movement.” It is here the equivalent of Feeling. To be
conscious of a change, is to feel a change. If we desire to express
it in physiological terms, we must define Consciousness--“a function
of the organism”; and this definition we shall find eminently useful,
because the organism being a vital mechanism, and the integrity of that
mechanism being necessary for the integrity of the function, while
every variation of the mechanism will bring a corresponding variation
of the function, we shall have an objective guide and standard in
our inquiries. Organisms greatly differ in complexity, yet because
they also agree in the cardinal conditions of Vitality, among which
Sensibility is one, we conclude that they all have Feeling; but the
Feeling of the one will differ from that of another, according to the
complexity of the sentient mechanism in each. The perfection of this
mechanism lies in the co-ordination of its parts, and the consensus of
its sentient activities; any disturbance of that consensus must cause
a modification in the total consciousness; and when the disturbance
is profound the modification is marked by such terms as “insanity,”
“loss of consciousness,” “insensibility.” These terms do not imply
that the sentient organs have lost their Sensibility, but only that
the disturbed mechanism has no longer its normal consensus, no longer
its normal state of Consciousness. Each organ is active in its own
way so long as its own mechanism is preserved; but the united action
of the organs having been disturbed, their _resultant_ function has
been altered. Hence in a fit of Epilepsy there is a complete absence
of some normal reactions, with exaggeration of others. In a state of
Coma there is no spontaneity--none of the manifold adaptations of the
organism to fluctuating excitations, external and internal, observable
in the normal state. The organism still manifests Sensibility--but
this is so unlike the manifestations when its mechanism is
undisturbed (and necessarily so since the Sensibility varies with
the mechanism) that it is no longer called by the same name. In the
normal organism Sensibility means Feeling, or Consciousness; but in
the abnormal organism there is said to be a “loss of Consciousness.”
What the physiologist or the physician means by the phrase “loss of
Consciousness” is intelligible, and for his purposes unobjectionable.
He observes many organic processes going on undisturbed--the
unconscious patient breathes, secretes, moves his limbs, etc. These
processes are referred to the parts of the mechanism which are not
disturbed; they are obviously independent of that adjustment of the
mechanism which by its _consensus_ has the special resultant named
Consciousness; he therefore concludes that these, and many other
organic processes, which are neither accompanied nor followed by
_discriminated_ feelings, are the direct consequences of the stimulated
mechanism. He never hesitates to adopt the popular language, and say,
“We sometimes act unconsciously, perceive unconsciously, and even think
unconsciously, all by the simple reflex of the mechanism.”

Now observe the opening for error in this language. The actions are
said to go on unconsciously, and, because unconsciously, as pure
reflexes, which are then assigned to an insentient mechanism, and
likened to the actions of machines. But, as I hope hereafter to make
evident, the reflex mechanism necessarily involves Sensibility; and
therefore reflex actions may be unaccompanied by Consciousness--in
one meaning of that term--without ceasing to be sentient, the feelings
are operative, although not discriminated. On the other hand, there is
another and very general meaning of the term Consciousness, which is
the equivalent of Sentience.

51. In discussing Automatism, or the Reflex Theory, it is absolutely
necessary that we should first settle the meaning we assign to the
term Consciousness. The laxity with which the term is used may be seen
in the enumeration occupying six pages of Professor Bain’s account of
the various meanings. Psychology is often said to be “the science of
the facts of Consciousness”; and the Brain is often assigned as “the
organ of Consciousness.” Yet there are many mental processes, and many
cerebral processes, which are declared to be unconscious. Obviously if
Consciousness is the function of the Brain, there can be no cerebral
activity which is unconscious; just as there can be no activity of the
lungs which is not respiratory. Usage therefore points to a general
and a special sense of the term. The general usage identifies it
with Sensibility, in its subjective aspect as Sentience, including
all psychical states, both those classed under Sensation, and those
under Thought. These states are the “facts of consciousness” with
which Psychology is occupied. In the special usage it is distinguished
from all other psychical states by a peculiar reflected feeling of
Attention, whereby we not only _have_ a sensation, but also _feel_ that
we have it; we not only think, but are conscious that we are thinking;
not only act, but are conscious of what we do. It is this which Kant
indicates when he defines it “the subjective form accompanying all our
conceptions (_Begriffe_)”; and Jessen when he defines it “the internal
knowing of our knowing, an in itself reflected knowing.”[212]

52. We shall often have to recur to this general and this special
meaning, both of which are too firmly rooted for any successful attempt
to displace them. The fact that some organic processes and some
mental processes take place now consciously and now unconsciously,
i. e. now with the feeling of reflected attention, and now with no
such feeling, assuredly demands a corresponding expression; nor, in
spite of inevitable ambiguities, is there ground for regretting that
the expression chosen should be only an extension of the expression
already adopted for all other states of Sentience. A sentient or
conscious state can only be a state of the sentient organism, itself
the unity of many organs, each having its Sensibility. There is
more or less consensus, but there is no introduction of a new agent
within the organism, converting what was physical impression into
mental reaction. From first to last there has been nothing but
neural processes, and combinations of such processes--which, viewed
subjectively, are sentient processes. Thus the gradations of sensitive
reaction are Sentience, Consentience, and Consciousness, which are
represented in the Logic of Feeling and the Logic of Signs. The
familiar term Conscience will then represent the Logic of Conduct.
Thus understood, we may say that a man sometimes acts unconsciously,
or thinks unconsciously, although his action and thought are ruled
by Consentience, as he sometimes acts and thinks unconscientiously,
although he is not without obedience to Conscience on other occasions.
The feeling which determines an action is _operative_, although it
may not be _discriminated_ from simultaneous feelings. When this
is the case, we say the feeling is unconscious; but this no more
means that it is a purely physical process taking place outside the
sphere of Sentience, than the immoral conduct of a man would be said
to be mechanical, and not the conduct of a moral agent. There is
undoubtedly a marked distinction expressed in the terms Consciousness
and Unconsciousness, but it is not that of contrasts such as Mental
and Physical, it is that of grades such as Light and Darkness. Just
as Darkness is a positive optical sensation very different from mere
privation--just as it replaces the sensation of Light, blends with
it, struggles with it, and in all respects differs from the _absence_
of all optical sensibility in the skin; so Unconsciousness struggles
with, blends with, and replaces Consciousness in the organism, and is
a positive state of the sentient organism, not to be confounded with a
mere negation of Sentience; above all, not to be relegated to merely
mechanical processes.

52 _a_. Remember that, strictly speaking, Consciousness is a
psychological not a physiological term, and is only used in Physiology
on the assumption that it is the subjective _equivalent_ of an
objective process. To avoid the equivoque of “unconscious sensation,”
we may substitute the term “unconscious neural process”; and as all
neural processes imply Sensibility, which in the subjective aspect is
Sentience, we say that Sentience has various modes and degrees--such
as Perception, Ideation, Emotion, Volition, which may be conscious,
sub-conscious, or unconscious. When Leibnitz referred to the fact of
“obscure ideas,” and modern writers expressed this fact as “unconscious
cerebration,” the first phrase did not imply a process that was other
than mental, the second phrase did not imply a process that was other
than physiological: both indicated a mode of the process known as
Consciousness under other modes. There are different neural elements
grouped in Ideation and Emotion; there are different neural elements
grouped in Consciousness, Sub-consciousness, and Unconsciousness; but
one tissue with one property is active in all.

53. The nervous organism is affected as a whole by every affection
of its constituent parts. Every excitation, instead of terminating
with itself--as is the case in most physical processes--or with the
motor impulse it excites, is propagated throughout the continuous
tissue, and thus sends a _thrill_ throughout the organism. The wave
of excitation in passing onwards beats against variously grouped
elements--temporary and permanent centres--disturbing their balance
more or less, and liberating the energy of some, increasing the tension
of others, necessarily affecting all. Those groups which have their
energy liberated set up processes that are either _discriminated_
as sensations, or are blended with the general stream, according
to their _relative_ energy in the consensus. Thus the impulse on
reaching the centres for the heart, lungs, legs, and tail excites
the innervation of these organs; but as these are only parts of the
organism, and as all the parts enter the consensus, and Consciousness
is the varying resultant of this ever-varying consensus, the
thrill which any particular stimulus excites will be unconscious,
sub-conscious, or conscious, in proportion to the extent of the
_irradiated_ disturbance, which will depend on the statical conditions
of the centres at the moment. A sound sends a thrill which excites
emotion, causes the heart to beat faster, the muscles to quiver, the
skin-glands to pour forth their secretion; yet this same sound heard
by another man, or the same man under other conditions, physical or
historical, merely sends a faint thrill, just vivid enough to detach
itself as a sensation from the other simultaneous excitations; and
the same sound may excite a thrill which is so faint and fugitive as
to pass unconsciously. Physiological and psychological inductions
assure us that these are only differences of degree. The same kind
of physiological effect accompanies the conscious and unconscious
state. Every sensory impression, no matter whether discriminated or
not, affects the circulation and develops heat. The blood-vessels of
the part impressed expand, vessels elsewhere contract--a change in
the blood pressure has been effected, which of course implies that
the whole organism has been affected. Delicate instruments show that
at the time a sensation is produced the temperature of the brain is
raised. The same is true of ideation. Mosso has invented a method of
registering the effect of thought on the circulation. He finds ideation
accompanied by a contraction of the peripheral vessels proportionate
to the degree of intellectual effort. A young man translating Greek
showed greater contraction than when he was translating Latin. During
sound sleep--when we are said to be unconscious--sudden noises
always cause contraction of the peripheral vessels. Psychological
observation assures us that the conscious and unconscious states
were both consentient, and were both operative in the same degree.
The absorbed thinker threads his way through crowded streets, and is
sub-conscious and unconscious of the various sights, sounds, touches,
and muscular movements which make up so large a portion of his sentient
excitation at the time; yet he deftly avoids obstacles, hears the
sound of a hurried step behind him, recognizes an interesting object
directly it presents itself, and can even recall in Memory many of the
uninteresting objects which he passed in sub-conscious and unconscious
indifference.

54. On all grounds, therefore, we must say that between conscious,
sub-conscious, and unconscious states the difference is only of
degree of complication in the neural processes, which by relative
preponderance in the consensus determine a relative discrimination. We
can only discriminate one thrill at a time; but the neural excitations
simultaneously pressing towards a discharge are many; and the
conditions which determine now this, and now the other excitation to
predominate by its differential pressure, are far beyond any mechanical
estimate. I mention this because the advocates of the Reflex Theory
maintain that the neural processes are the same whether a sensation be
produced or not; and that since the same actions follow the external
stimulation whether sensation be produced or not, this proves the
actions to be purely mechanical. I reply, the neural processes are
_not_ the same throughout in the two cases--otherwise the effects would
be the same. You might as well say, “Since the explosion of the gun
is the same, whether shotted or not, a blank cartridge will kill”;
but if you tell me that your gun killed the bird, I declare that the
cartridge was _not_ a blank one. Whether the explosion of the gun
_also_ produced terror in one bystander, curiosity in a second, and
attracted no notice from a third, will be altogether another matter.
In like manner the sensory impression which determines a movement may
or may not be accompanied or followed by _other_ sentient states; the
fact of such movement is evidence of its sentient antecedent; and an
external stimulus that will produce _this_ neural process, and this
consequent movement, must produce a feeling, although not necessarily a
discriminated sensation. Now since, for discrimination, _other_ neural
processes must co-operate, we cannot say that in the two cases _all_
the neural processes have been the same throughout; nor because of this
difference can we say that the process of the undiscriminated sensation
is a mechanical, not a sentient process. In the next problem this point
will be argued more fully.

55. The need of recognizing Consciousness and Consentience as degrees
of energy and complexity in sentient states is apparent when we
consider animal phenomena. Has a bee consciousness? Has a snail
volition? or are they both insentient mechanisms? All inductions
warrant the assertion that a bee has thrills propagated throughout its
organism by the agency of its nerves; and that some of these thrills
are of the kind called sensations--even discriminated sensations.
Nevertheless we may reasonably doubt whether the bee has sentient
states resembling otherwise than remotely the sensations, emotions,
and thoughts which constitute human Consciousness, either in the
general or the special sense of that term. The bee feels and reacts on
feelings; but its feelings cannot closely resemble our own, because
the conditions in the two cases are different. The bee may even be
said to think (in so far as Thought means logical combination of
feelings), for it appears to form Judgments in the sphere of the Logic
of Feeling--το νοητικὸν; although incapable of the Logic of Signs--το
διανοητικον. We should therefore say the bee has Consentience, but
not Consciousness--unless we accept Consciousness in its _general_
signification as the equivalent of Sentience. The organism of the bee
differs from that of a man, as a mud hut from a marble palace. But
since underlying these differences there are fundamental resemblances,
the functions of the two will be fundamentally alike. Both have the
function of Sentience; as mud hut and palace have both the office of
sheltering.

56. The question of Volition will occupy us in the next chapter.
Restricting ourselves here to that of Consciousness, and recalling
the distinction of the two meanings of the term, we now approach
the question of Unconsciousness. Are we to understand this term as
designating a purely physical state in contrast to the purely mental
state of Consciousness; or only as designating a difference of degree?
This is like asking whether Light and Darkness are both optical
feelings, or one an optical feeling and the other a physical process?
On the Reflex Theory, no sooner does a vital and mental process pass
from the daylight of Consciousness, or twilight of Sub-consciousness,
into the darkness of Unconsciousness, than the whole order of phenomena
is abruptly changed, they cease to be vital, mental, and lapse into
physical, mechanical processes. The grounds of this conclusion are,
first, the unpsychological assumption that the unconscious state is
out of the sphere of Sentience; and secondly, the unphysiological
assumption that the Brain is the only portion of the nervous system
which has the property of Sensibility. Restate the conclusion in
different terms and its fallacy emerges: “organic processes suddenly
cease to be organic, and become purely physical by a slight change
in their _relative_ position in the consensus; the organic process
which was a conscious sensation a moment ago, when its energy was not
balanced by some other process, suddenly falls from its place in the
group of organic phenomena--sentient phenomena--to sink into the group
of inorganic phenomena now that its energy is balanced.” Consider the
parallel case of Motion and Rest in the objective sphere. They are two
functions of the co-operant forces, one dynamic, the other static;
although markedly distinguishable as functions, we know that they are
simply the co-operant forces now unbalanced and now balanced; what
we call Rest is also a product of moving forces, each of which is
operant, and will issue in a definite resultant when its counter-force
is removed. Motion and Rest are correlatives, and both belong to the
sphere of Kinetics. In like manner Consciousness and Unconsciousness
are correlatives, both belonging to the sphere of Sentience.[213] Every
one of the unconscious processes is operant, changes the general state
of the organism, and is capable of at once issuing in a discriminated
sensation when the force which balances it is disturbed. I was
unconscious of the scratch of my pen in writing the last sentence, but
I am distinctly conscious of every scratch in writing this one. Then,
as now, the scratching sound sent a faint thrill through my organism,
but its relative intensity was too faint for discrimination; now that I
have redistributed the co-operant forces, by what is called an act of
Attention, I hear distinctly every sound the pen produces.

57. The inclusion of Sub-consciousness within the sentient sphere is
obvious; the inclusion of Unconsciousness within that sphere may be
made so, when we consider its modes of production, and compare it
with the extra-sensible conception of molecules and atoms. The Matter
which is sensible as masses, may be resolved into molecules, which lie
beyond the discrimination of sense; and these again into atoms, which
are purely ideal conceptions; but because molecules are _proved_, and
atoms are _supposed_, to have material properties, and to conform to
sensible canons of the objective world, we never hesitate to class them
under the head of Matter; nor do we imagine that in passing beyond the
discrimination of Sense they lose their objective significance. They
are still physical, not mental facts. So with Sentience: we may trace
it through infinite gradations from Consciousness to Sub-consciousness,
till it fades away in Unconsciousness; but from first to last the
processes have been those of a sentient organism; and by this are
broadly distinguished from all processes in anorganisms. The movement
of a limb has quite different modes of production from the movement of
a wheel; and among its modes must be included those of Sensibility,
a peculiarly vital property. Oxidation may be slow or rapid,
manifesting itself as combustion, heat, or flame, but it is always
oxidation--always a special chemical phenomenon. And so the neural
process of Sentience, whether conscious, sub-conscious, or unconscious,
is always a state of the sentient organism. If a material process does
not change its character, and become spiritual, on passing beyond the
range of sensible appreciation, why should a psychical process become
material on passing beyond the range of discrimination? If we admit
molecules as physical units, sentient tremors are psychical units.
The extra-sensible molecules have indeed their subjective aspect,
and only enter perception through the “greeting of the spirit.” The
sentient tremors have also their objective aspect, and cannot come
into existence without the neural tremors, which are their physical
conditions.

58. It is only by holding fast to such a conception that we can escape
the many difficulties and contradictions presented by unconscious
phenomena, and explain many physiological and psychological processes.
Descartes--followed by many philosophers--identified Consciousness
with Thought. To this day we constantly hear that to have a sensation,
and to be conscious of it, is one and the same state; which is only
admissible on the understanding that Consciousness means Sentience,
and Sentience the activity of the nervous system viewed subjectively.
Leibnitz pointed out that we have many psychical states which are
unconscious states--to have an idea and be conscious of it, are, he
said, not one but two states. The Consciousness by Descartes erected
into an essential condition of Thought, was by Leibnitz reduced to an
accompaniment which not only may be absent, but in the vast majority
of cases is absent. The teaching of most modern psychologists is
that Consciousness forms but a small item in the total of psychical
processes. Unconscious sensations, ideas, and judgments are made to
play a great part in their explanations. It is very certain that in
every conscious volition--every act that is so characterized--the
larger part of it is quite unconscious. It is equally certain that
in every perception there are unconscious processes of reproduction
and inference--there is much that is _implicit_, some of which cannot
be made explicit--a “middle distance” of sub-consciousness, and a
“background” of unconsciousness. But, throughout, the processes are
those of Sentience.

59. Unconsciousness is by some writers called _latent_ Consciousness.
Experiences which are no longer manifested are said to be stored up in
Memory, remaining in the Soul’s picture-gallery, visible directly the
shutters are opened. We are not conscious of these feelings, yet they
exist as latent feelings, and become salient through association. As a
metaphorical expression of the familiar facts of Memory this may pass;
but it has been converted from a metaphor into an hypothesis, and we
are supposed to _have_ feelings and ideas, when in fact we have nothing
more than a modified _disposition_ of the organism--temporary or
permanent--which when stimulated will respond in this modified manner.
The modification of the organism when permanent becomes hereditary; and
its response is then called an instinctive or automatic action. And as
actions pass by degrees from conscious and voluntary into sub-conscious
and sub-voluntary, and finally into unconscious and involuntary, we
call them volitional, secondarily automatic, and automatic. If any one
likes to say the last are due to latent consciousness, I shall not
object. I only point to the fact that the differences here specified
are simply differences of degree--all the actions are those of the
sentient organism.

60. Picture to yourself this sentient organism incessantly stimulated
from without and from within, and adjusting itself in response to such
stimulations. In the blending of stimulations, modifying and arresting
each other, there is a fluctuating “composition of forces,” with
ever-varying resultants. Besides the stream of direct stimulations,
there is a wider stream of indirect or reproduced stimulations.
Together with the present sensation there is always a more or less
complex group of revived sensations, the one group of neural tremors
being organically stimulated by the other. An isolated excitation is
impossible in a continuous nervous tissue; an isolated feeling is
impossible in the consensus or unity of the sentient organism. The term
Soul is the personification of this complex of present and revived
feelings, and is the substratum of Consciousness (in the general
sense), all the particular feelings being its _states_. To repeat an
illustration used in my first volume, we may compare Consciousness to
a mass of stationary waves. If the surface of a lake be set in motion
each wave diffuses itself over the whole surface, and finally reaches
the shores, whence it is reflected back towards the centre of the lake.
This reflected wave is met by the fresh incoming waves, there is a
blending of the waves, and their product is a pattern on the surface.
This pattern of stationary waves is a fluctuating pattern, because of
the incessant arrival of fresh waves, incoming and reflected. Whenever
a fresh stream enters the lake (i. e. a new sensation is excited from
without), its waves will at first pass over the pattern, neither
disturbing it nor being disturbed by it; but after reaching the shore
the waves will be reflected back towards the centre, and there will
more or less modify the pattern.




