CHAPTER II.

THE VITAL MECHANISM.


14. No answer can be successfully attempted in reply to the first
of the questions which closed the last chapter until we have given
precision to certain terms of incessant recurrence. I have often
to remark on the peculiar misfortune of Psychology, that all its
principal terms are employed by different writers, and are understood
by different readers, in widely different senses: they denote and
connote meanings of various significance. All physicists mean the same
thing when they speak of weight, mass, momentum, electricity, heat,
etc. All chemists mean the same thing when they speak of affinity,
decomposition, oxygen, carbonic acid, etc. All physiologists mean the
same thing when they speak of muscle, nerve, nutrition, secretion, etc.
But scarcely any two psychologists mean precisely the same thing when
they speak of sensation, feeling, thought, volition, consciousness,
etc.; and the differences of denotation and connotation in their uses
of such terms lead to endless misunderstanding. As Rousseau says: “Les
définitions pourraient être bonnes si l’on n’employait pas les mots
pour les faire.” But since we must employ words as our signs, our
utmost care should be given to clearly marking what it is the signs
signify.

15. The question we have now before us, whether animal actions are
interpretable on purely mechanical principles? can only be answered
after a preliminary settlement of the terms. The first of these
terms to be settled is that of mechanism, when applied to the vital
organism. If the organism is a mechanism, its actions must of course be
interpretable on mechanical principles. But this general truth requires
a special interpretation, if on inquiry we find that the organism is a
particular kind of mechanism, one which is _not_ to be classed under
the same head as inorganic machines. And this we do find. In Problem
I. § 22, will be found a statement of the radical difference between
organic and inorganic mechanisms, due to the differences in their
structures. But the differences there noted do not affect the operation
of abstract mechanical principles, which are of course manifested
_wherever_ there is a dependent sequence of material changes; and which
are the same abstract principles in the mechanism of the heavens,
the mechanism of a paper-mill, or the mechanism of an animal body.
In other words, the principles are abstract, and are abstracted from
all concrete cases by letting drop what is special to each case,
retaining only what is common to all. This procedure is indispensable
to the ideal constructions of Science. But we cannot rightly interpret
any concrete case by abstract principles alone; we must restore the
special characters which the abstraction has eliminated. The most lucid
explanation of the mechanism of the heavens will leave us quite in
the dark respecting the action of a paper-mill, until we have studied
the mill at work, ascertained its structure and mode of operation,
and therein detected what is common both to its mechanism and to the
mechanism of the heavens. Thus equipped, we approach the study of
the animal mechanism, but find ourselves wholly in the dark until we
have also ascertained its structure and mode of operation; then we
may recognize in it the principles of dependent sequence which had
been abstracted from the paper-mill and the heavens. To neglect this
concrete study, and to argue from Machinery to Life in disregard
of special conditions, is not more rational than to assume that the
movement of a piston is prompted by volition.

16. The recognition of special differences is no denial of fundamental
identities. We do not deny the presence of phenomena in organisms
which belong to physical and chemical agencies, but we assert that
organisms have other phenomena besides these, dependent on conditions
not present in physical and chemical phenomena. The same material
elements and forces may be recognized in a moving inorganic body,
and a moving organic body; but in the latter there is a speciality
of combination with a speciality of result. Just as the same words
and laws of grammatical construction may be recognized in prose and
poetry; yet poetry is not prose, but has special rules of its own,
and special effects. In an organism, as in a machine, the adjustment
of the parts is a condition of the mechanical action; the one enables
us to explain the other. But the parts adjusted, and the consequences
of the adjustment, are unlike in the two cases. This unlikeness is
pervading and profound. One cardinal difference is that the combination
of the parts is in the machine a fixed, in the organism a fluctuating
adjustment; and this fluctuation is due to certain vital processes
subjectively known as _sensitive guidance_. Hence machines have fixed
and calculated mechanisms; whereas organisms are variable and to a
great extent incalculable mechanisms.

17. I conceive, therefore, that a theory which reduces vital activities
to purely physical processes is self-condemned. Not that we are
to admit the agency of any extra-organic principle, such as the
hypothesis of Vitalism assumes (Prob. I. § 14); but only the agency
of an intra-organic principle, or the abstract symbol of _all_ the
co-operant conditions--the special combination of forces which result
in organization. This assures us that an organism is a peculiar kind
of mechanism, the processes in which are peculiar to it; and among
those processes there is one which results in what we call Sensibility.
This Sensibility is a factor which raises the phenomena into another
order. To overlook its presence is fatal to any explanation of the
organic mechanism. Yet it is overlooked by those who tell us that
when an impression on a nerve is conveyed to the brain, and is thence
reflected on the limbs--as when the retina of a wolf is stimulated
by the image of a sheep, and the spring of the wolf upon the sheep
follows as a “purely mechanical consequence--the whole process has
from first to last been physical.” Unless the term _physical_ is
here used to designate the _objective sequence_, as contemplated by
an onlooker, who likens the process to the sequence observable in a
machine, I should say that from first to last the process has been
_not_ physical, but _vital_, involving among its essential conditions
the peculiarly vital factor named Sensibility. The process taking place
in the wolf’s organism is one which involves conditions never found in
purely physical processes. We may indeed analytically disregard these.
We may view the process in its purely physical relations, or in its
purely chemical relations, or in its purely mathematical (mechanical)
relations. But this is the artifice of the analytical method. In
reality the process is no one of these, for it is all of these; it is a
process in a living organism, and depends on conditions only found in
living organisms--nay, in this particular case the process depends on
conditions only found in organisms like that of the wolf; for the image
of the sheep will stimulate the brain of a goat, horse, or elephant
without producing any such movement in the organism.

18. The importance of this point must excuse my reiteration of
it. We must make clear to ourselves that the organism is in its
objective aspect a physiological mechanism, in its subjective aspect
a psychological mechanism: in both aspects it is to be radically
demarcated from all inorganic mechanisms. In it the combination
and co-ordination of movements involve conditions never present
in machines; among these conditions, there are combinations and
co-ordinations of Sensibility, which, although material processes
on the objective side, are processes believed to be only present in
organisms. We have the strongest reasons for concluding that every
feeling, every change in Sensibility, has its correlative material
process in the organism--is, in short, only the subjective aspect
of the objective organic change. What in Physiology is called
Co-ordination and has reference to movements, in Psychology may be
called Logic, having reference to feelings. But be this latter point
accepted or rejected, the one point which admits of no dispute is
that an organism is radically distinguishable from every inorganic
mechanism in that _it acquires through the very exercise of its primary
constitution, a new constitution with new powers_. Its adjustment is a
changing and developing mechanism. That is to say, a machine, however
complex its structure, is constructed once for all, and this primary
constitution is final, the adjustment of parts remaining unaltered;
and although by exercise the machine may come to work more easily,
with less friction, it never comes to work differently, to _readjust_
its parts, and develop new capabilities. It has no _historical_ factor
manifest in its functions. It has no experience. It reacts at last
as at first. How different the organism! This has not only variable
adjustments due to internal fluctuations, it has experience which
develops new parts, and new adjustments of old parts. Every organism
has its _primary_ constitution in the adjustment of parts peculiar to
the species; it has also its _secondary_ or modified constitution,
in the adjustment which has been more or less altered by individual
experiences; it has, thirdly, its _temporary_ constitution in the
variable adjustment due to the varying state of tension which results
from varying stimulation.

19. A word on each. There is a structural disposition of the parts
which is common to large groups of organisms, so that a corresponding
similarity is observable in the reactions of these organisms. Thus all
quadrupeds use their limbs for locomotion in very similar ways; birds
use their wings for flight in similar ways. All vertebrates swallow
their food, defend themselves, shrink when hurt, etc., in ways that are
very similar. In so far as their organizations are alike, their actions
and reactions are alike. In so far as their organizations differ, their
actions and reactions differ. The goose and the vulture are alike in
the main lines of structure; still more alike are duck and hen; yet,
owing to certain unlike characters of structure, they manifest some
marked differences in action and reaction: the goose will starve in
the presence of food which the vulture gluttonously devours, and the
vulture will refuse the vegetable food which the goose devours; the
duck plunges into the water, the hen not only refuses to enter it,
but is greatly agitated when she sees the ducklings she has hatched
plunging into it. That peculiar instincts, habits, and feelings are
rigorously determined by peculiarities in the organism, no one doubts,
when animals are in question. If this is less obvious in the case of
men, the reason is that there the influence of other factors somewhat
masks the operation of the primary constitution--these factors are the
modified and the temporary constitutions. Yet even in man it is true to
say that his feelings and actions are the result of his organization,
native and acquired.

20. No two men are organized in all respects alike. There are
individual variations in structure, both native and acquired. These may
be too slight to be appreciable by any other test than the difference
of reaction under similar external stimuli; but the variations in the
sensibility to music, color, temperature, sexual influence, moral
influence, etc., betray corresponding differences in the organisms.
Any one variation in structure, seemingly trivial, may be the origin
of well-marked diversity in physical and moral characters. Compare
the bull with the ox, or the predatory aggressive eagle with the
cowardly vulture. Nor are the temporary modifications to be overlooked.
Antoine Cros mentions the case of a patient, a young girl, suffering
from congested liver and spleen, which of course altered the state
of her blood, and thus for a time modified her constitution. Her
moral character was greatly altered by it. She ceased to feel any
affection for father or mother; would play with her doll, but could
not be brought to show any delight in it; could not be drawn out of
her apathetic sadness. Things which previously had made her shriek
with laughter, now left her uninterested. Her temper changed, became
capricious and violent.[207] Congestion of the lungs, if unaccompanied
by congestion of the liver, never produces such effects, because not
thus altering the blood. The effects of liver congestion are familiar.
Cros cites the case of a magistrate whose liver was enlarged, and whose
skin showed a markedly bilious aspect, and in whom all affection seemed
to be dead: he did not exhibit any perversion or violence, only want
of emotive reaction. If he went to the theatre he could not feel the
slightest pleasure in it. The thoughts of his home, his absent wife
and children, were, he declared, as unaffecting to him as a problem in
Euclid.

21. Owing to the recognized dependence of peculiar instincts and modes
of reaction on peculiarities of structure, comparative anatomists
are quite confident, when they find a portion of a skull with two
occipital condyles, that the animal to which this skull belonged had
red blood-corpuscles without nuclei, and (if a female) suckled its
young. If in that fragment of skull there remain a single tooth, it
will prove that the animal was carnivorous or herbivorous, and had, or
had not, retractile claws. From such data a general conclusion may be
formed as to the instincts and habits of the animal. The data disclose
much of the primary constitution, that is to say, the mechanism
which the animal brought with it into the world, ready prepared to
react in definite ways on being stimulated. The connate mechanism
has correlative tendencies of reaction. Some of these tendencies are
inevitably called into play by external conditions, and they continue
unaltered amid great varieties of circumstances, provided none of these
variations directly deprive them of their appropriate stimulation.
Such tendencies of the connate mechanism are styled _automatic_ (an
unfortunate metaphor, which has led to the theory of Automatism), and
include, besides the visceral reactions, the more complex reactions
of winking, breathing, swallowing, coughing, flying, walking, etc. It
is true that we learn to walk, and learn to wink, whereas the other
actions require no tentative efforts directed by experience; but the
mechanism of all these actions is already laid down in the primary
constitution, and is inevitably called into play.

22. The instincts also belong to the connate mechanism, and in the
course of the normal experience of the animal inevitably come into
play; but, unlike the automatic tendencies of breathing, swallowing,
and coughing, they are capable of modification, or even suppression,
by alterations in the course of individual experience. The connate
mechanism of the cat determines its dread of water, and its enmity
to the dog and mouse; yet a cat will by the modifications of certain
experiences become as ready as an otter to take to the water, and
become so fond of a dog that she will allow him to tend upon her
kittens; and so indifferent to the mouse that she will let it run
over her body. All this implies a new adjustment in the nervous
centres, with new modes of reaction on sensory impressions: the
inherited mechanism has been modified. I need not dwell on the profound
modifications which the human inherited mechanism undergoes in the
course of experience--how social influences and moral and religious
teachings redirect, or even suppress, many primary tendencies; so that
“moral habits” become organized, and replace the original tendencies
of the organism. These, when organized, become the inevitable modes
of reaction, and are sometimes called secondarily automatic. It
is important to recognize this organization of experiences, this
acquisition of a secondary or modified constitution, if we would
explain psychological processes by physiological processes. Thus
the processes of Logic are automatic, they belong to the connate
primary mechanism, and their action is inevitable, invariable. The
elements of a judgment, like the elements of a perception, may vary,
and we therefore say that one judgment is false, and one perception
incomplete; but the judging process is always the same, and the
perceiving process is always the same. We may breathe pure air or
impure air, but the breathing process is in each case the same; and
judgment is as automatic as breathing, not to be altered, not to be
suppressed. Again, the moral terror at wickedness of any recognized
kind is as automatic as the instinctive terror at danger. The one has
its roots in the primary disposition called love of approbation and
its correlative dread of disapprobation: the social instinct. The
other has its root in the primary disposition called “instinct of
self-preservation,” which is really the reflex shrinking from pain: the
physiological instinct.

23. Besides the connate and acquired mechanism, we have now to consider
the temporary and fluctuating adjustments which represent the statical
condition of the organism at each moment. The automatism of the primary
constitution is such that previous experience and conscious effort
are not needed; nor will any experience or any effort alter the mode
of reaction. If a strong light falls on the eye, the iris contracts;
if the eyeball is dry, the eyelid drops; if sound-waves beat upon the
tympanum, the stapedius muscle contracts; if the lining of the throat
be tickled, the muscles involved in coughing or in vomiting contract.
No experience is necessary for these actions, some of which are so
complicated that if we had to learn them, as we learn far simpler
actions, the organism would perish before the power was attained. Yet
all of these presuppose a certain normal state of the mechanism, any
considerable variation in which will modify or suppress them.

24. Secondarily automatic actions are those which have been acquired
through experiences that have modified the organism, and produced a
new adjustment of parts. We learn to shield the eyes against a strong
glare of light by raising the hand; by winking we learn to shield the
eye against an approaching body; we also learn to turn the head in the
direction of a sound, and to thrust away with our hands the object that
is irritating our skin. Experience has been necessary for all these
actions, and has finally organized the tendencies to perform them,
so that the reaction is invariable, inevitable, unless controlled by
the will. If you tickle my throat, I may, or may not, push aside your
hand; but if the inside of my throat be tickled, I must cough. Here
we see the difference between the automatic and secondarily automatic
actions. The second being due to individual experience, are more or
less controllable; and whether they are or are not controlled depends
on the condition of the nerve-centres at the moment. You may tickle my
throat, or irritate my skin, without causing any movement of my hands
to thwart you, either because my nerve-centres are preoccupied by other
stimulations, and I am not conscious of the irritation, or because I do
not choose to thwart you.

25. It should be added that some secondarily automatic actions have
become so firmly organized that we can only with great difficulty
interfere with them. Others never enter into consciousness, and are
therefore often supposed to be purely mechanical. The movement of the
eye towards the brightest light, and the convergence of the axes of
both eyes, are reflexes which, although involuntary and unconscious,
are the products of education. They do not belong to the connate
constitution, although they are so inevitably acquired by experience
that they belong to every normal child. At first the infant stares with
a blank gaze, and its eyes, though moving under the stimulus of light,
move incoherently; the axes never converge except by accident. Very
early, however, the infant’s eyes are observed to follow the movements
of a bright light; and at last they acquire so certain and rapid a
power of adjustment that the eyes shift from spot to spot, always
“fixing” the object by bringing the most sensitive part of the retina
to bear on it. The incoherent movements have become precisely regulated
movements. It is the same with speech. The vocal organs are exercised
in an incoherent babble. By degrees these movements become regulated
so as to respond definitely to definite stimuli, and words are formed,
then sentences, till finally fluent speech becomes in a great degree
automatic. The vocal muscles respond to an auditory stimulus, and the
child repeats the word it has heard, just as the eye-muscles respond
to a retinal stimulus. That we acquire the power of converging the
axes, and accommodating the lens to near objects, is not only proved by
observation of infants, but also by cases of disease. After the reflex
mechanism has been long established, so that it acts with inevitable
precision, a slight paralysis of one of the muscles has the effect of
making all objects appear in a different position; the patient trying
to touch an object, then always moves his hand on one side of it. Von
Graefe relates the case of a stonebreaker who always struck his hand
with the hammer when he tried to strike the stone. Yet this very man
_learned_ to accommodate his movements to the new impressions; so that
if his paralysis had been cured, his modified mechanism would have been
ill adapted to the new conditions, and he would once more have struck
his hand instead of the stone.

26. This digression on the native and acquired dispositions of the
organism, while it has brought into strong light all that can be cited
in favor of regarding animal bodies as mechanisms, and their actions
as the direct consequences of mechanical adjustments, has also made
conspicuous the radical difference between an organism and a machine.
We cannot too emphatically insist on this radical difference. Between
the group of conditions involved in the structure and action of a
machine, and the group of conditions involved in the structure and
action of an organism, there are contrasts as broad as any that can be
named. To overlook these in taking account solely of the conditions
common to both groups is a serious error. On such grounds we might
insist that a tiger is a violet, because both are organisms.

The biologist will admit that an organism is a mechanism, and (in
so far as its bodily structure is concerned) a material mechanism.
All the actions of this structure are therefore mechanical, in the
two senses of the term: first, as being the actions of material
adjustments; secondly, as being movements, and thereby included under
the general laws of motion represented in Mechanics; the abstract
laws of movement for an organic body are not different from the
abstract laws of movement for an inorganic body. So far we have been
considering the abstract relations only. No sooner do we consider the
phenomena as concrete wholes, than we find great diversity in the modes
of production of the movements in organisms and machines. Now it is
precisely the modes of production which have interest for us. We never
understand a phenomenon so as to gain any practical control over it, or
any theoretical illumination from it, unless we have mastered some of
its conditions; our knowledge of these conditions is the measure of our
power.




