CHAPTER II.

DEDUCTIONS FROM GENERAL LAWS.


23. The evidence is of two kinds: deductions from the general laws of
nervous action, and inductions from particular manifestations. The
former furnish a presumption, the latter a proof.

The central process which initiates a reflex action may be excited
by the external stimulation of a peripheral nerve, by the internal
stimulation of a peripheral nerve, or by the irradiation from some
other part of the central tissue. The last-named stimulations are
the least intelligible, because they are so varied and complex,
and so remote from observation; among them may be placed, 1°, the
organized impulses of Instinct and Habit, with their fixed modes of
manifestation; 2°, the organized impulses of Emotion, which are more
variable in their manifestations, because more fluctuating in their
conditions; 3°, the organized impulses of Intellect, the most variable
of all. Whether we shrink on the contact of a cold substance or on
hearing a sudden sound,--at the sight of a terrible object,--at the
imaginary vision of the object,--or because we feign the terror which
is thus expressed,--the reflex mechanism of shrinking is in each case
the same, and the neural process discharged on the muscles is the same;
but the state of Feeling which originated the change--or, in strictly
physiological terms, the inciting neural process which preceded this
reflex neural process--was in each case somewhat different, yet in each
case was a mode of Sensibility.

24. The property of Sensibility belongs to the whole central tissue;
and we have every reason to believe that unless it is excited no reflex
takes place, whereas when it is exaggerated--as in epilepsy, or under
strychnine--the reflex discharges are convulsive. When anæsthetics are
given, consciousness first disappears, and then reflexion. When the
sensorium is powerfully excited by _other_ stimuli, the normal stimulus
fails to excite either consciousness or reflexion. Hence our conclusion
is that for consciousness, on the one hand, and _normal_ reflexion, on
the other, the proximate condition is a change in the sensorium; or--to
phrase it more familiarly--Feeling is necessary for reflex action.

The difficulty in apprehending this lies in the ambiguity of the
term Feeling. Many readers who would find no difficulty in admitting
Sensibility as a necessary element in reflex action, will resist the
idea of identifying Sensibility with Feeling. But this repugnance must
be overcome if we are to understand the various modes of Sensibility
which represent Feeling in animals, and its varieties in ourselves. We
understand how the general Sensibility manifests itself in markedly
different sensations--how that of the optic centre differs from that
of the auditory centre, and both from a spinal centre. The tones of a
violin are not the same as the tones of a violoncello, both differ from
the tones of a key-bugle: yet they all come under the same general laws
of tonality. So, as I often insist, the tissues in brain and cord being
the same, their properties must be the same, their laws of excitation,
irradiation, and combination the same, through all the varieties in
their manifestations due to varieties of innervation. Hence it is
that there are reflex cerebral processes no less than reflex spinal
processes: the motor impulse from, the hemispheres on the _corpora
striata_, or from posterior gray substance on anterior gray substance,
is similar to that from the anterior gray substance on the motor
nerves. The difference in reflexes arises from the terminal organs; as
the difference in sensations arises from the surfaces stimulated. But
not only are there reflex processes in the brain, of the same _order_
as those in the cord, there are volitional processes in the cord of
the same order as those in the brain. And in both the processes are
sometimes conscious, sometimes unconscious. No evidence suggests that
in the conscious action there is a sensorial process, and a purely
physical process in the unconscious action--only a different _relation_
of one sensorial process to others.

25. Let us contrast a cerebral and a spinal process, in respect to the
three stages of stimulation, irradiation, and discharge. A luminous
impression stimulates my retina, this excites my sensorium, in which
second stage I am conscious of the luminous sensation; the final
discharge is a perception, or a mental articulation of the _name_ of
the luminous object. But the irradiation may perhaps not have been
such as to cause a _conscious_ sensation, because the requisite neural
elements were already grouped in some other way; in this case there is
an unconscious discharge on some motor group, and instead of perceiving
and naming the luminous object, I move my head, or my band, or my
whole body, avoiding the object, or grasping at it. A third issue is
possible: the irradiation, instead of exciting a definite perception,
or a definite movement, may be merged in the stream of simultaneous
excitations, and thus form the component of a group, and the discharge
of this group will be a perception or a movement.

It is the same with a spinal process. An impression on the skin is
irradiated in the cord, and the response is a movement, of which we
are conscious, or unconscious. Here also a third issue is possible:
the irradiation may be merged in a stream of simultaneous excitations,
modifying them and modified by them, thus forming a component in some
ulterior discharge.

26. The obstacle in the way of recognizing that cerebral processes and
spinal processes are of the same order of sensorial phenomena, and have
the same physiological significance when considered irrespective of the
group of organs they call into activity, is similar to the obstacle
which has prevented psychologists from recognizing the identity of the
logical process in the combinations of Feeling and the combinations
of Thought, i. e. the Logic of Feeling and the Logic of Signs. This
obstacle is the fixing attention on the diversity of the effects when
the same process operates with different elements. Because the spinal
cord manifests the phenomena of sensation and volition, we are not to
conclude that it also manifests ideation and imagination; any more
than we are to conclude that a mollusc is capable of musical feelings
because it is affected by sounds.

27. The careless confusion of general properties with special
applications of those properties, and of functions with properties, has
been a serious hindrance to the right understanding of Sensibility and
its operations. Instead of recognizing that the nervous system has one
general mode of reaction, which remains the same under every variety
of combination with other systems, physiologists commonly lose sight
of this general property, and fix on one mode of its manifestation as
the sole characteristic of Sensibility. Sometimes the mode fixed on
is Pain, at other times Attention. Thus, when an animal manifests no
evidence of pain under stimulations which ordinarily excite severe
pain, this is often interpreted as a proof that _all_ sensation is
absent; and if with this absence of pain there is--as there often
is--clear evidence of the presence of some other mode of sensibility,
the contradiction is evaded by the assumption that what here looks like
evidence of sensation is merely mechanical reflexion. One would think
that Physiology and Pathology had been silent on the facts of analgesia
without anæsthesia, and of so much conscious sensation which is
unaccompanied by pain.[239] Who does not know that a patient will lose
one kind of sensibility while retaining others--cease to feel pain,
yet feel temperature, or be insensible to touch, yet exquisitely alive
to pain?[240] Inasmuch as Sensibility depends on the condition of the
centres, an abnormal condition will obviously transform the reaction
of the centres into one very unlike the normal reaction. For example,
Antoine Cros had a patient who was quite unable to feel the sensation
of cold on her left side--every cold object touching her skin on that
side was felt as a very hot one; whereas a hot object produced “the
sort of sensation which followed the application of an intermittent
voltaic current.”[241] Thus also the experiments of Rose[242] and
others have exhibited the effects of a dose of Santonine in causing all
objects to be seen as yellow in one stage, and violet in another.

28. If, then, certain alterations in the organic conditions are
accompanied by a suppression or perversion of some modes of
Sensibility, without suppressing the rest, it is but rational to
suppose that profound disturbances of the organic mechanism, such
as must result from the removal of the brain, will also suppress or
pervert several modes of Sensibility, and yet leave intact those
modes which belong to the intact parts of the mechanism. Assuming
that the spinal centres with the organs they innervate are capable of
reacting under certain modes of sensation, these will not necessarily
be suppressed by removal of the brain--all that will thereby be
suppressed is their co-operation with the brain. I know it will be
said that precisely this co-operation is necessary for sensation; and
that the spinal reactions are simple reflexions in which sensation has
no part. This, however, is the position I hope to turn. Meanwhile my
assumption is that sensation necessarily plays a part in the reflex
actions _of the organism_, and when that organism is truncated, its
actions are proportionately limited, its sensations less complex. The
spinal cord, separated from encephalic connections, cannot react in the
special forms of Sensation known as color, scent, taste, sound, etc.,
because it does not innervate the organs of these special senses, nor
co-operate with their centres. But it can, and does, react in other
modes: it innervates skin and muscles; and the sensibilities, thus
excited, it can also _combine_ and _co-ordinate_. It has its Memory,
and its Logic, just as the brain has: both no longer than they are
integral parts of an active living organism: neither when the organism
is inactive or dead. We do not expect the retina to respond in sounds,
nor the ear to respond in colors: we expect each organ to have its
special mode of reaction. What is common to both is Sensibility.
What is common to brain and cord is Sensibility--and the laws of
Grouping. Instead of marvelling at the disappearance of so many modes
of Sensibility when the brain is removed, our surprise should be to
find so many evidences of Sensibility remaining after so profound a
mutilation of the mechanism.

29. The current hypothesis, which assumes that the brain is the sole
organ of the mind, the sole seat of sensation, is a remnant of the
ancient hypothesis respecting the Soul and its seat; and on the whole
I think the ancient hypothesis is the more rational of the two. If the
Soul inhabits the organism, using it as an instrument, playing on its
organs as a musician plays on his instrument, we are not called upon
to explain the mode of operation of this mysterious agent; but if the
Soul be the subjective side of the Life, the spiritual aspect of the
material organism, then since it is a synthesis of all the organic
forces, the consensus of all the sentient phenomena, no one part can
usurp the prerogatives of all, but all are requisite for each. And
this indeed is what few physiologists would nowadays dispute. In spite
of their localizing sensation in the cerebral cells, they would not
maintain that the cerebral cells, nor even the whole brain, could
produce sensation--if _detached_ from the organism; the cheek of the
guillotined victim may have blushed when struck, but who believes that
the brain felt the insult, or the blow? Obviously, therefore, when we
read that thought is “a property of the gray substance of the brain, as
gravitation is of matter,” or that the brain is the exclusive organ of
Sensation, the writers cannot consistently carry out their hypothesis
unless they silently reintroduce other organs as co-operating agents;
for a neural process in the cerebrum is _in itself_ no more a
sensation than it is a muscular contraction, or a glandular secretion:
the muscles must co-operate for the contraction, the gland for the
secretion, the neural process being simply the exciting cause. In
like manner the Sensorium is necessary for the sensation, the neural
process--in cerebrum, or elsewhere--being simply the exciting cause.

30. And what is the Sensorium? A long chapter would be required
to state the various opinions which have been held respecting its
_seat_, although amid all the disputes as to the organ, there has been
unanimity as to the function, which is that of converting stimulations
into sensations. I cannot pause here to examine the contending
arguments, but must content myself with expounding the opinion I hold,
namely, that the Sensorium is the _whole_ of the sensitive organism,
and not any one isolated portion of it. When light falls on the optic
organ, or air pulses on the auditory organ, the reaction of each organ
determines the _specific_ character of the sensation, _but no such
sensation is possible unless there be a reaction of the organism_;
and the nature of the product will of course vary with the varying
factors which co-operate--a simple organism, a truncated organism, an
exhausted or otherwise occupied organism, will react differently from
a complex, a normal, or an unoccupied organism. Detach the optic organ
with its centre from the rest of the organism, and no normal sensation
of Sight will result from its stimulation; and in a lesser degree this
is equally true of a stimulation of the optic organ when the sensorium
is exhausted, or powerfully affected by other stimuli. Because of the
great importance of the cerebrum, and its predominance in the nervous
system, it has been supposed to constitute the whole of the sensorium,
in spite of the evidence of varied Sensibility after the cerebrum has
been removed. I do not wish to understate the cerebral importance (see
p. 166), yet I must say that the modern phrase _cerebration_, when
employed as more than a shorthand expression of the complex processes
which a cerebral process initiates, and when taken as the objective
equivalent of Consciousness or of Thought, seems to me not more
justifiable than to speak of Combustion as the equivalent of Railway
Transport. The railway wagons will not move unless the fuel which
supplies the boiler be ignited; the organism will not think unless the
cerebrum excites this peculiar mode of Sensibility by its action on
the organs. _It is the man, and not the brain, that thinks_: it is the
organism as a whole, and not one organ, that feels and acts.

31. Consciousness, or Sensation, is a complex product not to be
recognized in any _one_ of its factors. Cerebral processes and spinal
processes are the elements we analytically separate, as muscular
contractions are the elements of limb-movements. The synthetic unity
of these elements is a reflex; this we analytically decompose into
a sensation and a movement; and then we speak of sensation as the
reaction of the sensory organ, the movement as the reaction of the
muscular organ. By a similar procedure we separate the stimulation of
a sensory nerve from the reaction of the sensory organ, and that from
the reaction of the sensorium; and in this way we may come to regard
Cerebration as Thought. But those who employ this artifice should
remember that the organism is not an assemblage of organs, made up of
parts put together like a machine. The organs are differentiations of
the organism, each evolved from those which preceded it, all sharing in
a common activity, all _inter_-dependent.

32. That co-operation of the Personality which is conspicuous in
conscious actions is also inductively to be inferred in sub-conscious
and unconscious actions. We know that a man reacts on an impression
according to his physical and mental state at the moment--that through
his individuality he feels differently, and thinks differently from
other men, and from himself at other epochs, and in other states.
Because he resembles other men in many and essential points we
conclude that he will resemble them in all; but observation proves
this conclusion to be precipitate. Other men see a blue color in the
sky, or feel awe at sight of the setting sun; but he has perhaps
not learned to discriminate this sensation, is not conscious of the
blue; nor has he learned to feel awe at the setting sun. Why--having
normally constructed eyes--does he not see the blue of the sky? For the
same reason that a dog, or an infant, fails to see it. The color has
no _interest_ for him (and all cognition is primarily emotion), nor
has this want of personal interest been rectified from an impersonal
source: he has never been taught to distinguish the color of the sky;
and his eye wanders over it with the indifferent gaze with which a
savage would regard a Greek codex.

33. The point here insisted on, namely, that every reaction on an
impression is indirectly the reaction of the whole organism, and that
no organ detached from the organism has more significance than a word
detached from a sentence, is of far-reaching importance, and peculiarly
worthy of attention in considering the Reflex Theory, because almost
all the evidence urged in support of that theory presupposes the
legitimacy of concluding what takes place in the organism from what
is observed in an organ detached from its normal connections. No
experimental proof is necessary to show that many actions take place
unconsciously; the fact is undisputed. But does unconsciously mean
insentiently? It is certain that the unconscious actions take place in
a sentient organism, and involve organic processes of the same _order_
as the actions which are conscious. It is also certain that many
sentient processes take place unconsciously. For thousands of years men
used their eyes, and saw as their descendants see, yet were unconscious
of the blue sky and green of the grass. Were their visual reactions
not of the same _order_ as our own? So far as the optic apparatus
is concerned, there cannot be a doubt on the point; yet in them the
sensorium having a somewhat different disposition--the neural elements
being differently combined--their reactions correspondingly differed.
They too had optical Sensibility, and visual sensations; but they did
not feel precisely what we feel.

34. I have chosen these somewhat remote illustrations for the sake of
their psychological interest; but I might have confined myself to more
familiar examples. Thus the contents of the consciousness of a man born
blind cannot be _the same_ as the contents of one who has had visual
experiences, which will enter into the complex of every conscious
state, because the visual organs will have affected his sensorium;
nevertheless in the organism of the blind man there are conditions
so similar to those of other men, and his experiences will have been
so similar, that in spite of the modifications due to the absence of
visual experiences, his consciousness will in the main resemble theirs.
But now let us in imagination pursue this kind of modification, let us
take away hearing, taste, and smell, and we shall have proportionately
simplified the contents of consciousness--the reactions of the
sensorium--in thus simplifying the organism. There still will remain
Touch, Temperature, Pain, and the Systemic Sensations. There will still
remain an organism to react on impressions. So long as there is a
living organism, however truncated, there is a sentient mechanism. When
the brain has been removed, the removal causes both a _disturbance_ of
function and a _loss_ of function; the mechanism has been seriously
interfered with; yet all those parts of the mechanism which still
co-operate manifest their physiological aptitudes. The animal can live
without its brain, _ergo_ it can feel without its brain. Observation
proves this, for it discovers the brainless animal manifesting various
sensibilities, and combining various movements. The vision of the
brainless animal is greatly impaired, but it nevertheless persists.
The intelligence is greatly impaired, the spontaneity is reduced to a
minimum; but still both intelligence and spontaneity are manifested.

35. The physiologist has only two conclusions open to him. Either
he holds Sensation to be a _property_ of nerve-tissue--and in that
case he must assign it to the spinal cord as to the brain; or else
he holds Sensation to be a _function_ of an organ--and in that case,
although analytically he may decompose the organism into separate
organs, assigning special sensations to the reactions of each, he must
still admit that in reality these organs only yield sensations as
component parts of the organism. The notion of a separate organ, such
as the brain, being the exclusive seat of sensation is thus seen to be
untenable.

In popular phrase, “it is not the eye which sees, but the mind behind
the eye.” It is not the stimulus which is the _object_ felt--it is the
change in consciousness--the reaction of the sensorium. No one would
propound the absurdity that the retinal cells _see_, or the auditory
cells _hear_ (although by a conventional ellipsis these cells are said
to be “percipient” of colors and sounds), yet many writers have no
hesitation in asserting that the cerebral cells are the seats of these
and all other sensations. In a hundred treatises may be read the most
precise description of the transformation of molecular changes in the
retinal cells into molecular changes in the cerebral cells, where, it
is said, “we know that the stimulations become sensations.” Now who
knows this? How can it be known? Nay, who, on reflection, fails to see
that this cannot be so? If a sensation of sight were not much _more_
than a molecular change in the cerebrum stimulated by a molecular
change in the optic tract, three conclusions would follow, each of
which is demonstrably erroneous:--

I. The cerebrum in a decapitated animal would respond by a sensation of
sight to a retinal stimulation.

II. The animal deprived of its cerebrum could not respond by a
sensation of sight to a retinal stimulation.

III. The same retinal stimulation would always produce the same
cerebral process and the same sensation; whereas the sensation depends
on the condition of the sensorium at the time.

36. The difference between the Reflex Theory and that here upheld is
important in its general relations, and yet turns on a point which may
easily appear insignificant. The Reflex Theory asserts that when a
sensory nerve is stimulated, the excitation of the centre may either
subdivide into two waves, one of which passes directly to the brain
and there awakens sensation, the other passes over to the motor-roots
and causes muscular contractions; or, instead of thus subdividing, the
wave may pass at once to the motor-nerves, and then there is movement
without sensation. This is obviously a restatement in anatomical terms
of the observed fact that some reflexes take place consciously and
some unconsciously. But what evidence is there for this anatomical
statement? We have seen that there is none. According to all we
actually know, and reasonably infer, the continuity of tissue and the
irradiation of excitation are such that the stimulus wave must always
affect the whole system, so that brain and cord being structurally
united, their reactions must co-operate with varying energy dependent
on their statical conditions at the time.[243]

37. The physiological fact that the irradiation is _restricted_ to
certain paths, and therefore only certain portions of the whole system
are excited to discharge--the fact that stimulation takes effect along
the lines of least resistance--is that which gives the Reflex Theory
its plausible aspect. But this fact of restriction is not dependent on
an _anatomical_ disposition of structure, it is, as we have already
seen (PROBLEM II. § 166), dependent on a fluctuating physiological
disposition--a temporary statical condition of the centres. And it
enables us to understand why the reflex action which is at one moment
a distinctly conscious or even a volitional action, is at another
sub-conscious or unconscious. When an object is placed in the hand of
an infant the fingers close over it by a simple reflex. This having
also been observed in the case of an infant born without a brain,[244]
one might interpret it as normally taking place without brain
co-operation, were there not good grounds for concluding that normally
the brain must co-operate. Thus if the object be placed in the hand of
a boy, or a man, the fingers will close, or not close--not according to
an anatomical mechanism, but according to a physiological condition:
if the attention preoccupy his sensorium elsewhere, his fingers will
probably close, probably not; if his sensorium be directed towards the
object, either by the urgency of the sensitive impression, or by some
one’s pointing to the object, the fingers will close or not close,
just as he chooses--perhaps the hand will be suddenly drawn away. The
centre of innervation for the fingers is in the cord, and from this
comes the final discharge of the sensitive stimulation; but the neural
processes which preceded this discharge, and were consequent on the
stimulation, were in each case somewhat different. In each case the
impression on the skin was carried to the cord, and thence irradiated
throughout the continuous neural axis, restricted to certain paths by
the resistance it met with, but blending with waves of simultaneous
excitations from other sources, the final discharge being the resultant
of these component forces. We may suppose the brain to be the seat
of consciousness, and yet not conclude that the brain was unaffected
because the fingers closed unconsciously; any more than we conclude
that the retina of the unoccupied eye is unaffected by light when with
the other we are looking through a microscope, and only _see_ objects
with this eye--though directly we attend to the impressions on the
other eye we see the objects which before were unseen. We know that the
muscles of the back are all involved in walking, standing, etc., but we
are seldom conscious of their co-operation till rheumatism or lumbago
makes us painfully alive to it.

38. The two main positions of the Reflex Theory are, 1°, that
reflex actions take place without brain co-operation,--as proved by
observation of decapitated animals; 2°, that they take place without
brain co-operation,--as proved by our being unconscious of them.

To these the answers are: 1°. The proof drawn from observation of
decapitated animals is defective, because the conditions of the
organism are then abnormal--there is a disturbance of the mechanism,
and a loss of some of its components. The fact that a reflex occurs
in the absence of the brain is no proof that reflexes when the brain
is present occur without its participation. 2°. The absence of
consciousness cannot be accepted as proof of the brain not being in
action, because much brain-work is known to pass unconsciously, and
there are cerebral reflexes which have the same characters as spinal
reflexes.

39. A prick on the great toe traverses the whole length of the spinal
axis with effects manifested in various organs--the muscles of the
limb, the heart, the chest, the eyes, etc. The leg is withdrawn,
the heart momently arrested, the eyes turned towards the source of
irritation, the thoughts directed towards relief. These effects can
be observed--there are others which lie beyond our observation, and
can only be revealed by delicate experimental tests. But even the
observable effects are very fluctuating, because they depend on
fluctuating conditions. All we can say is, that so long as there is
continuity of structure, there must be continuity of excitation;
and the brain structurally connected with the centre of a sensory
impression, must necessarily co-operate more or less in the reactions
of that centre. In other words, the brain, although not the exclusive
seat of sensation, plays a part in every particular sensation, so long
as it forms a part of the stimulated organism.

40. This view being so widely opposed to the views current in
physiological schools, I was gratified to find Dr. Crichton Browne led
by his researches to a conclusion not unlike it in essential features.
In his essay on the Functions of the Optic Thalami[245] (well worthy
of attention on other grounds) he says: “Allowing the spinal cord a
power of independent action, it may still be that it generally acts
reflexly through, or in association with, a superior centre. The
sensorial ganglia can undoubtedly act alone in a reflex manner, but
they almost invariably consult the cerebrum before dealing with the
impressions which they receive; so it may be that the spinal cord,
though capable of spontaneous reaction, may yet commonly refer to some
higher seat of compound co-ordination before sending forth an answer
to any message brought to it.” What is here stated as a possible and
occasional process, I consider to be a necessary and universal process.
Dr. Browne acutely remarks that if “what may be termed the encephalic
loop were an integral part of every reflex act, then the influence of
an intracranial lesion in checking reflex action would not be difficult
to understand”--and we may add the notorious influence of the brain in
arresting reflex actions, and modifying them by the will, which is only
explicable on the supposition that the cerebral and spinal centres are
functionally associated. Dr. Browne further remarks: “In experimenting
upon myself I have sometimes thought that when the toe is pricked the
sensation of pain actually precedes the movement of withdrawal; and
in experimenting upon patients with sluggish nervous systems I have
certainly noticed that after the pricking of the toe the little cry of
pain has anticipated the muscular contractions of the leg. Now this cry
of pain is a secondary reflex act through the sensorial centre; it is
the result of a discharge from efferent nerves from the summit of what
we have spoken of as the encephalic loop line; and we should certainly
not expect that it would be developed earlier than the primary
reflexion upon the motor apparatus, unless indeed what we have regarded
as the primary reflexion really itself took place by way of the loop
line.”

41. The difference between a voluntary and involuntary act is not, I
conceive, that in the one case the brain co-operates and in the other
is inactive, but that while in both the brain co-operates, the state
of the sensorium known as mental prevision or ideal stimulation, is
present in the one, and absent or less conspicuous in the other. So
likewise the difference between a normal reflex action accompanied, and
the same action unaccompanied by consciousness, is not that the brain
co-operates in the one and is inactive in the other, but that the state
of the sensorium is somewhat different in the two cases. Movements
which originally were voluntary and difficult of execution--accompanied
therefore by brain co-operation--become by frequent repetition
automatic, easy of execution, and unconscious--they are then said to
depend on the direct action of the established mechanism. Granted. But
what are the components of this mechanism? Are they not just those
centres and organs which at first effected the movements? In becoming
easy and automatic, the movements do not _change their mechanism_--the
moving organs and the motor conditions remain what they were; all that
is changed is the degree of consciousness, i. e. the _state_ of the
sensorium which precedes and succeeds the movement. It is this which
constitutes the difficulty of the question. Some readers may consider
that all is conceded when unconsciousness is admitted. But this is
not so. My present argument is the physiological one that the brain
co-operates in reflex actions whenever the brain is structurally united
with the reflex centres; the psychological question as to whether
consciousness is also involved in this brain co-operation must be
debated on other grounds; and we have already seen that consciousness
operates in gradations of infinite delicacy.

Observe a man performing some automatic action, such as planing a
deal board, or cutting out a pattern, which he has done so often that
he is now able to do it “mechanically.” It is certain that his brain
co-operates, and that he could not act thus with an injured brain;
yet he is said to act unconsciously, his brain occupied elsewhere as
he whistles, talks to bystanders, or thinks of his wife and children.
Yet the brain is acting as an overseer of his work, attentive to every
stroke of the plane, every snip of the scissors; and this becomes
evident directly his attention is otherwise absorbed by an interesting
question addressed to him, or an interesting object meeting his eye:
then the work pauses, his hands are arrested, and the automatic action
will only be resumed when his attention is released--when he has
answered your question, or satisfied himself about the object.

42. This is a step towards understanding the co-operation of the brain
even in those connate reflexes which were not originally voluntary
acts, but were from the first organized tendencies, and are capable
of being realized in the absence of the brain. I admit that it is
difficult to find proof of brain co-operation here, though I think
the anatomical and physiological evidence render it highly probable.
But distinct proof to the contrary would not suffice for the Reflex
Theory--would not prove that reflex actions were insentient--unless
there had previously been proved that which seems to me contradicted
by the clearest and most massive evidence, namely, that the brain is
the sole seat of sentience. This contradictory evidence we will now
furnish.




