CHAPTER VIII.

THE LAWS OF NERVOUS ACTIVITY.


161. The foregoing remarks have had the object of showing how little
substantial aid Psychology can at present derive from what is known
of the elementary structure of the nervous system, indispensable
as an accurate knowledge of that structure must be to a complete
analysis of its functions. This caution has been specially addressed
to those medical and psychological students whose researches leave
them insufficient leisure to pursue microscopical investigations
for themselves, and who are therefore forced to rely on second-hand
knowledge, which is usually defective in the many qualifying
considerations which keep scepticism vigilant. Relying on positive
statements, and delusive diagrams which only display what the observer
_imagines_, not what he actually _sees_, they construct on such data
theories of disease, or of mental processes; or else they translate
observed facts into the terms of this imaginary anatomy, and offer the
translation as a new contribution to Science.

162. But little aid as can at present be derived from the teaching of
the microscope, some aid Psychology may even now derive from it. The
teaching will often serve, for instance, to correct the precipitate
conclusions of subjective analysis, which present artificial
distinctions as real distinctions, separating what Nature has united.
It will show certain organic connections not previously suspected;
and since whatever is organically connected cannot functionally be
separated, such sharply marked analytical distinctions as those of
periphery and centre, or of sensation and motion, must be only regarded
as artificial aids. The demonstration of the indissoluble union of
the tissues is a demonstration of their functional co-operation. So
also the anatomical demonstration of the similarity and continuity of
all parts of the central system sets aside the analytical separation
of one centre from another, except as a convenient artifice; proving
that cerebral substance is one with spinal substance, having the same
properties, the same laws of action.

For the present, Psychology must seek objective aid from Physiology
and Pathology rather than from elementary Anatomy. In the paragraphs
which are to follow I shall endeavor to select the chief laws of
nervous activity which the researches of physiologists and pathologists
disclose. By these laws we may direct and control psychological
research.


THE ENERGY OF NEURILITY.

163. Vitality is characterized by incessant molecular movement, both
of composition and decomposition, in the building up of structure and
the liberation of energy. The life of every organism is a complex of
changes, each of which directly or indirectly affects the statical
and dynamical relations, each being the resultant of many co-operant
forces. In the nourishment of every organite there is an accumulation
of molecular _tension_, that is to say, stored-up energy in a latent
state, ready to be expended in the activity of that organite; and this
expenditure may take place in a steady flow, or in a sudden gush.
The molecular movements under one aspect may be called convergent,
or _formative_: they build the structure, and tend to the state of
equilibrium which we call the statical condition of the organite,
i. e. the condition in which it is not active, but ready to act.
Perfect equilibrium is of course never attained, owing to the
incessant molecular change: indeed Life is inconsistent with complete
repose. Under another aspect the molecular movements may be called
_discharging_: they constitute the dynamic condition of the organite,
in which its functional activity appears. The energy is now diverted,
liberated, and the surplus, over and above that which is absorbed in
formation, instead of slowly dribbling off, gushes forth in a directed
stream. The slow formation of a secretion in a gland-cell, and the
discharge of that secretion, will illustrate this; or (if muscular
_tone_ be admitted) the incipient contraction of the chronic state, and
the complete contraction of the dynamic state, may also be cited.

164. The discharge which follows excitation may thus be viewed as
a _directed quantity_ of molecular movement. Because it is always
strictly relative to the energy of tension, and is inevitable when
that tension attains a certain surplus over what is required in
construction, there is a limit, 1°, to the growth and evolution of
every organite, and every organism (comp. Problem I. § 118), and, 2°,
to its dynamical effect. When there is no surplus, the organite is
incapable of discharge: it is then exhausted, i. e. will not respond to
stimulus.

165. The speciality of nerve-tissue is its pre-eminence in directive
energy. Like all other tissues, it grows, develops, and dies; but
above all others it has what we call _excitability_, or readiness in
discharging its energy in a directed stream. By its topographical
distribution it plays the functional part of exciting the activity of
other tissues: it transmits molecular disturbance from periphery to
centre, from centre to centre, and from centre to muscles, vessels, and
glands. When a muscle is excited it moves, and when a gland is excited
it secretes; but these actions end, so to speak, with themselves; the
muscle does not directly move any other muscle;[184] the gland does not
directly excite any other gland. The nerve, on the contrary, has always
a wide-spreading effect; it excites a centre which is continuous with
other centres; and in exciting one muscle, usually excites a group.
Hence the nervous system is that _which binds the different organs
into a dynamic unity_. And Comparative Anatomy teaches that there is a
parallelism between the development of this system and the efficient
complexity of the organism. As the tissues become more and more
specialized, and the organs more and more individualized, they would
become more and more unsuited to the general service of the organism,
were it not that a corresponding development of the nervous system
brought a unifying mechanism.

The great instability of neurine, in other words, its high degree of
tension, renders it especially apt to disturb the tension of other
tissues. It is very variable; and this variability will have to be
taken into account in explaining the restriction of discharges to
particular centres. A good example of exaggerated tension is furnished
by strychnine poisoning. The centres are then so readily excitable
that a touch, or a puff of cold air on the skin, will determine
convulsions. And it is worthy of remark that for some hours after this
convulsive discharge the centres return to something like their normal
state; and the animal may then be stroked, pinched, or blown upon
without abnormal reactions. But during this interval the centres are
slowly accumulating excess of tension from the poisoned blood; and at
the close, convulsions will again follow the slightest stimulus. This
alternation of exhaustion and recrudescence is noticed by Schröder
van der Kolk in the periodicity of the phenomena exhibited in spinal
disease.[185]


THE PROPAGATION OF EXCITATION.

166. Understanding, then, that the propagation of an excitation
depends on the state of tension of the tissue, and always follows
the line of least resistance, whichever that may be at the moment,
we have to inquire whether the transmission takes place only in one
direction, from periphery to centre in sensory nerves, and from centre
to periphery in motor nerves? By most physiologists this is answered
affirmatively. Indeed a special property has been assigned to each
nerve, in virtue of this imaginary limitation of centripetal and
centrifugal conduction. The “nerve-current” (accepted as a physical
fact, and not simply a metaphor) is supposed to “flow” from the
central cells along the motor nerve to the muscles; but by a strange
oversight the current is also made to “flow” _towards_ the central
cells which are said to produce it! Now although the fact may be, and
probably is, that normally the sensory nerve, being stimulated at its
peripheral end, propagates the stimulation towards the centre, and the
motor nerve propagates its central stimulation towards the periphery,
the question whether each nerve is not capable of transmission in
both directions is not thus answered. _A priori_ it is irrational to
assert that nerves fundamentally alike in composition and structure
are unlike in properties; and we might as well suppose that a train
of gunpowder could only be fired at one end, as to suppose that a
nerve could only be excited at one end. And how does the evidence
support this _a priori_ conclusion? Dubois Reymond proved that each
nerve conducted electricity in both directions; but as Neurility
has not been satisfactorily shown to be identical with the electric
current, this may not be considered decisive. Such a doubt does not
hang over the following facts. M. Paul Bert, pursuing John Hunter’s
curious experiments on animal _grafting_, has grafted the tail of
a rat under the skin of the rat’s back, the tip of the tail being
inserted under the skin, its base rising into the air, so that there
is here an inversion of the normal position. In the course of time
Sensibility gradually reappears in this grafted tail; and at the
end of about twelve months the rat not only feels when the tail is
pinched, but knows _where_ the irritation lies, and turns round to bite
the pincers.[186] Here we have a case of a sensory nerve reversed,
yet transmitting stimulation from the base to the tip of the tail,
instead of from the tip to the base, as in a normal organ. Vulpian
and Philippeaux having divided two nerves, united the central end of
the sensory nerve with the peripheral end of the motor nerve; when
the organic union was complete, and each nerve was formed out of the
halves of two different nerves, the effect of pinching one of these
was to produce simultaneously pain and movement, showing that the
excitation was transmitted upwards to the centre, and downwards to the
muscles.[187] It may be compared with a train of gunpowder having a
loaded cannon at one end and a bundle of straw at the other, when if a
spark be dropped anywhere on this train, the flame runs along in both
directions, explodes the cannon, and sets alight the straw.

167. Indeed we have only to remember the semi-liquid nature of the
axis cylinder to see at once that it must conduct a wave of motion as
readily in one direction as in another. A liquid transmits waves in any
direction according to the initial impulse. There is consequently no
reason for asserting that because the usual direction is centripetal
in a sensory nerve, and centrifugal in a motor nerve, each nerve is
_incapable_ of transmitting excitations in both directions. And I think
many phenomena are more intelligible on the assumption that neural
transmission is in both directions. If the eye is fixed steadfastly
on a particular color during some minutes, the retina becomes
exhausted, and no longer responds to the stimulus of that color: here
the stimulation is of course centripetal. But if instead of looking
intently on the color, the mind (in complete absence of light) pictures
it intently, _this cerebral image is equally capable of exhausting the
retina_; and unless we believe that color is a cerebral, not a retinal
phenomenon (which is my private opinion), we must accept this as proof
of a centrifugal excitation of a sensory tract. Another illustration
may be drawn from the muscular sense. There may be a few sensory fibres
distributed to muscles; but even if the observations of Sachs[188]
should be confirmed, I do not think that all muscle sensations can be
assigned to these fibres, but that the so-called motor fibres must
also co-operate. When a nerve acts upon a muscle, the muscle reacts
on the nerve; and when a nerve acts on a centre, the centre reacts on
the nerve. The agitation of the central tissue cannot leave the nerve
which blends with it unaffected; the agitation of the muscular tissue
must also by a reversal of the “current” affect its nerve. Laplace
points out how the movement of the hand which holds a suspended chain
is propagated along the chain to its terminus, and if when the chain
is at rest we once more set that terminus in motion, the vibration
will remount to the hand.[189] The contraction of a muscle will not
only stimulate the sensory fibres distributed through it, but also, I
conceive, stimulate the very motor fibres which caused the contraction,
since these fibres blend with the muscle.[190]

168. To understand this, it is necessary to remember that the
stimulation of a nerve does not arise[191] in the _changed state_ of
that nerve, but in the _process of change_, i. e. the disturbance of
the tension. The duration of the stimulation is that of the changing
process, and the intensity increases with the differential of the
velocity of change. So that when a nerve which has been excited by a
change of state returns to its former state, this return--being another
change--is a new excitation. That it is not the changed state, but the
change, which is operative, explains the fact noted by Brown Séquard:
a frog poisoned by strychnine, when decapitated and all respiration
destroyed, will remain motionless for days together, if carefully
protected from all external excitation; but its nervous system is in
such a state of tension all this time that the first touch produces
general convulsions. Freusberg also notes that if a brainless frog be
suspended by the lower jaw, and one foot be pinched, the other leg is
moved at first, then quickly droops again, and remains at rest until
the pincers are removed from the pinched foot, when suddenly all four
legs are violently moved by the _stimulation which the simple removal
produces_. Let us also add the well-known and significant fact that
if a nerve be divided rapidly by a sharp razor, neither sensation
nor motion is produced, because the intensity of a stimulus being,
to speak mathematically, _the function of the changing process_, the
duration of the process is in this case too brief. On the same ground
the application of a stimulus will excite no movement, if the force be
very slowly increased from zero to an intensity which will destroy the
nerve; but at any stage a _sudden_ increase will excite a movement.

169. We may group all the foregoing considerations in this formula:

  LAW I. Every neural process is due to a sudden disturbance of the
      molecular tension. The liberated energy is discharged along the
      lines of least resistance.

The conditions which determine the lines of least resistance are
manifold and variable. The nervous system is a continuous whole, each
part of which is connected with diverse organs; but in spite of this
anatomical diversity, the deeper uniformity causes the activity of
each part to depend on and involve the activity of every other, more
or less. By “more or less” is meant, that although the excitation of
one part necessarily affects the state of all the others, because of
their structural community, so that _each sensation and each motion
really represents a change in the whole organism_, yet the responsive
discharge determined in each organ by this change, depends on the
tension of the organ and its centre at that moment. A bad harvest
really affects the whole nation; but its effect is conspicuous on the
welfare of the poor rather than of the rich, although the price of
bread is the same to rich and poor. Nervous centres, and muscular or
glandular organs, differ in their excitability; one condition of this
greater excitability being the greater frequency with which they are
called into activity. The medulla oblongata is normally more excitable
than the medulla spinalis; the heart more than the limbs. Hence a
stimulus which will increase the respiration and the pulse may have no
_appreciable_ effect on the limbs; but some effect it must have.

170. Imagine all the nerve-centres to be a connected group of bells
varying in size. Every agitation of the connecting wire will more or
less agitate all the bells; but since some are heavier than others,
and some of the cranks less movable, there will be many vibrations
of the wire which will cause some bells to sound, others simply to
oscillate without sounding, and others not sensibly to oscillate.
Even some of the lighter bells will not ring if any external pressure
arrests them; or if they are already ringing, the added impulses, not
being rhythmically timed, will _arrest_ the ringing. So the stimulus
of a sensory nerve agitates its centre, and through it the whole
system; usually the stimulation is mainly reflected on the group of
muscles innervated from that centre, because this is the readiest path
of discharge; but it sometimes does not mainly discharge along this
path, the line of least resistance lying in another direction; and the
discharge never takes this path without also irradiating upwards and
downwards through the central tissue. Thus irradiated, it falls into
the general stream of neural processes; and according to the state in
which the various centres are at the moment it modifies their activity.
A nervous shock--physical or mental--sensibly affects all the organs. A
severe wound paralyzes, for a time, parts far removed from the wounded
spot. A blow on the stomach will arrest the heart; a fright will do
the same. Terror relaxes the limbs, or sets them trembling; so does
a concussion: if a frog be thrown violently on the ground, all its
muscles are convulsed; but if the nerves of one limb be divided before
the shock, the muscles of that limb will not be convulsed.

171. We are apt to regard the discharge on the moving organs as if
that were the sole response of a stimulation; but although the most
conspicuous, it is by no means the most important effect. Besides
exciting the muscles, more or less, every neural process has its
influence on the organic processes of secretion, and effects thermal
and electrical changes. Schiff has demonstrated that every sensation
raises the temperature of the brain; Nothnagel, that irritation of a
sensory nerve causes constriction of the cerebral arteries, and hence
cerebral anæmia. Brown Séquard and Lombard find the temperature of
a limb raised when its skin is pinched, and lowered when the skin
_elsewhere_ is pinched. Georges Pouchet has shown that fishes change
color according to the brightness or darkness of the ground over which
they remain; and these changes are dependent on nervous stimulation,
mainly through the eye, division of the optic nerves preventing the
change. These are so many _a posteriori_ confirmations of what _a
priori_ may be foreseen. They are cited here merely to enforce the
consideration, seldom adequately kept before the mind, that every
neural process is a change which causes other changes in the whole
organism.


STIMULI.

172. Stimuli are classed as external and internal, or physical and
physiological. The one class comprises all the agencies in the
External Medium which _appreciably_ affect the organism; the other
class all the changes _in_ the organism which appreciably disturb the
equilibrium of any organ. Although the pressure of the atmosphere, for
example, unquestionably affects the organism, and determines organic
processes, it is not reckoned as a stimulus unless the effect become
appreciable under sudden variations of the pressure. In like manner
the blood is not reckoned among the internal stimuli, except when
sudden variations in its composition, or its circulation, determine
appreciable changes. Because the external stimuli, and the so-called
Senses which respond to them, are more conspicuous than the internal
stimuli and the Systemic Senses, they have unfortunately usurped too
much attention. The massive influence of the Systemic Sensations in
determining the desires, volitions, and conceptions of mankind has not
been adequately recognized. Yet every one knows the effect of impure
air, or a congested liver, in swaying the mental mood; and how a
heavy meal interferes with muscular and mental exertion.[192] What is
conspicuous in such marked effects, is less conspicuously, but not less
necessarily, present in slighter stimuli.

173. A constant pressure on the tympanum excites no sound; only a
rhythmic alternation of pressures will excite the sensation. A constant
temperature is not felt; only changes in temperature. If Light and
Sound were as uniform as the circulation of the blood, or the pressure
of the atmosphere, we should be seldom conscious of the existence of
these stimuli. But because the changes are varied and marked, our
attention is necessarily arrested by them. The changes going on within
the tissues are too graduated to fix the attention; it is only by
considering their cumulative effects that we become impressed with
their importance. For example, the development of the sexual glands
determines conspicuous physical and moral results--we note consequent
effects on voice, hair, horns, structure of the skull and size of the
muscles, no less than the rise of new feelings, desires, instincts,
ideas. Any organic interference with the activity of the ovaries will
alter the moral disposition of the animal: suppression of this organic
process means non-development of the feelings of maternity; the moral
superstructure is absent because its physical basis is wanting.

174. Blood supplies the tissues with their plasmodes; a constant
supply of oxygenated blood is therefore necessary to the vitality of
the tissues. But it is an error to suppose that oxygen is the special
stimulus of nerve-centres, or that their activity depends on their
oxidation; on the contrary, the deficiency of oxygen or surplus of
carbonic acid is that which stimulates. When saturated with oxygen,
the blood paralyzes respiration; when some of the oxygen is withdrawn,
respiration revives. Here--as in all other cases--we have to remember
that differences in degree readily pass into differences in kind,
so that an excess of a stimulus produces a reversal of the effect;
thus although surplus of carbonic acid excites respiratory movements,
excess of carbonic acid causes Asphyxia. Abundance of blood is
requisite for the continuous activity of nerve-centres; but while a
temporary deficiency of blood renders them more excitable, too great a
deficiency paralyzes them. Anæmia, which causes great excitability, and
convulsions (so that nerves when dying are most irritable), may easily
become the cause of the death of the tissue. There are substances which
can only be dissolved by a given quantity of liquid; if this quantity
be in excess, they are precipitated from the solution. There are
vibrations of a given order which cause each string to respond; change
the special order, and the string returns to its repose.

In the stillness and darkness of the night we are excluded from most
of the external stimuli, yet a massive stream of systemic sensations
keeps the sensitive mechanism active, and in sleep directs the dreams.
The cramps and epileptiform attacks which occur during sleep are most
probably due to the over-excitability produced by surplus carbonic
acid. To temporary anæmia may be assigned the strange exaggeration of
our sensations during the moments which precede awakening; and the
greater vividness of dream-images.

It is only needful to mention in passing the varied stimuli by which
cerebral changes act upon the organism. The mention of a name will
cause a blush, a brightening of the eye, a quickening of the pulse. The
thought of her absent infant will cause a flow of milk in the mother’s
breast.

175. We may formulate the foregoing considerations in another law:

  LAW II. The neural excitation, which is itself a change, directly
      causes a change in the organ innervated, and indirectly in the
      whole organism.

The significance of this law is, that although for the convenience
of research and exposition we isolate one organ from the rest of the
organism, and one process from all the co-operant processes, we have to
remember that this is an artifice, and that in reality there is no such
separation.


STIMULATION.

176. Passing now from these general considerations to their special
application, we may formulate the law of stimulation:

  LAW III. A faint or moderate stimulation increases the activity
      of the organ; but beyond a certain limit, increase of
      stimulation diminishes, and finally arrests, the activity.
      Duration of stimulation is equivalent to increase.

A muscle stimulated contracts; if the stimulation be repeated,
the muscle becomes tetanized, and in this state has reached its
limit; a fresh stimulation then _relaxes_ the muscle. A very faint
stimulation of the vagus quickens the pulsation of the heart, but a
slight increase, or duration of the stimulation, slackens and arrests
the heart.[193] Every one knows how a moderate feeling of surprise,
pleasure, or pain quickens the heart and the respiration; and how a
shock of surprise, joy, grief, or great physical pain depresses,
and even arrests them. Excess of light is blinding; excess of sound
deafening.

177. The nervous system is incessantly stimulated, and variably.
Hence a great variation in the excitability of different parts. While
the regular and moderate activity of one part is accompanied by a
regular flow of blood to it, so that there is a tolerably constant
rhythm of nutrition and discharge, any irregular or excessive activity
exhausts it, until there has been a nutritive restoration. We can
thus understand how one centre may be temporarily exhausted while
a neighboring centre is vigorous. Cayrade decapitated a frog, and
suspended light weights to each of its hind legs; when either leg was
stimulated, the weight attached to it was raised. After each repetition
the weight was raised less and less, until finally the weight ceased to
be raised: the centre had been exhausted. But now when the other leg,
which had been in repose, was stimulated, it energetically contracted,
and raised its attached weight; showing that its centre was not
exhausted by the action of the other.[194]

178. This seems in contradiction with the principle that the excitation
of one centre is an excitation of all. It also seems in contradiction
with the principle urged by Herzen, that irritation of one sciatic
nerve _diminishes_ the excitability of the opposite leg; and this again
seems contradicted by the principle urged by Setschenow, that although
moderate excitation of one sciatic nerve will diminish the excitability
of the other, a powerful excitation will increase it.

179. All three principles are, I believe, exact expressions of
experimental evidence; and their seeming contradictions may be
reconciled on a wider survey of the laws of neural activity,
interpreted according to the special conditions of each case. These
laws may be conveniently classified as laws of Discharge, and Laws of
Arrest; the second being only a particular aspect of the first.


THE LAW OF DISCHARGE.

180. The physiological independence of organs, together with their
intimate dependence in the organism, and the fact that this organism is
incessantly stimulated from many sides at once, assure us _a priori_
that the “waves” of molecular movement due to each stimulus must
sometimes interfere and sometimes blend with others, thus diverting or
neutralizing the final discharge in the one case, and in the other case
swelling the current and increasing the energy of the discharge. We
are accustomed to speak of one part “playing on another,” sympathizing
with another, and so on; but what is the process expressed in these
metaphors? When an idea, or a painful sensation, quickens the pulse,
or increases the flow of a secretion, we are not to imagine that from
a spot in the cerebrum, or the surface, there is a nerve-fibre going
directly to the heart, or the gland, transmitting an impulse; in each
case the central tissue has been agitated by a sudden change at the
stimulated point, and the discharge on heart and gland is the resultant
of this agitation along the lines of least resistance. The nerves of
the great toe, for example, pass into the spinal cord at a considerable
distance from the spot where the nerves of the arm enter it; when,
therefore, the great toe is pinched, the arm does not move by direct
stimulation of its nerves, but by the indirect stimulation which has
traversed the whole central substance.

181. This is intelligible when we know that the whole central substance
is continuous throughout; but the difficulty arises when we have to
explain why, if this central substance is stimulated throughout,
_only_ arms and legs respond; in other words, why the toe-centre
“plays upon” the arm-centre, and not on the others? When a frog is
decapitated, if we gently touch one leg with the point of the scalpel,
the leg will move, but only this leg. Prick more forcibly, and both
legs will move. Keep on pricking, and all four legs are drawn up, and
the frog hops away. Each excitation was propagated along the cord;
but the discharge was restricted in the first case to one limb, in
the second to two, in the third it involved all the muscles of the
trunk. At the sight of a friend a dog wags his tail gently: as there
is no _direct_ connection between the optic nerves and the tail, this
playing of one centre on another must be by the agency of intermediate
centres; and we know that if the dog’s spinal cord be divided, this
excitation from the optic centre is no longer possible, yet the tail
will wag if the abdomen be tickled, or the leg pinched. Now compare the
effect on the dog produced by the sight of his master, or of a friend
accustomed to take him out. There is no longer a gentle wagging of the
tail, but an agitation of the whole body: he barks, leaps, and runs
about; the central stimulation is discharged through many outlets; and
could we test the effect, we should find an appreciable alteration
in the thermal and electrical condition of the whole organism, with
corresponding changes in circulation, secretion, etc. So different are
the consequences of two slightly different retinal impressions mingling
their stimulations with the same mass of central substance!

182. The discharge is determined by two conditions: the state of
tension, and the energy of the stimulation. _The state of tension is
increased by every stimulation which falls short of a discharge_; that
is to say, faint and frequent stimulation augments the excitability,
whereas powerful stimulation exhausts it. When, therefore, one
wave succeeds another in the same direction, it reaches a centre
more disposed to discharge; or, as Cayrade expresses it, “a certain
agitation of the cells is necessary for the manifestation of their
property of reaction, in the same way that the concentric circles
produced on the surface of water by a falling stone are more rapid and
more numerous if a stone has already agitated the surface.”

183. So much for the tension. What has been called the energy of the
stimulation is more complicated. It is not measurable as a simple
physical process; we cannot say that a given quantity of any external
force will determine a given discharge. It is mostly complicated by
psychical processes, and these so modify the result that instead of the
predicted discharge there is arrest, or discharge from another centre.
Press a dog’s skin with increasing violence, and the effect increases
from pleasurable to painful irritation; but whether the dog will cry
out and bite, or cry out and struggle to escape, depends upon whether
the pincher is a stranger or a friend. If you hurt a dog while removing
a thorn from its foot it will cry out, but although the pain causes it
to initiate a biting movement, by the time your hand is reached that
movement will have been changed, and the dog will lick the hand which
he knows is hurting him in the endeavor to relieve him of the thorn.
The co-operation of the mind is here evident enough. A purely psychical
process has interfered with the purely physiological process. And I
shall hereafter endeavor to show that psychical processes analogous in
kind though simpler in degree are really co-operant in actions of the
spinal cord. The dog would be said to discriminate between the pain
inflicted by a friend, and the same pain inflicted by a stranger. In
other words, the sensitive mechanism would be differently determined
in the direction of discharge, although the initial stimulation was the
same in each case. If we admit that the resulting action is in each
case the consequence of the particular group of elements co-operating,
there will be no ground for denying that analogous _discrimination_
is manifested by the brainless animal, who also responds differently
to different external stimuli, and differently to the same stimulus
under different central conditions. The brainless frog croaks if its
back be gently stroked with the handle of a scalpel; but if the point
be used, or if the handle be roughly pressed, instead of croaking,
the frog raises his leg in defence. Here the difference in the
peripheral irritation has excited a different reaction in the centre;
and this might be interpreted as purely physical; if now the leg be
fastened, and the movement of defence be thus prevented, the frog will
employ the other leg; or adopt some other means of relieving itself
from the irritation. It was a mass of registered experiences which
determined the dog not to bite his master. An analogous registration
of experiences determines the changed reactions of the brainless frog.
But this is a point which can only be touched on in passing here, and
it is touched on merely to facilitate our exposition of the complicated
conditions of neural discharge. These may be formulated in

  184. LAW IV. The simultaneous influence of several stimuli, each
      of which separately excites the same centre, is cumulative:
      stimuli then assist each other, and their resultant is their
      _arithmetical_ sum.

    Simultaneous stimuli, each of which excites a different centre,
      _interfere_ with each other’s energy, and their resultant is
      their _algebraical_ sum.

In this law there is a condensed expression of that composition of
forces which may either result in Discharge or Arrest. By simultaneity
is not to be understood merely the coincidence of impressions, but also
the reverberations of impressions not yet neutralized by others. Thus
when Sensibility is tested by the now common method,[195] it is found
that if one leg is withdrawn after a lapse of, say, ten pendulum beats,
the other leg, which has not been irritated, will nevertheless, on
irritation, be withdrawn in less than ten beats, provided the central
agitation caused by the first stimulation has _not yet subsided_. But,
on the contrary, the withdrawal will be considerably deferred, or
even prevented altogether, if at the same time that the leg is acted
on by the acid, a more powerful excitation takes place in some other
part of the body. In the one experiment we see simultaneous excitation
in the same centre and the same direction. In the other simultaneous
excitation in different centres. The more powerful excitation
suppresses the discharge from the less powerful; but although it
prevails, it loses just as much force as it arrests.[196]

185. There is another very interesting experiment by Freusberg, which
must be cited here.[197] When the sciatic nerve is divided, the frog’s
leg is of course not withdrawn from the acidulated water, because in
that case no sensory excitation is propagated from the skin to the
centre; but although there is no stimulation from the skin, there is
one from the muscles, as appears in the fact that if a small weight be
suspended on this leg, the other leg is more rapidly withdrawn from the
acidulated water--the action of the muscles having affected the centre
and increased its excitability.

186. When the motor group of one leg is moderately stimulated, the
discharge is confined to the muscles of that one leg; and according
to Herzen the excitability of the motor group of the other leg is
thereby somewhat diminished. But if the stimulation be increased, there
is an irradiation to the other group, which irradiation, although
not sufficient to excite a discharge, renders it much more _ready_
to discharge, so that a feeble stimulus suffices. This accords with
Setschenow’s observations, and is confirmed by Freusberg’s experiment,
in which, when one leg was stimulated by acid, if the acid were not
wiped off but allowed to keep up the irritation, the other leg moved
without being irritated; and this other leg having come to rest, when
in its turn dipped in the acid, was more rapidly withdrawn than the
first leg had been on first being stimulated; showing that the central
groups had become more excitable by the stimulation of either leg.

187. While it is intelligible that an excitation of one group should
increase the activity of neighboring groups, by an increase of the
vascular activity of the region, it is not so readily intelligible why
the feebler excitation of one group should diminish the excitability of
its neighbor; yet the facts seem to warrant both statements.

188. The conditions which determine Discharge are obscure. We may,
however, say that anatomical and physiological data force the
conclusion that whenever the central tissue is powerfully stimulated
in any one part, there is either a discharge, or a greater tension
(tendency to discharge) in every other part; in consequence of
which, every fresh stimulus in the _same_ direction finds the parts
more prepared to react; while every fresh stimulus in a _contrary_
direction meets with a proportional resistance. Stated thus generally,
the principle is clear enough; but the immense complication of
stimulations, and the statical variableness of the organs, renders its
application to particular cases extremely obscure. Why does the ticking
of a clock arrest the attention, even with unpleasant obtrusiveness, at
one time, and presently afterwards cease to be heard at all? Why does
the cut of a knife cause intense pain, and a far greater cut received
during the heat and agitation of a quarrel pass unfelt? Why will the
same external force excite convulsions in all the muscles, and at
another time scarcely be distinguishable? These are consequences of the
temporary condition of the centres; but there are permanent conditions
which in some organisms determine equally variable results. Thus the
shock of terror which will simply agitate one person, will develop an
epileptic attack in another, and insanity in a third; just as exposure
to cold will in one person congest the liver, in another the lungs. A
loud and sudden sound causes winking in most persons, and in many a
sort of convulsive shock. The harsh noise of a file causes a shiver in
some persons, and in others “sets the teeth on edge,” while in others
it causes an increased flow of saliva.

189. Nerves and centres have different degrees of excitability. The
nerve-terminals in the skin are more sensitive to impressions than
those in the mucous membrane; those in the alimentary canal are more
sensitive than those in the peritoneum; and all nerve-terminals are
more sensitive than nerve-trunks. A touch on the surface of the larynx
will produce a cough, but the nerve-trunk itself may be pinched or
galvanized without producing any such reflex. Moreover, there is the
difference of grouping. If the skin of the abdomen be tickled, there
is a reflex on the adductor and extensor muscles of the leg; but these
movements are reversed if the skin of the back be tickled. Nor indeed
are these movements invariable in either case; the one series will
sometimes quite suddenly change to the other, if the irritation is kept
up. That one and the same stimulus applied to the same spot should now
excite this group and now the other, shows that _both_ motor groups
are affected, and that the discharge takes place from the one which at
the time being is in the highest tension. The alternation of tension
explains rhythmical discharge.


THE LAW OF ARREST.

190. The Law of Arrest is only another aspect of the Law of Discharge,
and may be regarded as the conflict of excitations. If a stranger
enters the room where a woman lies in labor, there will often be caused
a sudden cessation of the uterine contractions.[198] Again, every one
knows how the breathing and the beating of the heart are arrested by
the idea of danger. The arrest is in each of the three cases only
temporary, because when the shock of the new stimulus has caused its
discharge (arrest), the peripheral irritation which caused the former
discharges resumes its influence, and uterus, heart, and diaphragm
begin to move again, even more energetically. Note, moreover, that not
only will the cerebral excitation arrest the spinal discharge--an idea
check the contractions of the uterus or the heart--but the reverse
also takes place. The brain of the woman may be intently occupied with
some scheme for the education or welfare of her expected child, but no
sooner do the labor pains set in, than all these cerebral combinations
are arrested.

191. One sensation arrests another; one idea displaces another. If
the foreleg of a headless frog be irritated, the hind-leg will also
be moved by the stimulation; or _vice versa_. Here there has been a
propagation of the excitation in either direction. But if while the
legs are thus irritated, and the centres are ready to discharge,
another and more powerful irritation reach the centre--say by pinching
the skin of the back--there will be no discharge on the legs. If the
vagus be irritated, the heart is arrested; but this does not take place
if at the same time, or immediately before, the foot has been sharply
pinched. A few gentle taps on the abdomen suffice to stop the heart;
but if a drop of acid be previously placed on the skin, we tap in vain,
the heart continues to beat. Brown Séquard cites several cases in which
convulsions were arrested by irritation of sensitive surfaces;[199]
and Dr. Crichton Browne records a case of a patient in whom there was
abolition of spinal reflex, due to cerebral irritation: tickling the
soles of the feet, or pricking the toes, which normally excites reflex
movements, in this case excited none whatever. “This seems to prove
that nerve currents, set in motion by irritation of the brain, or some
of its convolutions, transmitted down the cord, may inhibit reflex
action.”[200] Examples might indefinitely be multiplied. Pinch the
skin of a rabbit between the eyes, and you will observe that pulse and
respiration are slackened; but if the tail, which is very sensitive,
be pinched, this slackening is only momentary, and is succeeded by a
quickening--unless the pain be great. Even the effect of intense pain
may be neutralized by stimulating the vagus--just as the effect of
stimulating the vagus may be neutralized by pain. Claude Bernard found
that having dropped ammonia on the eyelid of a dog, the pain caused a
convulsive closure of the lid; but on galvanizing the vagus, the lid
opened again, to be closed when the galvanism ceased.[201] When the
heart is beating faintly (as in syncope), any irritating vapor applied
to the nostrils will cause a more energetic pulsation; yet a very
irritating vapor lowers the action of the heart beating normally, and
will even arrest that of a rabbit. Over-stimulation has almost always
the opposite effect of moderate stimulation.

192. While there seems every reason to believe that an excitation
necessarily affects the whole cerebro-spinal axis, there is no doubt
that there is a certain restriction of this irradiation to definite
paths, i. e. the responsive discharge is confined to definite groups.
Some of these restrictions are connate pathways: we bring them with us
at birth; but most of them are pathways acquired after birth. The boy
who sheds tears at parting from his mother when he goes to school, will
shed no tears when he parts from her to go to college, nay, perhaps
will shed none when he parts from her forever: not that his love has
lessened, but that the idea of such expression of it as “unmanly” has
become an organized tendency and arrests the tears. A youth of southern
race, who has not learned to be ashamed of tears, weeps freely under
such circumstances.

193. The pathways organized at birth are not many. Examples are the
inspiration which follows expiration; the movements of coughing when
the larynx is tickled; the movements of swallowing, sneezing, etc. Even
these may be arrested for a brief time by what is called “the will”;
but when once the discharge begins in any part of the mechanism, the
whole group is necessarily involved and the action is then inevitable.
Many of the reflex actions which are universal are nevertheless
acquired. Winking, for instance, when an object approaches the eye, is
universal among us, but is never seen in infants, nor in animals. It
is even doubtful whether the drawing up of the leg when the toes are
pinched is not an acquired reflex. Doubtful, I mean, in this sense,
that although the fact of non-withdrawal is observable in infants, who
cannot localize their sensations, this may be due to the imperfect
development of their nervous system. Mr. Spalding has proved that
although the callow bird cannot fly, the mechanism of flight is no
sooner developed than the action follows at once, without any previous
tentative experiences.

194. By experience we learn to restrict the paths of irradiation,
so as to wink with one eye while the other is unmoved, to bend one
finger while the rest are extended, to move one limb, or one group of
muscles, while the others are at rest; in short, to execute any one
particular action, and not at the same time agitate superfluously many
other organs. The boy when first learning to write is unable to prevent
the simultaneous motions of tongue and legs, which are ludicrously
irrelevant to the purpose of writing; but he learns to keep all his
organs in subjection, and only the eyes and hands active.[202] An
analogous restriction takes place in thinking. A train of thought is
kept up by the exclusion of all suggestions which are not pertinent;
and the power of the thinker is precisely this power of concentration.


THE HYPOTHESIS OF INHIBITORY CENTRES.

195. The facts and their formulated laws which have just been adduced
furnish a sufficient explanation of all the phenomena of arrest
which of late years have been detached and assigned to a special
mechanism of inhibitory nerves and centres. In spite of the eminent
authorities countenancing the hypothesis of a particular set of
inhibitory nerves, and particular centres of inhibition, I must confess
that the hypothesis appears to me inadmissible; and that I side with
those physiologists who hold that each nerve and each centre has its
inhibitory action. Indeed, if the action of arrest be, as I maintain,
only another aspect of the action of discharge, the result of the
conflict of forces, to say that all centres have the property of
excitation, is to say that all have the properties of discharge and
arrest: the discharge is only the resultant of the conflict along the
line of least resistance; the arrest is the effect of the conflict
along the line of greatest resistance. The observed phenomena of
arrest are so varied and numerous that the upholders of the inhibitory
hypothesis have been forced to invent not only arresting centres,
but centres which arrest these arresting centres! Dr. Lauder Brunton
candidly remarks: “At present our notions of nervous action seem to be
getting as involved as the Ptolemaic system of astronomy, and just as
epicycles became heaped upon cycles, so nerve-centres are being added
to nerve-centres. And yet, clumsy though the system may be, it serves
at present a useful purpose, and may give real aid until a better
is discovered.” I do not think a Copernicus is needed to discover
a better. The Law of Arrest as a general neural law suffices, when
the right conception of a _centre_ as a physiological rather than an
anatomical designation is admitted. (See p. 173.)

196. It would be out of place here to consider the conflicting evidence
which at present renders the question of the movements of the heart
one of the most unsatisfactory in the whole range of experimental
physiology. After devoting much time to it, and after writing a long
chapter on it, I suppress what I had written, and content myself with
the statement that no advantage whatever is derived from the hypothesis
of a special mechanism of arrest, unless perhaps in giving a temporary
precision to the direction of research. I mean that the search for
special centres may lead to the discovery of the particular paths to
which an impulse is restricted in any one action: as, for instance,
the vagus in retarding the pulsation of the heart. If the cerebrum can
determine a movement, and combine various movements, it is a centre of
arrest; if the cerebellum can determine and regulate movements, it is a
centre of arrest; if the medulla oblongata can determine and regulate
movements, it is a centre of arrest; if the medulla spinalis can
determine and combine movements, it is a centre of arrest; if a nerve
can dilate a constricted blood-vessel, or constrict a dilated one, it
is a nerve of arrest. In other words, every centre exerts its action
either in discharging, or in arresting the discharge of some other
centre.

The physiological process of Arrest may be physically interpreted
as Interference;[203] not that the process in nerve-tissue is to be
understood as the _same_ as that observed in fluids, or that the
metaphor of neural waves is to be taken for more than an intelligible
picturing of the process; the difference in the two agents forbids our
admitting the resemblance to be more than analogical. Thus interpreted,
however, we see that not only will one centre arrest the action of
another, but one nerve may be made to arrest itself! I mean that, under
similar conditions of interference, the stimulation which normally
follows on external stimulus may be inhibited by a previous, or a
counter stimulation. Thus the nerve which will be stimulated by a
chemical or mechanical stimulus, wholly fails to react if a constant
current is passing through it, although this constant current does not
itself cause a constant contraction. Remove the electrodes, and then
the chemical or mechanical stimulus takes effect. Or the experiment
may be reversed: let the nerve be placed in a saline solution, and
the muscles will be at once thrown into violent contraction; if the
electrodes are now applied to the nerve, the contractions suddenly
cease, to begin again directly the electrodes are removed.


ANATOMICAL INTERPRETATION OF THE LAWS.

197. The problem for the anatomist is twofold: First, given the
organ, he has to determine its function, or _vice versa_, given the
part of an organ, to determine its functional relation; secondly,
given the function, he has to determine its organ. The structural
and functional relations of nerves and centres have been ascertained
in a general way; we are quite sure that the posterior nerves carry
excitations from sensitive surfaces, that the anterior nerves carry
excitations to muscles and glands; and that the central gray substance
not only reflects a sensory excitation as a motor excitation, but
propagates an excitation along the whole cerebro-spinal axis. But when
we come to a more minute analysis of the functional activities, and
endeavor to assign their respective values to each part of the organic
mechanism, the excessive complexity and delicacy of the mechanism
baffles research. We are forced to grope our way; and the light of the
hypothetic lamps which we hold aloft as often misdirects as helps us.
The imaginary anatomy which at present gains acceptance, no doubt seems
to simplify explanations; but this seeming turns out to be illusory
when closely examined. The imagined arrangement of fibres and cells
we have seen to be not in agreement with observation; and were it
demonstrable, it would not account for the laws of propagation. Suppose
sensory fibres to terminate in cells, and fibres from these to pass
_upwards_ to other sensory cells and _transversely_ to motor cells, how
in such a connected system could irradiations take place, if the law of
isolated conduction were true? And how could isolated conduction take
place, if the excitation of a part were necessarily the excitation of
the whole? Why, for example, is pain not always irradiated? Why is it
even localized in particular spots, determining movements in particular
muscles; and when irradiation takes place, why is it circumscribed,
or--and this is very noteworthy--manifested in two widely different
places, the intercostal and trigeminal nerves? Why does the irritation
of intestinal worms manifest itself now by troubles of vision, now by
noises in the ear, and now by convulsions?

198. Answers to such questions must be sought elsewhere. Our first
search should be directed to the anatomical data, which have hitherto
been so imprudently disregarded. Under the guidance of the laws
formulated in this chapter, let us accept the anatomical fact of a
vast network forming the ground-substance in which cells and fibres
are embedded, and with which they are continuous; let us accept the
physiological principle Of similarity of property with similarity
of composition and structure; let us accept the hypothesis that the
discharge of neural energy is dependent on the degree of stimulus
and the degree of tension at the time being--and we shall have at
least a general theory of the process, though there will still remain
great obscurities in particular applications. We shall have before
us a vast network of pathways, all equally capable of conducting an
excitation, but not all equally and at all moments open. It will always
be difficult to determine what are the conditions which at any moment
favor or obstruct particular openings. Paths that have been frequently
traversed will of course be more readily traversed again; but this very
facility will _sometimes_ be an obstacle, since it will have caused
that path to be preoccupied, or have fatigued the organ to which it
leads.

199. Since the escape of an excitation must always be along the lines
of least resistance, an obvious explanation of the restriction to
certain paths has been to assume that some fibres and cells have
naturally greater resistance than others. But this explanation is
simply a restatement of the fact in other words. What is this greater
resistance? Why is it present in one fibre rather than in another?
We should first have to settle whether the resistance was in the
nervous pathway itself, or in the centre, or in the organ innervated;
an excitation might pass along the nervous tract, yet fail to change
the state of the centre, or the organ, sufficiently to produce an
appreciable response; and only those parts where an appreciable
response was produced would then be considered as having had the
pathways of propagation open.

200. When we reflect on the innumerable stimulations to which the
organism is subjected from so many various points, and remember
further that _each stimulation leaves behind it a tremor which
does not immediately subside_, we shall conceive something of the
excessive complexity of the mechanism, and marvel how any order is
established in the chaos. What we must firmly establish in our minds
is that the mechanism is essentially a _fluctuating_ one, its elements
being combined, recombined, and resolved under infinite variations
of stimulation. If it were a mechanism of fixed relations, such as
we find in machines, or in the “mechanism of the heavens,” we might
accept the notion of certain organites having greater resistance as
a consequence of their structure, just as one muscle resists being
moved by the impulse which will move another. Nor is it doubtful
that such differences exist in nervous organites; but the laws of
central excitation are not interpretable by any such hypothesis,
since we know that the paths which were closed against an impulse of
considerable energy may be all open to an impulse of feebler energy,
and that a slight variation in the stimulus will be followed by a wide
irradiation. For example, a grain or two of snuff will excite the
violent and complex act of sneezing, but the nerves of the nasal cavity
may be pinched, cut, or rubbed, without producing any such result.
One group of nervous organites will fail to involve the activity of
neighboring groups; and the simple movement of a single organ is then
all that appreciably follows the stimulation; yet by a slight change in
the stimulation, the organites are somewhat differently grouped, and
the result is a complex movement of many organs. It is this fluctuation
of combination in the organites which renders education and progress
possible. Those combinations which have very frequently been repeated
acquire at last an automatic certainty.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are now in a position to examine with more precision the extremely
important laws of nervous action which are involved in the phenomena
designated by the terms Reflex Action, Automatic Action, and Voluntary
Action.




PROBLEM III.

ANIMAL AUTOMATISM.

    “L’organisme le plus complexe est un vaste mécanisme qui résulte de
    l’assemblage de mécanismes secondaires.”--CLAUDE BERNARD.

    “Les corps vivants sont machines à l’infini.”--LEIBNITZ.

    “Noi lamentiamo con Majendie che nel linguaggio fisiologico siensi
    intruse le preopinioni psicologiche col trascico inevitabile
    del vocaboli, ai quali codeste preopinioni si trovano legate.
    Probabilmente questa fu una delle principali cagioni degli errori e
    degli equivoci anatomofisiologici, da cui non poterono svincolarsi,
    a loro insaputa, i cultori sperimentali della scienza, perchè nell’
    interpretare i fenomeni osservati erano obbligati ad usare il
    linguaggio di una false moneta in corso.”--LUSSANA _e_ LEMOIGNE,
    _Fisiologia dei Centri Nervosi_, 1871, I. 16.




ANIMAL AUTOMATISM.




