CHAPTER III.

ORGANISM, ORGANIZATION, AND ORGANIC SUBSTANCE.


45. There is a marked difference between organ_ic_ and organ_ised_
substances. The organic are non-living, though capable of living
when incorporated in organized tissue (albumen is such a substance);
or they may be incapable of living because they have lived, and are
products of waste, e. g. urea. The organized substance is a specific
combination of organic substances of various kinds, a combination
which is organization. Any organized substance is therefore either an
independent organism, or part of a more complex organism. Protoplasm,
either as a separate organism or as a constituent of a tissue, is
organized substance.

Organic substances are numerous and specific. They are various
combinations of proximate principles familiar to the chemist, which may
conveniently be ranged under three classes: The first class of organic
substances comprises those composed of principles having what is called
a mineral origin; these generally quit the organism unchanged as they
entered it. The second class comprises those which are crystallizable,
and are formed _in_ the organism, and generally quit it in this state
as excretions. The third class comprises the colloids, i. e. substances
which are coagulable and not crystallizable, and are formed in and
decomposed in the organism, thus furnishing the principles of the
second class. All the principles are in a state of solution. Water is
the chief vehicle of the materials which enter and the materials which
quit the organism; and bodies in solution are solvents of others, so
that the water thus acquires new solvent properties.

45_a_. Two points must be noted respecting organic substances: they are
mostly combinations of _higher multiples_ of the elements; and their
combinations are not _definite_ in quantity. Albumen, for example,
has (according to one of the many formulas which have been given) an
elementary composition of 216 atoms of Carbon, 169 of Hydrogen, 27 of
Nitrogen, 3 of Sulphur, and 68 of Oxygen; whereas in its final state,
in which it quits the organism as Urea, it is composed of 2 atoms
of Carbon, 4 of Hydrogen, 2 of Nitrogen, and 2 of Oxygen, all the
Sulphur having disappeared in other combinations. In like manner in
the organism Stearin falls from C_{114}, H_{110}, O_{12}, to Oxalic
Acid, which is C_{4}, H_{2}, O_{8}. It is obvious that the necessary
modifiability of organic substance is due to this multiplicity of its
elementary parts and the variety of its molecular structure.

45_b_. Nor is the indefiniteness of the quantitative composition less
important, though seldom adequately appreciated, or even suspected.
Robin and Verdeil[11] are the only writers I can remember who have
distinctly brought the fact into prominence. That all inorganic
substances are definite in composition, every one knows. Quicklime,
for example, may be got from marble, limestone, oyster-shells, or
chalk; but however produced, it always contains exactly 250 ounces
of calcium to 100 ounces of oxygen; just as water is always OH_{2}.
Not so the pre-eminently vital substances, those which are coagulable
and not crystallizable: no precise formula will express one of these;
for the same specific substance is found to vary from time to time,
and elementary analyses do not give uniform results. Thus, if after
causing an acid to combine with one of these substances, we remove
the acid, we are not certain of finding the substance as it was
before--as we are, for example, after urea is combined with nitric
acid and then decomposed. The same want of definiteness is of course
even more apparent in the _combinations_ of these proximate principles
into organized substance. Protoplasm differs greatly in different
places. Epithelial cells differ. Muscular and nervous fibres are never
absolutely the same in different regions. A striped and unstriped
muscular fibre, the muscular fibre of a sphincter or of a limb, a
nerve-fibre in a centre, in a trunk, or in a gland, will present
variations of composition. The elastic fibres of the ligaments are
larger in the horse than in man; and in other animals they are smaller.
These differences are sometimes due to the constituents, and sometimes
to the arrangement of the constituents; the conversion of Albumen into
Fibrine without elementary loss or addition, is a good example of the
latter. That the tissues of one man are not absolutely the same as
the tissues of another, in the sense in which it is true to say that
the chalk of one hill is the same as that of another, or as gold in
Australia is the same as gold in Mexico, is apparent in their very
different reactions under similar external conditions: the substance
which poisons the one leaves the other unaffected. The man who has once
had the small-pox, or scarlet fever, is never the same afterwards,
since his organism has now become insusceptible of these poisons. And
Sir James Paget has called attention to the striking fact revealed in
disease, namely, that in the same tissue--say the bone or the skin--a
morbid substance fastens only on certain small portions leaving all
the rest unaltered, but fastens on exactly corresponding spots of the
opposite sides of the body; so that on both arms, or both legs, only
the corresponding bits of tissue will be diseased. “Manifestly when
two substances display different relations to a third their composition
cannot be identical; so that though we may speak of all bone or
of all skin as if it were all alike, yet there are differences of
intimate composition. No power of artificial chemistry can detect the
difference; but a morbid material can.”[12] It is to this variability
of composition that we must refer individual peculiarities, and those
striking forms of variety known as idiosyncrasies, which cause some
organisms to be affected by what seem inexplicable influences--physical
and moral.

In spite of all these variations, however, there are certain specific
resemblances dependent of course on similarity of composition and
structure, so that the muscle of a crustacean is classed beside the
muscle of a vertebrate, although the elementary analysis of the two
yields different results. Nerve-tissue, according to my experience,
is the most variable of all, except the blood; variable not only from
individual to individual, and from genus to genus, but even in the same
individual it never contains the same quantities of water, phosphates,
etc. Hence it is that different nerves manifest different degrees of
excitability, and the same nerve differs at different times. Thus the
fifth pair, in a poisoned animal, retains its excitability long after
the others are paralyzed; and the patient under chloroform feels a
prick on the brow or at the temples, when insensible at any other spot.
The pneumogastric which is excitable during digestion is--in dogs at
least--inexcitable when the animal is fasting.

46. The organic substances are what analysis discovers in organized
substances, but none of them, not even the highest, is living, except
as organized. Albumen alone, or Stearin alone, is as incapable of
Vitality, as Plumbago, or Soda; but all organic substances are
capable of playing a part in vital actions; and this part is the
more important in proportion to their greater molecular variety.
Organization is a special synthesis of substances belonging to all
three classes; and the organized substance, thus formed, alone merits
the epithet living. We see how organized substances, being constituted
by principles derived from the inorganic world, and principles derived
from the organic world, have at once a dependence on the external
Medium, and an independence of it, which is peculiar to living beings.
An analogous dependence and independence is noticeable with respect to
the parts; and this is a character not found in inorganic compounds.
The organism, even in its simplest forms, is a structure of different
substances, each of which is complex. While one part of a crystal is
atomically and morphologically identical with every other, and is the
whole crystal “writ small,” one part of an organism is unlike another,
and _no part_ is like the whole. Hence the dependence of one organ and
one tissue on another, and each on all. Yet, while every part is, so to
speak, a condition of existence of every other, and the unity of the
organism is but the expression of this solidarity,--wherever organized
substance has been differentiated into morphological elements (cells,
etc.), each of these has its own course of evolution independently of
the others,--is born, nourished, developed, and dies.

47. The interdependence of nerve and muscle is seen in this, that the
more the muscle is excited the feebler its contractions become; this
decrease in contractility is compensated by an increased excitability
in its nerve; so that while the muscle demands a more powerful
stimulus, the nerve acquires a more energetic activity. Ranke’s curious
and careful experiments seem to prove that this depends on the wearied
muscle absorbing more water, owing to the acids developed by its
activity, and on the nerve losing this water--a nerve being always
more irritable when its quantity of water diminishes.

48. Herein we see illustrated the great law of organized activity,
that it is a simultaneity of opposite tendencies, as organized matter
is a synthesis of compositions and decompositions, always tending
towards equilibrium and disturbance, storing up energy and liberating
it. Unlike what is observed in unorganized matter, the conditions of
waste bring with them conditions of repair, and thus--within certain
limits--every loss in one direction is compensated by gain in another.
There is a greater flow of nutrient material, or, more properly
speaking, a greater assimilation of it by the tissue, where there has
been made a greater opening for it by previous disintegration. The
alkaline state of the nutrient material, and the acid state of the
material that has been used,--the alkaline state which characterizes
repose and assimilation, and the acid state which characterizes
activity and deassimilation, are but cases of this general law; on the
synthesis of these opposite tendencies depends the restless change,
together with the continued specific integrity, of organized matter.

49. The state of organization may therefore be defined as the
_molecular union of the proximate principles of the three classes
in reciprocal dissolution_. An organism is formed of matter thus
organized, which exists in two states--the _amorphous_ and the
_figured_. The amorphous substances are liquid, semi-liquid, and solid;
the figured are the cells, fibres, and tubes, called “anatomical
elements.” For these I prefer the term suggested, I believe, by Milne
Edwards, namely, _organites_, because they are the individual elements
which mainly constitute the organs, and are indeed by many biologists
considered as elementary organisms. These organites, which go to form
the tissues, and by the tissues the organs, have their specific form,
volume, structure, and chemical reactions. They exist in textures
or tissues, or separately (e. g. blood corpuscles), and are in many
respects like the simplest organisms known, such as Monads, Vibrios,
Amœbæ, etc.

50. The simplest form of life is not--as commonly stated--a cell, but
a microscopic lump of jelly-like substance, or protoplasm, which has
been named _sarcode_ by Dujardin, _cytode_ by Haeckel, and _germinal
matter_ by Lionel Beale. This protoplasm, although entirely destitute
of texture, and consequently destitute of organs, is nevertheless
considered to be living, because it manifests the cardinal phenomena
of Life: Assimilation, Evolution, Reproduction, Mobility, and
Decay. Examples of this simplest organism are Monads, Protamœbæ,
and Polythalamia.[13] Few things are more surprising than the vital
activity of these organites, which puzzle naturalists as to whether
they should be called plants or animals. All microscopists are familiar
with the spectacle of a formless lump of albuminous matter (a Rhizopod)
putting forth a process of its body as a temporary arm or leg, or else
slowly wrapping itself round a microscopic plant, or morsel of animal
substance, thus converting its whole body into a mouth and a stomach;
but these phenomena are surpassed by those described by Cienkowski,[14]
who narrates how one Monad fastens on to a plant and sucks the
chlorophyll first from one cell and then from another; another Monad,
unable to make a hole in the cell-wall, thrusts long processes of its
body into the opening already made, and drags out the remains of the
chlorophyll left there by its predecessor; while a third Monad leads a
predatory life, falling upon other Monads that have filled themselves
with food. Here, as he says, we stand on the threshold of that dark
region where Animal Will begins; and yet there is here only the
simplest form of organization.[15]

51. Now let our glance pass on to the second stage--the Cell. Here we
have a recognized differentiation in the appearance of a nucleus amid
the protoplasm. The nucleus is chemically different from the substance
which surrounds it; and although perhaps exaggerated importance has
been attributed to this nucleus, and mysterious powers have been
ascribed to it, yet as an essential constituent of the cell it commands
attention. Indeed, according to the most recent investigations, the
definition of a cell is “a nucleus with surrounding protoplasm.” The
cell-wall, or delicate investing membrane--that which makes the cell a
closed sac--is no longer to be regarded as a necessary constituent, but
only as an accessory.[16]

52. The cell may be either an organism or an organite. It may lead an
isolated life as plant or animal, or it may be united with others and
lead a more or less corporate existence; but always, even as an element
of a higher organism, it preserves its own individuality. At first we
see that the corporate union is very slight, merely the contact of one
cell with another of its own kind, as in the filament of a Conferva.
Rising higher, we see the cell united with others different from
it; plants and animals appear, having structures composed of masses
of various cells. Rising still higher, we see animal forms of which
the web is woven out of myriads upon myriads of cells, with various
cell-products, processes, fibres, tubes.


ORGANISM AND MEDIUM.

53. But we have only one half of the great problem of life, when we
have the organism; and it is to this half that the chief researches
have been devoted, the other falling into neglect. What is that
other? The Medium in which the organism lives. Every individual
object, organic or inorganic, is the product of two factors:--first,
the relation of its constituent molecules to each other; secondly,
the relation of its substance to all surrounding objects. Its
properties, as an object or an organism, are the results of its
constituent molecules, and of its relation to external conditions.
Organisms are the results of a peculiar group of forces, exhibiting
a peculiar group of phenomena. Viewing these in the abstract, we
may say that there are three regulative laws of life:--(1) The _Lex
Formationis_--the so-called _nisus formativus_, or “organizing force”;
(2) the _Lex Adaptationis_, or adaptive tendency; (3) the _Lex
Hereditatis_, or tendency to reproduce both the original form and its
acquired modifications. We have always to consider the organizing
force in relation to all surrounding forces--a relation succinctly
expressed in the word Adaptation. Just as water is water only under a
certain relation of its constituent molecules to the temperature and
atmospheric pressure--just as it passes into other forms (ice or steam)
in adapting itself to other conditions; so, likewise, the organism only
preserves its individuality by the adjustment of its forces with the
forces which environ it.

54. This relation of Organism and Medium, the most fundamental of
biological data, has had a peculiar fortune: never wholly unrecognized,
for it obtrudes itself incessantly in the facts of daily experience,
it was very late in gaining recognition as a principle of supreme
importance; and is even now often so imperfectly apprehended that one
school of philosophers indignantly rejects the idea of the Organism and
Medium being the two factors of which Life is the product. Not only
is there a school of vitalists maintaining the doctrine of Life as an
entity independent both of Organism and Medium, and using these as its
instruments; but there is also a majority among other biologists, who
betray by their arguments that they fail to keep steadily before them
the fundamental nature of the relation. Something of this is doubtless
due to the imperfect conception they have formed of what constitutes
the Medium; instead of recognizing in it the sum of external conditions
affecting the organism--i. e. the sum of the relations which the
organism maintains with external agencies,--they restrict, or enlarge
it, so as to misapprehend its significance--restrict it to only a few
of the conditions, such as climate, soil, temperature, etc., or enlarge
it to embrace a vast array of conditions which stand in no directly
appreciable relation to the organism. Every one understands that an
organism is dependent on proper food, on oxygen, etc., and will perish
if these are withheld, or be affected by every variation in such
conditions. Every one understands that an animal which can devour or be
devoured by another, will flourish or perish according to the presence
of its prey or its enemy. But it is often forgotten that among external
existences, all those which stand in no appreciable relation to the
organism are not properly to be included in its Medium. In consequence
of this oversight we frequently hear it urged as an objection to the
Evolution Hypothesis, that manifold organisms exist under the _same_
external conditions, and that organisms persist unchanged amid a
great variety of conditions. The objection is beside the question. In
the general sum of external forces there are certain items which are
nearly related to particular organisms, and constitute their Medium;
those items which are so distantly related to these organisms as to
cause no reactions in them, are, for them, as if non-existent.[17] Of
the manifold vibrations which the ether is supposed to be incessantly
undergoing, only certain vibrations affect the eye as light; these
constitute the Medium of Sight; the others are as if they were not.
Only certain vibrations of the air affect the ear as Sound; to all
other vibrations we are deaf; though ears of finer sensibility may
detect them and be deaf to those which affect us.

55. “The external conditions of existence” is therefore the correct
definition of the Medium. An animal may be surrounded with various
foods and poisons, but if its organism is not directly affected by them
they cannot be food or poison to it. An animal may be surrounded with
carnivorous rivals, but if it is not adapted to serve them as food, or
is too powerful to be attacked by them, they only indirectly enter into
its Medium, by eating the food it would eat. The analogy is similar
with anorganisms and their relation to their media. Every physical or
chemical phenomenon depends on the concurrence of definite conditions:
namely, the substance which manifests the change, and the medium in
which the change is manifested. Alter the medium, solid, liquid, or
gaseous, change its thermal or electrical state, and the phenomenon is
altered. But although similar alterations in the medium notoriously
influence the organism, yet, because a great many variations in
external conditions are unaccompanied by appreciable changes in the
organism, there are biologists who regard this as a proof of Life being
independent of physical and chemical laws; an error arising from their
not recognizing the precise nature of organic conditions.

56. To give greater precision to the conception of a Medium it will
be desirable to adopt the distinction much insisted on by Claude
Bernard, namely, 1°, an External or Cosmical Medium, embracing the
whole of the circumstances outside the organism, capable of directly
affecting it, and 2°, an Internal or Physiological Medium, embracing
the conditions inside the organism, and in direct relation with
it--that is to say, the plasma in which its tissues are bathed, by
which they are nourished. To these add its temperature and electrical
conditions. Bernard only includes the nutritive fluid; but inasmuch as
each organism possesses a temperature and electrical state of its own,
and these are only indirectly dependent on the external temperature
and electricity, and as it is with these internal conditions that
the organism is in direct relation, I include them with the plasma
among the constituents of the Physiological Medium. Any change in the
External Medium, whether of temperature or electricity, of food or
light, which does not disturb the Internal Medium, will of course leave
the organism undisturbed; and for the most part all the changes in
the External Medium which do affect the organism, affect it by first
changing the Internal Medium. External heat or cold raises or depresses
the internal temperature _indirectly_ by affecting the organic
processes on which the internal temperature depends. We see here the
rationale of acclimatization. Unless the organism can adapt itself to
the new External Medium by the readjustment of its Internal Medium, it
perishes.

57. We are now enabled to furnish an answer to the very common
objection respecting the apparent absence of any direct influence of
external conditions. Let the objection first be stated in the words
of a celebrated naturalist, Agassiz: “It is a fact which seems to be
entirely overlooked by those who assume an extensive influence of
physical causes upon the very existence of organized beings, that the
most diversified types of animals and plants are everywhere found under
identical circumstances. The smallest sheet of fresh water, every
point of the sea-shore, every acre of dry land, teems with a variety
of animals and plants. The narrower the boundaries which are assigned
as the primitive home of all these beings, the more uniform must be
the conditions under which they must be assumed to have originated; so
uniform indeed that in the end the inference would be that the same
physical causes can produce the most diversified effects.”

Obviously there is a complete misstatement of the argument here; and
the excess of the misstatement appears in the following passage: “The
action of physical agents upon organized beings presupposes the very
existence of those beings.” Who ever doubted it? “The simple fact that
there has been a period in the history of our earth when none of these
organized beings as yet existed, and when, nevertheless, the material
constitution of our globe and the physical forces acting upon it were
essentially the same as they are now, shows that these influences are
insufficient to call into existence any living being.”[18] Although
most readers will demur to the statement that because the material
constitution of our globe was “essentially the same” before and after
animal life appeared, therefore there could have been no special
conditions determining the appearance of Life, the hypothesis of
Evolution entirely rejects the notion of organic forms having been
diversified by diversities in the few physical conditions commonly
understood as representing the Medium. Mr. Darwin has the incomparable
merit of having enlarged our conception of the conditions of existence
so as to embrace _all_ the factors which conduce to the result. In
his luminous principle of the Struggle for Existence, and the Natural
Selection which such a struggle determines, we have the key to most of
the problems presented by the diversities of organisms; and the Law of
Adaptation, rightly conceived, furnishes the key to all organic change.

58. In consequence of the defective precision with which the phrase
“Medium,” or its usual equivalent “physical conditions,” is employed,
several biological errors pass undetected. Haeckel[19] calls attention
to the common mistake of supposing the organism to be passive under the
influence of external conditions, whereas every action, be it of light
or heat, of water or food, necessarily calls forth a corresponding
reaction, which manifests itself in a modification of the nutritive
process. He points out the obverse of this error in the current notion
that Habit is solely due to the spontaneous action of the organism,
in opposition to the influence of external agency,--as if every
action were not the response to a stimulus. Corresponding with the
fluctuations in the Medium there must necessarily be fluctuations of
Adaptation, and I think we may safely assume that it is only when these
fluctuations cease that the Adaptation becomes Habit. This is the
interpretation of the phrase “Habit is _second_ Nature,” and is very
different from the common interpretation which attributes it to the use
or disuse of organs; as if use or disuse were a spontaneous uncaused
activity.

59. The organism, simple or complex, is, we have already seen, built
up from materials originally derived from the External Medium, but
proximately from the Internal Medium. This statement, however, requires
some qualification, especially in view of the hypothesis that organized
substance was originally created such as we now find it, and not
evolved from inorganic materials. Whether this hypothesis be adopted,
or rejected, we have the fact that the immense majority of organisms
_now_ existing--if not all--are products of pre-existing organisms;
and therefore organized matter is now mainly, if not solely, formed by
organized matter.

We take, therefore, as our point of departure, the protoplasm; this
is the first of the three terms of the vital synthesis: Structure,
Aliment, and Instrument. The evolution of this is proximately
dependent on the _pabulum_ afforded it in the Internal Medium, which
is the true nutrient material, and to which what is usually called
_food_ stands in an external relation: for between the reception of
food and its assimilation by the organite, there is an indispensable
intermediary stage, through which matter passes from the unorganized
to the organized state. This intermediate is now recognized in plants
as in animals. The old belief that plants were nourished _directly_
from the soil and atmosphere can no longer be sustained. The process
of Nutrition is alike in both: in both the materials drawn from the
External Medium are formed into proximate principles and organic
substances. It is daily becoming more and more probable that the
inorganic materials, water and oxygen, so freely entering into the
organism, never pass directly from the External Medium to the tissues,
but have to pass through the Internal Medium where they are changed,
so that the water is no longer free, but exists in a fixed state
which has no analogue out of the living substance. Only a part of
the water can be pressed out mechanically; the rest--that which is
already incorporated with the other elements--can only be got rid
of in a vacuum and at a high temperature. Oxygen, also, comports
itself differently in the tissue; as is proved by the fact that its
physiological absorption is markedly different from any chemical
oxidation in a dead or decomposing tissue.[20] Be this as it may, we
know that organic substances have to be unbuilt and rebuilt in the
organism; that the albumen of our food never passes directly into
the albumen of our tissues; any more than the milk drunk by a nursing
mother will pass into her breasts, and increase her supply, except by
nourishing her.

60. In the First Series of these Problems the term Bioplasm was
employed to designate this organized part of the Internal Medium. I
was led to adopt it as a corresponding term to that of Psychoplasm,
by which I wished to designate the _sentient_ material of the
psychological medium. There can be little doubt that the term Bioplasm
was an unconscious reproduction of the title of Dr. Beale’s work,
which I must have seen advertised. I withdraw it now that I have read
Dr. Beale’s work, and see that the signification he attaches to the
term is almost identical with Protoplasm. In lieu thereof, the term
Plasmode (from _plasma_, anything formed, and _odos_, a pathway) may
be substituted: it represents the _nutrient_ material on its way to
form Protoplasm, which is _formative_ material; while the materials
_formed_ may be termed Organites and Products: the organite being
the cell or cell-derivative (fibre, tube); the products being the
gaseous liquid and solid derivatives of vital processes, which are
_secretions_ when they form intercellular substance or return into the
plasmode and re-enter the vital circle; _excretions_ when they are
rejected, as incapable of further assimilation. The liver-cell will
furnish an example of each kind of product. The bile, though containing
principles serviceable in the chemical transformations, is for the
most part excreted; but besides bile, the liver-cell produces starchy
and saccharine principles which are true secretions, and re-enter the
plasmode.

61. The organite is thus composed of sap, substance, and product;
the organism, of plasmode, tissue, and product. A glance at the
vegetable-cell shows it to be constituted by the primordial utricle,
or protoplasm, the outermost layer of which is condensed into a
membrane, or cell-wall, and the cavity thus enclosed is filled with
sap. The cell-wall grows as the protoplasm grows, and the protoplasm
draws its material from the plasmode. A glance at the blood, the great
reservoir of the river of life, shows us plasmode in the serum, and
organites in the corpuscles; the one distinguished by sodic salts,
the other by potassic salts. The plasmode, or serum, is in a constant
change of composition and decomposition, giving up to the various
tissue-organites and intercellular plasmodes the requisite materials,
and receiving from organites and plasmodes the products of their
changes. The serum is fed from the food _and_ the tissues; and it feeds
the several plasmodes which bathe the several tissues. Passing into the
capillaries, it becomes transformed as it passes through their walls
into the intercellular spaces, saturating the acid products of the
cell-activities with its alkalies, and furnishing the protoplasms with
their needed materials.

62. It will be understood that, although in appearance these stages
are sharply defined, in reality they are insensible. But from the
analytical point of view we may regard Nutrition as the office
of the plasmode, and Evolution as the office of the protoplasm.
Although evolution or genesis of form depends on assimilation, it is
not a necessary consequence: the plasmode or the protoplasm might
preserve such perfect equality in the waste and repair, such complete
equilibrium, as not to undergo any development. The ova, for example,
which exist in the ovaries at birth are not all subsequently developed;
and if with modern embryologists we conclude that there is no
replacement of these by proliferation we shall in them have examples of
organites remaining unchanged through a period of fifty years.[21] But
such an equilibrium is perhaps only possible in complete inactivity.

63. Again, although the office of the plasmode is primarily that of
forming protoplasm, I think there is evidence to suggest that it not
only does this, but that some of it is used in the direct development
of energy, especially heat and electricity. The various forms of starch
and sugar taken in with the food or formed in the liver, certainly do
not as such enter into protoplasm. The same with alcohol.

64. It is perhaps in forgetfulness of the artificial nature of
analytical distinctions that controversies rage respecting what are
called intercellular substances and cell-walls. Now that the wall
is no longer regarded as an essential constituent of the cell, but
as a secondary formation, two opinions are maintained: first, that
it is merely a concentration of the external layer of protoplasm;
secondly, that it is a product of secretion from the protoplasm.
Both positions may be correct. Certainly in some cases there is no
other appreciable difference between wall and protoplasm than that
of a greater consistence; whereas in many other cases there exists a
decided difference in their chemical reactions, showing a difference
of composition. Taking both orders of fact, we may conclude that the
cell-wall is sometimes part of the organite, and sometimes product: a
blood-cell and a cartilage-cell may be cited as examples of each. And
this argument applies to the intercellular substance also.

65. The terms plasmode and protoplasm are general, and include many
species. There are different plasmodes for the different tissues,
so that we find phosphates of soda in the blood-serum, phosphates
of potash in the nerve-plasma, phosphates of magnesia in the
muscle-plasma, and phosphates of lime in the bone-plasma; having
severally to form the specifically different protoplasms of these
tissues. Observe, moreover, the gradations of these in respect of their
physical state: the blood being the most liquid, the nerve a degree
more solid, the muscle still more solid, and the bone almost entirely
solid; and since solubility of material is a necessary condition of
the chemical changes, we can understand how the blood, the nerve, the
muscle, and the bone represent degrees of vital activity: the greater
the instability of organized substance, the more active its molecular
renovation. Many serious errors result from overlooking the specific
differences of protoplasms; among them may be mentioned that very
common one of asserting that the ovum of a man is not distinguishable
from the ovum of any other mammal, nor the ovum of a mammal from that
of a reptile; nay, we sometimes see it stated that the protoplasm from
which a mammal may be developed is the same as that which is the germ
of an oak. So long as this simply asserts that we have at present no
means of distinguishing them by any chemical or physical tests, there
can be no objection raised; but it is a serious misconception, which
any embryological investigation ought to rectify, to suppose that the
ovum is not specific from the first.

66. Between the organites and their plasmodes there is the necessary
relation, which corresponds with the relation between organisms and
their mediums. Once formed, the organites are arranged side by side,
or end on end, into textures or tissues, and these are grouped into
organs, every organ being constituted by a collection of tissues, as
every apparatus is by a collection of organs, and the organism by the
federation of all the parts. We have more than once insisted on the
necessity of synthetic interpretation to complete the indications of
analysis: which means that no account of vital phenomena is _real_
unless it takes in all the co-operant factors, both those of the
organism and the medium. Neglect of this canon vitiates Dr. Beale’s
otherwise remarkable labors.


THE HYPOTHESIS OF GERMINAL MATTER.

67. It may help to elucidate certain important points if I here examine
the hypothesis which Dr. Beale has worked out with such patient skill,
but with what seem to me such unphysiological results. He deserves, I
think, more applause than has been awarded to him, not only for the
admirable patience with which he has pursued the idea, but also for
the striking definiteness of the idea itself--always a great advantage
in an hypothesis, since it gives precision to research. If biologists
have paid but little attention to it, this is no doubt due to the
theoretical, still more than to the observational contradictions it
presents. Histologists dispute his facts, or his interpretations;
while other biologists do not see their way in the application of
his hypothesis. Respecting all disputed points of observation I
shall be silent, for I have myself made no systematic researches in
this direction, such as would entitle me to form an estimate of the
evidence. But my dissent from the hypothesis is founded on biological
principles so fundamental that I should be willing to take my stand
entirely on the facts he himself puts forward.[22]

68. The hypothesis is that nothing in the organism has any claim
to vitality except the minute masses of protoplasm (by him called
bioplasm), which in the egg represent, he thinks, about the
one-thousandth part of the whole mass, the rest being lifeless matter,
namely, pabulum, and formed material. This bioplasm is the _germinal
matter_ out of which, by a _process of dying_, arise the tissues and
humors constituting the _formed material_--these, with the pabulum
which feeds the germinal matter, being all dead material. The germinal
matter itself, though living, only lives because there is temporarily
associated with it that Vital Force of which we have already spoken (§
14). In virtue of this association, a particle of matter not exceeding
the one hundred-thousandth of an inch in diameter is said to be alive;
and, presumably, to contain within it all those manifold powers which
the term Life condenses. The pabulum brought under the influence of
this Vital Force is transformed into germinal matter which, escaping
from this mysterious influence, _dies into tissue_. Muscle-fibres and
nerve-fibres are thus not living parts, nor are their actions vital. So
that, to be consistent, we must not speak of the organism as living,
but as a dead structure _produced_ by the Vital Force, and _set in
action_ by the aid of scattered bits of germinal matter. He has not, I
think, stated whether each of these bioplasms has its own Vital Force,
so that the organism is the theatre of millions of Vital Forces; or
whether it is one Vital Force which animates the whole organic world of
plants and animals. But nothing can be less equivocal than his position
respecting the lifelessness of every part of the organism except the
germinal matter.

69. The germinal matter may be selected as the primary stage of the
formed material, the initial point of growth, and thus stand for the
pre-eminently distinctive centre of Nutrition; but were we to limit all
Nutrition to the germinal matter, as defined by Dr. Beale, and deny
the co-operation of all the formed material, we should still not be
justified in restricting Life to simple Nutrition. We cannot exclude
such phenomena as those of Sensation and Motion, nor can we assign
these to the germinal matter.[23] To suppose this, would be equivalent
to saying that the steam which issues from a teakettle is capable of
the actions of a locomotive engine. The steam from the kettle is like
the steam from the boiler, it has molecular energy, and by this will
co-operate in the production of mechanical work, if the mechanism be
adjusted to it. The molecular energy of the protoplasm in muscular
fibre may be indispensable to the movements of the muscles, but these,
and not the protoplasmic movements alone, are muscular contractions. An
hypothesis, therefore, which is obliged to declare that muscle-fibre
and nerve-fibre are not living, even when active in the organism,
seems to me defective at its base. If we view these apart from the
organism, they may, like all the other formed materials, be regarded
as dead; and no one doubts that epidermis, nail, horn, hair, and bone
are dead in this sense, that they cannot live independently, and do not
reproduce themselves. But so long as even these form constituents of
the living organism, they also are _living_ (§ 42).[24] It is only by a
misconception of the analytical artifice that so simple a truth could
have been missed.

70. But this misconception meets us at many a turn. The Vitalist
hypothesis of an extra-organic agent of course refuses to regard Life
as the expression of all the co-operant conditions; and even opponents
of that hypothesis often fall into the same error of principle, when
they attempt to explain Life by localizing it in the cells; which is
simply a morphological substitution for the once popular doctrine that
only the vascular parts were organized, and every part destitute of
blood-vessels was dead. This idea seemed supported by the facts of the
most highly vascular parts being the most vital, and of a parallelism
existing between the vital activity of those organs which when injected
seemed almost entirely composed of blood-vessels, as the liver and
brain, and those which showed scarcely a trace of vessels, as cartilage
and bone; it seemed supported also by the appearance of blood-vessels
in all new formations, and by the idea of the blood as the nutrient
fluid. Then came the cell-doctrine, and the belief that the cell was
the really ultimate morphological element--which may be true--and that
“here alone there is any manifestation of life to be found, so that
we must not transfer the seat of vital action anywhere beyond the
cell,”[25]--which is very questionable.

71. We have already seen that the cell is an anatomical element, or
organite; the organism is but an aggregate of organites _and_ their
plasmodes. But Biology, which deals with the organism as a whole, and
with functions which are the resultants of all the vital properties,
must not be restricted to any single factor, however important.
It would assuredly be deemed absurd to say that diamond rings and
lead-pencils were the same, because the diamond and the plumbago,
which are the specific elements of each, are both the same chemical
element,--carbon. The substance is really different in diamond and
plumbago, is different in properties, and is, in rings and pencils,
united with different substances into objects having very different
properties. Whatever analysis may discover as to the identities of
organic structures, we cannot explain a single vital phenomenon
without taking into account the three terms, Structure, Aliment,
and Instrument; and whenever a cell is said to be the seat of vital
action, these three terms must be implied. In Dr. Beale’s hypothesis
the restriction is carried to its extreme; not content with the cell,
he withdraws vital action from the cell as a whole, assigning it to
the protoplasm and nucleus--cell-contents and cell-wall being, in his
view, dead. If it be true that the protoplasm is alone concerned in
Nutrition, yet Nutrition is not Life. Occupied mainly with formative
processes, it leaves other indispensable processes to other parts. He
instances the removal of all the tissues during the metamorphoses of
insects:--“new organs and textures are laid down afresh and developed
_ab initio_, instead of being built up upon those first formed.” But to
show how he restricts the idea of Life, he adds: “Such complete change,
however, necessitates a state of existence during which _action_ or
_function remains in complete abeyance_.”[26]

The muscles and nerves which are instrumental in this functional life
are said to be dead. It is true that the muscle-fibre does not develop
fresh fibres. But it is equally true that the protoplasm of muscle does
not alone execute _muscular_ contraction. Each has its special office.
Hence I reject the idea that formed material is dead. He further says
“formed material may _be_ changed, it cannot _change_ itself.” The
antithesis is doubly inexact: 1°, nothing changes itself, but only
yields to pressure, or reacts on being stimulated; and 2°, all the
evidence at hand is against the notion that the formed material is
not the seat of incessant molecular change; it is wasted and repaired
molecule by molecule. Kölliker properly protests against the growing
tendency of histologists to deify protoplasm, and to make it the sole
seat of vital changes, the cell-wall and cell-products having also, he
says, their physiological importance. It is manifestly erroneous to
deny vital changes to the red blood-corpuscles on the ground of their
no longer containing germinal matter.[27]

72. The analytical view may separate certain parts as active, and
other parts as passive, and thus regard the cells as the seats of
vital activity, the intercellular substance as merely accessory and
instrumental; but the real or synthetical view must recognize both
parts as equally indispensable, equally vital. Take cartilage, for
instance, with its enormous preponderance of intercellular substance
(formed material), and consider how absolutely impossible any of its
uses would be were it reduced to the germinal matter of its corpuscles!
And so of all the tissues.

73. If formed material is not to be excluded from the living parts of
the organism, neither is the plasmode, out of which the germinal matter
arises, since here we have the nutritive changes in their highest
activity; and because the property of Nutrition is here most active,
the other property of Development is in abeyance. Dr. Beale holds that
pabulum necessarily becomes germinal matter; but when we come to treat
of Nutrition it will appear that this is not more true than that Food
necessarily becomes Tissue: some of it does; but much of it is used up
for heat and other purposes.

74. What is true and important in the distinction between germinal
matter and formed material is, that from the former onwards there is a
gradual process of devitalization, the older parts of every organite
and tissue approaching more and more to the state of inorganic matter.
But to show how vain is the attempt to restrict Vitality to any one
out of a complex of co-operant factors, we might set up a chemical
hypothesis to the effect that Vitality depends on phosphates, and
with it explain the phenomena quite as well as with the hypothesis of
germinal matter. For not only is it found that the productive quality
of a soil depends on its richness in phosphates, but, as Lehmann has
shown, wherever cells and fibres make their appearance phosphates
are found, even in the lowest organisms, which, however, contain but
little. Phosphates abound in seeds and ova, in muscles and ganglia,
and are deficient in the woody parts of plants and the elastic fibres
of animals. The infant absorbs phosphates in large quantities and
excretes them in small quantities. Nervous activity is accompanied
by the consumption of a third more phosphorus than accompanies
muscular activity. Phosphates are among the most energetic of organic
stimulants. But who would endow the phosphates with Vitality, on the
ground of their indispensable presence in all vital processes?

75. Life, as we saw, is the expression of the whole organism. Many of
the parts are incapable of manifesting any vital phenomena except in
connection with all the rest; and of those parts which may be separated
from the organism and continue to manifest some vital phenomena, none
are capable of manifesting all. When the connexus of the parts is
destroyed the organism is dead. Long after that cessation which we call
Death, there are still evidences of Vitality in some of the parts:
the heart will continue to beat, the glands will secrete, the hair
will grow, the temperature will still be above that of the surrounding
medium, the muscles will be excitable; these vital properties are
the activities of organized substances, and so long as the state of
organization is preserved they are preserved; but the Life, which
is the synthesis of all the vital properties, vanishes with the
destruction of that synthesis.

76. May we not generalize this, and say that every special form of
existence, organic or inorganic, is determined by the synthesis of its
elements? Atoms are grouped into molecules, molecules into masses,
masses into systems. Out of the textureless germinal membrane and
the yolk, with no additions from without except oxygen and heat,
are developed all the textures and organs of the chick; and this
chick weighs no more than the egg out of which it was evolved. The
development has been a succession of syntheses--epigenesis upon
epigenesis. We may, if we please, regard each organite, as it appears,
living its separate life, and each tissue its separate life; but we
must not confound under the same symbol modes of existence so widely
different as the activities of an organite, and the activities of an
organism constituted by millions of organites.

77. If therefore we cannot restrict Life to the processes of Nutrition,
Dr. Beale’s hypothesis, whatever value it may have as explaining
histogenesis, is quite unacceptable. Neither Vital Force nor Bioplasm
covers the whole ground. For the former there is no better evidence
than our ignorance of the real synthesis; for the latter the evidence
is positive in its nature, but its interpretation is questionable. Dr.
Beale selects as the germinal matter those portions of tissue which
are susceptible of being deeply stained by the carmine solution, the
formed material being only stained in a faint degree; the nucleus
and nucleolus are the portions of germinal matter which are most
deeply stained; and hence he concludes that the older the matter the
fainter will be its coloration. There is no dispute as to the value
of the staining process, invented by Gerlach, for the discrimination
of chemically different parts of a tissue; and Dr. Beale has made
excellent use of it in his researches.[28] But I altogether dispute
the conclusion that the staining process reveals the parts which are
exclusively vital; and for this reason: it depends solely on the acid
reaction of those parts; and we cannot divorce the acid from the
alkaline agencies, both being indispensable. Nay, it has been proved
that in the _living animal_ no organized substance can be stained. Lord
Godolphin Osborne first discovered, in 1856, that the protoplasm of
growing wheat was susceptible of coloration;[29] but Gerlach, in 1858,
found that this never took place in the _animal_ during life. He kept
tadpoles and intestinal worms for weeks in colored fluids, without a
single spot becoming stained; although no sooner did these animals die
than the staining began. Nor even when he injected the colored fluids
under the skin and into the stomach, was the slightest coloration
produced.[30]

To Gerlach’s testimony may be added that of Stein, who, in his
magnificent work on _Infusoria_, says that not only has no foreign
substance ever been found in the protoplasm of the _Opalina_, but
in the _Acineta_, and all the embryos of the higher Infusoria known
to him, he has been unable to color the living substance.[31] This
resistance of the living protoplasm is surely a serious objection
to the hypothesis that only those parts of the dead organism which
are stained were the truly vital parts. Ranke sums up the results
of his experiments thus: “They all show that the living cell resists
the imbibition of every substance which it cannot assimilate. It is
precisely the impossibility of staining the cell that proves this
conclusively, since every particle of carmine absorbed would have
revealed its presence.”

It is not to be supposed that Dr. Beale was unacquainted with Gerlach’s
experiments. He has at any rate so far qualified the statement of his
hypothesis as to admit that it is only after death that the germinal
matter is stained. “The living matter” (he says, _How to Work with the
Microscope_, p. 107) “possesses an acid reaction, or to speak more
correctly, an acid reaction is always developed immediately after its
death.” Now, since this acid reaction only presents itself after death,
and it is this which is revealed by the carmine, we have no right to
conclude that the carmine singles out the vital parts. Every one knows
that the living muscle and nerve, when in repose, present an alkaline
or faintly neutral reaction, and after excitation this is changed into
an acid reaction, which increases with the exhaustion of the tissue. In
strict logic, therefore--if we could logically apply such a test--it
is the unstained parts that ought to be called vital. But, in truth,
alkalinity and acidity are equally indispensable.

78. The main object of my bringing this question forward was to
illustrate the danger of being misled by analysis: a danger we shall
see to be very serious in psychological inquiries. The aid derived from
analysis need never be undervalued; all that we have to bear in mind is
that it is only a logical artifice, and that our real explanation must
always be synthetic. Because of the tendency to rely on analysis there
has been an imperfect discrimination of the profound difference between


ORGANISMS AND MACHINES;

and while on the one hand the legitimate striving of the biologist
to display the mechanism of organic actions has been denounced by a
certain school as Materialism and a hateful attempt to “rob Life of
its mystery,” there has been on the other hand a misconception of this
mechanism, as if its dependent actions were of the nature of machines,
that is to say, as if organized mechanisms were strictly comparable
with machines constructed of inorganic parts. No doubt the laws of
Mechanics are the same in both, for these are abstract laws which take
no account of concrete differences. But when elaborate parallels are
drawn up between steam-engines and animal organisms, the coal consumed
in the one likened to the food in the other, and the force evolved in
the combustion in both being the same, there is a complete obliteration
of all that specially distinguishes vital activity.

79. Between an organism and a machine there is the superficial
resemblance that both have a complex structure, and are constructed of
different and dependent parts. But underneath this resemblance there
is a radical diversity.[32] The arrangement of parts in the organism
is more than a _juxtaposition_, it is a _solidarity_, arising from
the fact of their being all differentiations from a common substance
which is a special combination of the three classes of proximate
principles. Thus they are not parts which have been _put together_, but
which have been _evolved_, each out of a pre-existing part, and each
co-operating in the very existence of the other. The machine is made
of independent and primarily unrelated parts; its integrity depends
on the continued preservation of the substance of each part; waste
is here destruction. The organism is constituted by interdependent
and primarily related parts; its integrity depends on the continued
destruction and renovation of their substance; waste is a condition of
vitality. The actions of the machine are _sub_ordinated; the actions
of an organism are _co_-ordinated. The lever moves a wheel, and the
wheel in moving liberates a spring, each transmitting a communicated
impulse, but otherwise each acts independently--no slight modification
in the structure or movement of the wheel will modify the structure or
the movements of the lever, no alteration in the tension of the spring
will affect the structure of the wheel. But in the organism all are
parts of one sympathetic whole; each reacts on each; each is altered
by the other. Not a nerve is stimulated, nor a muscle moved, but the
entire organism is affected. A condensation here is the cause of a
greater imbibition there. The injection of salt or sugar under the skin
of the frog’s leg will produce cataract in its eye. The activity of
a secreting cell in the ovary, or liver, alters the condition of the
brain; the activity of the brain will check the secretion of a gland,
or relax the sphincters of the bladder. When we observe the growth of
horns, or the appearance of the beard, concomitant with the secretion
of spermatic cells--and especially when we observe with these a
surprising change in the physical and moral capabilities and tendencies
of the organism--we understand how the remotest parts of this mechanism
are bound together by one subtle yet all-powerful tie. Nothing of
this is visible in a machine. In a machine the material is so far of
secondary importance that it may be replaced by materials of various
kinds: a pulley may be worked with a hempen cord, a silken cord, or an
iron chain; a wheel may be wood, iron, copper, brass, or steel; the
actions will in each case be similar. Not so the organic mechanism:
the slightest variation, either in composition or intimate structure,
will affect, and may frustrate the organic activity. It is only in the
skeleton that the specific character of the materials may be changed;
and here only in the substitution of one phosphate for another in the
solid masonry.[33]

80. Another marked characteristic of the organism is that it has a
connexus of actions, the simultaneous effect of a continuous evolution,
appearing in stages and ages. And in the animal organism there is a
_consensus_ as well as a _connexus_, through which there is evolution
of Mind; and in the Social Organism an evolution of Civilization.
This consensus forms an intermediate stage through which the animal
actions are sensitive as well as nutritive, and the nutritive are
regulated by the sensitive. It is obvious that nothing like this is to
be found in a machine; and we conclude, therefore, that any view of the
organism which regards its mechanism without taking in these cardinal
characteristics must be radically defective. We no more deny the
existence of mechanical phenomena in denying that the organism is like
a machine, than we deny the existence of chemical phenomena in denying
that Vitality is chemical.




