CHAPTER III.

THE RELATION OF BODY AND MIND.


27. The second question proposed was, In what sense can Feeling be
correctly spoken of as an Agent in organic processes? This brings
us face to face with a much-debated topic, the relation of Body and
Mind; and demands a theoretic interpretation of that First Notion
which expresses universal experience, namely, that what I know as
Myself is a Body, in one aspect, and a Soul, in the other. What I
call my Body is a persistent aggregate of objective phenomena; and
my Soul is a persistent aggregate of subjective phenomena: the one
is an individualized group of experiences expressible in terms of
Matter and Motion, and therefore designated _physical_; the other an
individualized group of experiences expressible in terms of Feeling,
and therefore designated _psychical_. But, however contrasted, they
are both simply embodiments of Experience, that is to say, are Modes
of Feeling. All Existence--as known to us--is the Felt. The laws of
our organism compel us, indeed, to postulate an Existent which is
_extra mentem_--a Real not Ourselves--but the same laws debar us from
any knowledge whatever of what this _is_, or is _like_. We know Things
absolutely _in so far_ as they exist in relation to us; and that is the
only knowledge which can have any possible significance for us.

28. It is impossible for me to doubt that I am a Body, though I may
doubt whether what is thus called is anything more than a group of
feelings. It is impossible for me to doubt that I am a Soul; though
I may doubt whether what is thus called is more than a group of
bodily functions. In separating what is unquestionable from what is
questionable, we separate the fundamental facts of consciousness
from the theoretic interpretations of those facts: no theoretic
interpretation can efface or alter the facts. Whatever Philosophy may
discover, it cannot displace the fact that I know I am a Soul, _in
every sense in which that phrase represents Experience_: I know the
Soul in knowing its concretes (feelings), and in knowing it as an
abstraction which condenses those concretes in a symbol. The secondary
question is, Whether this abstraction represents one Existent, and the
abstraction Body another and wholly different Existent, or the two
abstractions represent only two different Aspects? this may be debated,
and must be answered according to theoretic probabilities.

29. What are the probabilities? We are all agreed that Consciousness
is the final arbiter. Its primary deliverance is simply that
of _a_ radical distinction. It is silent on the nature of the
distinction--says nothing as to whether the distinction is one of
agents or of aspects. It says, “I am a Soul.” With equal clearness
it says, “I am a Body.” It does _not_ say, “I am two things.” Nor
does the fact of a radical distinction imply more than a contrast of
aspects, such as that of convex and concave. The curve has at every
point this contrast of convex and concave, and yet is the identical
line throughout. A mental process is at every point contrasted with
the physical process assumed to be its correlate; and this contrast
demands equivalent expression in the terms of each. The identity
underlying the two aspects of the curve is evident to Sense. The
identity underlying the mental and physical process is not evident to
Sense, but may be made eminently _probable_ to Speculation, especially
when we have explained the grounds of the difference, namely, that they
are apprehended through different modes. But although I admit that
the conclusion is only one of probability, it is one which greatly
transcends the probability of any counter-hypothesis. Let us see how
this can be made out.[208]

30. We start from the position that a broad line of demarcation must
be drawn between the mental and the physical aspect of a process,
supposing them to be identical in reality. Nothing can be more _unlike_
a logical proposition than the physical process which is its correlate;
so that Philosophy has hitherto been forced to forego every attempt at
an explanation of how the two can be causally connected: referring the
connection to a mystery, or invoking two different agents, spiritual
and material, moving on parallel lines, like two clocks regulated to
work simultaneously. But having recognized this difference, can we not
also discern fundamental resemblances? First and foremost, we note
that there is common to both the basis in Feeling: they are both modes
of Consciousness. The Mind thinking the logical proposition is not,
indeed, in the same _state_ as the Mind picturing the physical process
which is the correlate of that logical proposition--no more than I,
who see you move on being struck, have the same feelings as you who
are struck. But the Mind which pictures the logical proposition as
a process, and pictures the physical process as a bodily change, is
contemplating one and the same event under its subjective and objective
aspects; just as when I picture to myself the feelings you experience
on being struck I separate the subjective aspect of the blow from its
objective aspect. Secondly, between the logical proposition and the
physical process there is a community of causal dependence, i. e. the
mode of grouping of the constituent elements, whereby this proposition,
and not another, is the result of this grouping, and not another. In
fact, what in subjective terms is called Logic, in objective terms is
Grouping.

31. Let us approach the question on a more accessible side. Sensation
avowedly lies at the basis of mental manifestations. Now, rightly
or wrongly, Sensation is viewed alternately as a purely subjective
fact--a psychological process--and as a purely objective fact--the
physiological reaction of a sense-organ. It is so conspicuously a
physiological process that many writers exclude it from the domain
of Mind, assign it to the material organism, and believe that it is
explicable on purely mechanical principles. This seems to me eminently
disputable; but the point is noticed in proof of the well-marked
objective character which the phenomenon assumes. In this aspect a
sensation is simply the reaction of a bodily organ. The physiologist
describes how a stimulus excites the organ, and declares its reaction
to be the sensation. Thus viewed, and expressed in terms of Matter
and Motion, there is absolutely nothing of that subjective quality
which characterizes sensation. Yet without this quality the objective
process cannot be a sensation. Exclude Feeling, and the excitation of
the auditory organ will no more yield the sensation of Sound by its
reaction, than the strings and sounding-board of a piano when the keys
are struck will yield music to a deaf spectator. Hence the natural
inference has been that inside the organism there is a _listener_: the
Soul is said to listen, transforming excitation into sensation. This
inference only needs a more systematic interpretation and it will
represent the biological theory, which demands something _more_ than
the reaction of the sensory organ--namely, the reaction of the whole
organism _through_ the sensory organ. I mean, that no organ isolated
from the organism is capable of a _physiological_ reaction--only
of a physico-chemical reaction; and sensation depends on (_is_)
the physiological reaction. When a sense-organ is stimulated, this
stimulation is a vital process, and is raised out of the class of
physico-chemical processes by virtue of its being the indissoluble
part of a complex whole. Interfere with any one of the co-operant
conditions--withdraw the circulation, check respiration, disturb
secretion--and the sense-organ sinks from the physiological to the
physical state; it may then be brought into contact with its normal
stimuli, but no stimulation (in the vital sense) will take place, there
will be no vital reaction.

Condensing all vital processes in the symbol Vitality, we may say
Vitality is requisite for every physiological process. A parallelism
may be noted on the subjective side: all the sentient processes may be
condensed in the one symbol Sensibility (Feeling), and we must then
say, No psychological process is possible as an isolated fact, but
demands the co-operation of others--it is a _resultant_ of all the
contemporaneous conditions of Sensibility in the organism. In ordinary
language this is what is meant by saying that no impression can become
a sensation without the intervention of Consciousness--an ambiguous
phrase, because of the ambiguity of the term Consciousness, but the
phrase expresses the fact that in Sensation a process in the organism
is necessary to the reaction of the organ.

32. Having recognized the distinction between the two processes
objective and subjective, physical and mental, we have recognized
the vanity of attempting to assign their limits, and to say where
Motion ends and Feeling begins, or how Feeling again changes into
Motion. The one does _not_ begin where the other ends. According to the
two-clock theory of Dualism, the two _agents_ move on parallel lines.
On the theory of Monism the two _aspects_ are throughout opposed. Both
theories explain the facts; which explanation is the most congruous
with experience? Against the first we may object that the hypothesis of
two Agents utterly unallied in nature wants the cardinal character of
a fertile hypothesis in its unverifiableness: it may be true, we can
never know that it is true. By the very terms of its definition, the
Spirit--if that mean _more_ than an abstract expression of sentient
states--is beyond all sensible experience. This is indeed admitted by
the dualists, for they postulate a Spirit merely because they cannot
otherwise explain the phenomena of Consciousness. Herein they fail to
see that even their postulate brings no explanation, it merely restates
the old problem in other terms.

33. Up to the present time these same objections might have been urged
with equal force against Monism. Indeed, although many philosophers
have rejected the two-clock theory of Leibnitz, they have gained a very
hesitating acceptance for their own hypothesis of identity. To most
minds the difficulty of imagining how a physical process could _also_
be a psychical process, a movement also be a feeling, seemed not less
than that of imagining how two such distinct Agents as Matter and Mind
could co-operate, and react on each other, or move simultaneously on
parallel lines. Although for many years I have accepted the hypothesis
of Monism, I have always recognized its want of an adequate reply to
such objections. Unless I greatly deceive myself, I have now found
a solution of the main difficulty; and found it in psychological
conditions which are perfectly intelligible. But knowing how easily one
may deceive one’s self in such matters, I will only ask the reader to
meditate with open-mindedness the considerations now to be laid before
him, and see if he can feel the same confidence in their validity.

34. One of the early stages in the development of Experience is the
separation of Self from the Not-Self. I look out on “the vast extern
of things,” and see a great variety of objects, included in a visible
hemisphere. All these objects in various positions, having various
forms and colors, I believe to be wholly detached from, and in every
way unallied to, Myself. And what is that Self? It is my Body as a
visible and tangible object, separated from all other visible and
tangible objects by the constant presence of feelings connected with
it and its movements, and not connected with the other objects. This
constant presence of feelings is referred to a Soul, which I then
separate from my Body, as an Inner Self; and from this time onwards I
speak of the Body as _mine_, and learn to regard it in much the same
light as other outer objects. In my naïve judgment the external objects
are supposed to exist _as_ I see and touch them, whether I or any one
else see and touch them or not: they in no sense belong to the series
of feelings which constitute the Me. And since my Body resembles these
objects in visible and tangible qualities, and also in being external
to my feelings, it also takes its place in the objective world. Thus
arises the hypothesis of Dualism which postulates a _Physis_, or
object-world, and an _Æsthesis_, or subject-world: two independent
existents, one contemplated, the other contemplating.

35. Philosophy, as we know, leads to a complete reversal of this
primitive conclusion, and shows that the _contemplated_ is a _synthesis
of contemplations_, the Physis being _also_ the Æsthesis. Psychological
investigation shows that the objects supposed to _have_ forms,
colors, and positions within an external hemisphere, have these
only in virtue of the very feelings from which they are supposed
to be separated. The _visible_ universe exists only _as seen_: the
objects are Reals conditioned by the laws of Sensibility. The space
in which we see them, their geometrical relations, the light and
shadows which reveal them, the forms they affect, the lines of their
changing directions, the qualities which distinguish them,--all these
are but the externally projected signs of feelings. They are signs
which we interpret according to organized laws of experience; each
sign being itself a feeling connected with other feelings. We project
them outside according to the “law of eccentric projection”--which is
only the expression of the fact that one feeling is a sign of some
other, and is thereby _ideally detached_ from it. According to this
law I say, “my Body”; just as I say, “my House”; or, “my Property.”
Misled by this, Dualism holds that in the very fact of detaching my
Body from my Self, calling it _mine_, is the revelation of a distinct
entity within the body. But that this is illusory, appears in the
application of this same law of eccentric projection to sensations
and thoughts, which are called _mine_, as my legs and arms are mine.
If it is undeniable that I say _my_ Body--and thus ideally detach the
Body from the Soul--it is equally undeniable that I say _my_ Soul; and
from what is the Soul detached? In presence of this difficulty, the
metaphysician may argue that neither Body nor Soul can be coextensive
with its manifestations, but demands a noumenal Real for each--a
_substratum_ for the bodily manifestations, and a _substratum_ for the
mental manifestations. This, however, is an evasion, not a solution of
the difficulty. If we postulate an unknown and unknowable noumenon,
we gain no insight: first, because Philosophy deals only with the
known functions of unknown quantities, and therefore leaves the _x_
out of the calculation; secondly, because, granting the existence of
these noumena, we can have no rational grounds for asserting that they
are not of one and the same nature; for we have no grounds for _any_
assertion whatever about them. And if it be urged against this, that
Consciousness testifies to a distinction, I answer that on a closer
scrutiny it will be found to testify to nothing more than a diversity
of manifestation. All therefore that comes within the range of
knowledge is, How does this diversity arise?

36. There are two ways, and there are only two, in which differences
arise. These are, 1°, the _modes of production_ of a product, and,
2°, our _modes of apprehension_ of the product. Things may be very
different, and yet to our apprehension indistinguishable, so that
we regard them as identical; and they may be identical, yet appear
utterly unlike. A mechanical bird may seem so like a living bird, and
their actions so indistinguishable to the spectator, that he will not
suspect a difference, or suspecting it, will not be able to specify
it. Of both objects, so long as his modes of apprehending them are
circumscribed, he can only say what these imply: he sees familiar
forms, colors, and movements, which he interprets according to the
previous experiences of which these are the signs. But by varying the
modes of apprehension, and gaining thus a fuller knowledge, he finds
that the two products have very different modes of production; hence he
concludes the products to be different: the mechanism of the one is not
the organism of the other; the actions of the mechanical bird are not
the actions of the living bird. The fuller knowledge has been gained
by viewing the objects under different relations, and contemplating
them _in_ their modes of production, not as merely visible products. He
sees the mechanism performing by steel springs, wheels, and wires, the
work which the organism performs by bones, muscles, and nerves; and the
farther his analysis of the modes of production is carried, the greater
are the differences which he apprehends.

37. Now consider the other side. One and the same object will
necessarily present very different aspects under different subjective
conditions, since it is _these_ which determine the aspect. The object
cannot be to Sight what it is to Hearing, to Touch what it is to
Smell. The vibrations of a tuning-fork are seen as movements, heard
as sounds. In current language the vibrations are said to cause the
sounds. Misled by this, philosophers puzzle themselves as to how a
material process (vibration) can be transformed into a mental process
(sensation), how such a cause can have so utterly different an effect.
But I have formerly[209] argued at some length that there is no
transformation or causation of the kind supposed. The tuning-fork--or
that Real which in relation to Sense is the particular object thus
named--will, by one of its modes of acting on my Sensibility through
my optical apparatus, determine the response known as _vibrations_;
but it is not this response of the optical organ which is transformed
into, or causes the response of the auditory organ, known as _sound_.
The auditory organ knows nothing of vibrations, the optical nothing of
sounds. The responses are both modes of Feeling determined by organic
conditions, and represent the two different relations in which the
Real is apprehended. The Real _is_ alternately the one and the other.
And if the one mode of Feeling has a physical significance, while the
other has a mental significance, so that we regard the vibrations as
objective facts, belonging to the external world, and the sounds as
subjective facts, exclusively belonging to the internal world, this is
due to certain psychological influences presently to be expounded.
Meanwhile let us fix clearly in our minds that both vibrations and
sounds are modes of Feeling. My consciousness plainly assures me
that it is I who see the one, and hear the other; not that there are
two distinct subjects for the two distinct feelings. Add to which,
manifold uncontradicted experiences assure me that the occasional
cause--the objective factor--of the one feeling, is also the cause of
the other, and not that the two feelings have two different occasional
causes. From both of these undeniable facts we must conclude that the
difference felt is simply a difference of aspect, determined by some
difference in the modes of apprehension.

38. Assuming then that a mental process is only another aspect
of a physical process--and this we shall find the more probable
hypothesis--we have to explain by what influences these diametrically
opposite aspects are determined. From all that has just been said we
must seek these in the modes of apprehension. There can be no doubt
that we express the fact in very different terms; the question is,
What do these terms _signify_? Why do we express one aspect in terms
of Matter and Motion, assigning the process to the objective world;
and the other aspect in terms of Feeling, assigning the process to the
subjective world?

Let the example chosen be a logical process as the mental aspect,
and a neural process as its physical correlate. The particular
proposition may be viewed logically, as a grouping of experiences,
or physiologically, as a grouping of neural tremors. Here we have
the twofold aspect of one and the same reality; and these different
aspects are expressed in different terms. We cannot be too rigorous
in our separation of the terms; for every attentive student must have
noted how frequently discussions are made turbid by the unconscious
_shifting of terms_ in the course of the argumentation. This is not
only the mistake of opponents who are unaware of the shifting which has
occurred in each other’s minds, so that practically the adversaries
do not meet on common ground, but cross and recross each other; it is
also the mistake of the solitary thinker losing himself in the maze
of interlacing conceptions instead of keeping steadily to one path.
Only by such shifting of terms can the notion of the physical process
causing, or being transformed into, the mental process for a moment
gain credit; and this also greatly sustains the hypothesis of Dualism,
with its formidable objections: How can Matter think? How can Mind act
on Matter causing Motion?

39. Those who recognized that the terms Matter and Mind were
abstractions mutually exclusive, saw at once that these questions,
instead of being formidable, were in truth irrational. To ask if
Matter could think, or Mind move Matter, was a confusion of symbols
equivalent to speaking of a yard of Hope, and a ton of Terror. Although
Measure and Weight are symbols of Feeling, and in _this_ respect are
on a par with Hope and Terror, yet because they are objective symbols
they cannot be applied to subjective states, without violation of the
very significance they were invented to express. No one ever asks
whether a sensation of Sound can be a sensation of Color; nor whether
Color can move a machine, although Heat can, yet the one is no less a
sensation than the other. On similar grounds no one should ask whether
Matter can think, or Mind move Matter. The only rational question is
one preserving the integrity of the terms, namely, whether the living,
thinking organism presents itself to apprehension under the twofold
aspect--now under the modes of Feeling classified as objective or
physical; now under the modes classified as subjective or mental.

40. We are told that it is “impossible to imagine Matter thinking,”
which is very true; only by a gross _confusion_ of terms can Thought
be called a property of cerebral tissue, or of Matter at all. We
may, indeed, penetrate beneath the terms which relate to aspects,
and recognize in the underlying reality not two existences, but one.
Our conceptions of this reality, however, are expressed in symbols
representing different classes of feelings, objective and subjective;
and to employ the terms of one class to designate the conceptions of
the other is to frustrate the very purposes of language. Matter and
Mind, Object and Subject, are abstractions from sentient experiences.
We know them as abstractions, and know the concrete experiences from
which they are abstracted. Philosophers, indeed, repeatedly assure us
that we neither know what Matter is nor what Mind is, we only know the
_phenomenal products_ of the action and reaction of these two unknown
noumena. Were this so, all discussion would be idle; we could not say
whether Matter was or was not capable of thinking, whether Mind was or
was not the same as Matter, we could only abstain from saying anything
whatever on the topic. What should we reply to one who asked us to
name the product of two unknown quantities? So long as _x_ and _y_ are
without values their product must be without value. If the value of
_x_ be known, and that of _y_ unknown, then the product still remains
unknown: _x_ + _y_ = _x_ + 0 = _x_. Therefore, unless the Objective
aspect were the _equivalent_ of the Subjective aspect, it could never
be subjectively present. Feeling is but another aspect of the Felt.

41. It is because we do know what Matter is, that we know it is
_not_ Mind: they are symbols of two different modes of Feeling. If
we separate the conception of citizenship from the conception of
fatherhood, although the same man is both citizen and father, how much
more decisively must we separate the conception of Matter, which
represents one group of feelings, from the conception of Mind, which
represents another? One element in the former is common to the whole
group, namely, the reference to a Not-Self, induced by the sensation of
Resistance, which always ideally or sensibly accompanies the material
class. The axiom, I feel, _ergo_ I exist, has its correlative:--I act,
_ergo_ there are other existents on which I act; and these are not
wholly Me, for they resist, oppose, exclude me; yet they are also one
with Me, since they are felt by me. In my Feeling, that which is not Me
is Matter, the objective aspect of the Felt, as Mind is the subjective
aspect.

But since Hunger and Thirst, Joy and Grief, Pain and Terror, are also
_felt_, yet are never classed under the head of Matter, the grounds of
the classification of feelings have to be expressed. Professor Bain
makes the distinction between Matter and Mind to rest solely on the
presence or absence of Extension: this is the decisive mark: Matter
he defines as the Extended. The definition is inadequate. When I see
a dog and its image reflected in a pool, or see a dog and think of
another, in the three cases dog, image, and idea have Extension; but
I recognize the dog as a material fact, the idea as a mental fact;
and although the image of the dog has material conditions by which
I am optically affected, just as the idea has material cerebral
conditions, I recognize a marked difference between them and the dog,
due to the different modes of apprehension. The dog is known as a
persistent reality, which, when Sight is supplemented by Touch, will
yield sensations of Resistance, and thus disclose its materiality. The
image vanishes if I attempt to touch it; I see its outlines waver and
become confused with every disturbance of the surface of the pool;
the idea vanishes when another idea arises; whence I conclude that
neither has material reality, because neither has the Resistance which
characterizes the Not-Self. The image and the idea may be referred to
material conditions, but so may pains, terrors, volitions, yet these
are all without Extension, simply because they are not visual feelings.

42. Matter does not represent all feelings, but only the objective
sensibles; and these are not all characterized by Extension, but only
those which directly or indirectly involve optico-tactical experiences
accompanied by muscular experiences. Matter is primarily the Visible
and Resistant; and secondarily, whatever can be imagined as such;
so that ether, molecules, and atoms, although neither visible nor
tangible, are ranged under the head of Matter. Color is a feeling as
Sound and Scent are feelings, and although material conditions are
equally presupposed in all three, yet Color alone has Extension, and
because it can be imaged it has a more objective character than the
others, which having no lines and surfaces, want the optical conditions
for the formation of images, and are less definitely connected with
tactical and muscular experiences. Nevertheless, since Sound and Scent
are obviously associated with objects seen and touched, they have a
degree of materiality never assigned to such feelings as Hunger and
Thirst, Pleasure, Terror, and Hope.

43. When we refer feelings to material conditions, we follow the
natural tendency to translate the little known in terms of the better
known, and employ the symbols Matter and Motion, because these furnish
the intellect with images, i. e. definite and exact elements to operate
with. In hearing a sound, there is nothing at all like “vibrations,”
nothing like “aerial waves” and “neural processes,” given in that
feeling; but on attempting to _explain_ it, we remove it from the
sphere of Sensation to carry it into the sphere of Intellect, and
we must change our symbols in changing our problem; here our only
resource is to translate the subjective state into an _imaginable_
objective process, which can only be expressed in terms of Matter
and Motion. What we _heard_ as Sound is then _seen_ as Vibration.
When we are optically or mentally contemplating vibrations and neural
processes, we are supplanting one source of feeling by another,
translating an event in another set of symbols. But we can no more hear
the sound in seeing the vibrations, than a blind man can see the fly
in the amber which he feels with his fingers, or than we can feel the
amber he holds, while we are only looking at it. The phrase “material
conditions of Feeling” sometimes designates the objective aspect of the
subjective process, and sometimes the agencies in the external medium
which co-operate with the organism in the production of the feelings.
In each case there is an attempt to explain a feeling by intelligible
symbols.

44. The Animal probably never attempts such explanation; satisfied with
the facts, it is careless of their factors. Man is never satisfied:
is restless in the search after factors; and having found them, seeks
factors of these factors; so that Lichtenberg felicitously calls him
“_das rastlose Ursachenthier_”--“the animal untiring in the search
for causes.” And thus sciences arise: we translate experiences into
geometrical, physical, chemical, physiological, and psychological
terms--different symbols of the different modes of apprehending
phenomena.

45. “I see an elephant.” In other words, I am affected in a certain
way, and interpret my affection by previous similar experiences,
expressing these in verbal symbols. But I want an explanation, and
this the philosopher vouchsafes to me by translating my affection into
his terms. He takes me into another sphere--tells me of an undulating
Ether, the waves of which beat upon my retina--of lines of Light
refracted by media and converged by lenses according to geometric
laws--of the formation thereby of a tiny image of the gigantic elephant
on my retina as on the plate of a camera-obscura--this, and much
more, is what _he_ sees in _my_ visual feeling, and he bids me see it
also. Grateful for the novel instruction, I am compelled to say that
it does not alter my vision of the elephant, does not make the fact
a whit clearer, does not indeed correspond with what I feel. It is
outside knowledge, valuable, as all knowledge is, but supplementary.
It is translation into another language. And when I come to examine
the translation, I find it very imperfect. I ask my instructor: Is
it the tiny image on my retina which I see, and not the big elephant
on the grass? And how do I see this retinal image, which you explain
to be upside down?--how is it carried from my retina to my mind? I
have no consciousness of tiny reversed image, none of my retina,
only of a fact of feeling, which I call “seeing an elephant.” The
camera-obscura has no such feeling--it reflects the image, it does
not see the object. Here my instructor, having reached the limit
of his science,[210] hands me over to the physiologist, who will
translate the fact for me in terms not of Geometry, but of Anatomy
and Physiology. The laws of Dioptrics cease at this point: the image
they help to form on the retina is ruthlessly dispersed, and all its
beautiful geometric construction is lost in a neural excitation, which
is transmitted through semifluid channels of an optic tract to a
semifluid ganglion, whence a thrill is shot through the whole brain,
and is there _transformed_ into a visual sensation. Again I fancy I
have gained novel instruction of a valuable kind; but it does not
affect my original experience that I am enabled to translate it into
different terms; the less so because I cannot help the conviction that
the translation is imperfect, leaving out the essential points. If a
phrase be translated for me into French or German, I gain thereby an
addition to my linguistic knowledge, but the experience thus variously
expressed remains unaffected. When the fact is expressed in geometrical
or physiological terms, the _psychical process_ finds no adequate
expression. Neither in the details, nor in the totals, do I recognize
any of the qualities of my state of feeling in seeing the elephant.
I do not see the geometrical process, I do not see the anatomical
mechanism, I see the elephant, and am conscious only of that feeling.
You may consider my organism geometrically or anatomically, and bring
it thus within the circle of objective knowledge; but my subjective
experience, my spiritual existence, that of which I am most deeply
assured, demands another expression. Nay more, on closely scrutinizing
your objective explanations, it is evident that a psychical process
is _implied_ throughout--such terms as undulations, refractions,
media, lenses, retina, neural excitation, overtly refer, indeed, to
the material objective aspect of the facts, but they are themselves
the modes of Feeling by which the facts are apprehended, and would not
exist _as such_ without the “greeting of the spirit.”

46. What, then, is our conclusion? It is, that to make an adequate
explanation of psychical processes by material conditions we must first
establish an equivalence between the subjective and objective aspects;
and, having taken this step, we must complete it by showing wherein the
difference exists; having established this entity and diversity, we
have solved the problem.

Let us attempt this solution. When I speak to you, the spoken words
are the same to you and to me. You hear what I hear, you apprehend
what I apprehend. But there were muscular movements of articulation
felt by me and not felt by you; to feel these you also must articulate
the words; but so long as you merely hear the words, there is a
difference in our states of feeling. Some of my movements you can see,
others you can imagine; but this is not my feeling of them, it is your
optical equivalent of my muscular feeling. On a similar assumption of
equivalence, a neural process is made to stand for a logical process.
In thinking a proposition, we are logically grouping verbal symbols
representative of sensible experiences; and this is a quite peculiar
state of Consciousness, wholly unlike what would arise in the mental or
visual contemplation of the neural grouping, which is its physiological
equivalent. But this diversity does not discredit the idea of their
identity; and although some of my readers will protest against such an
idea, and will affirm that the logical process is not a process taking
place in the organism at all, but in a spirit which uses the organism
as its instrument, I must be allowed in this exposition to consider
the identity established, my purpose being to explain the diversity
necessarily accompanying it. Therefore, I say, that although a logical
process is identical with a neural process, it must appear differently
when the modes of apprehending it are different. While you are thinking
a logical proposition, grouping your verbal symbols, I, who mentally
_see_ the process, am grouping a totally different set of symbols: to
you the proposition is a subjective state, i. e. a _state_ of feeling,
not an _object_ of feeling: to become an object, it must be apprehended
by objective modes: and this it can become to you as to me, when we see
it as a process, or imagine it as a process. But obviously your state
in seeing or imagining the process must be different from your state
when the process itself is passing, since the modes of apprehension
are so different. There may be every ground for concluding that a
logical process has its correlative physical process, and that the two
processes are merely two aspects of one event; but because we cannot
apprehend the one aspect as we apprehend the other, cannot _see_ the
logical sequence as we _see_ the physical sequence, this difference in
our modes of apprehension compels us to separate the two, assigning
one to the subjective, the other to the objective class. Between the
sensible perception of an object and the reproduced image of the object
there is chiefly a quantitative difference in the physiological and
psychological processes: the image is a faint sensation. Yet this
quantitative difference brings with it the qualitative distinction
which is indicated in our calling the one a sensation, the other a
thought. The consequence has been that while all philosophers have
admitted the sensation to be--at least partly--a process in the bodily
organism, the majority have maintained that the thought is no such
process in the organism, but has its seat in a spirit independent of
the organism.

47. The states of Feeling which are associated with other states
characterized as objective because overtly referring to a Not-Self, we
group under the head of Matter: we assign material conditions as their
antecedents. Whereas states of Feeling which are not thus associated we
group under the head of Mind, and assign internal conditions as their
antecedents. Color and Taste are very different states of Feeling, yet
both are spontaneously referred to external causes, because they are
associated with visual and tactical states; whereas Hunger, Nausea,
Hope, etc., have no such associations, and their material conditions
are only theoretically assigned.

Our intelligible universe is constructed out of the elements of Feeling
according to certain classifications, the broadest of which is that
into external and internal, object and subject. The abstractions Matter
and Mind once formed and fixed in representative symbols, are easily
accredited as two different Reels. But the separation is ideal, and
is really a distinction of Aspects. We know ourselves as Body-Mind;
we do not know ourselves as Body _and_ Mind, if by that be meant two
coexistent independent Existents; and the illusion by which the two
Aspects appear as two Reals may be made intelligible by the analysis
of any ordinary proposition. For example, when we say “this fruit
is sweet,” we express facts of Feeling--actual or anticipated--in
abstract terms. The concrete facts are these: a colored feeling, a
solid feeling, a sweet feeling, etc., have been associated together,
and the colored, solid, sweet group is symbolized in the abstract
term “fruit” But the color, solidity, and sweetness are also abstract
terms, representing feelings associated in other groups, so that we
find “fruit” which has no “sweetness”; and “sweetness” in other things
besides “fruits.” Having thus separated ideally the “sweetness” from
the “fruit”--which in the concrete sweet-fruit is not permissible--we
easily come to imagine a real distinction. This is the case with the
concrete living organism when we cease to consider it in its concrete
reality, and fix our attention on its abstract terms--Body and Mind. We
then think of Body apart from Mind, and believe in them as two Reals,
though neither exists apart.

There is no state of consciousness in which object and subject are
not indissolubly combined. There is no physical process which is
not indissolubly bound up with the psychical modes of apprehending
it. Every idea is either an image or a symbol--it has therefore
objective reference, a material aspect. Every object is a synthesis
of feelings--it has therefore subjective reference, a material
aspect. Thus while all the evidence points to the identity of Object
and Subject, there is ample evidence for the logical necessity of
their ideal separation as Aspects. This I have explained as a case
of the general principle which determines all distinctions--namely,
the diversity in the modes of production of the products,
which--subjectively--is diversity in the modes of apprehending them.
The optico-tactical experiences are markedly different from the other
experiences, as being more directly referred to the Not-Self which
resists; and because these lend themselves to ideal constructions by
means of images and symbols, it is these experiences into which we
translate all the others when we come to explain them and assign their
conditions. For--and this is the central position of our argument--all
interpretation consists in translating one set of feelings in the terms
of another set. We condense sets of feelings in abstract symbols; to
_understand_ these we must reduce them to their concrete significates.
They are signs; we must show what they are signs of.

Now the symbols Object and Subject are the most abstract we can employ.
Because they are universal, they represent what cannot in reality be
divorced. We can, indeed, ideally separate ourselves from the Cosmos;
in the same way we can ideally separate our inner Self or Soul from our
outer Self or Body; and again our Soul from its sentient states, our
Body from its physical changes. But not so in reality. The separation
is a logical artifice, and a logical necessity for Science.

The necessity will be obvious to any one who reflects how the ideal
constructions of Science demand precision and integrity of terms. The
problem of Automatism brings this very clearly into view. The question
is, Can we translate all psychological phenomena in mechanical terms?
If we _can_, we ought; because these terms have the immense advantage
of being _exact_, dealing as they do with quantitative relations. But
my belief is that we cannot--nay, that we cannot even translate them
all into physiological terms. The distinction between quantitative and
qualitative knowledge (p. 354) is a barrier against the mechanical
interpretation. Physiology is a classificatory science, not a science
of measurement. Nor can the laws of Mind be deduced from physiological
processes, unless supplemented by and interpreted by psychical
conditions individual and social.




