CHAPTER III.

INDUCTIONS FROM PARTICULAR OBSERVATIONS.


43. In the last chapter we surveyed the deductive evidence, from which
the conclusion was that Reflexion necessarily involves Sensibility,
but not necessarily any one particular _mode_ of Sensibility, such
as Consciousness, Pain, Discomfort, Attention, or the reaction of
any one of the special Senses. Although each or all of these modes
may be involved in the sensorial process which determines a reflex
act, each or all may be absent. Such is the fact of observation. This
fact is interpreted on the hypothesis that Reflexion is the exclusive
property of the spinal cord, as Sensation is of the brain. When we
come to examine the evidence for this hypothesis, we find it to move
in a circle: the brain is said to be the exclusive seat of sensation,
because reflex actions can be effected after its removal; and reflex
actions are said to be insentient because they take place in the
absence of the brain.

A gentleman was one day stoutly asserting that there were no
gold-fields except in Mexico and Peru. A nugget, dug up in California,
was presented to him, as evidence against his positive assertion.
He was not in the least disconcerted. “This metal, sir, is, I own,
extremely _like_ gold; and you tell me that it passes as such in the
market, having been declared by the assayers to be undistinguishable
from the precious metal. All this I will not dispute. Nevertheless,
the metal is not gold, but _auruminium_; it cannot be gold, _because_
gold comes only from Mexico and Peru.” In vain was he informed that
the geological formation was similar in California and Peru, and the
metals similar; he had fixed in his mind the conclusion that gold
existed _only_ in Mexico and Peru: this was a law of nature; he had no
reasons to give why it should be so; but such had been the admitted
fact for many years, and from it he would not swerve. He was not fond
of new-fangled notions, which, after all, would only lead us back to
the exploded errors of the past. To accept the statement that gold was
to be found elsewhere than in Mexico and Peru, would be to return to
the opinion of the ancients, who thought there was gold in the upper
regions of Tartary!

Sensation is not tangible, assayable, like gold. We can understand,
therefore, that the very men who would make merry with the
_auruminium_, would accept easily such a phrase as “reflex action.”
The decapitated animal defends itself against injury, gets out of
the way of annoyances, cleans itself, performs many of its ordinary
actions, but is said to do these things without that Sensibility which,
if its head were on, would guide them. Even before the Reflex Theory
was invented this line of argument was used. Gall, referring to the
experiments of Sue, previously noticed, says that “Sue confounds the
effects of Irritability with those of Sensibility.”[246] Not gold, dear
sir, but _auruminium_!

44. On investigating the phenomena we soon come upon two classes which
must cause hesitation. We find that the brain has its reflex processes,
of the same order as those of the cord; we find that these processes
may be conscious or unconscious, voluntary or involuntary; so that we
can no longer separate brain from cord on the ground of Reflexion. In
this respect, at least, the two are mechanisms with similar powers.
Turning now to the other class of phenomena, we find that precisely as
the brain is an organ of Reflexion, the cord is an organ of Sensation.
All the evidence we can have, from which to infer the presence of
sensation, is furnished by the sensorial processes in the cord. Remove
the brain, and the animal still manifests Sensibility, and this in
degrees of energy and complexity proportional to the mechanisms still
intact: some of these manifestations have the character of volitional
actions, some of automatic actions, some of Memory, Judgment, and
selective Adaptation. These we observe not indeed with the energy and
variety of such manifestations when the brain co-operates, since the
disturbance of the organism which is the consequence of the brain’s
removal--or the meagreness of the organism which is the correlative
of the brain never having been developed--must of course involve a
corresponding difference in the observed phenomena; but the point here
brought forward is that phenomena of the same _order_ are manifested by
organisms with or without a brain.

45. Let us go seriatim through the evidence of these two classes:--


CEREBRAL REFLEXES.

While Theory separated the actions of the cord from those of the brain
on the ground of their being at times unconscious and involuntary,
Observation disclosed that this distinction could not be maintained.

This step was taken by Dr. Laycock in 1840. In a striking paper[247]
read by him at the British Association in 1844, he brought together the
evidence on which his view was founded. The idea has been adopted and
illustrated in the writings of Dr. Carpenter, who now calls the action
“unconscious cerebration.”

“I was led to this opinion,” Dr. Laycock says in announcing his view,
“by the general principle that the ganglia within the cranium, being
a continuation of the spinal cord, must necessarily be regulated as
to their reaction on external agencies by laws identical with those
governing the spinal ganglia and their analogues in the lower animals.
If, therefore, the spinal cord is a centre of reflexion, the brain must
also be one.” It is a matter of regret that Dr. Laycock did not extend
this principle, and declare that whatever was true of the _properties_
of the cranial centres must also be true of the spinal centres; if the
brain have Sensibility, the spinal cord must also have it.

Dr. Laycock refers to the curious phenomena of Hydrophobia in proof
that reflex actions may be excited by the optic nerves, or by a mere
idea of water. When a mirror was presented to a patient, the reflexion
of the light acting on his retina, in the manner of a reflexion
from the surface of water, produced a convulsive sobbing, as in the
attempt to swallow water, and the patient turned aside his head with
expressions of terror. Money was given him to induce him to look a
second time, but before he had looked a minute the same effect was
produced.

The _idea_ of water excited similar convulsions. No sooner was it
suggested that the patient should swallow a little water than he seemed
frightened, and began to cry out. By kindly encouragements he was
brought to express his willingness to drink, but the _sound_ of the
water, as it was poured out again, brought on convulsions. In another
case, “on our proposing to him to drink, he started up, and recovered
his breath by a deep convulsive inspiration. On being urged to try,
he took a cup of water in one hand and a spoon in the other. With as
expression of terror, yet with great resolution, he filled the spoon
and proceeded to carry it to his lips; but before it reached his mouth
his courage forsook him, and he was forced to desist. He repeatedly
renewed the attempt, but with no more success. His arm became rigid and
immovable whenever he tried to raise it to his mouth, and he struggled
in vain against this spasmodic resistance.”

In 1843 Griesinger--who appears to have known nothing of Dr. Laycock’s
paper--published his remarkably suggestive memoir on Psychical
Reflexes,[248] in which he extends the principle of Reflexion to all
the cerebro-spinal centres. The whole course of subsequent research
has confirmed this view; so that we may say with Landry, “L’existence
du pouvoir réflexe dans l’encéphale ou dans quelques unes de ses
parties établit une nouvelle analogie entre le centre nerveux cranien
et la moelle épinière.”[249] Indeed we have only to consider the
Laughter which follows a ludicrous idea, or the Terror which follows
a suggestion of danger,--the varying and involuntary expression of
Emotion,--and the curious phenomena of Imitation and Contagion,--to see
how large a place cerebral reflexion occupies.

46. The existence of cerebral reflexion having been thus made manifest,
Dr. Carpenter classed all reflex actions under three heads: 1°, the
excito-motor, determined by the spinal cord; 2°, the sensori-motor,
determined by the ganglia at the base of the brain; 3°, ideo-motor,
determined by the brain. From all these Consciousness is absent. From
the first, he supposes Sensation to be absent. As an artifice, such
a classification may have its value, but it is physiologically and
psychologically misleading. It sustains the hypothesis of an imaginary
excito-motor mechanism. It restricts Sensibility to one of its many
modes. It fails altogether to connect Sensation with Thought, the Logic
of Feeling with the Logic of Signs.

47. The view of Sensibility as common to the whole cerebro-spinal axis
is by no means new. Robert Whytt maintained it. Prochaska held that
the spinal cord formed the greater part of the _sensorium commune_;
and he adduced, in proof, the familiar facts of sensibility manifested
by headless animals. The next writer whom I can discover to have
held this opinion is J. J. Sue,--the father of the celebrated French
romance-writer,--who, in 1803, conceived that his experiments proved
the spinal cord to be capable of replacing, to a certain extent, the
functions of the brain.[250] Next came Legallois,[251] who undertook
to show, by a series of experiments, that the principle of sensation
and movement, in the trunk and extremities, has its seat in the spinal
cord. The mere division of the cord, he said, produces “the astonishing
result of an animal, in which the head and the body enjoy separate
vitality, the head living as if the body did not exist, and the body
living as if the head did not exist. Guinea-pigs, after decapitation,
seem very sensitive to the pain caused by the wound in the neck; they
alternately carry first one hind-leg and then the other, to the spot,
as if to scratch it. Kittens also do the same.”

A few years afterwards, 1817, Dr. Wilson Philip concluded that “the
spinal marrow possesses sensorial power, as appears from very simple
experiments”; but he held the brain to be the _chief_ source of
sensorial power.[252] The following year, Lallemand supported this
opinion by the very curious phenomena exhibited by infants born without
brains: these infants breathed, swallowed, sucked, squalled, and gave
very unequivocal signs of sensibility. The value of such observations
consists in disproving the objection frequently urged against the
evidence of decapitated animals, namely, that in these animals the
spinal cord preserves the remains of a sensibility endowed by the brain.

Longet here places an observation recorded by Beyer. A new-born infant,
whose brain, during the birth, had been completely extirpated (to save
the mother’s life), was wrapped in a towel, and placed in the corner
of the room, as a lifeless mass. While the surgeon was giving all his
care to the mother, he heard with horror a kind of murmur proceeding
from the spot where the body had been placed. In three minutes a
distinct _cry_ was heard. The towel was removed, and, to the surprise
of all, this brainless infant was seen struggling with rapid movement
of its arms and legs. It cried, and gave other signs of sensibility for
several minutes.[253]

In 1828 Calmeil arrived at the same conclusion as that reached by
Legallois, Wilson Philip, and Lallemand. Indeed when, in 1833, the
Reflex Theory appeared, this opinion was so firmly rooted, that
we find Mr. Grainger combating it as the established error of the
day. He takes as much pains to show that physiologists are wrong in
attributing sensation to the spinal cord, as I am here taking to show
that they were right.[254] “It is, indeed, apparent,” he says, “that
the whole question concerning the truth or falsehood of the theory
which attributes the reflex power to the spinal cord hinges upon the
correctness or incorrectness of the received doctrines respecting the
seat of sensation and volition; so that until those doctrines are
proved to be false, it is impossible to establish the hypothesis of Dr.
Hall.”[255]

The reader is requested to take note of this, because when we come to
the evidence which proves the spinal cord to be a centre of sensation,
we shall find that the _only_ ground for rejecting that evidence is the
assumed truth of the Reflex Theory, coupled with the assumption of the
brain being the exclusive seat of sensation. Whereas if the evidence
proves that the spinal cord _is_ a sensational centre, then the Reflex
Theory is destroyed, and cannot be urged against such evidence.

48. Thus many of the facts which prove the sensational function of
the spinal cord were known, and even a vague conception of their real
significance was general, until the Reflex Theory came to explain
all such facts as the results of mechanical adjustment, and of a new
nervous principle called “Reflexion.” For many years this theory has
reigned, and met with but little opposition. Yet the true doctrine has
not wanted defenders in Germany. Nasse[256] denied that decapitated
animals showed no spontaneity; he asserted that they exhibited clear
signs of mental activity. Carus sarcastically pointed out that the
_word_ “reflex” was replacing “irritability,” as a key to unlock all
puzzles; and he took up a position which is very similar to the one
occupied in these pages, namely, that the spinal cord being formed of
gray matter as well as of fibres, it must have sensibility and power of
reacting on nervous stimulus, no less than conductibility; that, in
fact, it is a centre, and must act like all other nerve-centres.[257]
J. W. Arnold opposed the Reflex Theory in a very remarkable little
work, in which he vindicates the claim of the spinal cord as a sensory
and motor centre, although denying to its actions any volitional
character.[258] This was in 1844. Eleven years elapsed without any
further opposition, when Edward Pflüger, in 1853, published his work
on the Sensorial Functions of the spinal cord.[259] In this work he
recurred to the old views of Prochaska and Legallois; but although he
attacked Marshall Hall with merciless severity, he did not point out
the fundamental error of the Reflex Theory, which theory he seems to
accept. Nor did he give his views that philosophical and anatomical
basis which could alone render his interpretations acceptable. Added to
this, the tone of asperity in which his work was written, created some
prejudice against him; and thus, while many admitted his facts, they
rejected his conclusions.[260]

In 1858 Professor Owen read a paper of mine at the Leeds meeting of
the British Association, on “The spinal cord as a centre of Sensation
and Volition,” in which a rapid indication of my point of view, and
an account of some experiments to illustrate it, were given--_not_, I
believe, conclusive to any of the audience. Indeed, the subject was
too vast to be discussed in such a paper; and my object was rather to
excite new inquiry, than to make converts to a view which could only be
embraced after a thorough reinvestigation of the dominant theories.

In 1859 appeared Schiff’s work;[261] and here we find a large space
allotted to the discussion of Pflüger’s doctrine. Schiff, whose
immense experience as an experimentalist, and whose acuteness and
caution every one will highly estimate, frankly pronounces in favor
of the sensational character of spinal actions; but he denies that
they are volitional, and objects strongly to the introduction of
any such idea as that of “psychical activity.” He thinks it utterly
untenable to suppose that impressions have reactions in the brain
which they have not in the spinal cord:--if one has sensibility, the
other must have it; and he thinks that, so far from the actions of the
cord being distinguishable from those of the brain by the character
of “reflexion,” and depending on a mechanical arrangement--_all_
actions, cerebral or spinal, are reflex; _all_ depend on a mechanical
arrangement.[262]

Since that time there has been the remarkable work of Goltz, so
often cited in these pages,[263] and his subsequent experiments on
dogs, which (although he does not decisively adopt the views of
Pflüger) furnish ample evidence that sensation and volition cannot be
exclusively localised in the brain.

49. Heubel’s interesting experiments[264] show that a frog may be
thrown into a state of profound sleep by the withdrawal of all external
stimulation, and in this state will remain lying on its back for hours.
Now this position is one so very uncomfortable that, when awake, the
frog will not retain it a moment, if free to turn round; and when
asleep, a prick on the toe, a sudden noise, or a beam of light will
awaken it, causing it to turn. That is to say, the withdrawal of the
normal stimuli so lowers the sensibility of the frog’s nerve-centres,
that he does not feel the effects of the unusual position, but feels
them directly the centres are stimulated into activity. All this is
intelligible enough on the supposition of the state of sleep being
dependent on a lowering of the cerebral activity. But what shall we
say on learning that precisely the same phenomena are manifested by a
brainless frog? Every one knows that the brainless frog is intolerant
of lying on its back, and immediately turns round, if placed on it. Yet
the brainless frog may be thrown into deep sleep by the same exclusion
of external stimuli; from which he also will be awakened by a prick,
a noise, or a beam of light; and no sooner is he awakened than he at
once turns round. Were the brainless frog incapable of sensation, a
prick on his toe would cause a simple reflex withdrawal of the leg;
but this is not the effect; on the contrary, the stimulus excites the
whole spinal cord, and whatever sensation of discomfort may be caused
by the abnormal position of the limbs in an uninjured awakened frog, is
excited in the brainless frog.

50. I need not swell this chapter with examples of Sensibility in
animals deprived of the brain; many have already been given, and
any text-book of Physiology will supply more. No one disputes the
observations, only the inference that these manifestations were
sentient: they are said to have been merely mechanical reflexes. If,
however, we can detect in them _some_ evidence of what all recognize as
peculiarly characteristic of Mind, the mechanical interpretation will
be less plausible.

At the outset the reader must be warned against exaggerating and
distorting the bearing of my remarks, and must not suppose that I
disregard the vast differences between the Logic of Signs which
belongs to Thought, and the Logic of Feeling which belongs to
Sensation, nor suppose that I look upon the spinal cord as a mental
organ having the _same_ functions as the brain. All that I wish to
establish is the common character of spinal and cerebral processes,
modified as each is by the character of the actions initiated by the
process.

51. This premised, let us begin with the evidence of


DISCRIMINATION.

Although this process is usually regarded as purely psychological, it
must obviously have its physiological side; we find it in Sensation as
in Ideation, and may expect to find it in unconscious as in conscious
processes--in a word, in all sensorial processes whatever. Place a
bit of marble on your tongue, and it will be touched, but not tasted:
the sensations of contact and temperature will excite reflexes, but
little or no reflexes from parotid and salivary glands. A difference in
sensation has a corresponding difference in reflex action; which may be
made evident by removing the tasteless marble, and replacing it by a
pinch of carbonate of lime, i. e. the marble in another state reduced
to a powder: this will excite a sensation of taste, and a secretion
from the glands. In both cases your sentient organism was affected, but
it reacted differently because the difference of the stimulation was
discriminated: consciously or unconsciously, you _felt_ differently.
Again: touch the back of your mouth with your finger, or a feather, and
a convulsive contraction of the gullet responds, followed by vomiting,
if the excitation be renewed. Yet these same nerves and muscles respond
by the totally opposite action of swallowing, if instead of the
stimulation coming from your finger, it come from the pressure of food
or drink.

Analogous experiments on animals without their brains yield similar
results.[265] The salivary secretion and the ordinary reactions of
Taste are provoked by sapid substances. Still more conclusive are the
observations made on a dog whose spinal cord has been divided, and
who therefore according to the reigning ideas is incapable of feeling
any impression made on parts below the section. A pencil inserted in
the rectum causes a reaction of the muscles energetically resisting
the entrance of this foreign body; yet this rectum so sensitive in
its reaction on the stimulus of the pencil, responds by the totally
different reaction--the relaxation of the muscles--on the stimulus of
fæcal matters.

52. “This is all mechanical,” you say? Mechanical, no doubt, as all
actions are; but the question here is whether among the conditions of
the mechanical action Sensibility has a place? The answer can only be
grounded on induction. The actions of the dog are analogous to the
actions which you know were sentient in yourself. There was in both a
discrimination, in both a corresponding reaction. I admit that what is
here called “discrimination” is the application of a logical term to a
mechanical process; I admit that if the spinal mechanism is insentient,
the fact of discrimination may still be manifested; but I conceive
that the many and coercive grounds for admitting that the mechanism is
sentient gain further support in the evidence of discrimination. Every
particular sensation has its corresponding reaction; and although this
has been acquired during ancestral or individual experiences, so that
in the majority of cases there is no consciousness accompanying the
operation, this, as we have seen, is not a valid argument against the
existence of a sensorial process. We have only to lower the Sensibility
of the cord by anæsthetics, or to _preoccupy_ its energies by some
other excitation, and the reaction fails.


MEMORY.

53. “But discrimination, if not a purely physical process, implies
Memory?” No doubt. And what is Memory--on its physiological side--but
an organized tendency to react on lines previously traversed? As
Griesinger truly says: “There is Memory in all the functions of the
central organs, including the spinal cord. There is one for reflex
actions, no less than for sense-images, words, and ideas.” Gratiolet
makes a similar assertion.[266] Indeed if, as we have seen, reflex
actions are partly connate, and partly acquired, it is obvious that the
second class must involve that very reproduction of experiences, which
in the sphere of Intellect is called Memory.

There is assuredly something paradoxical at first in this application
of the terms of the Logic of Signs, yet the psychologist will find
it of great service. But if the terms discrimination and memory
be objected to, they may be replaced by some such phrase as the
“adaptation of the mechanism to varying impulses.” On its objective
side, Discrimination is Neural Grouping; on its subjective side, it is
Association of experiences.


INSTINCT.

54. If we can detect evidences of Volition and Instinct in the
absence of the brain, our thesis may be considered less questionable.
And such evidence there is. Goltz decapitated a male frog (in the
pairing season), and observed that it not only sought, grasped, and
energetically embraced a female, but could always discriminate a
female from a male. Thus when a male frog closely resembling a female
in size and shape was presented to this decapitated animal, he clasped
it, but rapidly let it go again, whereas even the dead body of a
female was held as in a vice. Goltz tried to _delude_ this brainless
animal in various ways, always in vain. Only a female would be held
in his embrace. Goltz then presented a female in a reversed position,
so that the head was grasped by the male. Now here, had there been
simply a reflex machine, incapable of sentient discrimination, the
clutched female would have been held in this position, just like any
other object which excited the reflex; there would have been no “sense
of incongruity,” such as Goltz noticed in his frog, who at once began
a series of movements by which he was enabled, without letting the
female escape, to bring her into the proper position. To render this
observation still more significant, I may add that Goltz did not find
all male frogs act thus--many relinquished the female thus improperly
presented to them. Such phenomena observed in frogs possessing brains,
would be accepted as evidence of sexual instinct and volition.

Further: Goltz removed the brain from a frog, which he then held
under water, gently pressing the body so as to drive the air out of
its lungs; the body being then heavier than the water sank to the
bottom, where it remained motionless. He repeated this procedure with
another frog, not brainless but blinded. This one sank also, but in a
few minutes rose to the surface to breathe. This difference naturally
suggests that the brainless frog was insensible of the condition which
in the other caused a movement of relief. The one felt impending
suffocation, the other felt nothing. Such was the interpretation of a
German friend in whose presence I repeated the experiment. But I had
been instructed by Goltz, and bade my friend wait awhile. He did so,
and saw the brainless frog slowly rise to the surface and breathe there
like his blinded companion. So that the only difference observable was
in the lessened sensibility of the brainless frog.

55. But Goltz records a still more conclusive case. In a large vessel
of water he inverted a glass jar also containing water, which could
then only be retained in the jar by atmospheric pressure. Through the
neck of this inverted jar he thrust a blinded frog, not having pressed
the air out of its lungs. It rose at once in the jar, touching the
inverted bottom with its nose, and when the necessity of fresh air
was felt, the frog began restlessly feeling about the surface of its
prison till an issue was found in the neck of the jar, through which it
dashed into the vessel, and at once rose to the surface of the water
to breathe. In this observation are plainly manifested the stimulation
of uneasy sensation, the volition of seeking relief, and the
discrimination of it when found. If this frog was a sentient mechanism,
what shall we say to the fact that a brainless frog was observed to
go through precisely the same series of actions? Goltz pertinently
remarks: “So long as physiologists satisfied themselves that the
brain was the sole organ of sensation, it was easy to declare all the
actions of the brainless animal to be merely reflex. But now we must
ask whether the greater part of these actions are not due to the _power
of adaptation_ in the central organs, and are therefore to be struck
out of the class of simple reflexes? If I bind one leg of a brainless
frog and observe that he not only sees an obstacle, but crawls aside
from it, I must regard these movements as regulated by his central
power of adaptation; but now suppose I unbind the leg and remove the
obstacle, then if I prick the frog he hops forward. Must I now declare
this hop to have been a simple reflex? Not at all. In both cases the
physiological processes have been similar.”

       *       *       *       *       *

56. There are no doubt readers who will dismiss all evidence drawn
from experiments on frogs, as irrelevant to mammals and man. Let us
therefore see how the evidence stands with respect to animals higher
in the scale, endowed with less questionable mental faculties. In a
former chapter (PROBLEM II. § 29) we recorded the marked results of
removing the cerebral hemispheres; and at the same time suggested that
these by no means justified the conclusion usually drawn respecting
the hemispheres as the exclusive seat of sensation. And this on two
grounds: First, because the absence of some sensitive phenomena does
not prevent the presence of others: the mutilated organism is still
capable of manifesting Sensibility in those organs which remain intact.
Secondly, because were the mutilation followed by total destruction of
Sensibility, this would not prove Sensibility in the normal organism to
have its seat in the part injured. If the removal of a pin will destroy
the chronometric action of a watch, we do not thence infer that the
chronometric action was the function of this pin. And this objection
has the greater force when we remember that one hemisphere may be
removed without the consequent loss of a single function, and both may
be removed without the loss of several functions usually ascribed to
cerebral influence.[267]

57. Consider the analogous effects of injuries to or removal of
the Cerebellum, in causing disturbance of locomotion, whence the
conclusion has been drawn that the Cerebellum is the exclusive organ
of muscular co-ordination, in spite of the unquestionable evidence
that very many muscular co-ordinations still persist after this organ
is removed. What is the part played by the Cerebellum I do not pause
here to examine.[268] I only say that the movements of swimming,
sucking, swallowing, breathing, crying, micturition, defecation,
etc., are co-ordinated as well after removal of the Cerebellum as
they were before, and that consequently _their_ co-ordination has not
its seat in the Cerebellum. The parallelism is obvious. Removal of
the Cerebrum causes a disturbance in the combination of sensations,
and the execution of certain sense-guided actions, but causes little
appreciable disturbance in others. Removal of the Cerebellum causes
a disturbance in the combination of certain muscular sensations, and
the execution of certain co-ordinated actions, with little appreciable
disturbance in others.

58. So little have the facts been surveyed and estimated in their
entirety that there is perhaps no subject on which physiologists are
more agreed than on the function of the Cerebellum being that of
co-ordination. Yet consider this decisive experiment. I etherized
three healthy frogs, from one I removed the entire cranial centres;
from another I removed only the cerebellum; and, leaving the third
in possession of an intact encephalon, I made two sections of the
posterior columns of the spinal cord. The two first hopped, swam,
used their legs in defence, and exhibited a variety of muscular
co-ordinations, although in both the supposed organ of co-ordination
was absent. Whereas the third, which had this organ intact, and
was capable of moving each limb separately, and each pair of limbs
separately, was utterly incapable of moving all four simultaneously.
Why was this? Obviously because in the first two frogs the motor
mechanism remained intact, and only the cerebral and cerebellar
influence was removed; in the third frog the sensory part of the
motor mechanism had been divided, and no combination of the limbs was
possible.

59. Physiological induction agrees with anatomical induction in
assigning to the cerebrum and cerebellum the office of _incitation_
and _regulation_ rather than of _innervation_; for, as we have seen,
no nerve issues directly from them (PROBLEM II. § 7). Consequently the
effects of injuries to these centres are losses of spontaneity and of
complexity in the manifestations. Inasmuch as in the intact organism
all sensory impressions are propagated throughout the nervous centres,
the reactions of these highest centres will enter into the complex of
every adjusted movement; so the abolition of these centres will be the
dropping of a link in the chain, the abolition of a special element
in the complex group. The organs which are still intact will react,
each in its own way, on being stimulated; but the reaction will be
without the modifying influence of the absent centres. For instance,
the retinal stimulation from a luminous impression normally calls up a
cluster of associated feelings derived originally from other senses,
and a perception of the object is associated with emotions of desire,
terror, etc., according to the past history of the organism, and its
organized reactions, due to hereditary or acquired experiences. It
is these which form the complex feeling discharged in the particular
movement of prehension, or flight. Remove the brain, and there can be
no longer _this_ cluster of associated neural groups excited; there
will be therefore no emotion, simply the visual sensation, and such a
movement as is directly associated with it. The brainless dog moans
when hurt, it does not bark at the cat which it nevertheless sees,
and avoids as a mere obstacle in its path; the cat will cry, it will
not mew. The present pain moves the vocal organs, but does not revive
associated experiences. All those combinations by which a series of
dependent actions result from a single stimulation are frustrated when
the mechanism is disturbed, so that the mutilated animal can no longer
recognize its prey or its enemy, to feed on the one and fly from the
other; no longer builds its habitation, or rears its offspring. It
can still live, feed, sleep, move, and defend itself against present
discomfort; it cannot find its food, or protect itself against
prospective discomfort. We must supply the place of its Intelligence.
We must give it the food, and protect it from injuries.

There is therefore ample evidence to show that what is specially known
as Intelligence is very imperfect after the cerebral influence has been
abolished; but this does not prove the Cerebrum to be the exclusive
seat of Intelligence, it only proves it to be an indispensable factor
in a complex of factors. Still less does it prove the Cerebrum to be
the exclusive seat of Sensation, Instinct, Volition; for these may be
manifested after its removal, although of course even these will be
impaired by the loss of one factor.

60. And here an objection must be anticipated. In spite of the
familiar experience that one mode of Sensibility may be destroyed
without involving the destruction of other modes, there is a
general belief--derived from a mistaken conception of what is really
represented by the unity of Consciousness--that Consciousness
disappears altogether when it disappears at all; and hence, since
Sensation is supposed to imply Consciousness, it also cannot be
divisible, but must vanish altogether if it vanish at all. The first
answer is that Sensation as an abstraction is neither divisible nor
indivisible; but as a generalized expression of concrete sensorial
processes it is reducible to these processes, and divisible as
they are. No one doubts that we may lose a whole class of special
sensations--sight, hearing, pain, temperature, etc.--yet retain all
the others. No one doubts that we may lose a whole class of registered
experiences--forget a language, or lose memory of places so familiar as
the streets of the small town we inhabit, or of faces so familiar as
those of friends and relatives, while the names of these streets and
friends are still remembered when the sounds are heard. Yet sensation
and intelligence are not wholly lost. The mind is still erect amid
these ruins.[269]

61. This premised, let us consider the experimental evidence. Flourens
declares that when he removed the whole of the Cerebrum from pigeons
and fowls, they lost _all_ sensation, _all_ perception, _all_ instinct,
and _all_ volition. They lived perfectly well for months after the
operation, if the food were placed in their mouths; but they never
_sought_ their food; they never _took_ it, even when their beaks were
plunged into it: they could swallow, and digest the grains; but they
had no instinct to make them seek, no volition to make them pick up
the grains. They _saw_ nothing, although the iris remained irritable;
they heard nothing; they could not smell. A state of stupor came on,
resembling that of deep sleep. All voluntary action ceased. If they
were thrown into the air, they flew; if irritated, they moved away; but
if left to themselves, they remained motionless, with the head under
the wing, as in sleep. Now, inasmuch as these effects always ensue
when the Cerebrum is removed, and _never_ when only the Cerebellum is
removed, he concludes that all instincts, volitions, and sensations
“belong exclusively to the cerebral lobes.”

But all experimenters do not agree in other points named by Flourens;
nor in the conclusions he has drawn. On the contrary, it is very
certain, and we find evidence even in Flourens himself, that all
instincts and all sensations are _not_ destroyed by the removal of the
cerebral lobes.

62. Let us hear Bouillaud on this subject.[270] He repeated the
experiment of Flourens, removing the whole of the Cerebrum from
the Brain of a fowl; and he thus records his observations: “This
fowl passes the greater part of her time asleep, but she awakes at
intervals, and _spontaneously_. When she goes to sleep, she turns her
head on one side and buries it in the feathers of the wing; when she
awakes, she shakes herself, flaps her wings, and opens her eyes. In
this respect there is no difference observable between the mutilated
and the perfect bird. She does not seem to be moved at all by the
noise made round about her, but a very slight irritation of the skin
suffices to awaken her instantaneously. When the irritation ceases,
she relapses into sleep. When awake, she is often seen to cast stupid
glances here and there, _to change her place, and walk spontaneously_.
If put into a cage, _she tries to escape_; but she comes and goes
without any purpose, or rational design. When either foot, wing,
or head is pinched, she withdraws it; when she is laid hold of, she
_struggles to escape, and screams_; but no sooner is she liberated than
she rests motionless. If severely irritated, she screams loudly; but
it is not only to express pain that she uses her voice, for it is by
no means rare to _hear her cackle and cluck a little spontaneously_;
that is to say, when no external irritation affects her. Her stupidity
is profound; she knows neither objects nor places, nor persons, and is
completely divested of memory in this respect: not only does she not
know how to seek or take food, she does not even know how to swallow it
when placed in her beak--it must be pushed to the throat. Nevertheless
her indocility, her movements, her agitation, attest that she _feels_
the presence of a strange body. Inasmuch as external objects excite in
her no idea, no desire, she pays no attention to them; but she is not
absolutely deprived of the power of attention, for if much irritated
her attention is awakened. She knows not how to escape an enemy, nor
how to defend herself. All her actions, in a word, are blind, without
reflexion, without knowledge.”

In this recital, the evidence both of _sensation_ and _instinct_ is
incontestable, to any unprejudiced mind. Bouillaud, in commenting
on his observations, remarks, that assuredly _all_ sensation was
not destroyed, since the sensibilities of touch and pain were very
manifest. Nor is it certain, he says, that the fowl heard nothing, saw
nothing. It is true that she stumbled against objects, and knew not how
to avoid them. She opened her eyes on awaking, looked about, and showed
a sensibility in the pupil to light; which, he thinks, is incompatible
with the absence of all sensation of sight

63. The experiments of Longet[271] seem decisive on this latter point.
Having removed the whole of the Cerebrum from a pigeon, he observed
that whenever he approached a light brusquely to its eyes, there was
contraction of the pupil, and even winking; but, what was still more
remarkable, “when I gave a rotatory motion to the candle, and at such
a distance that there could be no sensation of heat, the pigeon made
a similar movement with its head. These observations, renewed several
times in the presence of persons who were at my lectures, left no
doubt of the persistence of sensibility to light after removal of the
cerebral lobes.” We have only to think of the baby following with its
eyes the light moved before it, to understand the kind of impression
produced by the candle on the pigeon. Longet also declares that his
experiments prove the existence of sensations of sound, after removal
of the whole cerebrum.

64. Dr. Dalton, giving the results of numerous experiments he
performed, says that removal of the Cerebrum plunges the animal in
“a profound stupor, in which he is _almost_ entirely inattentive to
surrounding objects.... Occasionally the bird opens its eyes with a
vacant stare, stretches his neck, perhaps shakes his bill once or
twice, or smoothes down the feathers upon his shoulders, and then
relapses into his former apathetic condition. This state of immobility,
however, is _not_ accompanied by the loss of sight, of hearing, or of
ordinary sensibility. _All these functions remain, as well as that
of voluntary motion._ If a pistol be discharged behind the back of
the animal, he at once opens his eyes, moves his head half round, and
gives evident signs of having heard the report; but he immediately
becomes quiet again, and pays no further attention to it. Sight is also
retained, since the bird will sometimes fix its eye on a particular
object, and watch it for several seconds together.”[272]

While, therefore, Flourens concludes from his experiments that the
Cerebrum is the seat of _all_ sensation and all volition; and Bouillaud
concludes that it is most probably the seat of _none_; Dr. Dalton
concludes that the functions of the Cerebrum are restricted to those
usually classed as intellectual. “The animal,” he says, “is still
capable, after removal of the hemispheres, of receiving sensations
from external objects. But these sensations appear to make upon
him no lasting impression. He is incapable of connecting with his
perceptions any distinct succession of ideas. He hears, for example,
the report of a pistol, but he is not alarmed by it; for the sound,
although distinctly perceived, does not suggest any idea of danger or
injury. The memory is altogether destroyed, and the recollection of
sensations is not retained from one moment to another. The limbs and
muscles are still under the control of the will; but the will itself
is inactive, because apparently it lacks its usual mental stimulus and
direction.”[273]

Dr. Dalton reminds us how disturbance of the cerebral functions in
human beings recalls these observations on animals. “In cases of
impending apoplexy, or of softening of the cerebral substance, among
the earliest and most common phenomena is a loss or impairment of
the memory. The patient forgets the names of particular objects, or
particular persons; or he is unable to calculate numbers with his usual
facility. His mental derangement is often shown in the undue estimate
which he forms of passing events. He is no longer able to appreciate
the true relation between different objects and different phenomena.
Thus he will show an exaggerated degree of solicitude about a trivial
occurrence, and will pay no attention to other matters of importance.
As the difficulty increases, he becomes careless of the directions and
advice of his attendants, and must be watched and managed like a child
or an imbecile. After a certain period he no longer appreciates the
lapse of time, and even loses the distinction between day and night.
Finally, when the injury to the hemispheres is complete, the senses may
still remain active and impressible, while the patient is completely
deprived of intelligence and judgment.”[274]

65. Having seen how far other experimenters are from confirming the
conclusions of Flourens, let us glance at his record of observations,
and we shall find there evidence that _all_ sensation and _all_
volition cannot be localized in the Cerebrum. Speaking of a fowl whose
Cerebrum was removed the day before, he says: “She shakes her head
and feathers, sometimes even she cleans and sharpens them with her
beak; sometimes she changes the leg on which she sleeps, for, like
other birds, she sleeps habitually resting upon one leg. In all these
cases she seems like a man asleep, who, without quite waking, changes
his place, and reposes in another, from the _fatigue_ occasioned by
the previous posture: he selects one more _comfortable_, stretches
himself, yawns, shakes himself a little, and falls asleep again.... On
the third day the fowl is no longer so calm; she comes and goes, but
without motive and without an aim; and if she encounters an obstacle
on her path, she knows not how to avoid it.”[275] In his second work
he remarks of a Duck operated on in the same way: “As I mentioned last
year _à propos_ of fowls, the duck walks about oftener, and for a
longer time together, when it is fasting, than when it is fed.”

Here he observes the unmistakable evidence of feelings of Hunger,
Fatigue, and Discomfort in animals which, according to him, have lost
_all_ sensation. He also observes the operation of instinct (cleaning
the feathers), and of spontaneous activity (walking about), in animals
said to have lost _all_ instinct and _all_ volition.

66. Still more decisive are the observations recorded by other
experimenters. Leyden removed the hemispheres _and_ the ganglia at
their base from a hen; yet this hen moved about and clucked. Meissner
noticed that a pigeon whose hemispheres had been removed always uttered
its _coo_, and showed restlessness at the usual feeding-time.[276]
Voit carefully extirpated the cerebrum from some pigeons, and kept
them for many months in health. For the first few weeks they exhibited
the well-known stupor. Then they began to shake this off, open their
eyes, walk, and fly about _spontaneously_. They gave unmistakable
signs of seeing and hearing. But the chief defect was in the inability
to feed themselves, and the complete insensibility to danger. They
also manifested signs of sexual feeling with lively cooings; though
quite unable to gratify their desires.[277] Vulpian having removed
the cerebrum, optic thalami, and corpora striata from a young rabbit,
found that on pinching its tail it cried out and struggled to
escape; and a rat thus mutilated not only struggled and cried when
pinched, but manifested strong emotion. “Il est très craintif, très
impressionable; il bondit pour peu qu’on le touche; le moindre bruit le
fait tressaillir. Un certain bruit d’appel fait avec les lèvres, ou un
soufflet brusque imitant celui qu’emettent les chats en colère excitent
chez le rat une vive émotion.”[278]

67. There are several well-authenticated cases on record of children
born without a vestige of brain, and others with only a vestige, who
nevertheless manifested the ordinary signs of sensation. I will cite
but one, and it shall be one for which an illustrious physiologist,
Panizza, is the guarantee. A male infant, one of twins, who lived but
eighteen hours, during that period manifested such unquestionable signs
of Sensibility as the following: the pupils contracted under light,
sharp sounds caused flutterings, and a bitter solution when placed in
the mouth was instantly rejected. This infant had not a vestige of
cerebrum, cerebellum, or cerebral ganglia. The medulla oblongata was
normal. There were no olfactory nerves, and the optic nerves terminated
in a little mass of membrane.[279]

68. The observations of Lussana and Lemoigne are both extensive and
precise, and the conclusion at which they arrive is that the removal
of the Cerebrum is the abolition of Intelligence and Instinct, but is
not the abolition of Sensation. Whereas Rolando, and after him Renzi,
consider that only the Intelligence is abolished, the supposed loss
of Instinct being really nothing more than the loss of the directive
influence which makes the Instinct to be executed.

69. Here it becomes needful to understand


THE MECHANISM OF INSTINCT.

Were we dealing with an ordinary mechanism, and the disturbances
produced in its actions by the removal of any part, we should attribute
all observed effects to _interference with the conditions of dependent
sequence_: we should infer that the actions were imperfectly performed,
or wholly abolished, because their requisite mechanical conditions were
disturbed. Let us be equally precise in dealing with the physiological
mechanism. If we have deprived it of an organ in which certain
combinations are effected, we must expect to find all actions which
were dependent on such combinations to be now impossible; but all the
actions which are not directly dependent on these combinations may
still be possible. The actions of feeding, for example, are determined
by certain sensations, when these are present in a particular sequence,
but not otherwise; the sensation of sight does not suffice, because
the animal must not only _see_ the food, he must _perceive_ it. The
action of defence and flight are also determined by certain sensations,
but only when these are connected in a certain sequence: the brainless
animal will defend itself, or move out of the way, under the stimulus
of unpleasant sensation; but will not be moved by a _prospective_
injury, because he fails to associate it with the sight of the
threatening object. In the same way a blind man shrinks at the actual
contact of the heated poker, but does not shrink at the approach of
that poker which he does not see. We do not deny him the possession
of the so-called instinct of Self-preservation on this ground; why
deny it to the brainless animal? The brainless fish or frog swims when
placed in the water, because the sensation from the _moving_ water[280]
sets going the swimming mechanism. To call this a “swimming instinct”
may seem extravagant; yet it is as fully entitled to the name as
Self-defence is, or the Alimentary Instinct. In all three cases there
is a connate mechanism set going by appropriate feelings.

70. Since all admit that there is an Alimentary Instinct, let us see
what kind of mechanism it implies. There must be a state of feeling
called Hunger, which--combined with other feelings--determines certain
muscular adjustments in the search, recognition, capture, and finally
the swallowing of the food:--a very complex series of actions, which
lead to and sustain one another until the desire is gratified. On the
mental side there are three constituents, all indispensable: the
hunger must be felt, the food must be discriminated, the desire must
be gratified; on the physical side there are also the indispensable
arrangements of the motor mechanism. Now it is obvious that the
_entire_ mechanism of this instinct cannot be localized in the brain,
even if its mental elements are localized there; and there is reason
to believe that even the mental elements--the feelings of hunger,
discrimination, and gratification--are not exclusively localized there.
The brainless animal manifests if not the feeling of Hunger, at any
rate that feeling of discomfort which is the basis of Hunger. The
restlessness is that of a hungry animal. Now we know that some of the
Systemic Sensibility is preserved, for we see the animal breathing,
swallowing, urinating, sleeping, preening its feathers, changing its
attitude, resting on one leg after the fatigue of the other, etc. We
may therefore infer that other systemic sensations, such as Hunger and
Thirst, arise under the usual conditions.

71. We have noted an indication of Hunger; but on further observation
we discover that although the food is eaten, if brought within reach
of that portion of the feeding mechanism which is still intact, yet
the second step--the feeling of recognition--is wanting. The animal
fails to perceive the food brought under his eyes, or even placed in
his mouth; unless the back part of the mouth be touched, no swallowing
takes place. Hence the animal can no longer feed himself, and is
therefore said to have lost his instinct. But although the mechanism
of the instinct has been _disturbed_, its action is not wholly
abolished. The brain is necessary for that combination of adjustments
which normally accompany the perception of food through sight and
scent; and its absence of course frustrates such combination; but we
shall presently see that although certain sensible marks by which a
perception is guided are absent, others may still be present, and
suffice.

72. Before adducing examples let me say that we cannot legitimately
attribute the abeyance of an instinct solely to the absence of the
brain, 1°, because we observe a similar abeyance of the instinct and
frustration of perception, even when the brain is present, and the
animal is in its normal state. 2°. On the other hand, some instincts
are unmistakably manifested, and some perceptions excited, after the
brain has been removed. In fact, all that is needful is that some of
the mental elements of such perception and such instinct be preserved;
and this is the case so long as the leading element is present.

73. On the first point consider this unequivocal example. A healthy,
hungry frog may be placed in a vessel in which lie a quantity of dead
flies. He sees these flies, but sight is not enough; to him they are
only so many black spots, in which he does not recognize his food,
because the flies do not move, and the _leading element_ in his
perception of food is not a _colored_ form, but a _moving_ form. Hence
this frog, in spite of brain and an intact organism, will starve amidst
appropriate food. Whereas the frog that will not snap at motionless
flies snaps at any other small moving object, though it be not his
food. Goltz observed one incessantly snapping at the moving tentacles
of a slug which was in the vessel--as if that were possible food! Not
only the stupid frog, but the more intelligent carnivora will starve
in the presence of appropriate food which is unrecognized, because the
leading element in the recognition is absent. The cat will not eat a
dead mouse, unless she has killed it herself. Predatory animals must
capture their food--unless the scent of blood excites their alimentary
instinct. So intimately is this sensation of a moving object connected
with the predatory impulse, that the cat which is unexcited by the dead
mouse cannot resist springing on a moving ball. We need not suppose the
cat to mistake this ball for food; but we must suppose that, accustomed
to pounce upon moving food, it is unable to resist the impulse of this
leading sensation.

74. The _presence_ of the brain not sufficing, in the absence of the
leading sensation, we shall now see that the _absence_ of the brain
will not prevent the execution of the instinctive action, if the
leading sensation be present. The brainless bird sees a heap of grain,
or a pan of water, but no more recognizes them by sight alone than the
frog recognizes the dead flies; yet if the bird’s feet be placed in
the water, _this_ sensation will suffice to make him drink; if placed
amid the grain, this sensation will (sometimes) suffice to make him
feed. Lussana and Lemoigne state that their brainless pigeons ate and
drank with avidity when their feet were placed in grain and water.[281]
M. Krishaber removed the hemispheres from a pigeon, and observed that
when his beak was thrust into a heap of hempseed the head was quickly
withdrawn, whereas when the beak was plunged into water the bird drank
eagerly. Every day he was forced to feed the bird by pouring the seed
into its throat, but every day it drank when the beak was thrust into
the pan of water.[282] Brücke noticed that his brainless hen, which
made no attempt to peck at the grain under her very eyes, began pecking
if the grain were thrown on the ground with force, so as to produce a
rattling sound. The sensation of hearing was here more perfect than
that of vision, and sufficed to awaken the state of feeling necessary
to initiate the pecking movement.[283]

75. Somewhat analogous phenomena are observed in Aphasia. The patient
can see printed or written letters, and even copy them; but he cannot
read, i. e. interpret, these symbols; as the birds see the grain, but
cannot connect this sensation with others. These letters and words,
which the patient cannot interpret when _seen_, he can interpret when
_heard_; he can not only understand them when spoken, but write them
if they are dictated to him. The birds recognize the grain and water
(or act as if they did) when other sensations than those of sight
are excited. Sound is the leading element in Language, both spoken
and written. We hear the words even when we see them, but we do not
see them when we hear them. The visible symbols are accessory and
subordinate. But to the born deaf the visible symbols dominate. How one
sensation will determine a particular group of movements which cannot
be effected by any other stimulus is abundantly illustrated in disease
no less than in experiment. Here is a very luminous example: Gratiolet
had a patient for six months under his eye incapable of articulating a
single word, owing to the incoherence of her incessant utterance--she
babbled sounds, but could not group the syllables into a recognizable
word. Yet she could sing the words of any song she knew, the musical
sensations being sufficient to guide her vocal organs. “Ainsi la
mémoire, infidèle dans le cas où les mots étaient des idées, devenait
claire et précise quand les mots étaient des chansons.”[284]

76. These illustrations plainly tell how the brainless animal may
starve amid his food, failing to perceive it because the leading
sensation is not excited; and how the same animal may manifest his
feeding instinct if the mechanism be set going by a leading sensation.
We are told, indeed, that in the absence of the brain the actions are
mechanical reflexes from impressions, and not comparable with the
complex processes determined by perception. I think, however, that the
only difference is in degree of complexity: a combination of touch,
temperature, and muscular movement will be simpler than one which also
combines sight, smell, and the revived images of associated sensations.
The sight of a sheep affects the instinctive mechanism of a wolf _only_
when combined with the leading element of smell. Place a stuffed sheep
in a field, and no wolf will approach and spring on it, whereas the
blind wolf will find and capture the real sheep; and I believe that
were it practicable to remove the brain without injury to the organ of
scent and the powers of locomotion, the wolf would track and capture
the living sheep.

77. The outcome of this discussion is that the mechanism of each
instinct is the adjustment of the organs which effect the instinctive
action; and this adjustment is not simply a cerebral process, but
a complex of _many_ sensorial processes; consequently the instinct
cannot be exclusively localized in the brain, although the cerebral
process may be a very important element in the adjustment. This is
true even on the supposition that in speaking of Instinct we refer
only to the state of feeling which originates the action--separating
the psychological from the physiological aspect of the phenomenon. For
the brain _minus_ the organism is obviously incapable of feelings;
whereas the organism _minus_ the brain is obviously capable of
sensibilities adequate to determine the actions. Thus the feeling
of hunger which prompts the alimentary actions does not arise if
the animal is satiated, nor does the sexual feeling which prompts
generative actions arise when the animal is castrated; but each arises
when the organism is in a particular state. In vain will food be placed
before the satiated animal, or a female before the castrated male;
food and female are seen and recognized, but no desires are excited,
in spite of the brain and its supposed instincts. On the contrary,
when the brain is removed, the need of the organism for food is felt,
and this need determines restless movements, which are directed by
certain other sensations, and the instinctive action of feeding is
finally effected; although, of course, the removal of the brain has
so disturbed the normal mechanism of the instinct that the action is
imperfect. Renzi says that an animal deprived of its brain has lost
the intelligence which enables it to seek and seize its food, but not
the instinct, since it still has the desire for food. The following
experiment may illustrate this. Renzi wounded superficially one optic
thalamus of a frog without injuring the external margin, or optic
tract. The frog showed no appreciable loss of sight, but hopped timidly
away whenever approached. Then both thalami were divided transversely,
the optic tract still being spared. This frog remained motionless
under every threat. It manifested no alarm, and even when directly
irritated, only crawled or hopped away like a brainless frog. Sight
still so far remained that obstacles were avoided.[285] Now since this
animal’s brain was intact, and its organs of movement were capable
of responding to stimulation, how are we to explain the loss of its
instinct of self-preservation? The frog perceived no danger in a
threatening approach, yet perceived an obstacle and avoided it, getting
under it if there were room enough, crawling beside it if that was
the easier escape. Why did one vision prompt the movements of escape,
and another fail? Was it not that in the one case the normal pathway
was still open, in the other closed? We know that one injury will
destroy the perception of color without destroying that of light and
shadow; so one injury may destroy the combination of neural processes
necessary for the perception of a _danger_, without destroying those
necessary for the perception of a _hindrance_. If all actions depend
on their mechanical conditions, they must be disturbed according to
the disturbance of the conditions. Nothnagel found that after removing
the _nucleus lentiformis_ on both sides of a rabbit, leaving all the
rest of the encephalon intact, the rabbit hopped when its tail was
pinched; yet although starting at the sound when hands were loudly
clapped, did not hop as a normal rabbit does; nor although closing his
eyes when a light was brought near them, did he ever move aside. No
feeling of danger was excited by sound or sight. In striking contrast
are the phenomena manifested by a rabbit whose _corpora striata_ have
been removed: it is with difficulty made to hop by pinching its skin,
whereas noises and sights cause it to make terrified bounds.[286]

78. No sooner do we analyze the conditions of an instinct than we
see the error of regarding instincts as localized in the brain. The
cerebral process is only one factor in the product--an important
factor, no doubt, since the cerebrum is the supreme centre of
incitation and regulation; but its absence does not wholly carry
away the activity of the mechanism, sentient and motor, on which the
instincts depend, it only carries away one source of stimulation and
regulation.

79. An instinct depends on a connate mechanism. Let us glance for a
moment at a parallel case of an ordinary reflex action, also dependent
on a connate mechanism, say that of sneezing. When the inner surface
of the nose is stimulated by snuff, or other irritant, the nasal
branch of the trigeminus is excited, and the effects are first a deep
inspiration, then a closure of the respiratory orifices by the tongue,
which in turn excites a spasmodic expiration. But the same effects
are producible from quite different stimulations--namely, that of the
ciliary nerves on sudden exposure to a glare of sunshine--or of the
skin nerves on a sudden draught of cold air. Brücke remarks that there
is perhaps no spot on the surface of the body from which this reflex
may not be excited in very sensitive people. He knew a gentleman who
always sneezed when in winter he laid hold of a cold door-bell; and the
fit of sneezing was only arrested by giving him a crust of bread or
something hard to gnaw. Now just as the connate mechanism of sneezing
may be set in action by a variety of stimulations, so may the connate
mechanism of an instinct.


ACQUISITION.

80. Not only may Discrimination and Instinct be manifested in the
absence of the brain, but even the acquisition of new modes of
reaction, such as are classed under Learning through Experience.
The objection is sometimes urged that animals without their brains
only manifest single reactions on stimulation--the pinched foot
is withdrawn, and then remains motionless until again pinched.
But although the stimulation does not excite a consecutive series
of movements, because there is no cerebrum to react in successive
stimulation, this does not prove the absence of sensation in the one
movement which is excited. If my hand be lying on the table, and
something irritates it, my hand is withdrawn, and then remains as
motionless as the limb of the brainless animal, _until_ some fresh
stimulation, external or internal, moves it. Although removal of
the brain causes a manifest reduction in the variety and succession
of the movements, all experimenters are agreed that animals acquire
a certain dexterity in executing actions which they had previously
failed to carry out after removal of their brains. “There is,” says
Freusberg, “a decided improvement acquired in the reactions of the
motor centres after division of the spinal cord, not indeed in vigor,
but in delicacy. Removed from the regulating influence of the brain,
the legs acquired through practice a power of self-regulation.” Nor
is this wonderful: pathways are made easy by repetition of impulses,
and new adaptations form new adjustments. It is thus all learning is
effected--intelligent, and automatic. Nor is there any force in the
objection that the power thus acquired speedily disappears, so that if
the stimulations are effected at long intervals the reactions do not
manifest their acquired dexterity. The spinal centres forget, as the
cerebral centres forget; but they also remember, i. e. they learn.
Because an animal shows to-day none of the aptitude it acquired three
days ago, we are not to deny that it had once acquired the aptitude it
has now lost. Attempt to teach a child to read by giving it spelling
lessons of two or three minutes at intervals of two or three months,
and little will the acquisition be!

       *       *       *       *       *

81. Hitherto we have been considering phenomena manifested in the
absence of the cerebral hemispheres, because it is in these that the
majority of writers place the sensorium. There are, indeed, many
authoritative writers who regard the ganglionic masses at the base of
the cerebrum, and even those of the medulla oblongata, as participating
in this sensorial property, which they refuse to the lower ganglia in
the spinal cord. I cannot follow their logic. The cerebrum is by its
position as a centre of centres, and its detachment from all direct
innervation of organs, so different from the rest of the neural axis,
that we can understand how it should be assigned a special function;
although being of the same tissue as the other ganglionic masses, it
must have the same property. And what that special function is I shall
hereafter endeavor to set forth. But that the upper region of the
spinal axis should differ so profoundly from the lower region as to
be the seat of psychical processes, while the lower region is simply
the seat of mechanical processes, is what I cannot understand, so
long as the anatomical structure and physiological properties of the
two regions are seen to be identical. The various centres innervate
various organs, and have consequently various functions. As each centre
is removed, we observe a corresponding loss of function--the organism
is truncated, but continues to manifest such functions as have still
their mechanisms intact. Let us suppose the brain or upper regions of
the cord detached from the lower regions by a section of the cord; the
animal will still live, and perform almost all its functions in the
normal way, but there will be little or no consensus between the lower
and the upper regions. Granting Sensibility to both, we must still see
that the sensation excited in one will not be felt in the other. And
this is the ground on which physiologists deny that the lower regions
have Sensibility. Without pausing here to examine this point, which
will occupy us in the next chapter, I assume that the positive evidence
of Sensibility suffices to discredit that argument; and in furtherance
of that assumption will cite an example of sensation and volition
manifested by the lower portion of the cord when separated from the
brain and upper portion.

82. The function of Urination is one which notoriously belongs to
the voluntary class, in so far as it is initiated or arrested by a
voluntary impulse, and it is one which, according to the classic
teaching, has its centre in the brain. The grounds on which this
cerebral centre is assigned are very similar to those on which other
functions are assigned to cerebral centres, namely, observation of the
suppression of the function when the pathway between certain organs and
the brain is interrupted. But the careful experiments of Goltz[287]
have demonstrated that the “centre” of Urination is not in the brain,
but in the lower region of the cord. When the cord is completely
divided, Urination is performed in the _normal_ way--not passively,
not irregularly, but with all the characters of the active regular
function. And, what is also noticeable, this function is so intimately
dependent on Sensibility that it will be arrested--like any other
function--by a sensation excited from the periphery--to be resumed when
the irritation ceases. Now this arrest from a stimulation of sensory
nerves takes place when the brain is cut off from the spinal centre,
just as when the brain is in connection with it.

The same is true of Defecation, and the still more complex functions
of Generation and Parturition. I can only refer the reader to the
very remarkable case of Goltz’s bitch with the spinal cord divided
in the lumbar region, if evidence be wanted for the performance of
complex functions so long as the spinal centres were intact. It is
true that Goltz considers these functions to have been independent
of _sensation_; but that is because he has not entirely emancipated
himself from the traditional views; for my purpose it is enough that he
admits the functions to be dependent on sensorial processes.

       *       *       *       *       *

83. To sum up the evidence, we may say that observation discloses a
surprising resemblance in the manifestations of the cord and brain. In
both there are reflex processes, and processes of arrest; in both there
are actions referable to conscious and unconscious processes; in both
depression and exaltation are produced by the same drugs; in both there
are manifestations interpretable, as those of Discrimination, Logic,
Instinct, Volition, Acquisition, Memory; in both there is manifestation
of Sensibility--how then can we deny Sensation to the one if we accord
it to the other?




