CHAPTER I.

THE COURSE OF MODERN THOUGHT.


1. Modern Philosophy has moved along two increasingly divergent lines.
One, traversed by Galileo, Descartes, Newton, and Laplace, had for
its goal the absolute disengagement of the physical from the mental,
i. e. the objective from the subjective aspect of phenomena, so
that the physical universe, thus freed from all the complexities of
Feeling, might be interpreted in mechanical terms. As a preliminary
simplification of the problem this was indispensable; only by it
could the First Notion of primitive speculation be replaced by the
Theoretic Conception of scientific speculation.[204] The early
thinker inevitably invested all external objects with properties and
qualities similar to those he assigned to human beings, and their
actions he assigned to human motives. Sun, moon, and stars seemed
living beings; flames, streams, and winds were supposed to be moved
by feelings such as those known to move animals and men. Nor was any
other conception then possible: men could only interpret the unknown
by the known, and their standard of all action was necessarily drawn
from their own actions. Not having analyzed Volition and Emotion,
above all not having localized these in a neuro-muscular system, men
could not suspect that the movements of planets and plants, and of
streams and stones, had motors of a different kind from the movements
of animals. The scientific conception of inert insensible Matter was
only attained through a long education in abstraction; and is assuredly
never attained by animals, or by savages. But no sooner were vital
conditions recognized, than the difference between vital and mechanical
movements emerged. When men learned that many of their own actions
were unaccompanied either by Love or Hate, by Pleasure or Pain, and
that many were unprompted by conscious intention, while others were
unaccompanied by conscious sensation, they easily concluded that
wherever the special conditions of Feeling were absent, the actions
must have some other motors. Intelligence, Emotion, Volition, and
Sensation being one by one stripped away from all but a particular
class of bodies, nothing remained for the other bodies but insensible
Matter and Motion. This was the Theoretic Conception which science
substituted for the First Notion. It was aided by the observation
of the misleading tendency of interpreting physical phenomena by
the human standard, substituting our fancies in the place of facts,
manipulating the order of the universe according to our imagination
of what it might be, or ought to be. Hence the vigilance of the new
school in suppressing everything pertaining to the subjective aspect
of phenomena, and the insistance on a purely objective classification,
so that by this means we might attain to a knowledge of things as they
are. By thus withdrawing Life and Mind from Nature, and regarding
the universe solely in the light of Motion and the laws of Motion,
two great scientific ends were furthered, namely, a classification
of conceptions, and a precision of terms. Objective phenomena made a
class apart, and the great aim of research was to find a mathematical
expression for all varieties under this class. Masses were conceived
as aggregates of Atoms, and these were reduced to mathematical points.
Forces were only different modes of Motion. All the numberless
differences which perception recognized as _qualities_ in things, were
reduced to mere variations in _quantity_. Thus all that was particular
and concrete became resolved by analysis into what was general and
abstract. The Cosmos then only presented a problem of Mechanics.

2. During this evolution, the old Dualism (which conceived a material
universe sharply demarcated from the mental universe) kept its
ground, and attained even greater precision. The logical distinction
between Matter and Mind was accepted as an essential distinction,
i. e. representing distinct reals. There was on the one side a group
of phenomena, Matter and Force; on the other side an unallied group,
Feeling and Thought: between them an impassable gulf. How the two
were brought into relation, each acting and reacting on the other,
was dismissed as an “insoluble mystery”--or relegated to Metaphysics
for such minds as chose to puzzle over questions not amenable to
experiment. Physics, confident in the possession of mathematical
and experimental methods which yielded definite answers to properly
restricted questions, peremptorily refused to listen to any suggestion
of the kind. And the career of Physics was so triumphant that success
seemed to justify its indifference.

3. In our own day this analytical school has begun to extend its
methods even to the mental group. Having reduced all the objective
group to mathematical treatment, it now tries to bring the subjective
group also within its range. Not only has there been more than one
attempt at a mathematical Psychology; but also attempts to reduce
Sensibility, in its subjective no less than in its objective aspect, to
molecular movement. Here also the facts of Quality are translated into
facts of Quantity; and all diversities of Feeling are interpreted as
simply quantitative differences.

4. Thus far the one school. But while this Theoretic Conception
stripped Nature of consciousness, motive, and passion, rendering it a
mere aggregate of mathematical relations, a critical process was going
on, which, analyzing the nature of Perception, was rapidly moving
towards another goal. Locke, Berkeley, Hume, and Kant, directing their
analysis exclusively to the subjective aspect of phenomena, soon broke
down the barriers between the physical and mental, and gradually merged
the former in the latter. Matter and its qualities, hitherto accepted
as independent realities, existing where no Mind perceived them, were
now viewed as the creations of Mind--their existence was limited to a
state of the percipient. The old Dualism was replaced by Idealism. The
Cosmos, instead of presenting a problem of Mechanics, now presented a
problem of Psychology. Beginning with what are called the secondary
qualities of Matter, the psychological analysis resolved these into
modes of Feeling. “The heat which the vulgar imagine to be in the fire
and the color they imagine in the rose are not there at all, but are in
us--mere states of our organism.” Having gained this standing-place,
there was no difficulty in extending the view from the secondary to the
primary qualities. These also were perceptions, and only existed in
the percipient. Nothing then remained of Matter save the hypothetical
unknown _x_--the postulate of speculation. Kant seemed forever to have
closed the door against the real Cosmos when he transformed it into
a group of mental forms--Time, Space, Causality, Quantity, etc. He
propounded what may be called a theory of mental Dioptrics whereby a
pictured universe became possible, as Experience by its own _a priori_
laws moulded _itself_ into a consistent group of appearances, which
produced the illusion of being a group of realities. He admitted,
indeed, that by the operation of Causality we are compelled to believe
in a Real underlying the appearances; but the very fact that this
Causality is a _subjective law_, is proof, he said, of its not being
an _objective truth_. Thus the aim of the mechanical conception was
to free research from the misleading complexities of subjective
adulterations, and view _things as they are_ apart from their
_appearances_; but this aim seemed illusory when Psychology showed that
Time, Space, Matter, and Motion were themselves not objective reals
except in so far as they represented subjective necessities; and that,
in short, things _are_ just what they _appear_, since it is only in the
relation of external reals to internal feelings that objects exist for
us.

5. Idealism has been the outcome of the psychological method. It
has been of immense service in rectifying the dualistic conception,
and in correcting the mechanical conception. It has restored the
subjective factor, which the mechanical conception had eliminated.
It has brought into incomparable clearness the fundamental fact that
all our knowledge _springs from_, and is _limited by_, Feeling. It
has shown that the universe represented in that knowledge, can only
be a picture of the system of things as these exist in relation to
our Sensibility. But equally with the mechanical conception it has
erred by incomplete analysis. For a complete theory of the universe,
or of any one phenomenon, those elementary conditions which analysis
has provisionally set aside must finally be restored. When Quality
is replaced by Quantity, this is an artifice of method, which does
not really correspond with fact. The quality is the fact given in
feeling, which we analytically refer to quantitative differences,
but which can never be wholly resolved into them, since it must be
presupposed throughout. One color, for example, may be distinguished
from another as having more or fewer undulations; and so we may by
abstraction, letting drop all qualitative characters, make a scale
of undulations to represent the scale of colors. But this is an
ideal figment. It is the representation of one series of feelings by
another series of different feelings. No variation of undulations will
really correspond with variation in color, unless we reintroduce the
suppressed _quality_ which runs through all color. Attempt to make one
born blind feel, or even understand, Color by describing to him the
kind of wave-movement which it is said to be, and the vanity of the
effort will be manifest. Movement he knows, and varieties of movement
as given in _tactile and muscular sensations_; but no combination and
manipulation of such experiences can give him the specific sensation
of Color. That is a purely subjective state, which he is incapable of
experiencing, simply because one of the essential factors is absent.
One set of objective conditions is present, but the other set (his
sense-organ) is defective. Without the “greeting of the spirit”
undulations cannot become colors (nor even undulations, for these
also are forms of feeling). Besides the sense-organ there is needed
the feeling of Difference, which is itself the product of past and
present feelings. The reproduction of other colors, or other shades of
color, is necessary to this perception of difference; and this involves
the element of Likeness and Unlikeness between what is produced and
reproduced. So that a certain mental co-operation is requisite even for
the simplest perception of quality. In fact, psychological analysis
shows that even Motion and Quantity, the two objective terms to which
subjective Quality is reduced, are themselves Fundamental Signatures
of Feeling;[205] so that here, as elsewhere, it is only by analytical
artifice that the objective can be divorced from the subjective. Matter
_is_ for us the Felt; its Qualities are differences of Feeling.

6. Not that this result is to be interpreted as freeing our Theoretic
Conception from its objective side, and landing us in Idealism,
which suppresses the real universe. The denial of all reality apart
from our minds, is a twofold mistake: it confounds the conception of
general relations with particular relations, declaring that because
the External in its relation to the sentient organism can only be
what it is felt to be, therefore it can have no _other_ relations to
other individual reals. This is the first mistake. The second is the
disregard of the constant presence of the objective real in every fact
of Feeling: the Not-Self is emphatically present in every consciousness
of Self.

The legitimate conclusion is neither that of Dualism nor of Idealism,
but what I have named Reasoned Realism (_Problems_, Vol. I. p. 201),
which reconciles Common Sense with Speculative Logic, by showing that
although the _truth_ of things (their _Wahrheit_) is just what we
perceive in them (our _Wahrnehmung_), yet their _reality_ is this, and
much more than this. _Things_ are what they are felt to be; and what
they are thought to be, when thoughts are symbols of the perceptions.
Idealism declares that they are _nothing but_ this. It is against this
_nothing but_ that Common Sense protests; and the protest is justified
by Reasoned Realism, which, taking a comprehensive survey of the facts,
thus answers the idealist: “Your synthesis is imperfect, since it
does not include _all_ the data--notably it excludes the fact of an
objective or Not-Self element in every feeling. You may, conceivably,
regard the whole universe as nothing but a series of changes in your
consciousness; but you cannot hope to convince me that I myself am
simply a change in yourself, or that my body is only a fleeting image
in your mind. Hence although I conclude that the Not-Self is to you, as
to me, undivorceable from Self, inalienable from Feeling, in so far as
it is felt, yet there must nevertheless be for both of us an existence
not wholly coextensive with our own. _My_ world may be my picture of
it; _your_ world may be your picture of it; but there is something
common to both which is more than either--an existent which has
different relations to each. _You_ are not _me_, nor is the pictured
Cosmos _me_, although I picture it. Looking at you and it, I see a vast
whole of which you are a small part; and such a part I conclude myself
to be. It is at once a picture and the pictured; at once subjective and
objective. To me all your modes of existence are objective aspects,
which, drawing from my own experience, I believe to have corresponding
subjective aspects; so that your emotions, which to me are purely
physical facts, are to you purely mental facts. And psychological
analysis assures me that all _physical facts are mental facts expressed
in objective terms_, and _mental facts are physical facts expressed in
subjective terms_.”

7. But while Philosophy thus replaces the conceptions of Dualism and
Idealism by the conception of the Two-fold Aspect, the special sciences
in their analytical career have disregarded the problem altogether.
The mechanical theory of the universe not only simplified research by
confining itself solely to the objective aspect of phenomena, but by
a further simplification set aside all vital and chemical relations,
to deal exclusively with mechanical relations. In ascertaining the
mathematical relations of the planetary system, no elucidation could
possibly be gained from biological or chemical conceptions; the
planets therefore were provisionally stripped of everything not
mechanical. In systematizing the laws of motion, it was necessary to
disengage the abstract relations from everything in any way resembling
spontaneity, or extra-mechanical agency: Matter was therefore, by
a bold fiction, declared to be inert, and its Motion regarded as
something superadded from without.

7_a_. And this was indispensable for the construction of those ideal
laws which are the objects of scientific research. Science, as we often
say, is the systematization of Experience under the forms of ideal
constructions. Experience implies Feeling, and certain fundamental
Signatures, all reducible to the primary discernment of Likeness and
Unlikeness. Hence Science is first a _classification_ of qualities
or discerned likenesses and differences; next a _measurement_
of quantities of discerned likenesses and differences. Although
measurement is itself a species of classification, it is distinguished
by the adoption of a standard unit of comparison, which, being precise
and unvarying, enables us to express the comparisons in precise and
unvarying symbols. Whether the unit of length adopted be an inch, a
foot, a yard, a mile, the distance of the earth from the sun, or the
distances of the fixed stars, the quantities thus measured are symbols
admitting of one invariable interpretation. The exactness of the
mathematical sciences is just this precision and invariability of their
symbols, and is not, as commonly supposed, the source of any superior
certainty as to the facts. The classificatory sciences, which deal with
qualities rather than with quantities, may be equally _certain_, and
represent fuller _knowledge_, because involving more varied feelings,
but they cannot pretend to exactness. Even on the quantitative side,
certainty is not identical with exactness. I may be quite certain that
one block of marble is larger than another--meaning that it affects
me more voluminously--but I cannot know how much larger it is, without
interpreting my feelings by the standard of quantity--the how-muchness
as represented by that standard. The immense advantages of exact
measurement need not be insisted on. The Biological Sciences, which
are predominantly classificatory, can never rival the Cosmological
Sciences in exactness; but they may reach a fuller knowledge; and
their certainty will assume more and more the character of exactness
as methods of measurement are applied to their classifications of
qualities. The qualitative and quantitative aspects of phenomena are
handled by the two great instruments, Logic and Mathematics, the second
being only a special form of the first. These determine the general
conceptions which are derived from our perceptions, and the whole
constitute Experience.

8. What is the conclusion to which these considerations lead? It
is that the separation of the quantitative from the qualitative
aspect of phenomena--the objective mechanical from the subjective
psychological--is a logical artifice indispensable to research; but
it is only an artifice.[206] In pursuance of this artifice, each
special science must be regarded as the search after special analytical
results; and meanwhile this method should be respected, and no
confusion of the boundaries between one science and another should be
suffered. Mechanical problems must not be confused by the introduction
of biological relations. Biological problems must not be restricted
to mechanical relations. I do not mean that the mechanical relations
present in biological phenomena are not to be sought, and, when found,
to be expressed in mechanical terms; I mean that such an inquiry must
be strictly limited to mechanical relations. Subjective relations
are not to be denied, because they are provisionally set aside, in an
inquiry into objective relations; but we must carefully distinguish
which of the two orders we are treating of, and express each in its
appropriate terms. This is constantly neglected. For example, nothing
is more common than to meet such a phrase as this: “A _sensory
impression_ is transmitted as a _wave_ of _motion_ to the brain, and
there being transformed into a state of _consciousness_, is again
reflected as a _motor_ impulse.”

The several sciences having attained certain analytical results, it
remains for Philosophy to co-ordinate these into a doctrine which will
furnish general conceptions of the World, Man, and Society. On the
analytical side a mechanical theory of the universe might be perfected,
but it would still only be a theory of mechanical relations, leaving
all other relations to be expressed in other terms. We cannot accept
the statement of Descartes that Nature is a vast mechanism, and Science
the universal application of mathematics. The equation of a sphere,
however valuable from a geometrical point of view, is useless as an
explanation of the nature and properties of the spherical body in
other relations. And so a complete theory of the mechanical relations
of the organism, however valuable in itself, would be worthless in
the solution of a biological problem, unless supplemented by all that
mechanical terms are incompetent to express.

9. The course of biological speculation has been similar to the
cosmological. It also began with a First Notion, which compendiously
expressed the facts of Experience. Nor can any Theoretic Conception be
finally adopted which does away with these facts, known with positive
certainty, and popularly expressed in the phrase: “I have a body, and
a soul.” We may alter the phrase either into “I _am_ a body, and I
_am_ a soul”; or into, “My body is only the manifestation of my soul”;
or, “My soul is only a function of my body”; but the fundamental
experiences which are thus expressed are of absolute authority, no
matter how they may be interpreted. That I have a body, or am a body,
is not to be speculatively argued away. That I move my arm to strike
the man who has offended me, or stretch out my hand to seize the fruit
which I see, is unquestionable; that these movements are determined by
these feelings, and are never thus effected unless thus determined, is
also unquestionable. Here are two sets of phenomena, having well-marked
differences of aspect; and they are grouped respectively under two
general heads, Life and Mind. Life is assigned to the physical
organism, or Body--all its phenomena are objective. Mind is assigned
to the psychical organism, or Soul--all its phenomena are subjective.
Although what is called my Body is shown to be a group of qualities
which are feelings--its color, form, solidity, position, motion--all
its physical attributes being what is felt by us in consequence of
the laws of our organization; yet inasmuch as these feelings have the
characteristic marks of objectivity, and are thereby referred to some
objective existence, we draw a broad line of demarcation between them
and other feelings having the characteristic marks of subjectivity,
and referring to ourselves as subjects. Psychological analysis shows
us that this line of demarcation is artificial, only representing a
diversity of aspect; but as such it is indispensable to science. We
cannot really separate in a sensation what is objective from what
is subjective, and say how much belongs to the Cosmos apart from
Sensibility, and how much to the subject pure and simple; we can only
view the sensation alternately in its objective and subjective aspects.
What belongs to extra-mental existence in the phenomenon of Color,
and what to the “greeting of the spirit,” is utterly beyond human
knowledge: for the ethereal undulations which physicists presuppose as
the cosmic condition are themselves subjected to this same greeting of
the spirit: they too are ideal forms of sensible experiences.

10. This conclusion, however, was very slowly reached. The distinction
of aspects was made the ground of a corresponding distinction in
agencies. Each group was personified and isolated. The one group was
personified in Spirit--an existent in every respect opposed to Matter,
which was the existent represented in the other group. One was said
to be simple, indestructible; the other compound, destructible. One
was invisible, impalpable, beyond the grasp of Sense; the other was
visible, tangible, sensible. One was of heaven, the other of earth.
Thus a biological Dualism, analogous to the cosmological, replaced
the First Notion. It was undermined by advances in two directions.
Psychology began to disclose that our conception of Matter was,
to say the least, _saturated_ with Mind, its Atoms confessedly
being ideal figments; and that all the terms by which we expressed
_material qualities_ were terms which expressed _modes of Feeling_;
so that whatever remained over and above this was the unknown _x_,
which speculation required as a postulate. Idealism, rejecting this
postulate, declared that Matter was simply the projection of Mind, and
that our Body was the objectivation of our Soul. Physiology began to
disclose that all the mental processes were (mathematically speaking)
_functions_ of physical processes, i. e. varying with the variations
of bodily states; and this was declared enough to banish forever the
conception of a Soul, except as a term simply expressing certain
functions.

11. Idealism and Materialism are equally destructive of Dualism. The
defects of particular idealist and materialist theories we will
not here touch upon; they mainly result from defects of Method. Not
sufficiently recognizing the primary fact testified by Consciousness,
namely, that Experience expresses both physical and mental aspects,
and that a Not-Self is everywhere indissolubly interwoven with Self,
an objective factor with a subjective factor, the idealist reduces
Existence to a mere panorama of mental states, and the Body to a
group in this panorama. He is thus incapable of giving a satisfactory
explanation of all the objective phenomena which do not follow in the
same order as his feelings, which manifest a succession unlike his
expectation, and which he cannot class under the order of his mental
states hitherto experienced. He conceives that it is the Mind which
_prescribes_ the order in Things; whereas experience assures us that
the order is _described_, not prescribed by us: described in terms of
Feeling, but determined by the laws of Things, i. e. the genesis of
subjective phenomena is determined by the action of the Cosmos on our
Sensibility, and the reaction of our Sensibility. He overlooks the
evidence that the mental forms or laws of thought which determine the
character of particular experiences, were themselves evolved through a
continual action and reaction of the Cosmos and the Soul, precisely as
the laws of organic action which determine the character of particular
functions were evolved through a continual adaptation of the organism
to the medium. These immanent laws are declared to be transcendental,
antecedent to all such action and reaction.

A similar exclusiveness vitiates the materialist doctrine. Overlooking
the primary fact that Feeling is indissolubly interwoven with processes
regarded as purely physical because they are considered solely in their
objective aspect, the materialist fails to recognize the operation of
psychological laws in the determination of physiological results;
he hopes to reduce Biology to a problem of Mechanics. But Vitality
and Sensibility are coefficients which must render the mechanical
problem insoluble, if only on the ground that mechanical principles
have reference to quantitative relations, whereas vital relations are
qualitative. His error is the obverse of the vitalist’s error. The
vitalist imagines that the speciality of organic phenomena proves the
existence of a cause which has no community with the forces operating
elsewhere; so, turning his back on all the evidence, he attempts to
explain organic phenomena without any aid from Physics and Chemistry.
The materialist, turning his back on all the evidence of quite special
conditions only found at work in living organisms, tries to explain
the problem solely by the aid of Physics and Chemistry. It is quite
certain that physiological and psychological problems are not to be
solved if we disregard the laws of Evolution through Epigenesis. The
mental structure is evolved, as the physical structure is evolved. It
is quite certain that no such evolution is visible in anorganisms,
nor will any one suppose it to be possible in machines. From the
biological point of view we must therefore reject both Idealism and
Materialism. We applaud the one when it says, “Don’t confuse mental
facts by the introduction of physical hypotheses”; and the other when
it says, “Don’t darken physical facts with metaphysical mists.” We say
to both, “By all means make clear to yourselves which aspect of the
phenomena you are dealing with, and express each in its own terms. But
in endeavoring to understand a phenomenon you must take into account
all its ascertainable conditions. Now these conditions are sometimes
only approachable from the objective side; at other times only from the
subjective side.”

12. While it is necessary to keep the investigation of a process on its
objective side, limited to objective conditions, and to express the
result in objective terms, we must remember that this is an artifice;
above all, we must remember that even within the objective limits our
analyses are only provisional, and must be finally rectified by a
restoration of all the elements we have provisionally set aside. Thus
rectified, the objective interpretation of vital and mental phenomena
has the incomparable advantage of simplifying research, keeping it
fixed on physical processes, instead of being perturbed by suggestions
of metaphysical processes. And as all physical investigation naturally
tends to reduce itself to a mechanical investigation, because Mechanics
is the science of motion, and all physical processes are motions,
we may be asked, Why should not the mechanical point of view be the
rational standing-point of the biologist? Our answer is, Because
Mechanics concerns itself with abstract relations, and treats of
products without reference to modes of production, i. e. with motions
without reference to all the conditions on which they depend. Every
physical change, if expressed in physical terms, is a change of
position, and is determined by some preceding change of position. It
is a movement having a certain velocity and direction, which velocity
and direction are determined by the velocity and direction of a force
(a pressure or a tension) compounded with the forces of resistance,
i. e. counter-pressures. Clearly, the nature of the forces in operation
must be taken into account; and it is this which the mechanical view
disregards, the biological regards. The mechanical view is fixed
on the ascertained adjustment of the parts, so that the working of
the organism may be explained as if it were a machine, a movement
here liberating a movement there. The biological view includes this
adjustment of parts, but takes in also the conditions of molecular
change in the parts on which the adjustment dynamically depends.
Mechanical actions may be expressed as the enlargement or diminution
of the angle of two levers; but chemical actions are not thus
expressible; still less vital and mental actions.

13. The organism is on the physical side a mechanism, and so long
as the mechanical interpretation of organic phenomena is confined
to expressing the mechanical principles involved in the mechanical
relations, it is eminently to be applauded. But the organism is
something more than a mechanism, even on the physical side; or, since
this statement may be misunderstood, let me say, what no one will
dispute, that the organism is a mechanism of a very special kind, in
many cardinal points unlike all machines. This difference of kind
brings with it a difference of causal conditions. In so far as the
actions of this mechanism are those of a dependent sequence of material
positions, they are actions expressible in mechanical terms; but in
so far as these actions are dependent on vital processes, they are
not expressible in mechanical terms. Vital facts, especially facts
of sensibility, have factors neither discernible in machines nor
expressible in mechanical terms. We cannot ignore them, although for
analytical purposes we may provisionally set them aside.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the course of the development of the mechanical theory, the history
of which has just been briefly sketched, biological problems have more
and more come under its influence. There has always been a fierce
resistance to the attempt to explain vital and sentient phenomena
on mechanical, or even physical principles, but still the question
has incessantly recurred, How far is the organism mechanically
interpretable? And while the progress of Biology has shown more and
more the machine-like adjustment of the several parts of which the
organism is composed, it has also shown more and more the intervention
of conditions not mechanically interpretable. We shall have to
consider the question, therefore, under two forms. First, whether
animals are machines, and if not, by what characters do we distinguish
them from machines? Secondly, in what sense can we correctly speak of
Feeling as an agent in organic processes?




