
Transcriber’s Note

In PROBLEM I, CHAPTER III, Section 45 (originally page 38), chemical
formulas represent the numbers of atoms in a molecule with patterns
like this: C_{114}. Throughout this eBook, pairs of underscores enclose
italicized text, Small-caps text appears as ALL-CAPS, and pairs of
equals signs enclose boldface text.




Works by the same Author.


  =PROBLEMS OF LIFE AND MIND. The Foundations of a Creed.= Two
      Volumes. Octavo. Per volume, $3.00.

      CONTENTS: The Method of Science and its Applications to
      Metaphysics--The Rules of Philosophizing--Psychological
      Principles--The Limitations of Knowledge--The Principles
      of Certitude--From the Known to the Unknown--Matter and
      Force--Force and Cause--The Absolute in the Correlations of
      Feeling and Motion.

  =THE STORY OF GOETHE’S LIFE.= New Edition. One volume. 16mo. With
      Portrait. $1.50.

*.* _For sale by all Booksellers. Sent, post-paid, on receipt of price
by the Publishers,_


HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & CO., BOSTON.




  THE
  PHYSICAL BASIS OF MIND.

  With Illustrations.


  _BEING THE SECOND SERIES_
  OF
  PROBLEMS OF LIFE AND MIND.

  BY
  GEORGE HENRY LEWES.

  [Illustration: The Riverside Press.]

  BOSTON AND NEW YORK:
  HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN AND COMPANY.
  The Riverside Press, Cambridge.
  1891.




  AUTHOR’S EDITION.

  _From Advance Sheets._


  _The Riverside Press, Cambridge, Mass., U. S. A._
  Printed by H. O. Houghton & Company.




PREFACE.


The title indicates that this volume is restricted to the group of
material conditions which constitute the organism in relation to the
physical world--a group which furnishes the data for one half of the
psychologist’s quest; the other half being furnished by historical and
social conditions.

The Human Mind, so far as it is accessible to scientific inquiry, has
a twofold root, man being not only an animal organism but an unit in
the social organism; and hence the complete theory of its functions and
faculties must be sought in this twofold direction. This conception
(which has been declared “to amount to a revolution in Psychology”),
although slowly prepared by the growing conviction that Man could not
be isolated from Humanity, was first expounded in the opening volume of
these _Problems of Life and Mind_; at least, I am not aware that any
predecessor had seen _how_ the specially human faculties of Intellect
and Conscience were products of social factors co-operating with the
animal factors.

In considering the Physical Basis a large place must be assigned to
the mechanical and chemical relations which are involved in organic
functions; yet we have to recognize that this procedure of Analysis is
artificial and preparatory, that none of its results are final, none
represent the synthetic reality of _vital_ facts. Hence one leading
object of the following pages has been everywhere to substitute
the biological point of view for the metaphysical and mechanical
points of view which too often obstruct research--the one finding its
expression in spiritualist theories, the other in materialist theories;
both disregarding the plain principle that the first requisite in a
theory of biological phenomena must be to view them in the light of
biological conditions: in other words, to fix our gaze upon what passes
in the organism, and not on what may pass in the laboratory, where
the conditions are different. Analysis is a potent instrument, but
is too often relied on in forgetfulness of what constitutes its real
aid, and thus leads to a disregard of all those conditions which it
has artificially set aside. We see this in the tendency of anatomists
and physiologists to assign to _one_ element, in a complex cluster of
co-operants, the significance which properly belongs to that cluster:
as when the property of a tissue is placed exclusively in a single
element of that tissue, the function of an organ assigned to its chief
tissue, and a function of the organism to a single organ.

Another object has been to furnish the reader uninstructed in
physiology with such a general outline of the structure and functions
of the organism, and such details respecting the sentient mechanism,
as may awaken an interest in the study, and enable him to understand
the application of Physiology to Psychology. If he comes upon details
which can only interest specially educated students, or perhaps
only by them be really understood, he can pass over these details,
for their omission will not seriously affect the bearing of the
general principles. I have given the best I had to give; and must
leave each reader to find in it whatever may interest him. The uses
of books are first to stimulate inquiry by awakening an interest;
secondly, to clarify and classify the knowledge already gained from
direct contemplation of the phenomena. They are stimuli and aids to
observation and thought. They should never be allowed to see for us,
nor to think for us.

The volume contains four essays. The first, on the _Nature of Life_,
deals with the speciality of organic phenomena, as distinguished
from the inorganic. It sets forth the physiological principles which
Psychology must incessantly invoke. In the course of the exposition I
have incorporated several passages from four articles on Mr. Darwin’s
hypotheses, contributed to the _Fortnightly Review_ during the year
1868. I have also suggested a modification of the hypothesis of Natural
Selection, by extending to the _tissues and organs_ that principle of
competition which Mr. Darwin has so luminously applied to _organisms_.
Should this generalization of the “struggle for existence” be accepted,
it will answer many of the hitherto unanswerable objections.

The second essay is on the _Nervous Mechanism_, setting forth what is
known and what is inferred respecting the structure and properties of
that all-important system. If the sceptical and revolutionary attitude,
in presence of opinions currently held to be established truths,
surprises or pains the reader unprepared for such doubts, I can only
ask him to submit my statements to a similar scepticism, and confront
them with the ascertained evidence. After many years of laborious
investigation and meditation, the conclusion has slowly forced
itself upon me, that on this subject there is a “false persuasion of
knowledge” very fatal in its influence, because unhesitatingly adopted
as the ground of speculation both in Pathology and Psychology. This
persuasion is sustained because few are aware how much of what passes
for observation is in reality sheer hypothesis. I have had to point out
the great extent to which Imaginary Anatomy has been unsuspectingly
accepted; and hope to have done something towards raising a rational
misgiving in the student’s mind respecting “the superstition of the
nerve-cell”--a superstition which I freely confess to have shared in
for many years.

The third essay treats of _Animal Automatism_. Here the constant
insistance on the biological point of view, while it causes a rejection
of the mechanical theory, admits the fullest recognition of all the
mechanical relations involved in animal movements, and thus endeavors
to reconcile the contending schools. In this essay I have also
attempted a psychological solution of that much-debated question--the
relation between Body and Mind. This solution explains why physical
and mental phenomena must necessarily present to our apprehension
such profoundly diverse characters; and shows that Materialism, in
attempting to deduce the mental from the physical, puts into the
conclusion what the very terms have excluded from the premises;
whereas, on the hypothesis of a physical process being only the
objective aspect of a mental process, the attempt to interpret the one
by the other is as legitimate as the solution of a geometrical problem
by algebra.

In the final essay the _Reflex Theory_ is discussed; and here once
more the biological point of view rectifies the error of an analysis
which has led to the denial of Sensibility in reflex actions, because
that analysis has overlooked the necessary presence of the conditions
which determine Sensibility. In these chapters are reproduced several
passages from the _Physiology of Common Life_.

According to my original intention, this volume was to have included an
exposition of the part I conceive the brain to play in physiological
and psychological processes, but that must be postponed until it can be
accompanied by a survey of psychological processes which would render
the exposition more intelligible.

  THE PRIORY, March, 1877.




CONTENTS.


  PROBLEM I. THE NATURE OF LIFE.


  CHAPTER I.
                                                                PAGE
  THE PROBLEM STATED                                               3
    (_The Position of Biology_)                                    4
    (_Organisms_)                                                  8
    (_Vital Force_)                                               14
    (_Vital Force controlling Physical and Chemical Forces_)      16


  CHAPTER II.

  DEFINITIONS OF LIFE                                             24


  CHAPTER III.

  ORGANISM, ORGANIZATION, AND ORGANIC SUBSTANCE                   37
    (_Organism and Medium_)                                       45
    (_The Hypothesis of Germinal Matter_)                         57
    (_Organisms and Machines_)                                    67


  CHAPTER IV.

  THE PROPERTIES AND FUNCTIONS                                    70
    (_Does the Function determine the Organ?_)                    78


  CHAPTER V.

  EVOLUTION                                                       89
    (_Natural Selection and Organic Affinity_)                   115
    (_Recapitulation_)                                           152


  PROBLEM II. THE NERVOUS MECHANISM.


  CHAPTER I.

  SURVEY OF THE SYSTEM,                                          157
    (_The Early Forms of Nerve-Centres_),                        168
    (_The Peripheral System_),                                   171
    (_Ganglia and Centres_),                                     172


  CHAPTER II.

  THE FUNCTIONAL RELATIONS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM,                176


  CHAPTER III.

  NEURILITY,                                                     189
    (_Origins of Nerve-Force_),                                  201
    (_The Hypothesis of Specific Energies_),                     207


  CHAPTER IV.

  SENSIBILITY,                                                   211


  CHAPTER V.

  ACTION WITHOUT NERVE-CENTRES,                                  227


  CHAPTER VI.

  WHAT IS TAUGHT BY EMBRYOLOGY?,                                 237


  CHAPTER VII.

  THE ELEMENTARY STRUCTURE OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM,                251
    (_Difficulties of the Investigation_),                       252
    (_The Nerve-Cell_),                                          258
    (_The Nerves_),                                              270
    (_The Neuroglia_),                                           273
    (_The Relations of the Organites_),                          278
    (_Recapitulation_),                                          299

  CHAPTER VIII.

  THE LAWS OF NERVOUS ACTIVITY                                   310
    (_The Energy of Neurility_)                                  311
    (_The Propagation of Excitation_)                            314
    (_Stimuli_)                                                  321
    (_Stimulation_)                                              324
    (_The Law of Discharge_)                                     326
    (_The Law of Arrest_)                                        333
    (_The Hypothesis of Inhibitory Centres_)                     336
    (_Anatomical Interpretations of the Laws_)                   339


  PROBLEM III. ANIMAL AUTOMATISM.


  CHAPTER I.

  THE COURSE OF MODERN THOUGHT                                   345


  CHAPTER II.

  THE VITAL MECHANISM                                            363


  CHAPTER III.

  THE RELATION OF BODY AND MIND                                  376


  CHAPTER IV.

  CONSCIOUSNESS AND UNCONSCIOUSNESS                              399


  CHAPTER V.

  VOLUNTARY AND INVOLUNTARY ACTIONS                              415


  CHAPTER VI.

  THE PROBLEM STATED                                             431


  CHAPTER VII.

  IS FEELING AN AGENT?                                           440


  PROBLEM IV. THE REFLEX THEORY.


  CHAPTER I.

  THE PROBLEM STATED                                             467


  CHAPTER II.

  DEDUCTIONS FROM GENERAL LAWS                                   490


  CHAPTER III.

  INDUCTIONS FROM PARTICULAR OBSERVATIONS                        509
    (_Cerebral Reflexes_)                                        511
    (_Discrimination_)                                           520
    (_Memory_)                                                   522
    (_Instinct_)                                                 522
    (_The Acquisition of Instinct_)                              536
    (_Acquisition_)                                              546


  CHAPTER IV.

  NEGATIVE INDUCTIONS                                            550




PROBLEM I.

THE NATURE OF LIFE.

    “La Physiologie a pour but d’exposer les phénomènes de la vie
    humaine et les conditions d’où ils dépendant. Pour y arriver
    d’une manière sûre, il faut nécessairement avant tout déterminer
    quels sont les phénomènes qu’on désigne sous le nom de vie en
    général. C’est pourquoi la première chose à faire est d’étudier
    les propriétés générales du corps qu’on appelle organiques ou
    vivans.”--TIEDEMANN, _Traité de Physiologie de l’Homme_, I. 2.

    “Some weak and inexperienced persons vainly seek by dialectics and
    far-fetched arguments either to upset or establish things that are
    only to be founded on anatomical demonstration and believed on the
    evidence of the senses. He who truly desires to be informed of the
    question in hand must be held bound either to look for himself, or
    to take on trust the conclusions to which they who have looked have
    come.”--HARVEY, _Second Dissertation to Riolan_.




THE NATURE OF LIFE.




CHAPTER I.

THE PROBLEM STATED.


1. Although for convenience we use the terms Life and Mind as
representing distinct orders of phenomena, the one objective and the
other subjective, and although for centuries they have designated
distinct entities, or forces having different substrata, we may now
consider it sufficiently acknowledged among scientific thinkers that
every problem of Mind is necessarily a problem of Life, referring to
one special group of vital activities. It is enough that Mind is never
manifested except in a living organism to make us seek in an analysis
of organic phenomena for the material conditions of every mental fact.
Mental phenomena when observed in others, although interpretable by our
consciousness of what is passing in ourselves, can only be objective
phenomena of the vital organism.

2. On this ground, if on this alone, an acquaintance with the
general principles of structure and function is indispensable to
the psychologist; although only of late years has this been fully
recognized, so that men profoundly ignorant of the organism have had
no hesitation in theorizing on its highest functions. In saying that
such knowledge is indispensable, I do not mean that in the absence
of such knowledge a man is debarred from understanding much of the
results reached by investigators, nor that he may not himself make
useful observations and classifications of psychological facts. It is
possible to read books on Natural History with intelligence and profit,
and even to make good observations, without a scientific groundwork of
biological instruction; and it is possible to arrive at empirical facts
of hygiene and medical treatment without any physiological instruction.
But in all three cases the absence of a scientific basis will render
the knowledge fragmentary and incomplete; and this ought to deter
every one from offering an opinion on debatable questions which pass
beyond the limit of subjective observations. The psychologist who has
not prepared himself by a study of the organism has no more right to
be heard on the genesis of the psychical states, or of the relations
between body and mind, than one of the laity has a right to be heard on
a question of medical treatment.


THE POSITION OF BIOLOGY.

3. Science is the systematic classification of Experience. It
postulates unity of Existence with great varieties in the Modes of
Existence; assuming that there is one Matter everywhere the same,
under great diversities in the complications of its elements. The
distinction of Modes is not less indispensable than the identification
of the elements. These Modes range themselves under three supreme
heads: Force, Life, Mind. Under the first, range the general properties
exhibited by _all_ substances; under the second, the general properties
exhibited by _organized_ substances; under the third, the general
properties exhibited by organized _animal_ substances. The first
class is subdivided into _Physics_, celestial and terrestrial, and
_Chemistry_. Physics treats of substances which move as masses,
or which vibrate and rotate as molecules, without undergoing any
appreciable change of structural integrity; they show changes of
_position_ and _state_, without corresponding changes in their
elements. Chemistry treats of substances which undergo molecular
changes of composition _destructive_ of their integrity. Thus the blow
which simply moves one body, or makes it vibrate, explodes another. The
friction which alters the temperature and electrical state of a bit of
glass, ignites a bit of phosphorus, and so destroys its integrity of
structure, converting phosphorus into phosphoric acid.

4. The second class, while exhibiting both physical and chemical
properties, is markedly distinguished by the addition of properties
called vital. Their peculiarity consists in this: they undergo
molecular changes of composition and decomposition which are
simultaneous, and _by this simultaneity preserve their integrity of
structure_. They change their state, and their elements, yet preserve
their unity, and even when differentiating continue specific. Unlike
all other bodies, the organized are born, grow, develop, and decay,
through a prescribed series of graduated evolutions, each stage being
the indispensable condition of its successor, no stage ever appearing
except in its serial order.

5. The third class, while exhibiting all the characteristics of the
two preceding classes, is specialized by the addition of a totally
new property, called Sensibility, which subjectively is Feeling. Here
organized substance has become animal substance, and Vegetality has
been developed into Animality by the addition of new factors,--new
complexities of the elementary forces. Many, if not most, philosophers
postulate an entirely new Existence, and not simply a new Mode, to
account for the manifestations of Mind; they refuse to acknowledge
it to be a vital manifestation, they demand that to Life be added a
separate substratum, the Soul. This is not a point to be discussed
here. We may be content with the assertion that however great the
phenomenal difference between Humanity and Animality (a difference we
shall hereafter see to be the expression of a new factor, namely, the
social factor), nevertheless the distinctive attribute of Sensibility,
out of which rise Emotion and Cognition, marks the inseparable
_kinship_ of mental with vital phenomena.

Thus all the various Modes of Existence may, at least in their
objective aspect, be ranged under the two divisions of Inorganic and
Organic,--Non-living and Living,--and these are respectively the
objects of the cosmological and the biological sciences.

6. The various sciences in their serial development develop the
whole art of Method. Mathematics develops abstraction, deduction,
and definition; Astronomy abstraction, deduction, and observation;
Physics adds experiment; Chemistry adds nomenclature; Biology adds
classification, and for the first time brings into prominence the
important notion of _conditions of existence_, and the variation
of phenomena under varying conditions: so that the relation of the
organism to its medium is one never to be left out of sight. In
Biology also clearly emerges for the first time what I regard as the
true notion of causality, namely, the _procession_ of causes,--the
combination of factors in the product, and not an _ab extra_
determination of the product. In Vitality and Sensibility we are made
aware that the causes are _in_ and not _outside_ the organism; that
the organic effect is the organic cause in operation; that there is
autonomy but no autocracy; the effect issues as a resultant of the
co-operating conditions. In Sociology, finally, we see brought into
prominence the _historical conditions of existence_. From the due
appreciation of the conditions of existence, material and historical,
we seize the true significance of the principle of Relativity.

7. Having thus indicated the series of the abstract sciences we have
now to consider more closely the character of Biology. The term was
proposed independently yet simultaneously in Germany and France, in
the year 1802, by Treviranus and Lamarck, to express “the study of the
forms and phenomena of Life, the conditions and laws by which these
exist, and the causes which produce them.” Yet only of late years has
it gained general acceptance in France and England. The term Cosmology,
for what are usually called the Physical Sciences, has not yet come
into general use, although its appropriateness must eventually secure
its recognition.

Biology,--the abstract science of Life,--embracing the whole organic
world, includes Vegetality, Animality, and Humanity; the biological
sciences are Phytology, Zoölogy, and Anthropology. Each of the
sciences has its cardinal divisions, statical and dynamical, namely,
Morphology--the science of form,--and Physiology--the science of
function.

Morphology embraces--1°, _Anatomy_, i. e. the description of the parts
then and there present in the organism; and these parts, or organs, are
further described by the enumeration of their constituent tissues and
elements; and of these again the proximate principles, so far as they
can be isolated without chemical decomposition. 2°, _Organogeny_, i. e.
the history of the evolution of organs and tissues.

Physiology embraces the properties and functions of the tissues and
organs--the primary conditions of Growth and Development out of
which rise the higher functions bringing the organism into active
relation with the surrounding medium. The first group of properties
and functions are called those of vegetal, or organic life; the second
those of animal, or relative life.


ORGANISMS.

8. It will be needful to fix with precision the terms, Organism, Life,
Property, and Function.

An organism, although usually signifying a more or less complex unity
of organs, because the structures which first attracted scientific
attention were all thus markedly distinguished from inorganic
bodies, has by the gradual extensions of research been necessarily
generalized, till it now stands for any organized substance capable of
independent vitality: in other words, any substance having the specific
combination of elements which manifests the serial phenomena of growth,
development, and decay. There are organisms that have no differentiated
organs. Thus a microscopic formless lump of semifluid jelly-like
substance (Protoplasm) is called an organism, because it feeds itself,
and reproduces itself. There are advantages and disadvantages in such
extensions of terms. These are notable in the parallel extension of
the term Life, which originally expressing only the complex activities
of complex organisms, has come to express the simplest activities of
protoplasm. Thus a Monad is an organism; a Cell is an organism; a Plant
is an organism; a Man is an organism. And each of these organisms is
said to have its Life, because

    “Through all the mighty commonwealth of things
     Up from the creeping worm to sovereign man”[1]

there is one fundamental group of conditions, one organized substance,
one vitality.

Obviously this unity is an abstraction. In reality, the life manifested
in the Man is _not_ the life manifested in the Monad: he has Functions
and Faculties which the Monad has no trace of; and if the two organisms
have certain vital characteristics in common, this unity is only
recognized in an _ideal construction_ which lets drop all concrete
differences. The Life is different when the organism is different.
Hence any definition of Life would be manifestly insufficient which
while it expressed the activities of the Monad left unexpressed the
conspicuous and important activities of higher organisms. A sundial
and a repeater will each record the successive positions of the sun
in the heavens; but although both are instruments for marking time,
the sundial will not do the work of the repeater; the complexity and
delicacy of the watch mechanism are necessary for its more varied and
delicate uses. A semifluid bit of protoplasm will feed itself; but it
will not feed and sustain a complex animal; nor will it feel and think.

9. Neglect of this point has caused frequent confusion in the attempts
to give satisfactory definitions. Biologists ought to have been warned
by the fact that some of the most widely accepted definitions exclude
the most conspicuous phenomena of Life, and are only applicable to the
vegetable world, or to the vegetal processes in the animal world. A
definition, however abstract, should not exclude essential characters.
The general consent of mankind has made Life synonymous with Mode of
Existence. By the life of an animal is meant the existence of that
animal; when dead the _animal_ no longer exists; the substances of
which the organism was composed exist, but under another mode; their
connexus is altered, and the organism vanishes in the alteration.
It is a serious mistake to call the corpse an organism; for that
_special_ combination which constituted the organism is not present in
the corpse. This misconception misleads some speculative minds into
assigning life to the universe. The universe assuredly exists, but it
does not live; its existence can only be identified with life, such as
we observe in organisms, by a complete obliteration of the speciality
which the term Life is meant to designate. Yet many have not only
pleased themselves with such a conception, but have conceived the
universe to be an organism fashioned, directed, and sustained by a soul
like that of man--the _anima mundi_. This is to violate all scientific
canons. The life of a plant-organism is not the same as the life of an
animal-organism; the life of an animal-organism is not the same as the
life of a human-organism; nor can the life of a human-organism be the
same as the life of the world-organism. The unity of Existences does
not obliterate the variety of Modes; yet it is the speciality of each
Mode which Science investigates; to some of these Modes the term Life
is consistently applied, to others not; and if we merge them all in a
common term, we must then invent a new term to designate the Modes now
included under Life.

10. In resisting this unwarrantable extension of the term I am not
only pointing to a speculative error, but also to a serious biological
error common in both spiritualist and materialist schools, namely
that of assigning Life to other than organic agencies. Instead of
recognizing the speciality of this Mode of Existence as dependent on
a speciality of the organic conditions, the spiritualist assigns Life
to some extra-organic Vital Principle, the materialist assigns it to
some inorganic agent--physical or chemical. Waiving for the present all
discussion of Vitalism, let us consider in what sense we must separate
organic from all inorganic phenomena.

11. There is a distinction between inorganic and organic which may
fitly be called radical: it lies at the root of the phenomena, and must
be accepted as an ultimate fact, although the synthesis on which it
depends is analytically reducible to a complication of more primitive
conditions. It has been already indicated in § 5. All organisms above
the very simplest are syntheses Of three terms: Structure, Aliment,
and Instrument. Crystals, like all other anorganisms have structure,
and in a certain sense they may be said to grow (_Mineralia crescunt_),
though the growth is by _increase_ and not by _modification_:[2]
the motherlye, which is the food of the crystal, is never brought
to the crystal, nor prepared for it, by any instrumental agency of
the crystal. Organisms are exclusively instrumental; the organ is an
instrument. The structural integrity of an organism is thus preserved
through an alimentation which is effected through special instruments.
Nothing like this is visible in anorganisms.

The increase of a crystal is further distinguishable from the growth
of an organism, in the fact Of its being simple accretion without
development; and the structure of the crystal is distinguishable from
that of an organism in the fact that its integrity is preserved by
the _exclusion_ of all molecular change, and not by the simultaneous
changes of molecular decomposition and recomposition. Inorganic
substances are sometimes as unstable as organic, sometimes even more
unstable; but their instability is the source of their structural
destruction--they change into other species; whereas the instability
of _organized_ substances (_not_ of organic) is the source of their
structural integrity: the tissue is renovated, and its renovation is a
consequence of its waste.

12. But while the distinction is thus radical, when we view the
organism from the _real_--that is, from the synthetic point of view--we
must also urge the validity of the analytical point of view, which
seizes on the conditions here complicated in a special group, and
declares these conditions to be severally recognizable equally in
anorganisms and in organisms. All the fundamental properties of Matter
are recognizable in organized Matter. The elementary substances and
forces familiar to physicists and chemists are the materials of the
biologist; nor has there been found a single organic substance, however
special, that is not reducible to inorganic elements. We see, then,
that organized Matter is only a special combination of that which in
_other_ combinations presents chemical and physical phenomena; and we
are prepared to find Chemistry and Physics indispensable aids in our
analysis of organic phenomena. Aids, but only aids; indispensable, but
insufficient.

13. There is therefore an ambiguity in the common statement that
organized matter is not _ordinary_ matter. Indisputable in one sense,
this is eminently disputable when it is interpreted as evidence of
a peculiar Vital Force “wholly unallied with the primary energy of
Motion.” If by “ordinary matter” be meant earths, crystals, gases,
vapors, then assuredly organized matter is not ordinary. “Between the
_living_ state of matter and its _non-living_ state,” says Dr. Beale,
“there is an absolute and irreconcilable difference; so far from our
being able to demonstrate that the non-living passes by gradations
into or gradually assumes the scale or condition of the _living_, the
transition is sudden and abrupt, and matter already in the living
state may pass into the non-living condition in the same sudden and
complete manner.”[3] The ambiguity here is sensible in the parallel
case of the difference between crystallizable and coagulable matter, or
between one crystal and another. If we can decompose the organic into
the inorganic, this shows that the elements of the one are elements
of the other; and if we are not yet able to recompose the inorganic
elements into organic matter (not at least in its more complex forms),
may this not be due to the fact that we are ignorant of the proximate
synthesis, ignorant of the precise way in which the elements are
combined? I may have every individual part of a machine before me, but
unless I know the proper position of each, I cannot with the parts
reconstruct the machine. Indeed the very common argument on which so
much stress is laid in favor of some mysterious Principle as the source
of organic phenomena, namely, that human skill is hopelessly baffled in
the attempt to make organic substances, still more a living cell, is
futile. Men can make machines, it is said, but not organisms, _ergo_
organisms must have a spiritual origin. But the fact is that no man can
make a machine, _unless_ he take advantage of the immense traditions of
our race, and apply the skill of millions who have worked and thought
before him, slowly and tentatively discovering the necessary means
of mechanical effect. The greatest thinker, or the deepest scholar,
who did not place himself in the line of the tradition, and learn the
principles of mechanism, and the properties of the materials, would be
as incapable of making a watch, as the physiologist now is of making
a cell. But the skill of man has already succeeded in making many
organic substances, and will perhaps eventually succeed in making a
cell, certainly will, if ever the special synthesis which binds the
elements together should be discovered. Not that such a discovery would
alter the position of Biology in relation to Chemistry. The making of
albumen, nay, the construction of an organism in the laboratory, would
not in the least affect the foundation of Biology, would not obliterate
the radical difference between organisms and anorganisms. It is the
speciality of organic phenomena which gives them a special place,
although the speciality may only be due to a complication of general
agencies.


VITAL FORCE.

14. A similar ambiguity to that of the phrase “ordinary matter” lies
in the equally common phrase “Vital Force,” which is used to designate
a special group of agencies, and is then made to designate an agent
which has no kinship with the general group; that is to say, instead of
being employed in its real signification--that which alone represents
our knowledge--as the abstract statical expression of the complex
conditions necessary to the manifestation of vital phenomena, or as
the abstract dynamical expression of the phenomena themselves, it
is employed as an expression of their unknown Cause, which, because
unknown, is dissociated from the known conditions, and erected into
a mysterious Principle, having no kinship with Matter. In the first
sense the term is a shorthand symbol of what is known and inferred.
The known conditions are the relations of an organism and its medium,
the organism being the union of various substances all of which have
their peculiar properties when isolated; properties that disappear
in the union, and are replaced by others, which result from the
combination--as the properties of chlorine and sodium all disappear in
the sea-salt which results from their union; or as the properties of
oxygen and the properties of hydrogen disappear and are replaced by the
properties of water. When therefore Vital Force is said to be exalted
or depressed, the phrase has rational interpretation in the alteration
which has taken place in one or more of the conditions, internal and
external: a change in the tissues, the plasma, or the environment,
exalts or depresses the energy of the vital manifestations; and to
suppose that this is effected through the agency of some extra-organic
Principle is a purely gratuitous fiction.

15. That we are ignorant of one or more of the indispensable conditions
symbolized in the abstract term Vitality or Vital Force, is no reason
for quitting the secure though difficult path of Observation, and
rushing into the facile but delusive path of Fiction, which proposes
metempirical Agents (in the shape of Vital and Psychical Principles)
to solve the problems of Life and Mind. We may employ the term Vital
Force to label our observations, together with all that still remains
unobserved; and we are bound to recognize the line which separates
observation from inference, what is proved from what is inferred;
but while marking the limits of the known, we are not to displace
the known in favor of the unknown. It is said that because of our
ignorance we must assume these causes of Life and Mind to be _unallied_
with known material causes, and belonging to a different order of
existences. This is to convert ignorance into a proof; and not only
so, but to allow what we do not know to displace what we do know. The
organicist is ready to admit that much has still to be discovered; the
vitalist, taking his stand upon this unknown, denies that what has been
discovered is really important, and declares that the real agent is
wholly unallied to it. How _can_ he know this?

He does not know it; he assumes it; and the chief evidence he adduces
is that the ordinary laws of inorganic matter are incapable of
explaining the phenomena of organized matter; and that physical and
chemical forces are controlled by vital force. I accept both these
positions, stripping them, however, of their ambiguities. The laws of
ordinary matter are clearly incompetent in the case of matter which is
not ordinary, but _specialized_ in organisms; and when we come to treat
of Materialism we shall see how unscientific have been the hypotheses
which disregard the distinction. The question of control is too
interesting and important to be passed over here.


VITAL FORCE CONTROLLING PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL FORCES.

16. The facts relied on by the vitalists are facts which every
organicist will emphasize, though he will interpret them differently.
When, for example, it is said that “Life resists the effect of
mechanical friction,” and the proof adduced is the fact that the
friction which will thin and wear away a dead body is actually the
cause of the thickening of a living--the skin of a laborer’s hand
being thickened by his labor; the explanation is not that Life, an
extra-organic agent, “resists mechanical friction”--for the mechanical
effect is _not_ resisted (the skin is rubbed off the rower’s hand
sooner than the wood is rubbed off the oar)--but that Life, i. e.
organic activity repairs the waste of tissue.

17. Again, although many of the physical and chemical processes which
invariably take place under the influences to which the substances
are subjected out of the organism, will not take place at all, or
will take place in different degrees, when the substances are in the
organism, this is important as an argument against the notion of vital
_phenomena_ being deducible from physical and chemical _laws_, but is
valueless as evidence in favor of an extra-organic agent. Let us glance
at one or two striking examples.

18. No experimental inquirer can have failed to observe the often
contradictory results which seemingly unimportant variations in the
conditions bring about; no one can have failed to observe what are
called chemical affinities wholly frustrated by vital conditions. Even
the ordinary laws of Diffusion are not always followed in the organism.
The Amœba, though semifluid, resists diffusion when alive; but when it
dies it swells and bursts by osmosis. The exchange of gases does not
take place in the tissues, precisely as in our retorts. The _living_
muscle respires, that is, takes up oxygen and gives out carbonic
acid, not on the principle of simple diffusion, but by two separable
physiological processes. The carbonic acid is given out, even when
there is no oxygen whatever present in the atmosphere, and its place
may then be supplied by hydrogen; and this physiological process is so
different from the physical process which goes on in the dead muscle
(the result of putrefaction), that it has been proved by Ranke to go
on when the temperature is so low that all putrefaction is arrested.
The same experimenter finds[4] that whereas living nerve will take up,
by imbibition, 10 per cent of potash salts, it will not take up 1 per
cent of soda salts, presented in equal concentration; and he points
to the general fact that the absorption of inorganic substances does
_not_ take place according to the simple laws of diffusion, but that
living tissues have special laws, the nerve, for instance, having
a greater affinity for neutral potash salts than for neutral soda
salts. Let me add, by way of anticipating the probable argument that
may urge this in favor of Vital Principle which is lightly credited
with the prescience of final causes, that so far from this “elective
affinity” of the tissues being intelligent and always favorable,
Ranke’s experiments unequivocally show that it is more active towards
destructive, poisonous substances, than towards the reparative,
alimentary substances; which is indeed consistent with the familiar
experience that poisons are more readily absorbed than foods, when both
are brought to the tissues. Thus it is well known that of all the salts
the sulphate of copper is that which plants most readily absorb--and
it kills them. The special affinities disappear as the vitality
disappears, and dying plants absorb all salts equally.

19. The more the organism is studied, the more evident it will become
that the simple laws of diffusion, as presented in anorganisms rarely
if ever take effect in tissues; in other words, what is called
Imbibition in Physics is the somewhat different process of Absorption
in Physiology.[5] The difference is notable in this capital fact, that
whereas the physical diffusion of liquids and gases is determined
by differences of density, the physiological absorption of liquids
and gases is determined by the molecular organization of the tissue,
which is perfectly indifferent to, and resists the entrance of, all
substances incapable of entering into organic combination, either as
aliment or poison. A curious example of the indifference of organized
substances to some external influences and their reaction upon others,
is the impossibility of provoking ciliary movement in an epithelial
cell, during repose, by any electrical, mechanical, or chemical stimuli
except potash and soda. Virchow discovered that a minute quantity of
either of these, added to the water in which the cell floated, at once
called forth the ciliary movements.

20. The true meaning of the resistance of Vitality to ordinary chemical
affinity is, that the conditions involved in the phenomena of Vitality
are not the conditions involved in the phenomena of Chemistry; in other
words, that in the living organism the substances are placed under
conditions different from those in which we observe these substances
when their chemical affinities are displayed in anorganisms. But we
need not go beyond the laboratory to see abundant examples of this
so-called resistance to chemical affinity, when the conditions are
altered. The decomposition of carbonates by tartaric acid is a chemical
process which is wholly resisted if alcohol instead of water be the
solvent employed. The union of sulphur with lead is said to be due
to the affinity of the one for the other; but no one supposes this
affinity to be irrespective of conditions, or that the union will take
place when any one of these conditions is absent. If we fuse a compound
of lead and iron in a crucible containing sulphur, we find it is the
iron, and not the lead, which unites with the sulphur; yet we do not
conclude that there is a Crucible Principle which frustrates chemical
affinity and resists the union of sulphur and lead; we simply conclude
that the presence of the iron is a condition which prevents the
combination of the sulphur with the lead: not until all the iron has
taken up its definite proportion of sulphur will the affinity of the
lead come into play. This is but another illustration of the law that
_effects are processions of their causes_, summations of the conditions
of their existence. If the fire burns no hole in the teakettle so long
as there is water to conduct the heat away, this is not due to any
principle more mysterious than the presence of a readily conducting
water.[6]

21. In accordance with the law of Causation just mentioned, which
has been expounded in detail in our First Series (Vol. II. p. 335),
the special combinations of Matter in organisms must present special
phenomena. Therefore since the province of Biology is that of
explaining organic phenomena by means of their organic conditions,
it must be radically distinguished from the provinces of Physics and
Chemistry, which treat not of organized but of inorganic matter. It
is idle, it is worse, for it is misleading, to personify the organic
conditions, known and inferred, in a Vital Principle; idle, because we
might with equal propriety personify the conditions of crystallization
in a Crystal Principle; misleading, because the artifice is quickly
dropped out of sight, and the abstract term then becomes accepted as
an entity, supposed to create or rule the phenomena it was invented to
express.

22. Inquirers are but too apt to misconceive the value of Analysis,
which is an artifice of Method indispensable to research, though
needing the complementary rectification by Synthesis before a real
explanation can be reached. Analysis decomposes the actual fact into
ideal factors, separates the group into its components, and considers
each of these, not as it exists in the group, in the reality, but as
it exists when theoretically detached from the others. The oxygen
and hydrogen into which water is decomposed did not exist as these
gases in the water; the albumen and phosphate we extract from a nerve
did not exist _as_ isolated albumen and phosphate in the nerve, they
were molecularly combined. In like manner the physical and chemical
processes which may analytically be inferred in vital processes do
not really take place in the same way as out of the organism. The
real process is always a vital process, and must be explained by the
synthesis of all the co-operant conditions. The laws of Physics and
Chemistry formulate abstract expressions of phenomena, wherever and
whenever these appear, without reference to the _modes of production_;
and in _this_ sense the movement of a limb is no less a case of
Dynamics than the movement of a pulley--the decomposition of a tissue
is a case of Chemistry no less than the decomposition of a carbonate;
the electromotor phenomena observed in muscle are as purely physical
as those observed in a telegraph. But when a biologist has to explain
the movements of the limbs, or the decompositions of tissues, he has
to deal with the phenomena and their modes of production, he has
a particular group before him, and must leave out nothing that is
characteristic of it. The movements of the pulley do not depend on
Contractility and Sensibility, which in turn depend on Nutrition. The
decomposition of the carbonate does not depend on conditions resembling
those of a living tissue. Vaucanson’s duck was surprisingly like a
living duck in many of its movements; but in none of its actions was
there any real similarity to the actions of a bird, because the machine
was unlike an organism in action. The antithesis of mechanism and
organism will be treated of in § 78.

23. We conclude, then, that defining physical phenomena as the
movements which take place _without_ change of structure, and chemical
phenomena as the movements _with_ change of structure, although
both classes may be said to take place in the organism, and to be
the primary conditions on which organic phenomena depend, they do
not embrace the whole of the conditions, nor are the sciences which
formulate them capable of formulating either the special phenomena
characteristic of organisms or their special modes of production. The
biologist will employ chemical and physical analysis as an essential
part of his method; but he will always rectify what is artificial in
this procedure, by subordinating the laws of Physics and Chemistry
to the laws of Biology revealed in the synthetic observation of
the organism as a whole. The rectification, here insisted on, will
be recognized as peculiarly urgent in Psychology, which has greatly
suffered from the misdirection of Analysis.

24. No one will misunderstand this specialization of Biology to mean
a separation of Life from the series of objective phenomena, and
the introduction of a new entity; the specialization points to a
Mode of Existence. All classifications are artifices, but they have
their objective grounds; the ground of difference on which Biology
is separated from Chemistry and Physics, though all three may be
merged in a common identity, is such as to justify the term radical.
A vital process is no more to be considered physico-chemical, because
physico-chemical conditions are presupposed in it, than a feeling is
to be considered a nutritive process, because Nutrition is presupposed
in all Feeling. Organic substances have been made by chemists, and
inorganic “cells” have also been made; but these substances were not
organized, these “cells” would not live. The germ-cell is the workshop
of generation, the secreting-cell the workshop of secretion, the
muscle-cell the workshop of contraction. What is required over and
above organic substances and cell-forms, is that special state called
_organization_. See § 49.

Those who contemplate the manifestations without also taking into
account their modes of production may see nothing but physico-chemical
facts in vital facts. It is by a similar limitation of the point of
view that Vitality is often confounded with Movement, and portions
of organic matter are said to live, simply on the evidence of their
movements.[7]




