CHAPTER V.

VOLUNTARY AND INVOLUNTARY ACTIONS.


61. Much of what has been said in the preceding chapter respecting
the passive side of the organism is equally applicable to the active
side. Our actions are classed as voluntary and involuntary mainly in
reference to their being consciously or unconsciously performed; but
not wholly so, for there are many involuntary actions of which we are
distinctly conscious, and many voluntary actions of which we are at
times sub-conscious and unconscious. I do not propose here to open the
long and arduous discussion as to what constitutes Volition, my present
purpose being simply that of fixing the meaning of terms, so that the
question of Automatism may not be complicated by their ambiguities.
“Voluntary” and “involuntary” are, like “conscious” and “unconscious,”
correlative terms; but commonly, instead of being understood as
indicating differences of degree in phenomena of the same order, they
are supposed to indicate differences of kind--a new agent, the Will,
being understood in the one case to direct the Mechanism which suffices
without direction in the other.

62. This interpretation is unphysiological and unpsychological,
since it overlooks the fact that both voluntary and involuntary
actions belong to the same _order_ of phenomena, i. e. those of the
sentient organism. Both involve the same _efficient_ cause, i. e.
co-operant conditions. We draw a line of demarcation between the two
abstractions--as between all abstractions--but the concrete processes
they symbolize have no such demarcation. Just as the thought which at
one moment passes unconsciously, at another consciously, is in itself
the same thought, and the same neural process; so the action which at
one moment is voluntary, and at another involuntary, is itself the same
action, performed by the same mechanism. The incitation which precedes,
and the feeling which accompanies the action, belong to the accessory
mechanisms, and may be replaced by other incitations and other
feelings; as the fall of an apple is the same event, involving the same
conditions, i. e. efficient cause, whether the _occasional_ cause be a
gust of wind or the gardener’s scissors, and whether the fall be seen
and heard or not. I may utter words intentionally and consciously, and
I may utter the same words automatically, unconsciously; I may wink
voluntarily, and wink involuntarily. There are terms to express these
differences; but they do not express a difference in the efficient
agencies.

63. Many writers seem to think that the involuntary actions belong
to the physical mechanical order, because they are not stimulated by
cerebral incitations, and cannot be regulated or controlled by such
incitations--or as the psychologists would say, because Consciousness
in the form of Will is no agent prompting and regulating such actions.
But I think this untenable. The actions cannot belong to the mechanical
order so long as they are the actions of a vital mechanism, and so long
as we admit the broad distinction between organisms and anorganisms.
Whether they have the special character of Consciousness or not,
they have the general character of sentient actions, being those
of a sentient mechanism. And this becomes the more evident when we
consider the gradations of the phenomena. Many, if not all, of those
actions which are classed under the involuntary were originally of
the voluntary class--either in the individual or his ancestors; but
having become permanently organized dispositions--the pathways of
stimulation and reaction having been definitely established--they have
lost that volitional element (of hesitation and choice) which implies
regulation and control. But even here a slight change in the habitual
conditions will introduce a disturbance in the process which may
awaken Consciousness, and the sense of effort, sometimes even causing
control. An instinctive or an automatic action may be thus changed,
or arrested. Take as an example one of the unequivocally automatic
actions, that of Breathing. It is called automatic because, like the
actions of an automaton, it is performed by a definitely constructed
mechanism, always working in the same way when stimulated and left to
itself. There must of course be a sense of effort in every impulse
which has resistance to overcome, organs to be moved; but the mechanism
of Breathing is so delicately adjusted, that the sense of effort is
reduced to a minimum, and we are unconscious of it, or sub-conscious
of it. Nevertheless, without altering the rate or amplitude of the
inspirations and expirations, we become distinctly conscious of them,
and, moreover, within certain limits we can control them, so that the
Breathing passes from the involuntary to the voluntary class.

64. Pass on to other examples. What action can be more involuntary than
the rhythmic movements of the heart and the contractions of the iris?
Compared with the actions of the tongue or limbs, these seem riveted
by an iron necessity, freed from all consciousness and control. Yet
the movements of the heart are not only stimulated by sensations and
thoughts, they are also capable of being felt; and the movements both
of heart and iris are not wholly removed from our control. That we do
not habitually control (that is, _interfere_ with) the action of the
heart, the contraction of the iris, or the activity of a gland, is
true; it is on this account that such actions are called involuntary;
they obey the immediate stimulus. But it is an error to assert that
these actions _cannot_ be controlled, that they are altogether beyond
the interference of other centres, and cannot by any effort of ours
be modified. It is an error to suppose these actions are essentially
distinguished from the voluntary movement of the hands. We have
acquired a power of definite direction in the movements of the hands,
which renders them obedient to our will; but this acquisition has been
of slow laborious growth. If we were asked to use our toes as we use
our fingers--to grasp, paint, sew, or write with them, we should find
it not less impossible to control the movements of the toes in these
directions, than to contract the iris, or cause a burst of perspiration
to break forth. Certain movements of the toes are possible to us; but
unless the loss of our fingers has made it necessary that we should
use our toes in complicated and slowly acquired movements, we can do
no more with them than the young infant can do with his fingers. Yet
men and women have written, sewed, and painted with their toes. All
that is requisite is that certain links should be established between
sensations and movements; by continual practice these links _are_
established; and what is impossible to the majority of men, becomes
easy to the individual who has acquired this power. This same power
can be acquired over what are called the organic actions; nevertheless
the habitual needs of life do not _tend_ towards such acquisition,
and without some strong current setting in that direction, or some
peculiarity of organization rendering it easy, it is never acquired.
In ordinary circumstances the number of those who can write with their
toes is extremely rare, the urgent necessity which would create such a
power being rare; and rare also are the examples of those who have any
control over the movement of the iris, or the action of a gland; but
both rarities exist.

It would be difficult to choose a more striking example of reflex
action than the contraction of the iris of the eye under the stimulus
of light;[214] and to ordinary men, having no link established which
would guide them, it is utterly impossible to close the iris by any
effort. It would be not less impossible to the hungry child to get
on the chair and reach the food on the table, until that child had
_learned_ how to do so. Yet there are men who have learned how to
contract the iris. The celebrated Fontana had this power; which is
possessed also by a medical man now living at Kilmarnock--Dr. Paxton--a
fact authenticated by no less a person than Dr. Allen Thomson.[215] Dr.
Paxton can contract or expand the iris at will, without changing the
position of his eye, and without an effort of adaptation to distance.

To move the ears is impossible to most men. Yet some do it with ease,
and all could learn to do it. Some men have learned to “ruminate” their
food; others to vomit with ease; and some are said to have the power of
perspiring at will.[216] Now, if once we recognize a link of sensation
and motion, we recognize a possible source of control; and if the
daily needs of life were such that to fulfil some purpose the action
of the heart required control, we should learn to control it. Some
men have, without such needs, learned how to control it. The eminent
physiologist, E. F. Weber of Leipzig, found that he could completely
check the beating of his heart. By suspending his breath and violently
contracting his chest, he could retard the pulsations; and after
three or five beats, unaccompanied by any of the usual sounds, it was
completely still. On one occasion he carried the experiment too far,
and fell into a syncope. Cheyne, in the last century, recorded the case
of a patient of his own who could at will suspend the beating of his
pulse, and always fainted when he did so.

65. It thus appears that even the actions which most distinctly bear
the character recognized as involuntary--uncontrollable--are only so
because the ordinary processes of life furnish no necessity for their
control. We do not learn to control them, though we could do so, to
some extent; nor do we learn to control the motions of our ears,
although we could do so. And while it appears that the involuntary
actions can become voluntary, it is familiar to all that the voluntary
actions tend, by constant repetition, to become involuntary. Thus
involuntary actions, under certain limitations, may be controlled; on
the other hand, the voluntary are incapable of being controlled under
the urgency of direct stimulation. Both are reflexes.

Inasmuch as almost all actions are the products of stimulated
nerve-centres, it is obvious that these actions are reflex--reflected
from those centres. It matters not whether I wink because a sensation
of dryness, or because an idea of danger, causes the eyelid to close:
the act is equally reflex. The nerve-centre which supplies the eyelid
with its nerve has been stimulated; the stimuli may be various, the
act is uniform. At one time the stimulus is a sensation of dryness,
at another an idea of danger, at another the idea of communicating
by means of a wink with some one present; in each case the stimulus
is reflected in a muscular contraction. Sensations excite other
sensations; ideas excite other ideas; and one of these ideas may issue
in an action of control. But the restraining power is limited, and
cannot resist a certain degree of urgency in the original stimulus. I
can, for a time, restrain the act of winking, in spite of the sensation
of dryness; but the reflex which sets going this restraining action
will only last a few seconds; after which, the urgency of the external
stimulus is stronger than that of the reflex feeling--the sensation of
dryness is more imperious than the idea of resistance--and the eyelid
drops.

If a knife be brought near the arm of a man who has little confidence
in the friendly intentions of him that holds it, he shrinks, and the
shrinking is “involuntary,” i. e. in spite of his will. Let him have
confidence, and he does not shrink, even when the knife touches his
skin. The idea of danger is not excited in the second case, or if
excited, is at once banished by another idea. Yet this very man, who
can thus repress the involuntary shrinking when the knife approaches
his arm, cannot repress the involuntary winking when the same friend
approaches a finger to his eye. In vain he prepares himself to resist
that reflex action; in vain he resolves to resist the impulse; no
sooner does the finger approach, than down flashes the eyelid. Many
men, and most women, would be equally unable to resist shrinking on the
approach of a knife: the association of the idea of danger with the
knife would bear down any previous resolution not to shrink. It is from
this cause that timorous women tremble at the approach of firearms. An
association is established in their minds which no idea is powerful
enough to loosen. You may assure them the gun is not loaded; “_that_
makes very little difference,” said a naïve old lady to a friend of
mine. They tremble, as the child trembles when he sees you put on the
mask. These illustrations show that the urgency of any one idea may,
like the urgency of a sensation, bear down the resistance offered by
some other idea; as the previous illustrations showed that an idea
could restrain or control the action which a sensation or idea would
otherwise have produced. According to the doctrines current, the Will
is said to be operative when an idea determines an action; and yet all
would agree that the winking which was involuntary when the idea of
danger determined it, was voluntary when the idea of communicating with
an accomplice in some mystification determined it.

66. There is no real and essential distinction between voluntary and
involuntary actions. They all spring from Sensibility. They are all
determined by feeling. It is convenient, for common purposes, to
designate some actions as voluntary; but this is merely a convenience;
no psychological nor physiological insight is gained by it; an analysis
of the process discloses no element in a voluntary action which is
not to be found in an involuntary action--except in the origin or
degree of stimulation. In ordinary language it is convenient to mark a
distinction between my raising my arm because I will to raise it for
some definite purpose, and my raising it because a bee has stung me; it
is convenient to say, “I _will_ to write this letter,” and “this letter
is written against my will--I have no will in the matter.” But Science
is more exacting when it aims at being exact; and the philosopher,
analyzing these complex actions, will find that in each case certain
muscular groups have been set in action by different sensational or
ideational stimuli. The action itself is that of a neuro-muscular
mechanism, which mechanism works in the same way, whatever be the
source of the original impulse. The stimulation may be incited
directly from the periphery, or indirectly from a remote centre; and
the action may be arrested by a peripheral or central stimulation:
the reflex which ordinarily follows the excitation of a sensory nerve
will be modified, or arrested, if some other nerve be at the same time
stimulated. (See Law of Arrest, _Prob._ II. § 190.)

67. All actions are reflex, all are the operations of a mechanism,
all are sentient, because the mechanism has Sensibility as its vital
property. In thus preserving the integrity of the order of vital
phenomena, and keeping them classified apart from physical and chemical
phenomena, we by no means set aside the useful distinctions expressed
in the terms voluntary and involuntary; any more than we set aside the
distinction of vertebrate and invertebrate when both are classed under
Animal, and separated from Plant, or Planet.

The mechanisms of the special Senses respond in special reactions;
the mechanisms of special actions have also their several responses.
The tail responds to stimulation with lateral movements, the chest
with inspiration and expiration, and so on. These responses are called
automatic, and have this in common with the actions of automata that
they are uniform, and do not need the co-operation of Consciousness,
though they do need the operation of Sensibility, and are thereby
distinguished from the actions of automata. The facial muscles, and
the limbs, also respond to stimulation in uniform ways, but owing to
the varieties of stimulation the actions are more variable, and have
more the character of volitional movements. With this greater freedom
of possible action comes the eminently mental character of _choice_.
In the cerebral rehearsal of an act not yet performed--its mental
prevision--as when we intend to do something, yet for the moment
arrest the act, so that there is only a nascent excitation of the
motor process, there is a peculiar state of Consciousness expressive
of this state of the mechanism: we call the prevision a _motive_--and
it becomes a _motor_ when the intention is realized, the nascent
excitation becomes an unchecked impulse. The abstract of all motives we
call Will. A motive is a volition in the sphere of the Intellect. In
the sphere of Emotion it is a motor. Hence we never speak of the Will
of a mollusc, or the motives of an insect, only of their sensations and
motors. Yet it is obvious that the reflex in operation when a snail
shrinks at the approach of an object is essentially similar to the
reflex in operation when the baby shrinks, and this again is still more
similar to that in operation when the boy shrinks: the boy has the idea
of danger, which neither baby nor snail can have; the idea is a motive,
which can be controlled by another idea; the baby and the snail can
have no such motive, no such control--are they therefore automata?

68. If I see that a donkey has wandered into my garden, the motive
which determines me to take a stick and with it drive the donkey
away is a cerebral rehearsal of the effects which will follow my
act. The sight of the donkey has roused disagreeable feelings,
and these suggest possible means of alleviation; out of these
possibilities--reproductions of former experiences--I choose one.
But if I seize the stick with which some one is threatening me, I do
not pause to choose, I snatch automatically without hesitation. Yet
this unreflecting automatic act is itself as truly volitional as my
seizing the stick to drive away the donkey--it is the motor which has
been organized in me by previous experiences--it is the consequence
of an emotion, not of a deliberation; and it has not been determined
by any clear prevision of consequences. Feeling inspires, and feeling
guides my movements, so that if my snatch has missed the stick, I
snatch again, or duck under. This is the kind of Volition we ascribe
to animals. It is a great part of our own. By insensible degrees, acts
which originally were prompted by motives sink into the automatic
class prompted by motors. When an angry man snatches up a knife, doffs
bystanders aside, and rushes on his enemy to stab him, he does not
distinctly prefigure the final result, he only obeys each motor, and
is conscious of each step; but had he planned the murder he would have
foreseen the end, and this prevision would have been the motive. The
angry man is struck with horror at the sight of the bleeding corpse,
and passionately declares he did not _mean_ to kill. Nor did he will
the consequences of his act, yet he certainly willed each separate
step--he recognized the knife, saw the bystanders, knew they would
interfere with him, willed to push them aside. He may be right in
declaring that the act was involuntary; but assuredly it was not purely
mechanical.

69. Again, we are not conscious of the separate sensations which guide
speech or writing; we cannot properly be said to will the utterance
of each tone, or the formation of each letter. Are these processes
mechanical and not volitional? By no means. We know that they were
laboriously learned by long tentative efforts, each of which was
accompanied by distinct consciousness. We also know that now when the
mechanism is so easy in its adjustment as to suggest automatism, there
needs but a slight alteration in the conditions to make us distinctly
conscious of the processes--the wrong word spoken, or one letter ill
formed, suffices to arrest the easy working of the mechanism. A similar
mechanism operates in thinking, which also lapses from the conscious
and voluntary to the unconscious and involuntary state. The logical
process of Judgment is as purely a reflex from one neural group to
another, as the physiological process of co-ordination. In ordinary
thinking we are as little conscious of the particular steps--our
interest being concentrated on the result--as we are of the particular
stages of an action. The adjustments of the mechanism of Reproduction
and Association are _set_ going by a motive, and _kept_ going by
psychological motors. And here--as in bodily actions--there is often
a conflict between motive and motors--between the foreseen result,
and the available means of reaching it--the motors usually prevailing
because they represent the active side of the mechanism. Thus when an
oculist wishes to examine a patient’s eye, he does not tell him to give
a particular direction to his eye, knowing that the _motive_ to do so
will not suffice; instead of this he simply moves his own hand in the
desired direction, certain that the eye will by reflex irresistibly
follow it. Nay, there are sometimes such anomalies of innervation
that the eye, instead of obeying the motive, moves in a contrary
direction. Meschede mentions a patient whose movements were mostly of
this anomalous kind: when he willed to move the eyes to the right, they
moved to the left; when he willed to move them up, they moved down. It
was thus also with his hands and feet. Yet he was distinctly conscious
that his intention had been frustrated, and that he acted “because he
could not help it.”[217] How insensibly a motive sinks into a motor,
that is to say, a voluntary into an involuntary act, may be recognized
in speech, writing, singing, walking, etc., and in the incessant
movements of the eye in fixing objects. Aubert has well remarked
that we only give definite movements to the eye when we wish to see
an object distinctly. Whenever the indistinct vision suffices--as in
walking through the streets occupied in conversation or thought--we
make no such movements; but no sooner does any object excite our
attention, than the effort to fix that object at once excites the
necessary reflex.[218]

70. By the Will, then, we must understand the abstract generalized
expression of the impulses which determine actions, when those
impulses have an ideal origin; by Volition the still more generalized
expression of all impulses which determine actions. The one class is
that of _motives_ with ideal elements; the other that of _motors_ with
sensational or emotional elements. But both are mental states, both
are neural processes in a sentient organism; neither is mechanical,
except in so far as all actions are expressible in mechanical terms.
For convenience we class actions as reflex, automatic, involuntary,
unconscious, voluntary, and conscious. If we separate the reflex
from the voluntary, we need not therefore dissociate the former from
Sensibility; and the reason why we ought not to separate it is that we
know it to be sense-guided from first to last, although the sensations
may escape discrimination. The feeling of Effort, which was formerly
felt when an action was performed, may have become so minimized
that it is too faint for more than a momentary consciousness, too
evanescent for the memory to retain it; yet the feeling must always
be operant when its mechanism is in action. The ease with which the
mechanism works does not change the adjustment of its elements, nor
alter its character. The facile unobtrusive performance of a vital
function does not change it from a vital to a mechanical act. Mr.
Spencer seems to me to express himself ambiguously when he says:
“Just as any set of psychical changes originally displaying Memory,
Reason, and Feeling cease to be conscious, rational, and emotional
as fast as they by repetition grow closely organized, so do they at
the same time pass beyond the sphere of Volition. Memory, Reason,
Feeling, and Will disappear in proportion as psychical changes become
automatic”[219]--for while it is perfectly true that we only call those
psychical changes “automatic” which have lost the special qualities
called “conscious, rational, and emotional,” it is not less true that
they remain from first to last _psychical_ changes, and are thereby
distinguished from _physical_ changes. To suppose that they pass from
the psychical to the physical by frequent repetition would lead to the
monstrous conclusion that when a naturalist has by laborious study
become so familiarized with the specific marks of an animal or plant
that he can recognize at a glance a particular species, or recognize
from a single character the nature of the rest, the rapidity and
certainty of this judgment proves it to be a mechanical, not a mental
act. The intuition with which a mathematician sees the solution of a
problem would then be a mechanical process, while the slow and bungling
hesitation of the tyro in presence of the same problem would be a
mental process: the perfection of the organism would thus result in its
degradation to the level of a machine!

The operations of the intellect may furnish us with an illustration.
Ideas are symbols of sensations. The idea of a horse is an abstraction
easily traceable to concrete sensations, yet as an abstraction is
so different a state of feeling that we only identify it with its
concretes by a careful study of its stages of evolution, namely,
sensation, image, reproduced images resembling yet differing from the
original sensation, a coalescence of their resemblances, and finally
the substitution of a verbal symbol for these images. With this symbol
the intellect operates, and sometimes operates so exclusively with it
that not the faintest trace of image or sensation is appreciable--the
word horse takes the place of the image in the sequence of sensorial
processes, just as the image takes the place of the sensation. It does
this as a neural equivalent. In the same way we substitute verbal
symbols for a bag of sovereigns when we pay a creditor with a check;
he pays the check away to another; and this monetary equivalent passes
from hand to hand without a single coin making its appearance. Does
the transaction cease to be commercial, monetary, in this substitution
of signs? No; nor does a process cease to be psychical when an image
is substituted for a sensation, and a verbal symbol for an image. This
every one will admit. Must we not go further, and extend the admission
to automatic actions which originally were voluntary, and have now lost
all trace of ideal prevision, and almost all traces of accompanying
consciousness? _The motor mechanism has its symbols also_; in this
sense, that whereas the action which at first needed complex sensorial
processes to set it going and keep it going, is now determined by a
single one of those processes taking the place of their resultant. When
a practised accountant runs his eye up a column of figures, he does
not pause to realize the values of those figures by decomposing the
symbols into their numerical units, he simply groups one symbol with
another according to their intuited relations, and the final result is
reached with a certainty not less, and a rapidity far greater, than if
it had been reached by step-by-step verification. It is thus with the
pianoforte-player. It is thus with all automatic performances, except
those dependent on the connate adjustments of the mechanism.




