CHAPTER II.

DEFINITIONS OF LIFE.


25. Biology, the science of Life, being thus assigned its place in the
hierarchy of objective laws, we now proceed to consider what the term
Life symbolizes.

By a large preliminary simplification, Life may be defined as _the
mode of existence of an organism in relation to its medium_. To render
this of any value, however, a clear conception of the organism is
first indispensable; and this must be preceded by an examination of
the various attempts to define life in anticipation of such a clear
conception.

26. Every phenomenon, or group of phenomena, may be viewed under
two aspects--the _statical_, which considers the conditions of
existence; and the _dynamical_, which considers these conditions in
their resultant,--in their _action_. The statical definition of Life
will express the connexus of the properties of organized substance,
all those conditions, of matter, form, and texture, and of relation
to external forces, on which the organism depends. These various
conditions, condensed into a single symbol, constitute Vitality or
Vital Force, and are hence taken as the Cause of vital phenomena.
The dynamical definition will express the connexus of Functions and
Faculties of the organism, which are the statical properties of
organized substance in action, under definite relations.

It is obvious that the term Life must vary with the varying
significates it condenses,--every variation in the complexity of the
organism will bring a corresponding fulness in the signification of
the term. The life of a plant is less significant than the life of
an animal; and the life of a mollusc less than that of a fish. But
not only is the term one of varying significance, it is always an
abstract term which drops out of sight particular concrete differences,
registering only the universal resemblances.

       *       *       *       *       *

27. It would be a profitless labor to search out, and a wearisome
infliction to set down, the various definitions which have been
proposed and accepted; but certain characteristic examples may be
selected. All that I am acquainted with belong to two classes: 1°, the
_meta_-physiological hypothesis of an _extra_-organic agent, animating
lifeless matter by unknown powers; 2°, the physiological hypothesis
which seeks the cause of the phenomena (i. e. the conditions) _within_
the organism itself,--a group of conditions akin to those manifested
elsewhere, but differently combined. The first hypotheses are known
under the names of Animism and Vitalism,--more commonly the latter. The
second are known as Organicism and Materialism,--but the latter term
only applies to some of the definitions.

28. Under Vitalism are included all the hypotheses of a soul, a spirit,
an archæus, a vital principle, a vital force, a _nisus formativus_,
a plan or divine idea, which have from time to time represented the
metaphysical stage of Biology. The characteristic of that stage is
the personification of a mystery, accompanied by the persuasion that
to name a mystery is to explain it. In all sciences when processes
are imperfectly observed, the _theory_ of the processes (which is a
systematic survey of the available evidence marshalled in the order
of causal dependence) is supplemented by _hypothesis_, which fills up
with a guess the gap left by observation. The difference between the
metaphysical and the positive stages of a science lies in the kind of
guess thus introduced to supplement theory, and the degree of reliance
accorded to it. I have more than once insisted on the scientific
canon that “to be valid, an explanation must be expressed in terms of
phenomena already observed”; now it is quite clear that most of the
extra-organic hypotheses do not fulfil this condition; no one having
ever _observed_ a spirit, an archæus, or a vital principle; but only
_imagined_ these agents to explain the facts observed. As an example of
the difference, and a proof that the value of an hypothesis does not
rest on the facility with which it connects observations, and seems
to explain them, take the three hypotheses of animal spirits, nervous
fluid, and electricity, by which neural processes have been explained.
The animal spirits are imaginary; the nervous fluid is without a basis
in observation, no evidence of such a fluid having been detected;
but electricity (or, speaking rigorously, the movements classed as
electrical), although not proved to be _the_ agent in nerve-action,
is proved to exist in nerves as elsewhere, and its modes of operation
are verifiable. It, therefore, and it alone of the three hypotheses,
is in conformity with the scientific canon. It may not, on full
investigation, meet all requirements; it may be rejected as imperfect;
but it is the kind of guess which scientific theory demands.

The second difference noticeable between the metaphysical and the
positive stages is the degree of reliance accorded to hypothesis;
which is very much the same as that noticeable in the uncritical and
critical attitudes of untrained and trained intellects. The one accepts
a guess as if it were a proof; is fascinated by the facility of linking
together isolated observations, and, relying on the guess as truth,
proceeds to deduce conclusions from it; the other accepts a guess as
an aid in research, trying by its aid to come upon some observation
which will reveal the hidden process; but careful never to allow the
guess to _supersede observation_, or to form a basis of deductions not
immediately verified.

29. A glance at the metaphysiological definitions will detect both the
kind of guess and the kind of reliance which prevailed. The mystery
was not simply recognized, it was personified as an entity: Will and
Intelligence were liberally accorded to it, for it was supposed to
shape matter, and direct force into predestined paths by prescience of
a distant end. The observed facts of the egg passing through successive
changes into a complex organism were so marvellous, so unlike any
facts observable in the inorganic world, that they seemed to demand a
cause drawn from higher sources. The mystery of life obtruded itself
at every turn. It was named, and men fancied it explained. But in
truth no mystery is got rid of by explanation, however valid; it is
only shifted farther back. Explanation is the resolution of a complex
phenomenon into its conditions of existence--the product is reduced to
its factors; the explanation is final when this resolution has been
so complete that a reconstruction of the product is possible from
the factors. The vast majority of explanations--especially in the
organic region--are no more than what mathematicians call “a first
approximation.” It is through successive approximations that science
advances; but even when the final stage is reached a mystery remains.
We may know that certain elements combine in certain proportions
to produce certain substances; but why they produce these, and not
different substances, is no clearer than why muscles contract or
organisms die. This Why is, however, an idle question. That alone which
truly concerns us is the How, and not the Why.

30. Biology is still a long way off the How. But it can boast of
many approximations; and its theories are to be tested by the degree
of approximation they effect. In this light the physiological,
_intra_-organic, hypotheses manifestly have the advantage. Many of them
are indeed very unacceptable; they are guided by a mistaken conception
of the truths reached by Analysis. For when men first began to discard
the extra-organic hypotheses, and to look into the organism itself,
they were so much impressed by the mechanical facts observed, that they
endeavored to reduce all the phenomena to Mechanics. The circulation
became simply a question of hydraulics. Digestion was explained as
trituration. The chemists then appeared, and their shibboleths were
“affinities” and “oxidations.” With Bichat arose the anatomical school,
which decomposing the organism into organs, the organs into tissues,
and these tissues into their elements, sought the analytical conditions
of existence of the organism in the properties of these tissues, and
the functions of these organs. The extra-organic agent was thus finally
shown to be not only a fiction, but a needless fiction.

Every student of the history of the science will note how from the very
necessities of the case the metaphysiologists, without relinquishing
their Vital Principle, have been led more and more to enter on the
track of the physiologists, pursuing their researches more and more
into the processes going on in the organism, and assigning more and
more causal efficiency to these, with a corresponding restriction
of the province of their extra-organic cause. Hence in the ranks of
the vitalists have been found some of the very best observers and
theorists; but they were such in despite of, and not in consequence
of, their hypothesis, which was only invoked by them when evidence
was at fault. Nor, unscientific as vitalism is, can we deny that it
has been so far serviceable to the science, that it has corrected the
materialist error of endeavoring to explain organic phenomena by
physico-chemical laws; and has persistently kept in view the radical
difference between organic and inorganic.

31. These remarks may justify a selection of definitions, classified
under the two heads. The selection is fitly opened by the Aristotelian
definition which prevailed for centuries.

Aristotle distinguishes Life, which he says means “the faculties of
self-nourishment, self-development, and self-decay,” from the Vital
Principle. Every natural body manifesting life may be regarded as an
essential existence (οὐσία); but _then it is an existence only as a
synthesis_ (ὡς συθέτη); and since an organism is such a synthesis,
being possessed of Life, it cannot be the Vital Principle (ψυχή).
Therefore it follows that the Vital Principle must be an essence, as
being the Form of a natural body holding life in _potentiality_. The
Vital Principle is the primary reality of an organism. “It is therefore
as idle to ask whether the Vital Principle and Organism are one, as
whether the wax and the impress on it are one.... Thus if an eye
were an animal, Vision would be its Vital Principle: for Vision is,
abstractedly considered, the essence of the eye; but the eye is the
body of Vision, and if Vision be wanting, then, save in name, it is no
longer an eye.”

Apart from certain metaphysical implications, inevitable at that
period, there is profound insight in this passage. His adversary
Telesio quite misconceives the meaning here assigned to the Vital
Principle.[8]

32. Let us pass over all the intermediate forms of the hypothesis, and
descend to Kant, who defines Life “an internal principle of action”
(this does not distinguish it from fermentation); an organism he says
is “that in which every part is at once means and end.” “Each part
of the living body has its cause of existence in the whole organism;
whereas in non-living bodies each part has its cause in itself.”
Johannes Müller adopts a similar view: “The harmonious action of the
essential parts of the individual subsist only by the influence of a
force, the operation of which is extended to all parts of the body,
and does not depend on any single parts; this _force must exist before
the parts_, which are in fact formed by it during the development of
the embryo.... The vital force inherent in them generates from the
organic matter the essential organs which constitute the whole being.
This _rational creative force_ is exerted in every animal strictly in
accordance with what the nature of each requires.”

33. This is decidedly inferior to Aristotle, who did not confound
the vegetative with the rational principle. It rests on the old
metaphysical error of a _vis medicatrix_, an error which cannot
sustain itself against the striking facts which constantly point to
a _vis destructrix_, a destructive tendency quite as inexorable as
the curative tendency. And the experimental biologist soon becomes
impressed with the fact that the tissues have indeed a _selective_
action, by which from out the nutrient material only these substances
are assimilated which will enter into combination with them; but this
selective action is fatal, no less than reparative: substances which
poison the tissue are taken up as readily as those which nourish
it. The idea of prescience, therefore, cannot be sustained; it is
indeed seldom met with now in the writings of any but the Montpellier
school, who continue the traditions of Stahl’s teaching. It has been
so long exploded elsewhere that one is surprised to find an English
physiologist clinging to a modification of it--I mean Dr. Lionel Beale,
who repeatedly insists on Life as “a peculiar Force, _temporarily
associated_ with matter,” a “power capable of controlling and directing
both matter and force,” an “_undiscovered_ form of force _having no
connection with primary energy or motion_.” “The higher phenomena of
the nervous system are probably due primarily to the movements of the
germinal matter due to vital power, which vital power of this the
highest form of germinal matter is in fact the living _I_.”

34. Apart from the primary objection to all these definitions,
namely, that they seek to express organic phenomena in terms of an
extra-organic principle, to formulate the facts _observed_ in terms
of a cause _inferred_, there is the fatal objection that they speak
confidently on what is avowedly unknown. If the force be, as Dr. Beale
says, “undiscovered,” on what grounds can he assert that it has _no_
connection with the forces which are known? All that the observed facts
warrant is the assertion that organic phenomena are special (which
no one denies), and must therefore depend on special combinations of
matter and force. But on this ground we might assume a crystallizing
Force, and a coagulating Force, having no connection with the molecular
forces manifested elsewhere: these also are special phenomena, not to
be confounded with each other.

35. Schelling defines Life as “a principle of individuation” and a
“cycle of successive changes determined and fixed by this internal
principle.” Which is so vague that it may be applied in very different
senses. Bichat’s celebrated definition (which is only a paraphrase of
a sentence in Stahl), “the sum of the functions which resist Death,”
although an endeavor to express the facts from the Intra-organic point
of view, is not only vague, but misrepresents one of the cardinal
conditions, by treating the External Medium as antagonistic to Life,
whereas Life is only possible in the relation to a Medium.

36. Were it not so vague, the definition proposed by Dugès and Béclard
would be unexceptionable: the former says it is “the special activity
of organized beings”; the latter, “the sum of the phenomena proper to
organized bodies.” When supplemented by a description of organized
bodies, these formulæ are compendious and exact. The same remark
applies to the definition of Lamarck: “that state of things which
permits organic movements; and these movements, which constitute active
life, result from a stimulus which excites them.”

37. De Blainville, and after him Comte and Charles Robin, define
it thus: “Life is the twofold internal movement of composition and
decomposition at once general and continuous.” This, excellent as
regards what is called vegetal life, is very properly objected to by
Mr. Herbert Spencer in that it excludes those nervous and muscular
functions which are the most conspicuous and distinctive of vital
phenomena. The same objection must be urged against Professor Owen’s
definition: “Life is a centre of intussusceptive assimilative force
capable of reproduction by spontaneous fission.”

38. In 1853, after reviewing the various attempts to express in a
sentence what a volume could only approximately expound, I proposed the
following: “Life is a series of definite and successive changes, both
of structure and composition, which take place within an individual
without destroying its identity.” This has been criticised by Mr.
Herbert Spencer and by Dr. Lionel Beale, and if I had not withdrawn
it before their criticisms appeared, I should certainly have modified
and enlarged it afterwards. I mention it, however, because it is an
approach to a more satisfactory formula in so far as it specifies two
cardinal characteristics distinguishing organisms from all anorganisms,
namely, the incessant evolution through definite stages, and the
preservation of specific integrity throughout the changes; not only
the organism as a whole is preserved amidst incessant molecular
change, but each tissue lives only so long as the reciprocal molecular
composition and decomposition persist. On both of these points I shall
have to speak hereafter. The definition, however, is not only defective
in its restriction to the molecular changes of Nutrition, taking no
account of the Properties and Functions of the organism; but defective
also in giving no expression to equally important relations of the
organism to the medium.

39. This last point is distinctly expressed in Mr. Spencer’s
definition: “Life is the continuous adjustment of internal relations
to external relations.” Considered as a formula of the most general
significance, embracing therefore what is common to all orders of vital
phenomena, this is the best yet proposed.[9] If I propose another it
will not be to displace but to run alongside with Mr. Spencer’s; and
this only for more ready convenience. Before doing so I must say a few
words by way of clearing the ground.

40. What does the term Life stand for? What are the concrete
significates of this abstract symbol? As before stated, it is sometimes
a compendious shorthand for the special phenomena distinguishing living
from non-living bodies; and sometimes it expresses not these observed
phenomena, but their conditions of existence, which are by one school
personified in an abstract and extra-organic cause. Thus the life of
an animal, a man, or a nation, means--1°, the special manifestations
of these organisms, and groups of organisms; or 2°, the causes which
produce these manifestations. We are often misunderstood by others, and
sometimes vague to ourselves, when we do not bear these two different
meanings in view. It was probably some sense of this which made
Aristotle distinguish Vitality from Life, as that of the one uniform
cause separated from its multiple effects; it was certainly the motive
of Fletcher, who thus expressly limits the meanings: “_Vitality_ or
_Irritability_, the property which characterizes organized beings
of being acted on by certain powers otherwise than either strictly
mechanically or strictly chemically; _Life_, the sum of the actions
of organized beings resulting directly from their vitality so acted
on.”[10]

Vitality and Life being thus discriminated as the statical and
the dynamical aspects of the organism, we find in relation to the
former two radically opposed conceptions: the metaphysiological or
extra-organic, and the physiological or intra-organic. The first
conceives Vitality to be a Vital Principle, or extra-organic agent,
sometimes a soul, spirit, archæus, idea, and sometimes a force, which
easily becomes translated into a property.

The conception of an entity must be rejected, because it is
metempirical and unverifiable, § 34. The conception of a force must
be rejected, because it is irreconcilable with any definite idea we
have of force. What the term Force signifies in Physics and Chemistry,
namely, mass animated by velocity, or _directed pressure_, which is
the activity of the agent,--is precisely that which these vitalists
pertinaciously exclude. They assume a force which has nothing in
common with mass and velocity; which is _not a resultant, but a
principle_; which instead of being a _directed quantity_, is itself
autonomous and _directive_, shaping matter into organization, and
endowing it with powers not assignable to matter. If this vital force
has any mass at its back, it is a spiritual mass; if it is directed,
the direction issues from a “Mind somewhere.” Now this conception is
purely metempirical. Not only is it inexact to speak of Vitality as
a force, it is almost equally inexact to speak of it as a property;
since it is a term which includes a variety of properties; and when
Fletcher assigns the synonym of Irritability, this at once reveals the
inexactness; for beside this property, we must place Assimilation,
Evolution, Disintegration, Reproduction, Contractility, and
Sensibility,--all characteristic properties included in Vitality.

41. Having thus rejected the conceptions of entity, force, and
property, we are left in presence of--1°, the organic conditions as the
elements, and 2°, of their synthesis (in the state called organization)
as the personified principle. Vital forces, or the vital force, if
we adopt the term for brevity’s sake, is a _symbol of the conditions
of existence of organized matter_; and since organisms are specially
distinguishable from anorganisms by this speciality of their synthesis,
and not by any difference in the nature of the elements combined, this
state of organization is the “force” or “principle” of which we are in
quest. To determine what Life means, we must observe and classify the
phenomena presented by living beings. To determine what Vitality--or
organization--means, we must observe and classify the processes which
go on in organized substances. These will occupy us in the succeeding
chapters; here I may so far anticipate as to propose the following
definitions:--

42. Life is the functional activity of an organism in relation to
its medium, as a synthesis of three terms: Structure, Aliment, and
Instrument; it is the sum of functions which are the resultants of
Vitality; Vitality being the sum of the properties of matter in the
state of organization.

43. Vital phenomena are the phenomena manifested _in_ organisms when
external agencies disturb their molecular equilibrium; and _by_
organisms when they react on external objects. Thus everything done in
an organism, or by an organism, is a vital act, although physical and
chemical agencies may form essential components of the act. If I shrink
when struck, or if I whip a horse, the blow is in each case physical,
but the shrinking and the striking are vital.

Every part of a living organism is therefore vital, as _pertaining_
to Life; but no part has this Life when isolated; for Life is the
synthesis of all the parts: a federation of the organs when the
organism is complex, a federation of the organic substances when the
organism is a simple cell.

44. All definitions, although didactically placed at the introduction
of a treatise, are properly the final expression of the facts which
the treatise has established, and they cannot therefore be fully
apprehended until the mind is familiarized with the details they
express. Much, therefore, which to the reader may seem unintelligible
or questionable in the foregoing definition, must be allowed to pass
until he has gone through the chapters which follow.




