CHAPTER IV.

THE PROPERTIES AND FUNCTIONS.


81. The terms Property and Function are not always used with desirable
precision. There is, however, a marked distinction between the property
which characterizes a tissue in whatever organ the tissue may be found,
and the function which is exhibited by an organ composed of several
tissues. We ought never to speak of a function unless we imply the
existence of a correlative organ; and it is therefore incorrect to
speak of the function of Nutrition, since _all_ the tissues nourish
themselves; but we may speak of certain organs as special instruments
in facilitating Nutrition. Thus also with respiration, usually, but not
accurately, spoken of as the function of the lungs; the lungs being
simply the most effective of the instruments by which the interchange
of gases (which also takes place in every tissue) is facilitated. If
by Respiration we mean Breathing, then, indeed, Respiration is the
function of the lungs; if we mean the absorption of oxygen and the
exhalation of carbonic acid, Respiration is a general property of
vital tissue. A fragment of muscle removed from the body respires, so
long as its organization is intact; but it does not _breathe_--it has
no accessory instruments, nor does it need them. The co-operation of
nerve centres, diaphragm, ribs, circulating system, etc., necessary
in the complex organism to bring the due amount of oxygen to the
tissues, and convey away the carbonic acid, is here needless. In
the ascending animal series we find this necessity growing with the
complexity of the organism. The whole skin respires in the amphibia,
and to some extent in man also: a frog will live for ten or fourteen
days after extirpation of its lungs, the skin respiring sufficiently
to keep up a feeble vitality. But the skin does not suffice; and, very
early, certain portions are specialized into organs (at first in the
shape of external gills, and finally as internal lungs), for the more
energetic, because more specialized, performance of this office. In the
simpler organisms the blood is easily reached by the air; therefore no
instrument is needed. In primitive societies the transport of goods is
effected by men and women carrying them; in civilized societies by the
aid of horses and camels, and wagons drawn by oxen; till finally these
are insufficient, and railways are created, whose power of transport
transcends the earlier methods, as the breathing of a mammal transcends
the respiration of a mollusc. Breathing is the special function of an
organ--the lungs (or more strictly, the thoracic apparatus)--as Railway
Transport is a special social function. Although each of the tissues
forming this organ can, and does, exhale carbonic acid and absorb
oxygen--and each of the railway servants can, and does, transport
objects to and from the locomotive--yet the main work is thrown upon
the special apparatus.

82. What is meant by properties of tissue and functions of organs
may be thus illustrated. Let us suppose ourselves investigating the
structure of a ship. We find it composed of various _materials_--wood,
iron, copper, hemp, canvas, etc.; and these under various
_configurations_ are formed into particular parts serving particular
purposes, such as deck, masts, anchor, windlass, chains, ropes, sails,
etc. In all these parts the materials preserve their properties; and
wherever wood or iron may be placed, whatever purpose the part may
serve, the properties of wood and iron are unaffected; and it is
through a combination of these properties that the part is effective;
while through the connection of one part with another the purpose
becomes realized. The purposes to which masts, ropes, or sails are
subservient may be called their functions; and these of course only
exist, _as such_, in the ship. It is the same with the organism. We
find it composed of various Tissues, and these are combined into
various Organs or Instruments.[34] The properties of Tissues remain
the same, no matter into what Organs they may be combined; they
preserve and exert their physical, chemical, and vital properties,
as wood and iron preserve their properties. Each Tissue has its
characteristic quality; and the Organ which is constructed out of a
combination of several Tissues, more or less modified, is effective
solely in virtue of these properties,[35] while the Function of that
organ comes into play through its combination with other organs. For
example, muscular tissue has a vital property which is characteristic
of it, Contractility; and muscles are organs constituted by this
tissue and several others;[36] such organs have the general function
of Contraction, but whether this shall be specially manifested in
the beating of the heart, the winking of the eyelid, the movement
of the chest, or the varied movements of the limbs, will depend on
the _anatomical connections_. The reader unfamiliar with Biology is
requested to pay very particular attention to this point; he will find
many obscurities dissipated if he once lays hold of the “principal
connections.”

82_a_. Although Bichat’s conception was of great value, it was
not sufficiently disengaged from the metaphysical mode of viewing
biological phenomena. Both he and his disciples will be found treating
Properties as entities, and invoking them as _causes_ of the phenomena
instead of recognizing them simply as abstract _expressions_ of the
phenomena. Readers of my First Series will remember how often I have
had occasion to point out this common error: men having baptized
observed facts with a comprehensive name, forget the process of
baptism, and suppose the name to represent a mysterious agency. The
fact that gases combine is expressed in the term affinity; and then
Affinity is understood to be the cause of the combinations. The fact
that bodies tend towards each other is called their gravitation, and
Gravitation is then said to cause the tendency. The doctrine of vital
properties has been thus misunderstood. While no one imagines that
he can operate on affinity otherwise than by operating on the known
conditions under which gases combine, many a biologist and physician
speaks as if he could operate on the Irritability of a tissue, or the
Co-ordination of muscles, by direct action on these abstractions.

Let it be therefore once for all expressly stated that by the property
of a tissue is simply meant the _constant mode of reaction of that
tissue under definite conditions_. The property is not a cause,
otherwise than the conditions it expresses are a cause. And these
conditions are first those of the organized structure itself, and
secondly those of the medium in which it lives. Oxygen unites with
Hydrogen to form water, but only under certain pressures; so likewise
muscles manifest Contractility on being stimulated (that is their mode
of reaction), but only under certain degrees of temperature, humidity,
and a certain chemical composition of the plasmode. The property is
so truly an expression of the co-operant conditions, that it is found
to vary with those conditions, and to vanish when they vary beyond a
certain limit.

An attempt has been made to restrict the notion of a property to an
ultimate fact. Whatever is not reducible to known conditions is to
be accepted as a property. Combustion, for example, is reducible to
the molecular combination of oxygen and some other gas; but this
combination itself is not reducible, and it is therefore christened
affinity. I cannot accept this view. Admitting our inability to say
_why_ gases combine under certain conditions (and in this sense all
facts are inexplicable and ultimate, unless we take the _how_ as
ample explanation of the _why_), I must still say that since affinity
itself depends on the co-operation of known conditions, it is not less
explicable than combustion. But the point is unimportant: what we have
here to settle is the meaning of a property of tissue,--and that is the
mode of reaction which that tissue manifests under constant conditions,
internal and external.

83. The evolution of Life is the evolution of special properties and
functions from general properties and functions. The organism rises in
power as it ramifies into variety. Out of a seemingly structureless
germinal membrane, by successive differentiations certain portions
are set apart for the dominant, or exclusive, performance of certain
processes; just as in the social organism there is a setting apart
of certain classes of men for the dominant or exclusive performance
of offices, which by their co-operation constitute Society. The
soldier fights, but ceases to build or reap, weave or teach; the
mason builds; the agriculturist sows and reaps; the priest and
thinker teach; the statesman governs. In simple societies each
does all, or nearly all; but the social life thus manifested is
markedly inferior to the energetic life of a complex society. So with
organisms. An amœba manifests the general properties of Nutrition,
Reproduction, Sensibility, and Movement. But it has no special organs,
consequently no special functions. The polype has a certain rudimentary
specialization of parts: it has a simple alimentary cavity, and
prehensile tentacles; and although by these it can seize and digest its
prey, it can only do so in a limited way--all the manifold varieties
and power of prehension and digestion observed in more complex
organisms are impossible with such organs as the polype possesses.

84. Differences of structure and connection necessarily bring about
corresponding differences in Function, since Function is the _directed
energy_ of the Properties of tissues. One organ will differ from
another in structure, as the liver from the pancreas, or the kidney
from the spleen; or one organ may closely resemble another but differ
from it only in _connections_, as a sensory and a motor nerve, or an
extensor and a flexor muscle. We must therefore always bear both points
in mind. Every modification, structural or connectional, is translated
by a corresponding modification in the office. The hand and the foot
show this well. The tissues are the same in both, the properties are
the same, and both have the same general function of Prehension; but
their morphological differences carry corresponding differences in
their uses.

Suppose we have a galvanic battery, we know that its electric force
may be variously applied. Two pieces of charcoal fixed to the ends of
its conducting wires give us the electric light; replacing the charcoal
by a telegraphic apparatus we can transmit a message from one continent
to the other; the wires dipped in a solution effect a chemical
decomposition, dipped into a mixture of gases they effect a chemical
composition. In these, and many other applications, the property of the
battery is constant; but the functions it subserves have varied with
the varying co-operants. So with the properties of tissue.[37] Not only
have we to bear in mind the organic connections of the tissues, but
also the relation of the organs to their media. Swimming and Walking,
for example, are both functions of the locomotive apparatus, but they
are specially differenced by the media in which the animal moves.

85. The properties of tissues are their peculiar modes of reaction, and
each tissue has its dominant characteristic, such as the Contractility
of the muscle, and the Neurility of the nerve. But there has of late
years sprung up a misleading conception, partly a consequence of the
cell-theory, and partly of the almost inevitable tendency of analysis
to disregard whatever elements it provisionally sets aside; this
conception is the removal of the property from its _tissue_, and the
localization of it in one of the _organites_--cell or fibre. This has
been conspicuously mischievous in the case of the nerve-cell, which has
been endowed with mysterious powers, and may be said to have usurped
the place of nerve-tissue. I shall have to speak of this in the next
problem. Here I only warn the student against the common error. The
properties of a tissue depend on the structure and composition of
that tissue, together with its plasmode and products; they vary as
these vary. To select any one element in this complex, and ascribe the
reaction of the tissue to that, is only permissible as a shorthand
expression.

86. What has just been expounded may be condensed in the following
biological law:--

    _Identity of tissue everywhere implies identity of property; and
    similarity of tissue corresponding similarity of property. Identity
    of organic connection everywhere implies identity of function; and
    similarity of organic connection similarity of function._

87. This law, first formulated by me in 1859, and then applied to the
interpretation of nervous functions, was so little understood that for
the most part it met with either decided denial or silent neglect;
no doubt because of the general disinclination to admit that the
properties and functions of the spinal cord could be _similar_ to those
of the brain, in correspondence with the similarity of their tissues
and organic connections. Even Professor Vulpian, who adopted it, as
well as my principal interpretations, hesitated, and relapsed into the
orthodox view in assigning three different properties to one and the
same tissue in cord, medulla oblongata, and cerebrum.[38] In the course
of our inquiries we shall so frequently have to invoke this law that I
earnestly beg the reader to meditate upon it, and ask himself upon what
other grounds, save those of structure and connection, the properties
and functions can possibly rest? If on no other, then similarity in
structure and connection by logical necessity involves similarity in
property and function.


DOES THE FUNCTION DETERMINE THE ORGAN?

88. Closely connected with this law, which simply formulates the
self-evident principle that _every action is rigorously determined by
the nature of the agent, and the conditions under which the act takes
place_, is the surprising question whether functions are dependent
upon organs, or organs dependent on functions?--a question which
sometimes takes this shape: Is Life the result of organization, or is
organization the result of Life?

The vitalist, who holds that Life is an extra-organic agent, is logical
in declaring organization to be the consequence of Life;[39] but there
are many organicists who conclude from certain facts that organs are
developed by functions, and that organization is a result of Life.
There seems, however, to be some equivoque here. I cannot otherwise
understand how Mr. Spencer should have written: “There is one fact
implying that Function must be regarded as taking the precedence of
Structure. Of the lowest rhizopods which present no distinctions
of parts, and nevertheless feed and grow and move about, Professor
Huxley has remarked that they exhibit Life without Organization.”[40]
The equivoque here arises from the practice of calling all living
bodies “organisms,” even those destitute of the differentiations
called organs; but if we substitute the term “living body” in lieu of
“organism,” the equivoque will disappear, and Function no longer seem
to precede Structure. Neither Mr. Spencer nor Mr. Huxley would affirm
that Life can be manifested without a living body; and every living
body must have a structure of some sort--unless by structure be meant
a special configuration of parts. The properties of a body, whether it
be simple or complex in structure, result from the properties of its
components; and the vital phenomena vary with these varying components.
The substance of a Rhizopod is indeed simple as compared with that of
higher organisms, but is complex as compared with anorganisms; and
corresponding with this simplicity of structure there is simplicity of
vital function.[41]

89. The _properties_ of steam are exhibited by the kettle on the fire,
no less than by the gigantic engine which animates a manufactory;
but the _uses_ of steam (the functions of the engine) vary with the
varying structure, and the applications of that structure to other
structures. Precisely analogous is the case of the organ and its
function, in relation to the living substance of which it is a peculiar
modification. Vital actions are manifested by a lump of protoplasm; but
these actions are as sharply demarcated from the actions of more highly
organized animals, as the phenomena of a steam-engine are from those of
a teakettle.

90. Mr. Spencer has nowhere defined what he means by Structure, nor
given a definition of Organ, and this neglect makes it difficult
rightly to appreciate his view. But whether we take structure to
signify the _substance_ of the living body, or the _differentiations_
of that substance into separate tissues and organs, in either case
the actions (functions) of which this structure is the agent must be
rigorously determined by it. Mr. Spencer has avowed this in declaring
that the “general physiologist may consider functions in their widest
sense as the correlatives of tissue.” Is this true in the widest sense
and not true in the narrowest? I am puzzled to find him insisting that
“function from beginning to end is the determining cause of structure.
Not only is this manifestly true where the modification of structure
arises by reaction from modification of function; but it is also
true where a modification of structure otherwise produced apparently
initiates a modification of function.” Such language would be
consistent were he a vitalist who believed in a Principle independent
of Matter which shapes matter into organic forms; but as a positive
thinker he can scarcely escape the admission that since Function is the
activity of the Agent (Function in the widest sense being the action
of the whole Organism, and in its narrowest sense the action of the
special Organ) there cannot be an _activity preceding the agent_. I
suspect that he does not always bear in mind the distinction between
Property and Function, and consequently is led into statements at
variance with the principles he professes. As far as I understand the
course of his thought, it runs somewhat thus: With the increased use
of an organ its volume may be increased, its structure altered; this
alteration will, by reaction, cause alterations in other organs, and
thus the result of a change in the habitual activities of an animal
will be an alteration in the arrangement of its parts.

91. We speak loosely of an organ being developed by increased activity;
but this is loose speech, and investigation shows that the organ is not
developed _by_, but accompanies the increased activity, every increment
of activity being necessarily preceded by a corresponding increment
of structure. This is evident _à priori_: the force manifested is
inherent in the structure manifesting it. Thus we ought not to say
“the vascular system furnishes good instances of the increased growth
that _follows_ increased function”; we ought to say, “that _permits_
increased function.” The muscle having a contractile power represented
by 10, expends, we will suppose, 7 units of force in its normal
activity, and these are replaced by its normal nutrition. If from an
extra demand upon it 9 units are expended, the muscle becomes fatigued,
if 10, exhausted, and it will no longer contract, the whole disposable
sum of its contractility being dissipated. During all these stages the
structure of the muscle--or to prevent all equivoque, let us say the
substance of the muscle--has been changing, not indeed in any degree
appreciable to the eye, but appreciable by the more decisive tests of
chemical and physiological reactions. Yet inasmuch as in the ordinary
course of things the waste is quickly repaired, the muscle in repose
once more regains its original state, once more represents 10 units of
contractility. Now let us consider what takes place when extra labor
is thrown upon the muscle, when exercise causes growth. At the outset
of a walking tour we may not be able to compass more than twenty miles
a day, at its close we manage thirty. Is it the increased activity
of the function which has caused this increase of structure? In one
sense, yes; but let us understand it. Had the increase of activity
been temporary, there would have been only a temporary increase of
structure. But when the ordinary expenditure of 7 units rises to 9,
on several successive days, this extra expenditure of tissue has had
to be met by an extra nutrition--i. e. more plasmode has been formed
and more protoplasm. It is a physiological law, easily explained,
that, within due limits, extra waste brings about extra repair: as the
channels are widened and multiplied, the _derived_ currents become
stronger, and the increased flow of nutrition which was temporary
becomes permanent, because this increase is no longer dependent on an
extra stimulus, but on an enlarged channel.[42] When the channels have
not become multiplied or enlarged, which must be the case whenever the
extra stimulus is fluctuating and temporary, the extra expenditure is
not followed by increased size of the muscle: the currents resume their
old directions, no longer being diverted.

92. Let the social organism furnish us with an illustration. At the
present moment there is a movement against the retail shopkeepers of
London in favor of Co-operative Stores. The stimulus of getting better
goods and cheaper, attracts the flow of custom from its old channels;
and if this continue a certain time the new arrangements will be so
thoroughly organized, and will work so easily, that Co-operative Stores
will to a great extent supplant the retail shops. But if from any
causes the stimulus slackens before this reorganization has passed from
the oscillating into the permanent stage--if the goods are not found
to be superior, or the cheapness not worth the extra trouble--the old
influences (aiding our indolence) which have been long and continuously
at work, will cause the social organism to resume its old aspect,
and the co-operative “varieties” will disappear, or exist beside the
ancient “species.”

In the one case as in the other a glance at the process is enough
to detect that the increase in the activity has been preceded by
a corresponding increase in the structure. The muscle has not been
enlarged _by_ extra activity, but _with_ it. The co-operative action
has grown with each additional co-operator. Looking at the cases from
afar we may justly say that development has been due to function; but
looking to the process we see that each increment of activity was
necessarily dependent on an increment of substance. When changes of
habit or adaptation are said to produce modifications in structures,
this is true in as far as one modification of structure necessarily
brings with it correlative modifications, the growth of one part
affecting the growth of all more or less; but we must remember that
to render the structure capable of new adaptations corresponding
modifications must have been going on. The retail shopkeepers might
securely laugh at the co-operative movement if the respectable families
would not or could not become co-operant. When Mr. Spencer urges that
“not only may leaf-stalks assume to a great degree the character of
stems when they have to discharge the functions of stems by supporting
many leaves, and very large leaves, but they may assume the characters
of leaves when they have to undertake the functions of leaves,” I would
ask if he is not reversing the actual process? The stem cannot assume
the functions of a leaf until it has first assumed the character of a
leaf. The assumptions of both must be gradual, and _pari passu_.

93. The hand is an organ, its function is prehension. The performance
of this function in any of its numerous applications is rigorously
limited by the structure of the hand--the bones, muscles, nerves,
circulating and absorbent vessels, connective tissue, fat, etc. Fatigue
the nerve, and the function will be feebly performed; exhaust it,
and the function ceases; diminish the action of the heart, tie an
artery, or vitiate the structure of the blood, and the function will
be correspondingly affected; stiffen the tendons, soften the bones,
diminish the synovial fluid, or increase the fat--in short, make _any_
alteration whatever in the structure of the hand, and an alteration
is necessarily produced in its function. So rigorously is function
dependent upon structure, that the hand of one man will execute
actions which are impossible to another. The hand of a baby is said to
be the same in structure as the hand of a man; and since the powers
(functions) of the two are notoriously different, we might rashly
conclude that here function was dissociated from structure. The case is
illustrative. In baby and man the structure is similar, not the same;
the resemblance is of kind, not of degree; and the function likewise
varies with the degree. The penny cannon which delights the child is
similar in structure to the ten-pounder which batters down walls; and
though, speaking generally, we may say that the function of both is to
fire gunpowder for human ends, no one expects the penny cannon to be
employed in warfare. In physiology, as in mechanics, the effect varies
with the forces involved.

There can be no doubt that an exaggerated activity will produce a
modification in the active organ, for this is only the familiar case of
increased growth with increased exercise, and this is the biological
meaning in which Function can be said not, indeed, to _create_, but to
_modify_ an existing Organ. Preceding the activity there must be the
agent. Every organ although having its special function has also the
properties of all the tissues which constitute it. The function is only
the synthesis of these properties to which a dominant tissue gives a
special character. The eye, for example, though specially characterized
by its retinal sensibility to light, is largely endowed with muscles,
and its movements are essential to Vision. The intestinal canal, again,
though specially characterized by its secretions for the decomposition
of food, has muscles which are essential to Digestion. In many animals,
especially vegetable-feeders, there is an exaggeration of the muscular
activity in certain parts of the intestinal canal which is only
possible through a corresponding development of the muscular tissue, so
that in some birds, crustaceans, and molluscs we find a gizzard, which
is wholly without a mucous membrane to secrete fluids, and which aids
Digestion solely by trituration.

94. Mr. Spencer, as I have already suggested, seems to have been
led into his view by not keeping distinctly present to his mind the
differences between Properties of tissue and Function, the activity
of an organ. “That function takes precedence of structure,” he says,
“seems implied in the definition of Life. If Life consist of inner
actions so adjusted as to balance outer actions--if the actions are
the _substance_ of Life, while the adjustment constitutes its _form_;
then may we not say that the actions formed must come before that which
forms them--that the continuous change which is the basis of function
must come before the structure which brings the function into shape?”
The separation of “actions formed” from “that which forms them” is
inadmissible. An action cannot come _before_ the agent: it is the
agent in act. The continuous change, which is the basis of Vitality,
is a change of molecular arrangements; and the organ which gives a
special _direction_ to the vital activity, e. g. which shapes the
property of Contractility into the function of Prehension, this organ
must itself be formed before it can manifest this function. It is true
that in one sense the organs are formed by, or are differentiated in,
a pre-existent organism; true that the general activity of living
substance must precede the special activity of any organ, as the
expansions of steam must precede any steam-engine action; but the
general activity depends on the general structure; and the special
actions on the special structures. If by Organization we are to
understand not simply organized substance, but a more or less complex
arrangement of that substance into separate organs, the question is
tantamount to asking whether the simplest animals and plants have life?
And to ask the question, whether Life precedes organic substance? is
tantamount to asking whether the convex aspect of a curve precedes
the concave! or whether the motions of a body precede the body! To
disengage ourselves from the complicated suggestions of such a word as
Life, let us consider one of the vital phenomena, Contraction. This
is a phenomenon manifested by simple protoplasm, and by the highly
differentiated form of protoplasm known as muscle. In one sense it
would be correct to say that Contractility as a general property of
tissue precedes Contraction, which is specialized in muscle. But
it would be absurd to say that _muscular_ contraction preceded the
existence of muscle, and formed it. The contractions of the protoplasm
are not the same as muscular contractions any more than the hand of
a baby is the same as a man’s; the general property which both have
in common depends on the substance both have in common; the special
property which belongs to the muscle depends on its special structure.
An infinite activity of the contractile protoplasm would be incompetent
to form a muscle, unless it were accompanied by that peculiar change in
structure which constitutes muscle. The teakettle might boil forever
without producing a steam-engine or the actions of a steam-engine. That
which is true of one function is true of all functions, and true of
Life, which is the sum of vital activities.

95. It is this haziness which made Agassiz “regret to observe that
it has almost become an axiom that identical functions presuppose
identical organs. There never was a more incorrect principle leading
to more injurious consequences.”[43] And elsewhere he argues that
organs can exist without functions. But this is obviously to pervert
the fundamental idea of an organ. “The teeth of the whale which never
eat through the gums, and the breasts of the males of all classes
of mammalia,” are cited by him as examples of such organs without
functions; but in the physiological significance of the term these are
not organs at all. It is no more to be expected that the breasts of
the male should act in lactation, than that the slackened string of a
violin should yield musical tones; but the breasts of the male may be
easily stimulated into yielding milk, and the slackened string of the
violin may be tightened so as to yield tone. Even the breasts of the
female do not yield milk except under certain conditions, and in the
absence of these are on a par with those of the male.

96. Organized substance has the general properties of Assimilation,
Evolution, Sensibility, and Contractility; each of the special
tissues into which organized substance is differentiated manifests a
predominance of one of these properties. Thus although the embryo-cells
all manifest contractility, it is only the specialized muscle-cell
which continues throughout its existence to manifest this property,
and in a dominant form; the muscle-cell also assimilates and develops,
but besides having these properties in common with all other cells, it
has the special property of contracting with an energy not found in
the others. All cells respire; but the blood-cells have this property
of absorbing oxygen to a degree so far surpassing that of any other
cell that physiologists have been led to speak of their containing a
peculiar respiratory substance. In like manner all, or nearly all,
the tissues contain _myeline_--which indeed is one of the chief
constituents of the yolk of eggs--but only in the white sheath of the
nerves is it detached and specialized as a tissue.

97. But while Sensibility and Contractility are general properties
of organized substance, specialized in special tissues; Sensation
and Contraction are functions of the organs formed by such tissues;
and these organs are only found in animal organisms. It is a serious
error, which we shall hereafter have to insist on, to suppose that
Sensation can be the property of ganglionic cells, or, as it is more
often stated, the property of the central gray matter. Sensation is
the function of the organism; it varies with the varying organ; the
sensation of Touch not being the same as the sensation of Sight, or of
Sound.

98. We may consider the organism under two aspects--that of Structure
and that of Function. The latter has two broad divisions corresponding
with the vegetal and animal lives; the one is Nutrient, the other
Efficient. The one prepares and distributes Food, the other distributes
Motion. Of course this separation is analytical. In reality the two are
interblended; and although the neuro-muscular system is developed out
of the nutritive system, it is no sooner developed than it plays its
part as Instrument in the preparation and distribution of Aliment.

This not being a treatise on Physiology, there can be no necessity for
our here considering the properties and functions in detail. What is
necessary to be said on Sensibility and Contractility will find its
place in the course of future chapters; for the present we will confine
ourselves to Evolution on account of its psychological, no less than
its physiological, interest.




