CHAPTER VII.

IS FEELING AN AGENT?


78. Descartes having attributed all animal actions to a sensitive
mechanism, and indeed all human actions to a similar mechanism,
endeavored to reconcile this hypothesis with the irresistible facts
of Consciousness--which assured us that _our_ actions, at least, were
determined by Feeling. To this end he assumed that man had a spiritual
principle over and above the sentient principle. The operation of this
principle was, however, limited to Thought; the actions themselves were
all performed by the automatic mechanism; so that, in strict logic, the
conclusion from his premises was the same for man as for animals.

This conclusion Professor Huxley announced in his Address before the
British Association, 1874[222]--to the great scandal of the general
public, which did not understand him aright; and to the scandal also of
a physiological public, which, strangely enough, failed to see that it
was the legitimate expression of one of their favorite theories--the
celebrated Reflex Theory. Now although it is quite open to any one to
reject the premises which lead to such a conclusion, if he sees greater
evidence against the conclusion than for the premises, it is surely
irrational to accept the premises as those of scientific induction,
and yet reject the conclusion because it endangers the stability of
other opinions? For my own part, I do not accept the premises, and my
polemic will have reference to them.

79. Professor Huxley adopts certain Theses which represent the views
generally adopted by physiologists; to which he adds a Thesis which is
adopted by few, and which he only puts forward hypothetically. Against
these positions I place Antitheses, less generally adopted, but which
in my belief approximate more nearly to the inductions of experience.

  _Theses._                           _Antitheses._

  I. There can be no sensation        I. There is sensation without
  without consciousness.              consciousness, if consciousness
                                      means a special mode of Sentience.

  II. There can be no                 II. The co-operation of the brain
  consciousness without the           is only necessary for a special
  co-operation of the brain.          mode of Sentience; other modes are
                                      active when the brain is inactive.

  III. Sensation and Consciousness    III. Unless the molecular changes
  are in some inexplicable way        be limited to the brain as the
  caused by molecular changes in      _occasional_ cause, there is
  the brain, following upon these     no _following_ of sensation or
  as one event follows another,       motion, no causal link between the
  the causal link between motion      two; but the neural process _is_
  and sensation being a mystery.      the sensation, viewed objectively,
                                      the sensation is the neural
                                      process, viewed subjectively. In
                                      this antithesis, Neural Process
                                      is not limited to the brain, but
                                      comprises the whole sensitive
                                      organism as the _efficient_ cause.

  IV. All actions which take place    IV. All actions are the actions of
  unconsciously are reflex, and       a reflex mechanism, and all are
  reflex actions are the operation    sentient, even when unconscious;
  of an insentient mechanism;         they are therefore never purely
  they are therefore as purely        mechanical, but always organical.
  mechanical as those of automata.

  V. The animal body is a reflex      V. Sentience being necessary to
  mechanism; even when the            reflex action, it is necessarily
  brain co-operates with the          an agent.
  other centres, and produces
  consciousness, this product is
  not an agent in determining
  action, it is a collateral
  result of the operation.

80. The first four Theses are those current in our textbooks, so
that it is only the fifth which will have the air of a paradox. Nor,
as a paradox, is it without advocates. Schiff long ago suggested it
hypothetically. Hermann mentions it as entertained by physiologists,
whom he does not name.[223] Laycock, and, if I remember rightly, Dr.
Drysdale, have insisted on it; and Mr. Spalding has proclaimed it with
iterated emphasis. Of the Antitheses nothing need be said here, since
the whole of this volume is meant to furnish their evidence.

I have already stated that my polemic is against the views that
Professor Huxley is _supposed_ to hold by those whom his expressions
mislead, rather than against the views I imagine him really to hold.
I have little doubt that he would disavow much that I am forced to
combat, although his language is naturally interpreted in that sense.
But I do not know in how far he would agree with me, and in the
following remarks I shall confine myself to what seems to be the plain
interpretation of his words, since _that_ is the interpretation which
has been generally adopted, and which I most earnestly desire to refute.

81. To begin with this passage. After stating the views of Descartes,
he says: “As actions of a certain degree of complexity are brought
about by mere mechanism, why may not actions of still greater
complexity be the result of a more refined mechanism? What proof is
there that brutes are other than a superior race of marionnettes, which
eat without pleasure, cry without pain, desire nothing, know nothing,
and only simulate intelligence as a bee simulates a mathematician?”
What proof? Why, in the first place, the proof which is implied in
the “more refined mechanism” required for the greater complexity of
actions. In the next place, the proof that the organism of the brute is
very different from the mechanism of a marionnette, and is so much more
like the organism of man, that since we know man to eat with pleasure
and cry with pain, there is a strong presumption that the brute eats
and cries with somewhat similar feelings.

82. Having stated the hypothesis, Professor Huxley says he is not
disposed to accept it, though he thinks it cannot be refuted. His chief
reason for not accepting it is that the law of continuity forbids
the supposition of any complex phenomenon suddenly appearing; the
community between animals and men is too close for us to admit that
Consciousness could appear in man without having its beginnings in
animals. Finding that animals have brains, he justly concludes that
they also must have brain functions; and they also therefore must
be credited with Consciousness. This argument seems to me to have
irresistible cogency; and to be destructive not only of the automaton
hypothesis, but equally of the hypothesis on which the Reflex Theory
is founded. If the law of continuity forbids the sudden appearance of
Consciousness, the law of similarity of property with similarity of
structure forbids the supposition that central nerve-tissue in one
part of the system can suddenly assume a totally different property
in another part. If the brain of an animal, a bird, a reptile, or a
fish--and _a fortiori_ if the œsophageal ganglia of an insect or a
mollusc--may be credited with Sensibility, because of the fundamental
similarity of these structures with the structures of the human brain,
then surely the spinal cord must be credited with Sensibility; for the
tissue of the spinal cord is more like that of the brain, than the
brain of a reptile is like the brain of a man. The sudden disappearance
of all Sensibility, on the removal of one portion of the central
nervous system, would be a violation of the law of continuity. And if
it be said that Consciousness is not the same as Sensibility, but is a
specially evolved function of a specially developed organ, the answer
will be that this is only a difference of mode, and that the existence
of Sensibility is that which renders the automaton and reflex theories
untenable.

83. Professor Huxley would probably admit this; for however his
language may at times seem to point to another conclusion, and is so
far ambiguous, he has expressed the view here maintained with tolerable
distinctness in the following passage, to which particular attention is
called:--

“But though we may see reason to disagree with Descartes’ hypothesis,
that brutes are unconscious machines, it does not follow that he
was wrong in regarding them as automata. _They may be more or less
conscious sensitive automata_; and the view that they are such
conscious machines is that which is implicitly or explicitly adopted
by most persons. When we speak of the actions of the lower animals
being guided by instinct and not by reason, what we really mean is that
though they feel as we do, yet their actions are the results of their
physical organization. We believe, in short, that they are machines,
one part of which (the nervous system) not only sets the rest in motion
and co-ordinates its movements in relation with changes in surrounding
bodies, but is provided with a special apparatus the function of which
is the calling into existence of those states of consciousness which
are termed sensations, emotions, and ideas.”

84. To say that they are “conscious automata” seems granting all that
I demand; but there are two objectionable positions which the phrase
conceals: first, that Consciousness is not a coefficient; and secondly,
that Reflex Action is purely mechanical.

Professor Huxley nowhere, I think, establishes the distinction
between Consciousness as a term for a special mode of Feeling, and
Consciousness as the all-embracing term for sentient phenomena. His
language always implies that an action performed unconsciously is
performed mechanically; which may be acceptable if by unconsciously be
meant insentiently. I hold that whether consciously or unconsciously
performed, the action is equally vital and sentient. In the case he has
cited of a soldier now living who is subject to periodic alternations
of normal and abnormal states, in the latter states all the actions
being said to be “unconscious,” we have only to read the account to
recognize ample evidence of Sentience. Here is a descriptive passage:--

85. “His [the soldier’s in the abnormal state] movements remain free,
and his expression calm, except for a contraction of the brow, an
incessant movement of the eyeballs, and a chewing motion of the jaws.
The eyes are wide open, and their pupils dilated. If the man happens
to be in a place to which he is accustomed he walks about as usual;
but if he is in a new place, or if obstacles are intentionally placed
in his way, he stumbles against them, _stops, and then feeling over
the objects with his hands, passes on one side of them_. He offers
no resistance to any change of direction which may be impressed upon
him, or to the forcible acceleration or retardation of his movements.
He eats, drinks, smokes, walks about, dresses and undresses himself,
rises and goes to bed at the accustomed hours. Nevertheless pins may be
run into his body, or strong electric shocks sent through it, without
causing the least indication of pain; no odorous substance, pleasant or
unpleasant, makes the least impression; he eats and drinks with avidity
whatever is offered, and takes asafœtida or vinegar of quinine as
readily as water; no noise affects him; and light influences him only
under certain conditions.”

There is no one of these phenomena that is unfamiliar to students of
mental disease. The case is chiefly remarkable from the periodicity of
the recurrence of the abnormal state. I have collected other cases of
the kind, and may hereafter find a fitting occasion to quote them.[224]
The anæsthesia and “unconsciousness” noted, no more prove the actions
performed by this soldier to have been purely mechanical, i. e.
undetermined by sensation, than anæsthesia and unconsciousness prove
somnambulists and madmen to be machines. In the pathological state
called “ecstasy” there is a considerable diminution of sensibility to
external stimuli; with a concentration on certain feelings, images,
trains of thought, exhibiting itself in expressions of emotion.
“Les malades,” says a master, “paraissent entièrement absorbés par
leurs mouvements intérieurs, ils refusent généralement de manger, et
spécialement la volonté de l’âme semble complètement enchainée.”[225]

86. Observe that while this soldier exhibits such insensibility to
certain stimuli, he unequivocally exhibits sensibility to other
stimuli. All his acts show sense-guidance. Sight and Touch obviously
regulate his movements. And when he feels objects placed in his way,
and then passes beside them, wherein does this differ from the normal
procedure of sensitive organisms? wherein does it resemble automata?
Dr. Mesmet--from whose narrative the case is cited--remarks that the
sense of Touch seems to persist “and indeed to be more acute and
delicate than in the normal state”; upon which Professor Huxley has
this comment:--“Here a difficulty arises. It is clear from the facts
detailed that the nervous apparatus by which in the normal state
sensations of touch are excited is that by which external influences
determine the movements of the body in the abnormal state. But does the
state of consciousness, which we term a tactile sensation, accompany
the operation of this nervous apparatus in the abnormal state? or
is consciousness utterly absent, the man being reduced to a pure
mechanism? It is impossible to obtain direct evidence in favor of the
one conclusion or the other; all that can be said is that the case of
the frog shows that the man may be devoid of any kind of consciousness.”

87. It is here we are made vividly aware of the absolute need there is
to disengage the terms employed from their common ambiguities. All the
evidence of a tactile sensation which can possibly be furnished, on the
objective side, is furnished by the actions of this soldier; to doubt
it would be to throw a doubt on the sensibility of any animal unable
to _tell_ us what it felt; nay, even a man if he were dumb, or spoke
a language we could not understand, could give us no other proof. We
conclude that the soldier had tactile sensations, because we see him
guided by them as we ourselves are guided by tactile sensations; we
know that he is an organism, not a machine, and therefore reject the
inference that he has become reduced to a “pure mechanism” because
it is inferred that his consciousness is absent. And on what is this
inference grounded? 1°, The belief that the brain is the sole organ
of consciousness (Sentience)--a belief flatly disproved by the facts,
which show Sentience when the brain has been removed; and 2°, the
belief that the decapitated frog, because it avoids obstacles and
redirects its leaps to avoid them, does so without Sentience. According
to the definition we adopt, we may either say that the decapitated
frog, and the soldier in his abnormal state, act without consciousness,
or with it. But what does not seem permissible is to deny that their
actions exhibit the clearest evidence of _sense-guidance_, and the
kind of volition which this sense-guidance implies; and this is quite
enough to separate them from actions of automata. When a man ducks his
head to avoid a stone which he sees falling towards him, he assuredly
has a sensation, i. e. there is a grouping of neural elements, which
subjectively is a sensation, and this originates a grouping of other
neural elements, the outcome of which is a muscular movement, which
subjectively is a motor sensation: _this_ grouping would not have
been originated unless the particular grouping had preceded it; nor
would the simple retinal stimulus have excited this sensation unless
the nerve-centres had been attuned to such response by many previous
experiences: the ignorant child would not duck its head on seeing
the stone approach. In our familiar use of the word Consciousness it
would be correct to say that the man ducks his head “unconsciously”;
and yet expressing the fact in psychological language, we also say:
He ducks his head because _remembering_ the pain of former similar
experiences, he _knows_ that if the stone strikes him he will again
be hurt as before, therefore he _wills_ to avoid it; expressing it
in physiological language we may say: The man acts thus because he
is so organized that a particular neural process is the stimulus of
a particular central discharge; and he became thus organized through
a long series of anterior adjustments responding to stimuli, each
adjustment being the activity of the vital organism.

88. There can be no doubt that the soldier had perceptions, and that
these perceptions guided his movements; whether these shall be called
“states of consciousness” or not, is a question of terms. Now since
we know that _certain actions are uniformly consequent on certain
perceptions_, we are justified in inferring that _whenever the
actions are performed, the perceptions preceded them_: this inference
may be erroneous, but in the absence of positive evidence to the
contrary it is that which claims our first assent. Is it evidence to
the contrary that the perception may have stimulated the action, yet
been unaccompanied by the special mode named consciousness? Not in
the least. We learn to read with conscious effort; each letter has
to be apprehended separately, its form distinguished from all other
forms, its value as a sign definitely fixed, yet how very rarely are
we “conscious” of the letters when we read a book? Each letter is
perceived; and yet this process passes so rapidly and smoothly, that
unless there be some defect in a letter, or the word be misspelled,
we are not “conscious” of the perceptions. Are we therefore reading
automata?[226]

We are said to walk unconsciously at times; and the continuance of the
movement is said to be due to reflex action. But it is demonstrable
that the cutaneous sensibility of the soles of the feet is a primary
condition. If the skin be insensible, the walking becomes a stumble. In
learning to walk, or dance, the child fixes his eyes on his feet, as he
fixes them on his fingers in learning to play the piano. After a while
these registered sensations _connected_ with the muscular sense suffice
to guide his feet or his fingers; but not if feet or fingers lose their
sensibility.

89. With these explanations let us follow the further details of this
soldier’s abnormal actions:--

“The man is insensible to sensory impressions made through the ear,
the nose, the tongue, and, to a great extent, the eye; nor is he
susceptible to pain from causes operating during his abnormal state.
Nevertheless it is possible _so to act upon his tactile apparatus as
to give rise to those molecular changes in his sensorium which are
ordinarily the causes of associated trains of ideas_. I give a striking
example of this process in Dr. Mesmet’s words: ‘Il se promenait dans
le jardin, on lui remet sa canne qu’il avait laissé tomber. Il la
palpe, promène à plusieurs reprises la main sur la poignée coudée de
sa canne--devient attentif--semble prêter l’oreille--et tout à coup
appelle, “Henri! les voilà!” Et alors portant la main derrière son
dos comme pour prendre une cartouche, il fait le mouvement de charger
son arme, se couche dans l’herbe à plat ventre dans la position d’un
tirailleur, et suit avec l’arme épaulée tous les mouvements de l’ennemi
qu’il croit voir à courte distance.’ In a subsequent abnormal period
Dr. Mesmet caused the patient to repeat this scene by placing him in
the same conditions. Now in this case the question arises whether the
series of actions constituting this singular pantomime was accompanied
by the ordinary states of consciousness, the appropriate trains of
ideas, or not? Did the man dream that he was skirmishing? or was he in
the condition of one of Vaucanson’s automata--_a mechanism worked by
molecular changes in the nervous system_? The analogy of the frog shows
that the latter assumption is perfectly justifiable.”

90. Before criticising this conclusion let me adduce other
illustrations of this dreamlike activity. “A gentleman whom I attended
in a state of perfect apoplexy,” says Abercrombie, “was frequently
observed to adjust his nightcap with the utmost care when it got into
an uncomfortable state: first pulling it down over his eyes, and
then turning up the front of it in the most exact manner.” According
to the current teaching, these actions, which seem like evidence
of sensation, are nothing of the kind, because--the patient was
“unconscious”; that is to say, because he did not exhibit one complex
kind of Sensibility, it is denied that he exhibited another kind!
he did not feel discomfort, nor feel the movements by which it was
rectified--because he could not speak, discuss impersonal questions,
nor attend to what was said to him! Abercrombie cites other cases: “A
gentleman who was lying in a _state of perfect insensibility_ from
disease of the brain” (note the phrase, which really only expresses
the fact that external stimuli did not create their normal reactions)
“was frequently observed even the day before his death to take down
a repeating watch from a little bag at the head of his bed, put it
close to his ear and make it strike the hour, and then replace it in
the bag with the greatest precision. Another whom I saw in a state of
profound apoplexy, from which he recovered, had a perfect recollection
of what took place during the attack, and mentioned many things which
had been said in his hearing when he was supposed to be in a state of
perfect unconsciousness.” Dr. Wigan also tells of a lady whom he knew,
and who was actually put in a coffin, under the belief that she was
dead when in a trance. Her sense of hearing was then preternaturally
acute. In her second-floor bedroom she heard what the servants said
in her kitchen. When her brother came to see her and he declared she
should not be buried until putrefaction set in, she felt intense
gratitude and a gush of tenderness, but was unable to move even an
eyelid as a manifestation of her feeling. Suddenly all her faculties
returned. Dr. Wigan adds that he visited the Countess Escalante, one
of the Spanish refugees, who remained in a similar state for a short
period, during which she saw her husband and children, and was quite
conscious of all they did and said--but did not recognize them as her
own. She was absolutely without the power of moving a finger or of
opening her mouth. Dr. Neil Arnott told me of a similar case in his
practice. In these last cases we learn that consciousness--in its
ordinary acceptation--was present, though bystanders could see no trace
of it. And very often in cases where Consciousness, or at any rate
Sensibility, is clearly manifested, its presence is denied, because the
patient on recovering his normal condition is quite unable to remember
anything that he felt and did. Under anæsthetics patients manifest
sensation, but on awaking they declare that they felt nothing--of
what value is their declaration? M. Despine tells us of a patient who
under chloroform struggled, swore, and cried out, “_Mon Dieu! que
je souffre!_” yet when the operation was over, and he emerged from
the effects of the chloroform, he remembered nothing of what he had
felt.[227]

91. Returning now to Dr. Mesmet’s soldier, and to the conclusion that
his dreamlike acts were no more than the actions of one of Vaucanson’s
automata, surely we are justified in concluding, first, that these
actions were not of the same kind as those of an automaton, since they
were those of a living organism; secondly, that they present all the
evidence positive and inferential which Sensibility can present in
the actions we observe in another, and do not feel in ourselves; and
thirdly, if with physiologists we agree that the mechanism of these
actions is “worked by molecular changes in the nervous system,” there
is some difficulty in understanding how Consciousness, which is said
to be caused by such changes, could have been absent--how the _cause
could operate yet no effect be produced_.

92. What automata can be made to perform is surprising enough, but
they can _never_ be made to display the fluctuations of sense-guided
actions, such as we see in the report of Dr. Mesmet’s soldier:--

“The ex-sergeant has a good voice, and had at one time been employed
as a singer at a café. In one of his abnormal states he was observed
to begin humming a tune. He then went to his room, dressed himself
carefully, and took up some parts of a periodical novel which lay
on the bed, as _if he were trying to find something_. Dr. Mesmet,
suspecting that he was seeking his music, made up one of these into a
roll and put it into his hand. _He appeared_ satisfied, took up his
cane, and went down stairs to the door. Here Dr. Mesmet turned him
round, and he walked quite contentedly in the opposite direction. The
_light of the sun_ shining through a window happened to fall upon
him, and _seemed to suggest the footlights of the stage_ on which he
was accustomed to make his appearance. He stopped, opened his roll of
imaginary music, put himself in the attitude of a singer, and sang with
perfect execution three songs one after the other. After which he wiped
his face with his handkerchief and drank without a grimace a tumbler of
strong vinegar-and-water.”

93. Epileptic patients have frequently been observed going through
similar dreamlike actions in which only those external stimuli which
have a relation to the dream seem to take effect.[228] We interpret
these as phenomena of _disordered_ mental action, the burden of proof
lies on him who says they are phenomena of pure mechanism. A mail-coach
does not suddenly cease to be a mail-coach and become a wheelbarrow
because the coachman is drunk, or has fallen from the box. The horses,
no longer guided by the reins, may dash off the highroad into gardens
or ditches; but it is their muscular exertions which still move the
coach.

Can any one conceive an automaton acting as the sergeant is described
to be in the following passage?--

“Sitting at a table he took up a pen, felt for paper and ink, and began
to write a letter to his general, in which he _recommended himself for
a medal_ on account of his good conduct and courage. It occurred to
Dr. Mesmet to ascertain experimentally how far vision was concerned in
this act of writing. He therefore interposed a screen between the man’s
eyes and his hands; under these circumstances he _went on writing for
a short time, but the words became illegible, and he finally stopped_.
On the withdrawal of the screen, he _began to write again where he had
left off_. The substitution of water for ink in the inkstand had a
similar result. He stopped, _looked at his pen, wiped it on his coat_,
dipped it in the water, and began again, with the same effect. On one
occasion he began to write upon the topmost of ten superposed sheets
of paper. After he had written a line or two, this sheet was suddenly
drawn away. _There was a slight expression of surprise_, but he
continued his letter on the second sheet exactly as if it had been the
first. This operation was repeated five times, so that the fifth sheet
contained nothing but the writer’s signature at the bottom of the page.
Nevertheless, when the signature was finished, his eyes turned to the
top of the blank sheet, and he went through the form of reading over
what he had written, a movement of the lips accompanying each word;
moreover, with his pen _he put in such corrections as were needed_.”

94. Dr. Mesmet concludes that “his patient sees some things and not
others; that the sense of sight is accessible to all things which
are brought into relation with him by the sense of touch, and, on the
contrary, is insensible to things which lie outside this relation.”
In other words, the sensitive mechanism acts, but acts abnormally.
This is precisely what is observed in somnambulists. Yet Professor
Huxley, who makes the comparison, appears to regard both states as
those in which the organism is reduced to a mere mechanism, because
on recovering their normal state the patients are unconscious of what
has passed; and because the frog, without its brain, also manifests
analogous phenomena. Neither premise warrants the conclusion. I
have already touched on the unconsciousness of past actions; let me
add the case of Faraday, who was assuredly not an automaton when he
prepared and delivered a course of lectures which were nevertheless so
entirely obliterated from his memory that the next year he prepared and
delivered the same course once more, without a suspicion that it was
not a new one. As to the frog, I must leave that case till I come to
examine the evidence on which the hypothesis of the purely mechanical
nature of spinal action rests.

95. The point never to be left out of sight is that actions which are
known to be preceded and accompanied by sensations do not lose their
special character of Sentience, as actions of a sentient mechanism,
because they are not also preceded and accompanied by that peculiar
state which is specially called Consciousness, i. e. attention to the
passing changes (comp. p. 403). When we see a man playing the piano,
and at the same time talking of something far removed from the music,
we say his fingers move unconsciously; but we do not conclude that
he is a musical machine--muscular sensations and musical sensations
regulate every movement of his fingers; and if he strikes a false
note, or if one of the notes jangles, he is instantly conscious of
the fact. Either we must admit that his brain is an essential part
of the mechanism by which the piano was played, and its function an
essential agent in the playing; or else we must admit that the brain
and its function were not essential, and therefore the playing would
continue if the brain were removed. In the latter case, we should have
a musical automaton. That a particular group of sensations, such as
musical tones, will set going a particular group of muscular movements,
without the intervention of any _conscious_ effort, is not more to be
interpreted on purely mechanical principles, than that a particular
phrase will cause a story-teller to repeat a familiar anecdote, or an
old soldier “to fight his battles o’er again.”

96. Let us now pass to another consideration, namely, whether
Consciousness--however interpreted--is legitimately conceived as a
factor in the so-called conscious and voluntary actions; or is merely a
_collateral result_ of certain organic activities? To answer this, we
must first remember that Consciousness is a purely subjective process;
although we may believe it to be objectively a neural process, we are
nevertheless passing out of the region of Physiology when we speak of
Feeling determining Action. Motion may determine Motion; but Feeling
can only determine Feeling. Yet we do so speak, and are justified. For
thereby we implicitly declare, what Psychology explicitly teaches,
namely, that these two widely different aspects, objective and
subjective, are but the two faces of one and the same reality. It
is thus indifferent whether we say a sensation is a neural process,
or a mental process: a molecular change in the nervous system, or a
change in Feeling. It is either, and it is both, as I have elsewhere
explained.[229] There it was argued that the current hypothesis of a
neural process _causing_ the mental process--molecular movement being
in some mysterious way _transformed_ into sensation--is not only
inconceivable, but altogether unnecessary; whereas the hypothesis
that the two aspects of the one phenomenon are simply two different
expressions, now in terms of Matter and Motion, and now in terms of
Consciousness, is in harmony with all the inductive evidence.

97. “It may be assumed,” says Professor Huxley, “that molecular
changes in the brain are the causes of all the states of consciousness
of brutes. Is there any evidence that these states of consciousness
may conversely cause those molecular changes which give rise to
muscular motion? I see no such evidence. The frog walks, hops, swims,
and goes through his gymnastic performances, quite as well without
consciousness, and consequently without volition, as with it; and if a
frog in his natural state possesses anything corresponding with what
we call volition, there is no reason to think that _it is anything but
a concomitant of the molecular changes in the brain_, which _form part
of the series involved in the production of motion_. The consciousness
of brutes would appear to be related to the mechanism of their body
simply as a collateral product of its working, and to be _as completely
without any power of modifying that working as the steam-whistle which
accompanies the work of a locomotive engine is without influence
upon its machinery_. Their volition, if they have any, is an emotion
_indicative_ of physical changes, not a _cause_ of such changes.”
Particular attention is called to the passages in italics. In the first
is expressed a view which seems not unlike the one I am advocating, but
which is contradicted by the second. Let us consider what is implied.

98. When Consciousness is regarded solely under its subjective aspect
there is obviously no place for it among material agencies, regarded
as objective. So long as we have the material mechanism in view we
have nothing but material changes. This applies to the frog, with
or without its brain; to man, supposed to be moved by volition, or
supposed to move automatically. The introduction of Consciousness is
not the introduction of another agent in the series, but of a new
aspect; the neural process drops out of sight, the mental process
replaces it. The question whether we have any ground for inferring
that in the series there is included the particular neural state which
subjectively is a state of Consciousness, must be answered according
to the evidence. Well, the evidence shows that the actions do involve
the co-operation; and this Professor Huxley expresses when he says that
the molecular changes in the brain form part of the series involved in
the production of motion. Whether we regard the process objectively
as a series of molecular changes, or subjectively as a succession of
sentient changes, the sum of which is on the one side a motor impulse,
on the other a state of consciousness, we must declare Consciousness
to be an agent, _in the same sense that we declare one change in the
organism to be an agent in some other change_. The facts are the same,
whether we express them in physiological or in psychological terms. The
physiologist, having only the material aspect of the organism in view,
says, “A cerebral process initiates a motor process”; the psychologist
says, “A sensation determines an action.” Unless the two processes have
been linked together by an organic disposition, native or acquired,
there will be no such motor process following the cerebral process.
A dog standing outside the gate is unable to ring the bell, though
having seen another dog ring it, he may wish to do so; but the cerebral
process (his wish) is not linked on to the needful motor process--he
has not learned to realize the wish; whereas the other dog, having by
trial hit upon the right mode of directing his muscles, has registered
this experience, and can ring the bell. The organized disposition
which enables the dog to do this may truly enough be called a
modification of the mechanism; but what we have here to note is that a
sensation originally determined the movement, and always determines it.

99. It is the unfortunate ambiguity of the word Consciousness, and
the questionable hypothesis of the brain being the sole seat of
Sensibility, which darken this investigation. Because animals, after
the brain has been removed, are seen to perform certain actions
as deftly as before, they are said to perform these without the
intervention of Consciousness; when all that is proved by the facts is
that these actions are performed without the intervention of the brain.
In support of this explanation, examples are cited of unconscious
actions performed by human beings. But if we assign Sensibility not to
one part of the nervous system exclusively, but to the whole, we can
readily understand how the loss of a part will be manifested by very
marked changes in the reactions of the whole, and yet not altogether
prevent the reactions of the parts remaining intact. An animal must
respond somewhat differently with and without a brain. One marked
difference is the spontaneity of the actions when the brain is intact,
and the loss of much spontaneity when the brain is injured or removed.
Cerebral processes prompt and regulate actions, as the pressure of the
driver on the reins prompts and regulates the movements of the horses;
but the carriage is moved by the horses and not by the driver; and the
action is executed by the motor mechanism, whether the incitation arise
in a cerebral process or a peripheral stimulation.

100. If we admit that Consciousness is itself an organic process,
accompanying the molecular changes as a convex surface accompanies
a concave, we must also admit that its fluctuations are adjustments
and readjustments of the organic mechanism, and that the actions are
the effects of these--their resultants. The loss of the brain must
obviously cause a great disturbance in these adjustments. We may call
that a loss of Consciousness, if we choose to limit the term to one
_mode_ of sentient reaction. But this loss of a mode does not change
those reactions which persist so as to convert them into purely
mechanical reactions. A troop of soldiers may have lost its directing
officer, but will fight with the old weapons and the old intelligence,
though not with the same convergence of individual efforts. A frog or a
pigeon no more acts as _well_ without a brain as with a brain, than the
troop of soldiers fights as well without an officer.

101. Having thus claimed a place for Consciousness in the series of
organic processes, let us now see whether it has a place among the
active agencies. According to Professor Huxley it is not itself an
agent, but only the “collateral product of the working of the machine.”
It accompanies actions, it does not direct them. It is an index, not a
cause.

Surely it seems more accurate to say that it accompanies _and_ directs
the working? It accompanies the working in two senses: first, as the
subjective aspect of the objective process; secondly, as the change
which produces a subsequent change, that is to say, the movements
initiated by a feeling are themselves also _felt as they pass_; and
this feeling enters into the general stream of simultaneous excitations
out of which new movements and feelings arise; or to express it
physiologically, the sensory impressions determine muscular movements,
which in turn react on the nerve-centres, and these reactions
blend with the general excitation of reflected and re-reflected
processes.[230] Since every change in Consciousness is a change in
the sentient organism, which objectively is a change in the nervous
centres, the working of the mechanism being itself a dependent series
of such changes, each movement must have a reflected influence on the
general state. This reflected influence may be viewed as a collateral
product of the working; but there is no real analogy between it and
the whistle of the steam-engine, because this reflected influence
demonstrably _does_ intervene in the _subsequent_ movements. The
feeling which accompanies or follows a particular movement cannot
indeed modify _that_ movement, since that is already set going, or
has passed; here there is some analogy to the steam-whistle; but the
analogy fails in the subsequent history: no movements whatever of
the steam-engine are modified by the whistle which accompanies the
working of that engine; yet how the reflected influence modifies the
working of the organism! If the hand be passing over a surface, there
is, accompanying this movement, a succession of muscular and tactile
feelings which may be said to be collateral products. But the feeling
which _accompanies_ one muscular contraction _is itself the stimulus_
of the next contraction; if anywhere during the passage the hand
comes upon a spot on the surface which is wet or rough, the change in
feeling thus produced, although a collateral product of the movement,
instantly changes the direction of the hand, suspends or alters the
course--that is to say, the _collateral product of one movement becomes
a directing factor in the succeeding movement_. Now this is precisely
what no automaton can effect, unless for changes that are prearranged.
A steam-engine drives its locomotive over the rails, be they smooth
or rough, entire or broken; it whistles as it goes, but no whistling
directs and redirects its path.

102. Volition is said to be an “emotion indicative of physical changes,
not a cause of such changes.” Here it is necessary to understand in
what sense the term cause is employed. I should prefer stating the
proposition thus: a volition is a state of the sentient organism,
indicative of physical changes which have taken place, and of changes
which will take place. Because it is the _expression_ of the first
group of changes, it cannot be their _origin_; but it can be, and is
the origin of the second group, which it initiates. The indignation
excited by an insult or a blow is not the origin of the emotion or
the pain, but it is the origin of the actions which are prompted by
this sentient state. In fact no sooner do we admit that the organism
is a sentient mechanism, than the conclusion is irresistible that
Sensibility is a factor in the working of that mechanism.

103. “Much ingenious argument,” says Professor Huxley, “has at various
times been bestowed upon the question: How is it possible to imagine
that volition which is a state of consciousness, and as such has not
the slightest community of nature with matter and motion, can act upon
the moving matter of which the body is composed, as it is assumed to do
in voluntary acts? But if, as is here suggested, the voluntary acts of
brutes--or in other words, the acts which they desire to perform--are
as purely mechanical as the rest of their actions, and are simply
accompanied by the state of consciousness called volition, the inquiry,
so far as they are concerned, becomes superfluous. Their volitions
do not enter into the chain of causation of their actions at all....
As consciousness is brought into existence only as the consequence
of molecular motion in the brain, it follows that it is an indirect
product of material changes. The soul stands related to the body as the
bell of a clock to the works, and consciousness answers to the sound
which the bell gives out when it is struck.” This has been answered in
the foregoing pages; nor do I think the reader who has recognized the
ambiguity of the term Consciousness, and the desirability of replacing
it in this discussion by the less equivocal term Sentience, will need
more to be said.

104. The important question whether reflex actions are insentient, and
therefore mechanical, will occupy us in the next problem. The question
of Automatism which has been argued in the preceding chapters, may,
I think, be summarily disposed of by a reference to the irresistible
evidence each man carries in his own consciousness that his actions
are frequently--even if not always--determined by feelings. He is
quite certain that he is not an automaton, and that his feelings are
not simply collateral products of his actions, without the power of
modifying and originating them. Now this fundamental fact cannot be
displaced by any theoretical explanation of its factors. Nor would
this fundamental truth be rendered doubtful, even supposing we were to
grant to the full all that is adduced as evidence that _some_ actions
were the result of purely mechanical processes without sentience at
all. I am a conscious organism, even if it be true that I sometimes act
unconsciously. I am not a machine, even if it be true that I sometimes
act mechanically.




PROBLEM IV.

THE REFLEX THEORY.

    “Si omnes patres sic, et Ego non sic.”--ABELARD, _Sic et Non_.

    “Will man bestimmen wo der Mechanismus aufhört und wo der Wille
    anfängt so ist die Frage überhaupt falsch gestellt. Denn man setzt
    hier Begriffe einander gegenüber die gar keine Gegensätze sind.
    Vorgebildet in den mechanischen Bedingungen des Nervensystems sind
    _alle_ Bewegungen.”--WUNDT, _Physiologische Psychologie_.

    “Sollte die so durchsichtige Homologie zwischen Hirn and
    Rückenmark, wie solche sich schlagend in Bau und Entwicklung
    darthut, wesentlich andere physiologische Qualitäten
    bedingen?”--LUSCHINGER in _Pflüger’s Archiv_, Bd. XIV. 384.




THE REFLEX THEORY.




