CHAPTER I.

SURVEY OF THE SYSTEM.


1. Our knowledge of mental processes is derived from reflection on our
personal experiences, combined with inferences from our observation
of other men and animals, under similar conditions. The processes
are complex and variable; so complex and variable, that knowledge of
their component factors can only be gained through long tentative
study, aided by fortunate circumstances which present these factors
separately, or at any rate in such marked predominance as to fix
attention. This subjective analysis of the _processes_ has to be
supplemented by, and confirmed by an objective analysis of, the
_conditions_, external and internal: the facts of Feeling have to be
traced to facts of Physiology, which will exhibit that Physical Basis
of Mind so earnestly sought by the inquirer.

Both the subjective and the objective analysis are at present in a
very imperfect state. Although there is much confident assertion and
“false persuasion of knowledge” in both regions, there is, unhappily,
little that can be seriously accepted as demonstrated. In the present
volume we shall concern ourselves almost exclusively with the objective
analysis, and do our utmost to mark what is mere inference from what
is verified observation. It is only by Observation that facts can be
_settled_; however Analogy and Inference may suggest where the truth
may lie, they are finger-posts, not goals. At the best they only tell
us what Observation _would_ reveal could the processes be submitted to
Sense.

In a loose and general way every one knows that the Nervous System is
a dominant agent in all sentient processes; although not by any means
the only agent, yet, because of its predominance, it is artificially
accepted as the only one. With the greater complexity of this system,
there is observed a corresponding increase in the variety of sentient
phenomena. The labors of anatomists have secured a tolerably exact plan
of the topographical distribution of this system; a somewhat chaotic
mass of observation and inference passes as a description of its
elementary structure. The labors of physiologists have succeeded to a
small extent in localizing certain functions in certain organs of this
system. But imperfect as our knowledge of the elementary structures is,
our knowledge of the functions is still more so. I wish I could say
otherwise, and that I could ask my readers to accept with confidence
what teachers confidently propound. The attitude of scepticism is
always repulsive; the sceptic is seldom received without disfavor,
because he throws on us the labor of investigation there where we wish
for the confidence of knowledge. Yet it is only by facing the facts
that we can hope one day to solve the great questions.

2. The nervous system has, in our artificial view of it, two divisions:
the Peripheral, which connects the organism with the external world;
and the Central, which connects each part of the organism with all
the other parts. Although the system is constituted by various
tissues--neural, connective, vascular, and elastic--it receives its
characteristic designation from nerve-fibrils, nerve-fibres, and
nerve-cells; just as the muscular system receives its designation
from contractile cells and fibres. This neural tissue assumes three
well-marked forms: 1°, _nerves_, which are bundles of fibres and
fibrils, enclosed in a membranous sheath; 2°, _ganglia_, which are
clusters of cells, fibres, and fibrils, sometimes enclosed in a sheath,
sometimes not; 3°, _centres_, which are artificial divisions of the
neural axis, serving as points of union for different organs.

In the Invertebrata the neural axis is the chain of ganglionic masses
running along the ventral side, and giving off the nerves to organs of
sense, and to the muscles. It may be seen represented in Fig. 1.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.--_Nervous system of a beetle._ The small round
masses, or _ganglia_, are seen to be connected by longitudinal fibres,
and from the ganglia issue fibres to the limbs, organs of sense, and
viscera.]

In the Vertebrata the axis is dorsal, and is called the _cerebro-spinal
axis_, including brain and spinal cord. When we look at this structure
superficially we see various nerves radiating _from_ it to skin,
glands, and muscles; but a closer examination, enlightened by knowledge
of function, shows that some of these nerves pass _into_ it from the
various surfaces and sense-organs, and are therefore called _afferent_
or _sensory_; whereas another set passes out of it to glands and
muscles, and these nerves are therefore called _efferent_ or _motory_.
There are also fibres which, passing from one part of the great centre
to another, are called _commissural_.

To this brief account of the cerebro-spinal system may be added a word
on the connected chain of ganglia and nerves known as the Sympathetic,
because it was formerly supposed to be the organ through which the
various “sympathies” were effected. It is now held to be the system
devoted to the viscera and blood-vessels; but there is still great want
of agreement among physiologists as to whether it is an independent
system, having a special structure somewhat different from that of the
cerebro-spinal, or whether it is simply a great plexus of nerves and
ganglia, only topographically distinguishable from the rest of the
nervous system. Into this point it is unnecessary for me to enter here.
Enough to say, that I entirely agree with Sigmund Mayer in adopting
the second view.[80] In no histological character, yet specified, are
the sympathetic nerves and ganglia demarcated from the others. There
are, indeed, _more_ non-medullary fibres (the gray fibres of Remak)
in the sympathetic; but the same fibres are also abundant in the
cerebro-spinal system; and the sympathetic has also its large medullary
fibres.

3. The Centres are composed of two substances: the gray and the white.
The gray substance is often called the vesicular because of its
abundant cells; but it has even more fibres than cells, and the white
substance has also a few cells.[81] The gray substance is distributed
over the surface of the brain--in the convolutions; and in various
other parts of the encephalon. It surrounds the central canal which
forms the ventricles of the brain and is continued as a very small
cavity all down the spinal cord. Besides entering into the important
and conspicuous masses known as the cerebral ganglia--(the _optic
thalami_, and _corpora striata_)--the gray substance is massed in the
_corpora quadrigemina_, _crura cerebri pons varolii_, and _medulla
oblongata_. We shall have occasion to refer to each of those parts.
Until modern times all the masses included in the skull under the
familiar term Brain (or the technical term Encephalon) were regarded
as the only centre, and also as the origin of all the nerves. Nor has
this notion even yet entirely disappeared, although the spinal cord
is known not to be a large nerve trunk, but a centre or connected
chain of centres, structurally and functionally similar to the cranial
centres. The shadow of the ancient error still obscures interpretation
of the part this spinal cord plays in the sentient mechanism; and thus
although the cord is universally admitted to be a centre for “sensitive
impressions,” it is usually excluded from Sensation. This widespread
and misleading notion will be critically examined in a future problem.

4. Beginning our survey of the cerebro-spinal axis with the Spinal
Cord, we observe it to consist: 1°, of _central gray substance_
surrounding the scarcely visible canal, which is all that remains of
the primitive groove in the germinal membrane (§ 9); 2°, irregular
gray masses, called the _anterior and posterior horns_,[82] connected
with the anterior and posterior _roots_ of the spinal nerves; and 3°,
strands of white fibres enclosing this central substance, and called
the _anterior lateral and posterior columns_.

Like the Cerebrum, it is a double organ formed by two symmetrical
halves, as the cerebrum is of two hemispheres. Each half innervates
the corresponding half of the body. The cord is unlike the cerebrum
in external form, though very like it in internal structure. The gray
structure is mainly external in the cerebrum, and is internal in the
cord.

From the anterior side of the cord (that which in animals is the under
side) the motor nerves issue; from the posterior (in animals the
upper) side, issue the sensory nerves. On each of the sensory nerves
there is a ganglion. The _roots_ of each nerve, formed of several
rootlets issuing from the anterior and posterior columns, subsequently
unite together, and proceed in a single sheath to muscles and skin,
separating again, however, before they reach muscles and skin. Fig. 2
represents this arrangement.

[Illustration: Fig. 2.--_A portion of the spinal cord with its nerves_
(after Bernard). The left-hand figure shows the anterior side; the
right-hand the posterior. A the anterior, and P, the posterior root,
they meet at _g_, the ganglion; _c_ and _d_ are filaments connecting
two posterior roots.]

5. There are thirty-one pairs (sometimes thirty-two) of such
nerves--namely, eight cervical, twelve thoracic, five lumbar, five
sacral, and one (or two) coccygeal. Figs. 3 to 6 represent transverse
sections, which display the entrance of the roots of the nerves into
the anterior and posterior horns.

6. Similar masses of gray substance in the _Medulla Oblongata_ (which
is the name given to the cord when it passes into the skull)[83] are
supposed to be the origins of some other nerves (the cranial).

[Illustration: Fig. 3.--_Transverse section of one half of the
spinal cord in the lumbar region_ (after Kölliker). _a_, anterior
root entering the anterior gray horns, _m_ and _l_, where cells are
clustered; _c_, central canal; _d_ and _e_, the anterior and posterior
commissures uniting the two halves of the cord; _b_, posterior root
entering the posterior gray horn.]

[Illustration: Fig. 4.--_Transverse section of both halves of the cord,
cervical region._ _a_, Fissure separating the anterior columns; _b_,
fissure of the posterior.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5.--_Transverse section of the cord in the dorsal
region._]

[Illustration: Fig. 6.--_Transverse section in the lumbar region._]

Although the Medulla Spinalis is unquestionably continued as the
Medulla Oblongata, the arrangement of its tissues here becomes
gradually changed, and so complicated that it baffles the scalpel.
Anatomists are, however, agreed on the one point of fundamental
importance to us here--namely, that there is only a rearrangement, not
a new tissue. Accepting the artificial division into two organs, we may
say that their functions are different, inasmuch as they are different
in their anatomical connections--they innervate different parts; but as
nerve-centres they have one and the same property.

On its posterior surface the Medulla Oblongata opens as the _fourth
ventricle_. It is then no longer a closed canal, but an expansion of
the spinal canal, which is covered by the Cerebellum. On its anterior
surface projects the _pons varolii_. Figs. 7 and 8 represent these.

[Illustration:

    Fig. 7.--_Back, or upper view of the Medulla Oblongata as it
    continues the Med. Spinalis._ 1, Section of the thalami; 2, corpora
    quadrigemina (the two lower bodies are imperfectly represented in
    the engraving); 3, section of the crura cerebelli; 4, the fourth
    ventricle; 5, the restiform bodies; 6, the calamus scriptorius.
]

[Illustration:

    Fig. 8.--_Front, or under view of the Med. Oblong._ 1, Optic nerves
    cut off at the chiasma; 2, crura cerebri; 3, pons varolii; 4,
    olivary bodies; 5, anterior pyramids; 6, spinal columns.
]

While thus on the one hand continuing the Medulla Spinalis, the
Medulla Oblongata is seen on the other hand to be continuous with the
Brain--its white columns passing upwards in the _crura cerebri_, its
cavity repeated in the other ventricles. Above it lie the ganglionic
masses, the _corpora quadrigemina_, _optic thalami_, and _corpora
striata_. Crowning these are the big and little brains, Cerebrum and
Cerebellum. Figs. 9 and 10 represent this relation of Medulla Spinalis,
Medulla Oblongata, and Brain. Fig. 11 is a purely artificial diagram
which will give the reader some idea of the disposition of the white
and gray substances.

[Illustration:

    Fig. 9.--_Human Brain in Profile._ 1, Cerebrum; 2, cerebellum; 3,
    pons varolii and medulla oblongata.
]

[Illustration:

    Fig. 10.--_One half of the Brain in Profile, from the inside._
    1, Convolutions of the cerebrum; 2, corpus callosum or great
    commissure uniting the two hemispheres; 3, arbor vitæ or branching
    arrangement of gray and white matter in the cerebellum; 4, pons
    varolii and medulla.
]

[Illustration:

    Fig. 11.--_Diagram of a vertical section of the Brain_ (after
    Dalton). 1, Olfactory ganglion; 2, cerebral hemisphere; 3, corpus
    striatum; 4, thalamus; 5, corpora quadrigemina; 6, cerebellum; 7,
    ganglion of the pons varolii; 8, olivary body.
]

7. In man the Cerebrum is to the Cerebellum as 9 to 1. In the lower
vertebrates the preponderance is still greater. The cerebrum is in our
artificial systems commonly divided into three lobes. The frontal lobe
is that portion which lies in front of the deep fissure named after
Rolando; between that fissure and the “internal perpendicular fissure”
lies the parietal lobe; behind this we have the occipital lobe; and,
below the fissure of Sylvius, the tempero-sphenoidal lobe. Each lobe is
again subdivided according to its convolutions.

The disposition of the fibres in the brain is far too complex to be
accurately followed. All that we can say is, that there are strands
which connect one convolution with another, strands which connect
one hemisphere with another, strands which connect cerebrum with
cerebellum, and strands which connect the cerebrum with the lower
ganglia. It is important to conceive this distinctly; for we shall
hereafter see that the function of the Brain (by brain is here meant
both Cerebrum and Cerebellum) is not that of _innervation_, but of
_incitation and regulation_. To speak metaphorically, it is the
coachman who holds in his hands the reins, and guides the team. One
cardinal fact should arrest attention, namely, that not a single nerve
in the body has its origin or centre of innervation in the cerebrum and
cerebellum. The olfactory and optic nerves do indeed _seem_ to issue
from the cerebrum; and are commonly described as cerebral nerves. But
the facts of Development, minute Anatomy, and Experiment prove this to
be inexact. Although I shall continue to speak of the olfactory and
optic nerves in accordance with universal usage, not wishing to burden
the reader with unnecessary innovations, I must at the outset express
my opinion that these nerves cannot be brought under the same general
type as the other sensory nerves. Embryology and Anatomy suggest that
they have no more claim to the title than the _crura cerebri_. Of this
hereafter. Setting these aside, no one now refuses to acknowledge
that Cerebrum and Cerebellum, although centres of Incitation and
Association, are not the centres of direct Innervation: the organic
mechanism in all its _physiological_ processes will act independently
of them (so far as such artificial distinctions are admissible at all).
This does not throw a doubt on their _physiological_ functions, nor on
their participation in the normal execution of physiological processes.

8. From this rapid survey two important points may be selected for
special attention. First, the continuity of the neural axis throughout;
secondly, the fundamental similarity of its _structure_, underlying
great variations in its form and connections. This, which is the
anatomical expression of the Unity of the nervous system, will become
more evident after we have expounded what Embryology and Microscopic
Anatomy teach. We may therefore digress here awhile to consider


THE EARLY FORMS OF NERVE CENTRES.

9. In the outermost layer of the germinal membrane of the embryo a
groove appears, which deepens as its sides grow upwards, and finally
close over and form a canal. This canal is composed of cells all alike.
Its foremost extremity soon bulges into three well-marked enlargements,
which are then called the _primitive cerebral vesicles_. The cavities
of these vesicles are continuous. Except in position and size, there
are no discernible differences in these vesicles, which are known as
the Fore-brain, Middle-brain, and Hind-brain.

10. The _Fore-brain_ soon buds off from each side a small vesicle. This
is the optic vesicle, the first rudiment of what subsequently becomes
optic nerve and retina. At this period it is simply a vesicle with
a hollow stem, the cavity being continuous with the cavity of the
cerebral vesicle, and the walls continuous with the cerebral wall.

It thus appears that the retina and optic “nerve” are primitive
portions of the brain--a detached segment of the general centre,
identical in structure with the cerebral vesicle, and not unlike in
form. A cup-like depression quickly forms the optic vesicle into an
inner and an outer fold. The inner or concave fold becomes the retina,
and the outer or convex fold (that nearest to the brain) becomes its
choroid membrane. On the fourth day of incubation the retina of the
chick is composed of spindle-shaped cells, all alike. On the seventh
day there is a differentiation into layers, one of which on the eighth
day is granular; on the tenth two are granular; and on the thirteenth
ganglionic cells appear. Some of the cells have elongated into radial
fibres (known as Müller’s fibres); and with the appearance of rods and
cones the normal retinal elements are complete.

11. The researches of Foster and Balfour[84] confirm the statement that
all the different parts of the retina (whether nervous or connective)
are derived from one and the same layer of embryonic cells, which
originally formed a portion of the first cerebral vesicle.

12. Meanwhile the hollow stem of this optic vesicle begins to develop
fibres amidst the nuclei of its walls. The “optic nerve” arises: it
is still hollow; and in birds remains so through life. The fibres as
they are developed _grow forwards towards the retina_, and spread over
its internal surface. _They also grow forwards towards the brain_,
and spread over its substance; but it is _not_, as might be supposed,
and is generally believed, with the cerebral hemispheres (or that
portion of the Fore-brain from which these are derived), but with the
Middle-brain (which becomes the _corpora quadrigemina_), that the optic
fibres are in connection.[85]

13. This will be understood when the further development is traced.
The Fore-brain, after budding off the optic vesicles, buds off two
larger vesicles--the future cerebral hemispheres. This is noticeable
on the second day of incubation, and by the third day each vesicle is
as large as the whole of the original Fore-brain. Their development is
essentially like that of the optic vesicles; both as to the cellular
and the fibrous elements.

The _convolutions_, _corpus callosum_, _nucleus lentiformis_,
and _corpora striata_ are then indicated. Meanwhile, that which
originally was the Fore-brain has lapsed into the secondary rank as
Intermediate-brain (_Zwischenhirn_), and becomes the parts surrounding
the third ventricle, namely, the _thalami_, _corpora candicantia_,
_infundibulum_, and what is called the “posterior perforated substance.”

14. The _Middle-brain_, or Second Vesicle, develops the _corpora
quadrigemina_ from the roof of its cavity, and the _crura cerebri_ from
its floor.

The _Hind-brain_, or Third Vesicle, divides into two, like the First
Vesicle; it buds off the hemispheres of the cerebellum; its cavity
forms the fourth ventricle; its walls the _medulla oblongata_.

15. It thus appears that the primitive membrane forms into a canal,
which enlarges at one part into three vesicles, and from these are
developed the encephalic structures. The continuity of the walls
and cavities of these vesicles is never obliterated throughout the
subsequent changes. It is also traceable throughout the medulla
spinalis. And microscopic investigation reveals that underneath all the
morphological changes the walls of the whole cerebro-spinal axis are
composed of similar elements on a similar plan.[86]

16. Two conclusions directly follow from this exposition:--first, that
_since the structure of the great axis is everywhere similar, the
properties must be similar_; secondly, that _since there is structural
continuity, no one part can be called into activity without at the same
time more or less exciting that of all the rest_.


THE PERIPHERAL SYSTEM.

17. Following the analytical division, we now come to the Peripheral
System of nerves and ganglia. The separation, I must often repeat,
is purely artificial; but the artifice has conveniences. We separate
in the same way the heart from veins and arteries, and the capillary
circulation from the arterial.

Each nerve has its direct connection with a particular centre, and
indirectly with the whole system. It has its circumscribed territory,
and individual office. Except in a few cases of anastomosis, the action
of one nerve does not involve that of another: only one muscle or one
group of muscles is moved, without exciting motion in a neighbor. It is
through the centres that these individual territories are united; and
a wave of excitation always passes throughout the central substance.
Thus the centres are not simply organs of association, consequently of
regulation, but are the nexus whereby the diversity of the actions is
integrated into the unity of consensus.

18. Nothing further need at present be stated respecting the nerves;
but it is needful to give precision to the ideas of


GANGLIA AND CENTRES,

usually spoken of as if they were convertible terms. That this is
inexact may be readily shown, and that it is misleading appears in its
causing physiologists to credit every ganglion, wherever found, with
central functions; and, by an almost inevitable extension of the error,
has led to the assignment of central functions to a single ganglionic
cell! This is but part of that “superstition of the cell” against
which I shall have to protest. I will not here raise the doubt which
presses from various sides respecting the central functions of the
ganglia in the heart and intestines, because the reader perhaps shares
the general opinion on that point; but let me simply ask what central
function can possibly be assigned to the ganglia on each of the spinal
sensory nerves? above all to those grouped and scattered ganglionic
cells which are found at the peripheral termination of some nerves, and
in the very trunks of others? There may, indeed, be imagined a central
function for the ganglia in the mesentery, and even in the choroid coat
of the retina, on the hypothesis (quite gratuitous, I think) of their
regulating the circulation; but even this explanation cannot be adopted
with respect to the ganglionic cells which appear in the course of the
nerve.[87]

The meaning of a physiological centre is, that it is a point _to_ which
stimulations proceed, and _from_ which they are reflected. The meaning
of a ganglion is, that it is a group of nerve cells dispersed among, or
in continuation with, nerve fibres: it may be a centre of reflection,
or it may not; and in the latter case its physiological office is at
present undetermined. A ganglion is no more a centre in virtue of its
cell-group than a muscle is a limb. All function depends on connection,
and central function demands a connection of afferent and efferent
parts.

19. The ganglia found in the ventral cord of the Invertebrate (see
Fig. 1) are centres, each of which has considerable independence,
each regulating a single segment of the body, or a group of similar
segments. As the scale of animal complexity ascends, these separated
centres tend more and more to coalesce, and with this coalescence
comes an increasing _combination_ of movements.[88] Observe the
caterpillar slowly crawling over a leaf; each segment of its body moves
in succession; but when this caterpillar becomes a butterfly the body
moves rapidly, and all at once. Open the caterpillar, and you find its
nervous centres are thirteen separate ganglia, each presiding over a
distinct part of the body, and each capable of independent action.
Open the butterfly, and you find the thirteen ganglia greatly changed:
the second and third are fused into one; the fourth, fifth, and sixth
into another; the eleventh and twelfth into another; the only trace of
the original separation is in a slight constriction of the surface. The
movements of the caterpillar were few, simple, slow, and those of the
butterfly are many, varied, and rapid.

20. In the Vertebrates the coalescence of ganglia is such that the
spinal axis is one great centre. We do indeed anatomically and
physiologically subdivide it into several centres, because several
portions directly innervate separate organs; but its importance lies in
the intimate blending of all parts, so that _fluctuating combinations_
of its elements may arise, and varied movements result. Each centre
combines various muscles; the axis is a combination of centres. The
brainless frog, for instance, has still the spinal cord, and therefore
the power not only of moving either of his limbs, but also of combining
their separate movements: if grasped, he struggles and escapes; if
pricked, he hops away. But these actions, although complex, are much
less complex and varied than the actions of the normal frog.

There is not only a coalescence of ganglia, but a greater and greater
concentration of the substance in the upper portions of the axis. In
the inferior vertebrates, and in the mammalian embryo, the spinal
cord occupies the whole length of the vertebral canal from the head
to the tip of the tail; and here the centres of reflexion correspond
with the several segments. But as the cranial mass develops there is a
withdrawal of neural substance from the lower parts, and the centres of
reflexion are then some way removed from the segments they innervate.
In the animal development there is even a greater and greater
predominance of the upper portions, so that the brain and medulla
oblongata are of infinitely more importance than the spinal cord.

21. Besides the central group of elements which belong to fixed and
definite actions, we must conceive these elements capable of variable
combinations, like the pieces of colored glass in a kaleidoscope, which
fall into new groups, each group having its definite though temporary
form. The elements constitute really a continuous network of variable
forms. It is to such combinations, and not to fixed circumscribed
ganglia, that we must refer the subordinate centres of the axis. We
speak of a centre for Respiration, a centre for Laughing, a centre for
Crying, a centre for Coughing, and so on, with as much propriety as
we speak of a centre for Swallowing or for Walking. Not that in these
cases there is a circumscribed mass of central substance set apart for
the innervation of the several muscles employed in these actions, and
for no other purpose. Each action demands a definite group of neural
elements, as each geometric form in the kaleidoscope demands a definite
group of pieces of glass; but these same pieces of glass will readily
enter into other combinations; and in like manner the muscles active
in Respiration are also active in Laughing, Coughing, etc., though
differently innervated and co-ordinated.

22. The physiological rank of a centre is therefore the expression of
its power of fluctuating combination. The medulla oblongata is higher
than the medulla spinalis, because of its more varied combinations;
the cerebrum is higher than all, because it has no fixed and limited
combinations. It is the centre of centres, and as such the supreme
organ.




