CHAPTER VI.

THE PROBLEM STATED.


71. If the preceding attempt to disengage the question from the
ambiguities of its terms has been successful, we shall find little
difficulty in rationally interpreting all the facts adduced in favor
of Animal Automatism, without having recourse to a mechanical theory
of biological phenomena. The objections to that theory are that it
employs terms which have very misleading _connotations_ even when they
do not _denote_ phenomena of widely different orders; so that the moral
repugnance commonly felt at the attempt to treat the animal organism as
if it were a machine, is sustained by the intellectual repugnance at
the attempt to explain biological phenomena on principles derived from
phenomena of a simpler order.

Remark, in passing, this piquant contradiction: the Automaton theory
of Descartes, when applied to the animals, generally excited ridicule
or repulsion; whereas the far more inconsistent and mechanical
theory of Reflex Action has been almost universally welcomed as a
great discovery, though it banishes the Sensibility which Descartes
preserved. And further, the philosophers who most loudly protested
against the idea that animals were machines, were the philosophers
who most insisted that these animals were made, not evolved--planned
by their maker, as a watch is planned by its maker, with a distinct
purpose and prevision in the disposition of every part; whereas the
philosophers who most emphatically reject this notion of organisms
being made, are often those who liken organisms to machines.

72. The paradox propounded by Descartes loses much of its strangeness
when we understand his meaning. Its terms are infelicitous because of
their misleading connotations. When he says that all the actions of
animals which seem to be due to Consciousness are in fact produced on
the same principles as those of a machine, he means that animals have
not souls to direct their actions; but since, on being questioned, he
is ready to admit that animals have sensation, perception, emotion, and
memory, his denial of their souls practically comes to much the same as
the ordinary position that animals have not Thought nor Consciousness
of Self.[220] The admission of sensation is, however, quite enough to
mark the essential difference between an organism and a machine.

73. It was really a great step taken by Descartes when he directed
attention to the fact that all animal actions were executed in
strict conformity with mechanical principles, because both before
his time, and since, we may observe a great disregard of the animal
mechanism, and a disposition to interpret the phenomena on metaphysical
principles. But the connotations of the term “machine” were such as to
lead the mind away from the special conditions of the vital mechanism,
and fix it exclusively on the general conditions of machinery. Hence
his opponents misunderstood him, and some of his followers made the
same oversight, and ended by eliminating sensation altogether. In
pursuance of this mechanical point of view, to the exclusion of the
biological, Thought and even Consciousness have been eliminated from
among the organic agencies, and are said to have no more influence in
determining even human actions than the whistle of the steam-engine has
in directing the locomotive. There are thus two _meta_physiological
theories. According to the one, Consciousness directs indeed the
actions of the organism, but is not itself an organic process--it sits
apart, like a musical performer playing on an instrument. According
to the other, it is not a directing agency, but an accessory product
of certain organic processes, which processes may go on quite as well
without any accompaniment and interference of Consciousness.

74. Two observations arise here. First, we observe a want of due
recognition of the objective and subjective aspects, and their
respective criteria. Secondly, we observe mental facts of irresistible
certainty interpreted by material hypotheses of questionable value;
and not only so, but a higher validity is assigned to the material
hypotheses than to the mental facts they are invented to explain. That
we are conscious, and that our actions are determined by sensations,
emotions, and ideas, are facts which may or may not be explained by
reference to material conditions, but which no material explanation
can render more certain. That animals resemble us in this as in
other respects is an induction of the highest probability. It is
also a fact that many actions take place, as we say, unconsciously
and involuntarily; and that some take place now consciously, now
unconsciously. These facts also we endeavor to explain: and when
we find that some of the unconscious and involuntary actions take
place after the brain has been removed, this is interpreted on the
material hypothesis of the brain being the sole seat of sensation
and consciousness; and is urged in favor of the hypothesis that
consciousness cannot be an agent in the mechanism. Here the confusion
of objective and subjective aspects is patent. Consciousness as a
subjective fact cannot be a material or objective fact. But may it not
be another aspect of that which is objective? So long as we are dealing
with the objective aspect, we have nothing but material processes in a
material mechanism before us. A change within the organism is caused
by a neural stimulation, and the resulting action is a reflex on the
muscles. Here there is simply a transference of motion by a material
mechanism. There is in this no evidence of a subjective agency;
there could be none. But when we come to investigate the process, we
find that it differs from similar processes in anorganisms, by the
necessary co-operation of special conditions, and among these--the
vital conditions--there are those which in their subjective aspect we
express not in terms of Matter and Motion, but in terms of Feeling,
i. e. not in objective but in subjective terms. I see a stone move on
being struck; I also see a man shrink on being struck, and hear a dog
howl on being kicked. I do not infer that the stone feels as the man
and dog feel, because I know the stone and the dog to be differently
constituted, and infer a corresponding difference in their reactions. I
infer that the man and dog feel, because I know they are like myself,
and conclude that what I feel they feel, under like conditions.

75. Descartes says that animals are sensitive automata. They _always_
act as we _sometimes_ act, i. e. when we are not conscious of what we
do, as in singing, walking, playing the piano, etc. We are said to do
these things mechanically, automatically, and hence the conclusion that
these actions are those of a pure mechanism. But it would be truer to
say that we never act mechanically, we always act organically. “When
one who falls from a height throws his hands forwards to save his
head,” says Descartes, “it is in virtue of no ratiocination that he
performs this action” (that depends on the definition: in the Logic
of Feeling there is a process of ratiocination identical with that in
the Logic of Signs). “It does not depend upon his _mind_” (again a
question of definition), “but takes place merely because his senses
being affected by _present danger_” (senses, then, have a perception
of danger?) “some change arises in his brain which determines the
animal spirits to pass thence into the nerves in such a manner as is
required to produce this motion, in the same way as in a machine, and
without his mind being able to hinder it. Now since we observe this in
ourselves, why should we be so much astonished if the light reflected
from the body of a wolf into the eye of a sheep has the same force to
excite in it the motion of flight?”

Here, both in the case of the man and the sheep, there is presupposed
the very mental experience which is denied. The young child will
not throw out its arm to protect itself; but after many experiences
of falling and stumbling, there is an organized perception of the
impending danger, and the means of averting it, and it is this which
determines the throwing out of the arms. If this is not a mental
fact--a process of judgment--then the logical conclusion by which a
financier on hearing a war rumor orders his broker to sell stock, is
not a mental fact. The light reflected from the body of a wolf would
not disturb the sheep unless its own, or its _inherited_ organized
experience were ready there to respond. But this organized experience,
you say, enters into the mechanism? Yes; but it cannot be made to
enter into the mechanism of an automaton, because however complex that
mechanism may be, and however capable of variety of action, it is
constructed solely for definite actions on calculated lines: all its
readjustments must have been foreseen, it is incapable of adjusting
itself to unforeseen circumstances. Hence every interruption in the
prearranged order either throws it out of gear, or brings it to a
standstill. It is regulated, not self-regulating. The organism, on the
contrary--conspicuously so in its more complex forms--is variable,
self-regulating, incalculable. It has _selective adaptation_ (p.
221) responding readily and efficiently to novel and unforeseen
circumstances; _acquiring_ new modes of combination and reaction. An
automaton that will learn by experience, and adapt itself to conditions
not calculated for in its construction, has yet to be made; till it
is made, we must deny that organisms are machines. Automatism in the
organism implies Memory and Perception. A sudden contact--a sudden
noise--a vague form seen in the twilight will excite the mechanism
according to its organized experiences. We start automatically, before
we automatically interpret the cause; we start first, and then ask,
What is that? But we do not always start at sounds or sights which have
no association with previous experiences. The child and the man both
see the falling glass, but the child does not automatically stretch out
a hand to save the glass. Having once learned the action of swimming or
billiard-playing, we automatically execute these; without consciously
remembering the rules, we unconsciously obey them; each feeling as it
rises is linked on to another, each muscle is combined with others in a
remembered synthesis.

76. Kempelen’s chess-player surprised the public, but every instructed
physiologist present knew that in some way or other its movements were
directed by a human mind; simply because no machine could possibly have
responded to the unforeseen fluctuations of the human mind opposed to
it. Even the mind of a dog or a savage would be incompetent to pass
beyond the range of its previous experiences, incompetent to seize the
significance of an adversary’s moves on the chessboard. Now just as
we conclude that mental agency is essential to a game of chess, so we
conclude that Sensibility is essential to the fluctuating responses
of an organism under unforeseen circumstances. We can conceive an
automaton dog that would bark at the presence of a beggar; but not of
an automaton dog that would bark one day at the beggar and the next
day wag his tail, remembering the food and patting that beggar had
bestowed. Since all we know of machines forbids the idea of their
being capable of adjusting their actions to new circumstances, or of
evoking through experience new powers of combination, we conclude that
wherever this capability of adaptation is present there is an agency in
operation which does not belong to the class of mechanical agencies.
Goltz has shown that a frog deprived of its brain manifests so much of
vision as enables it to avoid obstacles--leaping to the right or to
the left of a book placed in its path. This Professor Huxley regards
as purely mechanical:--“Although the frog appears to have no sensation
of light, visible objects act upon the motor mechanism of its body.”
Should we not rather conclude that if the frog had no sensation,
no such effect would follow? because although a machine _might_ be
constructed to respond to variations of light and shadows, none could
be constructed (without Sensibility) to respond to the fluctuating
conditions as an organism responds.[221] Were the reflex actions
of the organism purely mechanical--i. e. involving none of those
fluctuating adjustments which characterize Sensibility--the effect
would be uniform, and proportional to the impact; but it is variable,
and proportional to the static condition of the nervous centres at the
moment. Exaggerate this--by strychnine, for instance--and the slightest
touch on the skin will produce general convulsions. Lower it--by an
anæsthetic--and no reflex at all will follow a stimulus. In anæsthesia
of the mucous membrane, no reflex of the eyelid, no secretion of
tears, follows on the irritation of the membrane; no sneezing follows
irritation of the inside of the nose; no vomiting follows irritation of
the fauces.

77. The question has long ceased to be whether the organism is a
mechanism. To the physiologist it is this before all things. To the
psychologist also it has of late years more and more assumed this
character; because even when he postulates the existence of a spiritual
entity _in_ the organism but not _of_ it, he still recognizes the
necessity of a mechanism for the execution of the acts determined by
the spirit; and when the psychologist adopts the theory of spiritual
phenomena as the subjective aspect of what objectively are material
phenomena, he of course regards the bodily mechanism and the mental
mechanism as one and the same real.

This settled, the problem of Automatism may be thus stated: Granting
the animal organism to be a material mechanism, and all its actions
due to the operation of that mechanism, are we to conclude that it is
an automaton essentially resembling the automata we construct, the
movements of which may, or may not, be _accompanied_ by Feeling, but
are in no case _determined_ by Feeling?

Descartes says that animals are sensitive automata. Professor Huxley
says that both animals and men are sensitive and conscious automata;
so that misleading as the language of Descartes and Professor Huxley
often is in what its terms connote, we do them great injustice if
we suppose them to have overlooked the points of difference between
organisms and machines which have been set forth with so much emphasis
in a preceding chapter; and the reader is requested to understand that
without pretending to say how much the inevitable connotation of their
language expresses their opinions, and how much it may have only led
to their being misunderstood, my criticisms are directed against this
connotation and this interpretation.




