CHAPTER V.

EVOLUTION.


99. That organized substance has the property of nourishing itself
by assimilating from its internal medium substances there present in
an unorganized state, and that this is followed by a development or
differentiation of structure, is familiar to every inquirer.

Every one who has pursued embryological researches, and in a lesser
degree every one who has merely read about them, must have been
impressed by this marvel of marvels: an exceedingly minute portion
of living matter, so simple in aspect that a line will define it,
passes by successive modifications into an organism so complex that a
treatise is needed to describe it; not only do the cells in which the
ovum and the spermatozoon originate, pass into a complex organism,
reproducing the forms and features of the parents, and with these
the constitutional peculiarities of the parents (their longevity,
their diseases, their mental dispositions, nay, their very tricks and
habits), but they may reproduce the form and features, the dispositions
and diseases, of a grandfather or great-grandfather, which had lain
dormant in the father or mother. Consider for an instant what this
implies. A microscopic cell of albuminous compounds, wholly without
trace of organs, not appreciably distinguishable from millions of other
cells, does nevertheless contain within it the “possibilities” of an
organism so complex and so special as that of a Newton or a Napoleon.
If ever there was a case when the famous Aristotelian notion of a
“potential existence” seemed justified, assuredly it is this. And
although we can only by a fallacy maintain the oak to be _contained_
in the acorn, or the animal contained in the ovum, the fallacy is so
natural, and indeed so difficult of escape, that there is no ground
for surprise when physiologists, on first learning something of
development, were found maintaining that the perfect organism existed
already in the ovum, having all its lineaments in miniature, and only
growing into visible dimensions through the successive stages of
evolution.[44] The preformation of the organism seemed an inevitable
deduction from the opinions once universal. It led to many strange,
and some absurd conclusions; among them, to the assertion that the
original germ of every species contained within it all the countless
individuals which in process of time might issue from it; and this in
no metaphysical “potential” guise, but as actual boxed-up existences
(_emboîtés_); so that Adam and Eve were in the most literal sense
progenitors of the whole human race, and contained their progeny
already shaped within them, awaiting the great accoucheur, time.

100. This was the celebrated “emboîtement” theory. In spite of obvious
objections it gained scientific acceptance, because physiologists could
not bring themselves to believe that so marvellous a structure as that
of a human organism arose by a series of successive modifications, or
because they could not comprehend how it was built up, part by part,
into forms so closely resembling the parent-forms. That many and
plausible reasons pleaded in favor of this opinion is evident in the
fact that illustrious men like Haller, Bonnet, Vallisneri, Swammerdamm,
Réaumur, and Cuvier, were its advocates; and if there is not a sigle
physiologist of our day who accepts it, or who finds any peculiar
difficulty in following the demonstrations of embryologists, how from
the common starting-point of a self-multiplying epithelial cell parts
so diverse as hairs, nails, hoofs, scales, feathers, crystalline lens,
and secreting glands may be evolved, or how from the homogeneous
germinal membrane the complex organism will arise, there are very
few among the scorners of the dead hypothesis who seem capable of
generalizing the principles which have destroyed it, or can conceive
that the laws of Evolution apply as rigorously to the animal and
vegetable _kingdoms_ as to the individual _organisms_. The illustrious
names of those who advocated the preformation hypothesis may serve to
check our servile submission to the authorities so loudly proclaimed as
advocates of the fixity of species. The more because the two doctrines
have a common parentage. The one falls with the other, and no array of
authorities can arrest the fall. That the manifold differentiations
noticeable in a complex organism should have been evolved from a
membrane wholly destitute of differences is a marvel, but a marvel
which Science has made intelligible. Yet the majority of those to
whom this has been made intelligible still find an impossibility in
admitting that the manifold forms of plant and animal were successively
evolved from equally simple origins. They relinquish the hypothesis of
preformation in the one case, and cling to it in the other. Evolution,
demonstrable in the individual history, seems preposterous in the
history of the class. And thus is presented the instructive spectacle
of philosophers laughing at the absurdities of “preformation,” and
yet exerting all their logic and rhetoric in defence of “creative
fiats”--which is simply the preformation hypothesis “writ large.”

101. It would not be difficult to show that the doctrine of
Epigenesis, with which Wolff forever displaced the doctrine of
Preformation, leads by an inevitable logic to the doctrine of universal
Evolution; and that we can no more understand the appearance of a
new organism which is not the modification of some already existing
organism, than we can understand the sudden appearance of a new organ
which is not the modification of some existing structure. In the one
case as in the other we may disguise the process under such terms as
creative fiat and preformation; but these terms are no explanations;
they re-state the results, they do not describe the process; whereas
Epigenesis describes the process as it passes under the eye of science.

102. If any reader of these pages who, from theological or zoölogical
suspicion of the Development Hypothesis, clings to the hypothesis
of a creative Plan which once for all arranged the organic world in
Types that could not change, will ask what rational interpretation can
be given to the succession of phases each embryo is forced to pass
through, it may help to give him pause. He will observe that _none_ of
these phases have any adaptation to the future state of the animal, but
are in positive contradiction to it, or are simply purposeless; whereas
all show stamped on them the unmistakable characters of _ancestral_
adaptations and the progressions of Organic Evolution. What does the
fact imply? There is not a single known example of a complex organism
which is not developed out of simpler forms. Before it can attain the
complex structure which distinguishes it, there must be an evolution of
forms similar to those which distinguish the structures of organisms
lower in the series. On the hypothesis of a Plan which prearranged
the organic world, nothing could be more unworthy of a supreme
intelligence than this inability to construct an organism at once,
without previously making several tentative efforts, undoing to-day
what was so carefully done yesterday, and _repeating for centuries the
same tentatives, and the same corrections, in the same succession_. Do
not let us blink this consideration. There is a traditional phrase much
in vogue among the anthropomorphists, which arose naturally enough from
the tendency to take human methods as an explanation of the divine--a
phrase which becomes a sort of argument--“The Great Architect.” But
if we are to admit the human point of view, a glance at the facts of
embryology must produce very uncomfortable reflections. For what should
we say to an architect who was unable, or being able was obstinately
unwilling, to erect a palace except by first using his materials in the
shape of a hut, then pulling it down and rebuilding them as a cottage,
then adding story to story and room to room, _not_ with any reference
to the ultimate purposes of the palace, but wholly with reference to
the way in which houses were constructed in ancient times? What should
we say to the architect who could not form a museum out of bricks
and mortar, but was forced to begin as if going to build a mansion:
and after proceeding some way in this direction, altered his plan
into a palace, and that again into a museum? Yet this is the sort of
succession on which organisms are constructed. The fact has long been
familiar; how has it been reconciled with Infinite Wisdom? Let the
following passage answer for a thousand:--“The embryo is nothing like
the miniature of the adult. For a long while the body in its entirety
and its details presents the strangest of spectacles. Day by day and
hour by hour the aspect of the scene changes, and this instability is
exhibited by the most essential parts no less than by the accessory
parts. One would say that Nature feels her way, and only reaches the
goal after many times missing the path,--on dirait que la nature
tâtonne et ne conduit son œuvre à bon fin qu’après s’être souvent
trompée.”[45] Writers have no compunction in speaking of Nature feeling
her way and blundering; but if in lieu of Nature, which may mean
anything, the Great Architect be substituted, it is probable that the
repugnance to using such language of evasion may cause men to revise
their conceptions altogether; they dare not attribute ignorance and
incompetence to the Creator.

103. Obviously the architectural hypothesis is incompetent to explain
the phenomena of organic development. Evolution is the universal
process; not creation of a direct kind. Von Baer, who very properly
corrected the exaggerations which had been put forth respecting the
identity of the embryonic forms with adult forms lower in the scale,
who showed that the mammalian embryo never was a bird, a reptile,
or a fish, nevertheless emphasized the fact that the mammalian
embryo passes through all the lower typical forms; so much so that,
except by their size, it is impossible to distinguish the embryos of
mammal, bird, lizard, or snake. “In my collection,” he says, “there
are two little embryos which I have omitted to label, so that I am
now quite incompetent to say to what class they belong. They may be
lizards, they may be small birds, or very young mammals; so complete
is the similarity in the mode of formation of the head and trunk.
The extremities have not yet made their appearance. But even if they
existed in the earliest stage we should learn nothing from them, for
the feet of lizards, mammals, and the wings of birds, all arise from
the same common form.” He sums up with his formula: “The special type
is always evolved from a more general type.”[46]

Such reminiscences of earlier forms are intelligible on the supposition
that originally the later form was a modification of the earlier form,
and that this modification is repeated; or on the supposition that
there was a similarity in the organic conditions, which similarity
ceased at the point where the new form emerged. But on no hypothesis
of creative Plan are they intelligible. They are useless structures,
failing even to subserve a temporary purpose. Sometimes, as Mr. Darwin
remarks, a trace of the embryonic resemblance lasts till a late age:
“Thus birds of the same genus, and of closely allied genera, often
resemble each other in their first and second plumage: as we see in
the spotted feathers in the thrush group. In the cat tribe most of the
species are striped and spotted in lines; and stripes or spots can
plainly be distinguished in the whelp of the lion and the puma. We
occasionally, though rarely, see something of this kind in plants....
The points of structure in which the embryos of widely different
animals of the same class resemble each other often have no direct
relation to their conditions of existence. We cannot, for instance,
suppose that in the embryos of the vertebrata the peculiar loop-like
courses of the arteries near the bronchial slits are related to similar
conditions in the young mammal which is nourished in the womb of its
mother, in the egg of a bird which is hatched in a nest, and in the
spawn of a frog under water.”

104. It would be easy to multiply examples, but I will content myself
with three. The tadpole of the Salamander has gills, and passes his
existence in the water; but the _Salamandra atra_, which lives high
up among the mountains, brings forth its young full-formed. This
animal never lives in the water. Yet if we open a gravid female, we
find tadpoles inside her with exquisitely feathered gills, and (as I
have witnessed) these tadpoles “when from the mother’s womb untimely
ripped,” if placed in water, swim about like the tadpoles of water
newts. Obviously this aquatic organization has no reference to the
future life of the animal, nor has it any adaptation to its embryonic
condition; it has solely reference to ancestral forms, it repeats a
phase in the development of its progenitors. Again, in the embryo of
the naked Nudibranch, we always observe a shell, although the animal
is without a shell, and there can be no purpose served by the shell in
embryonic life.[47] Finally, the human embryo has a tail, which is of
course utterly purposeless, and which, although to be explained as a
result of organic laws, is on the creative hypothesis only explained as
an adherence to the general plan of structure--a specimen of pedantic
trifling “worthy of no intellect above the pongo’s.”[48]

105. Humanly appreciated, not only is it difficult to justify the
successive stages of development, the incessant building up of
structures immediately to be taken down, but also to explain why
development was necessary at all. Why are not plants and animals
formed at once, as Eve was mythically affirmed to be taken from Adam’s
rib, and Minerva from Jupiter’s head? The theory of Evolution answers
this question very simply; the theory of Creation can only answer
it by affirming that such was the ordained plan. But the theory of
Evolution not only gives the simpler and more intelligible answer to
this question, it gives an answer to the further question which leaves
the theory of Creation no loophole except a sophism--namely, why the
formation of organisms is constantly being frustrated or perverted?
And, further, it gives an explanation of the law noticed by Milne
Edwards, that Nature is as economical in her means as she is prodigal
in her variation of them: “On dirait qu’avant de recourir à des
ressources nouvelles elle a voulu épuiser, en quelque sorte, chacun
des procédés qu’elle avait mis en jeu.”[49] The applause bestowed on
Nature for being economical is a curious transference to Nature of
human necessities. Why, with a whole universe at her disposal, should
Nature be economical? Why must she always be working in the same
groove, and using but a few out of the many substances at her command?
Economy is a virtue only in the poor. If Nature, in organic evolutions,
is restricted to a very few substances, and a very few modes of
combination, always creating new forms by modification of the old, and
apparently incapable of creating an organism at once, this must imply
an inherent necessity which is very unlike the free choice that can
render economy a merit.

106. There may indeed be raised an objection to the Development
Hypothesis on the ground that if the complex forms were all developed
from the simpler forms, we ought to trace the identities through all
their stages. If the fish developed into the reptile, the reptile
into the bird, and the bird into the mammal (which I, for one, think
questionable), we ought to find, it is urged, evidence of this passage.
And at one time it was asserted that the evidence existed; but this
has been disproved, and on the disproof the opponents of Evolution
take their stand. Although I cannot feel much confidence in the idea
of such a passage from Type to Type, and although the passage, if ever
it occurred, must have occurred at so remote a period as to leave
no evidence more positive than inference, I cannot but think the
teaching of Embryology far more favorable to it than to our opponents.
Supposing, for the sake of argument, that the passage did take place,
ought we to find the embryonic stages accurately reproducing the
permanent forms of lower types? Von Baer thinks we ought; and lesser
men may follow him without reproach. But it seems to me that he starts
from an inadmissible assumption, namely, that the development must
necessarily be in a straight line rather than in a multiplicity of
divergent lines. “When we find the embryonic condition,” he says,
“differing from the adult, we ought to find a corresponding condition
somewhere in the lower animals.”[50] Not necessarily. We know that
the mental development of a civilized man passes through the stages
which the race passed through in the course of its long history, and
the psychology of the child reproduces the psychology of the savage.
But as this development takes place under conditions in many respects
different, and as certain phases are hurried over, we do not expect
to find a complete parallel. It is enough if we can trace general
resemblances. Von Baer adds, “That certain correspondences should occur
between the embryonic states of some animals and the adult states of
others seems inevitable and of no significance(?). They could not fail,
since the embryos lie within the animal sphere, and the variations
of which the animal body is capable are determined for each type by
the internal connection and mutual reaction of its organs, so that
particular repetitions are inevitable.” A profound remark, to which I
shall hereafter have occasion to return, but its bearing on the present
question is inconclusive. The fact that the embryonic stages of the
higher animals resemble in general characters the permanent stages
of the lower animals, and very closely resemble the embryonic stages
of those animals, is all that the Development Hypothesis requires.
Nor is its value lessened by the fact that many of the details and
intermediate stages seem passed over in the development of the higher
forms, for the recapitulation can only be of outlines, not of details;
since there are differences in the forms, there must be differences in
their histories.

107. In the preceding observations the object has simply been to show
that the phenomena to be explained can be rationally conceived as
resulting from gradual Evolution, whereas they cannot be so rationally
interpreted on any other hypothesis. And here it may be needful to say
a word respecting Epigenesis.

The Preformation hypothesis, which regarded every organism as a simple
educt and not the product of a germ, was called by its advocates an
evolution hypothesis--meaning that the adult form was an outgrowth of
the germ, the miniature magnified. Wolff, who replaced that conception
by a truer one, called his, by contrast, Epigenesis, meaning that
there was not simply _out_-growth but _new_ growth. “The various
parts,” he says, “arise one _after_ the other, so that always one is
secreted from (_excernirt_), or deposited (_deponirt_) on the other;
and then it is either a free and independent part, or is only fixed
to that which gave it existence, or else is contained within it. So
that _every part is the effect of a pre-existing part, and in turn
the cause of a succeeding part_.”[51] The last sentence expresses
the conception of Epigenesis which embryologists now adopt; and
having said this, we may admit that Wolff, in combating the error
of preformation, replacing it with the truer notion of gradual and
successive formation, was occasionally open to the criticism made
by Von Baer, that he missed the true sense of Evolution, since the
new parts are not _added on_ to the old parts as new formations,
but _evolved from_ them as transformations. “The word Evolution,
therefore, seems to me more descriptive of the process than Epigenesis.
It is true that the organism is not preformed, but the course of its
development is precisely the course which its parents formerly passed
through. Thus it is the Invisible--the course of development--which is
predetermined.”[52] When the word Epigenesis is used, therefore, the
reader will understand it to signify that necessary succession which
determines the existence of new forms. Just as the formation of chalk
is not the indifferent product of any combination of its elements,
carbon, oxygen, and calcium, but is the product of only one series of
combinations, an evolution through necessary successions, the carbon
uniting with oxygen to form carbonic acid, and this combining with the
oxide of calcium to form chalk, so likewise the formation of a muscle,
a bone, a limb, or a joint has its successive stages, each of which
is necessary, none of which can be transposed. The formation of bone
is peculiarly instructive, because the large proportion of inorganic
matter in its substance, and seemingly deposited in the organic tissue,
would lead one to suppose that it was almost an accidental formation,
which might take place anywhere; yet although what is called
connective tissue will ossify under certain conditions, true bone is
the product of a very peculiar modification, which almost always needs
to be preceded by cartilage. That the formation of bone has its special
history may be seen in the fact that it is the last to appear in the
animal series, many highly organized fishes being without it, and all
the other systems appearing before it in the development of the embryo.
Thus although the mother’s blood furnishes all the requisite material,
the fœtus is incapable of assimilating this material and of forming
bone, until its own development has reached a certain stage. Moreover,
when ossification does begin, it generally begins in the skull (in
man in the clavicle); and the only approach to an internal skeleton
in the Invertebrates is the so-called skull of the Cephalopoda.
Not only is bone a late development, but cartilage is also; and
although it is an error to maintain that the Invertebrates are wholly
destitute of cartilage, its occasional presence having been fully
proved by Claparède and Gegenbaur, the rarity of its presence is very
significant. The animals which can form shells of chalk and chitine are
yet incapable of forming even an approach to bone.

108. Epigenesis depends on the laws of succession, which may be likened
to the laws of crystallization, if we bear in mind the essential
differences between a crystal and an organism, the latter retaining
its individuality through an incessant molecular change, the former
only by the exclusion of all change. When a crystalline solution
takes shape, it will always take a definite shape, which represents
what may be called the _direction_ of its forces, the polarity of
its constituent molecules. In like manner, when an organic plasmode
takes shape--crystallizes, so to speak--it always assumes a specific
shape dependent on the polarity of its molecules. Crystallographers
have determined the several forms possible to crystals; histologists
have recorded the several forms of Organites, Tissues, and Organs.
Owing to the greater variety in elementary composition, there is in
organic substance a more various polar distribution than in crystals;
nevertheless, there are sharply defined limits never overstepped, and
these constitute what may be called the specific forms of Organites,
Tissues, Organs, Organisms. An epithelial cell, for example, may be
ciliated or columnar, a muscle-fibre striated or non-striated, a
nerve-fibre naked or enveloped in a sheath, but the kind is always
sharply defined. An intestinal tube may be a uniform canal, or a canal
differentiated into several unlike compartments, with several unlike
glandular appendages. A spinal column may be a uniform solid axis, or
a highly diversified segmented axis. A limb may be an arm, or a leg, a
wing, or a paddle. In every case the anatomist recognizes a specific
type. He assigns the uniformities to the uniformity of the substance
thus variously shaped, under a history which has been similar; the
diversities he assigns to the various conditions under which the
processes of growth have been determined. He never expects a muscular
tissue to develop into a skeleton, a nervous tissue into a gland,
an osseous tissue into a sensory organ. He never expects a tail to
become a hand or a foot, though he sees it in monkeys and marsupials
serving the offices of prehension and locomotion. He never expects
to find fingers growing anywhere except from metacarpal bones, or an
arm developed from a skull. The well-known generalization of Geoffroy
St. Hilaire that an organ is more easily annihilated than transposed,
points to the fundamental law of Epigenesis. In the same direction
point all the facts of growth. Out of a formless germinal membrane we
see an immense variety of forms evolved; and out of a common nutritive
fluid this variety of organs is sustained, repaired, replaced; and
this not indifferently, not casually, but according to rigorous laws
of succession; that which precedes determining that which succeeds
as inevitably as youth precedes maturity, and maturity decay. The
nourishment of various organs from plasmodes derived from a common
fluid, each selecting from that fluid only those molecules that are
like its own, rejecting all the rest, is very similar to the formation
of various crystals in a solution of different salts, each salt
separating from the solution only those molecules that are like itself.
Reil long ago called attention to this analogy. He observed that if
in a solution of nitre and sulphate of soda a crystal of nitre be
dropped, all the dissolved nitre crystallizes, the sulphate remaining
in solution; whereas on reversing the experiment, a crystal of sulphate
of soda is found to crystallize all the dissolved sulphate, leaving the
nitre undisturbed. In like manner muscle selects from the blood its own
materials which are there in solution, rejecting those which the nerve
will select.

109. Nay, so definite is the course of growth, that when a limb or part
of a limb is cut off from a crab or salamander, a new limb or new part
is reproduced in the old spot, exactly like the one removed. Bonnet
startled the world by the announcement that the _Naïs_, a worm common
in ponds, spontaneously divided itself into two worms; and that when he
cut it into several pieces, each piece reproduced head and tail, and
grew into a perfect worm. This had been accepted by all naturalists
without demur, until Dr. Williams, in his “Report on British Annelida,
1851,” declared it to be a fable. In 1858, under the impulse of Dr.
Williams’s very emphatic denial, I repeated experiments similar to
those of Bonnet, with similar results. I cut two worms in half, and
threw away the head-bearing segments, placing the others in two
separate vessels, with nothing but water and a little mud, which was
first carefully inspected to see that no worm lay concealed therein. In
a few days the heads were completely reformed, and I had the pleasure
of watching them during their reconstruction. When the worms were quite
perfect, I again cut away their heads, and again saw these reformed.
This was repeated, till I had seen four heads reproduced; after which
the worms succumbed.

110. The question naturally arises, Why does the nutritive fluid
furnish only material which is formed into a part like the old one,
instead of reproducing another part, or one having a somewhat different
structure? The answer to this question is the key to the chief problem
of organic life. That a limb _in situ_ should replace its molecular
waste by molecules derived from the blood, seems intelligible enough
(because we are familiar with it), and may be likened to the formation
of crystals in a solution; but how is it that the limb _which is not
in existence_ can assimilate materials from the blood? How is it that
the blood, which elsewhere in the organism will form other parts,
here will only form this particular part? There is, probably, no one
who has turned his attention to these subjects who has not paused to
consider this mystery. The most accredited answer at present before the
world is one so metaphysiological that I should pass it by, were it
not intimately allied with that conception of Species, which it is the
object of these pages to root out. It is this:

111. The organism is determined by its Type, or, as the Germans say,
its Idea. All its parts take shape according to this ruling plan;
consequently, when any part is removed, it is reproduced according to
the Idea of the whole of which it forms a part. Milne Edwards, in a
very interesting and suggestive work, concludes his survey of organic
phenomena in these words: “Dans l’organisme tout semble calculé en
vue d’un résultat déterminé, et l’harmonie des parties ne résulte
pas de l’influence qu’elles peuvent exercer les unes sur les autres,
mais de leur co-ordination sous l’empire d’une puissance commune,
d’un plan préconçu, d’une force pré-existante.”[53] This is eminently
metaphysiological. It refuses to acknowledge the operation of immanent
properties, refuses to admit that the harmony of a complex structure
results from the mutual relations of its parts, and seeks _outside_
the organism for some mysterious force, some plan, not otherwise
specified, which regulates and shapes the parts. Von Baer, in his great
work, has a section entitled, “The nature of the animal determines
its development”; and he thus explains himself: “Although every stage
in development is only made possible by the pre-existing condition
[which is another mode of expressing Epigenesis], nevertheless the
entire development is ruled and guided by the Nature of the animal
which is about to be (von der gesammten Wesenheit des Thieres welches
werden soll), and it is not the momentary condition which alone
and absolutely determines the future, but more general and higher
relations.”[54] One must always be slow in rejecting the thoughts
of a master, and feel sure that one sees the source of the error
before regarding it as an error; but in the present case I think the
positive biologist will be at no loss to assign Von Baer’s error to
its metaphysical origin. Without pausing here to accumulate examples
both of anomalies and slighter deviations which are demonstrably due
to the “momentary conditions” that preceded them, let us simply note
the logical inconsistency of a position which, while assuming that
_every separate stage_ in development is the necessary sequence of its
predecessor, declares the _whole of the stages_ independent of such
relations! Such a position is indeed reconcilable on the assumption
that animal forms are moulded “like clay in the hands of the potter.”
But this is a theological dogma, which leads to very preposterous and
impious conclusions; and whether it leads to these conclusions or to
others, positive Biology declines theological explanations altogether.
Von Baer, although he held the doctrine of Epigenesis, coupled it,
as many others have done, with metaphysical doctrines to which it is
radically opposed. He believed in Types as realities; he was therefore
consistent in saying, “It is not the Matter and its arrangements which
determine the product, but the nature of the parent form--the Idea,
according to the new school.” How are we to understand this Idea? If
it mean an independent Entity, an agency external to the organism, we
refuse to acknowledge its existence. If it mean only an _a posteriori_
abstraction expressing the totality of the conditions, then, indeed,
we acknowledge that it determines the animal form; but this is only an
abbreviated way of expressing the law of Evolution, by which each stage
determines its successor. The Type does not _dominate_ the conditions,
it _emerges_ from them; the animal organism is not cast in a mould, but
the imaginary mould is the form which the polarities of the organic
substance assume. It would seem very absurd to suppose that crystals
assumed their definite shapes (when the liquid which held their
molecules in solution is evaporated) under the determining impulse
of phantom-crystals, or Ideas; yet it has not been thought absurd to
assume phantom forms of organisms.

112. The conception of Type as a determining influence arises from
that fallacy of taking a resultant for a principle, which has played
so conspicuous a part in the history of philosophy. Like many others
of its class it exhibits an interesting evolution from the crude
metaphysical to the subtle metaphysical point of view, which at last
insensibly blends into the positive point of view. At first the Type or
Idea was regarded as an objective reality, external to the organism it
was supposed to rule. Then this notion was replaced by an approach to
the more rational interpretation, the idea was made an internal not an
external force, and was incorporated with the material elements of the
organism, which were said to “endeavor” to arrange themselves according
to the Type. Thus Treviranus declares that the seed “dreams of the
future flower”; and “Henle, when he affirms that hair and nails grow in
virtue of the Idea, is forced to add that the parts endeavor to arrange
themselves according to this Idea.”[55] Even Lotze, who has argued
so victoriously against the vitalists, and has made it clear that an
organism is a vital mechanism, cannot relinquish this conception of
legislative Ideas, though he significantly adds, “these have no power
in themselves, but only in as far as they are grounded in mechanical
conditions.” Why then superfluously add them to the conditions? If
every part of a watch, in virtue of the properties inherent in its
substance, and of the mutual reactions of these and other parts,
has a mechanical value, and if the sum of all these parts is the
time-indicating mechanism, do we add to our knowledge of the watch, and
our means of repairing or improving it, by assuming that the parts have
over and above their physical properties the metaphysical “tendency”
or “desire” to arrange themselves into this specific form? When we
see that an organism is constructed of various parts, each of which
has its own properties inalienable from its structure, and its uses
dependent on its relation to other parts, do we gain any larger insight
by crediting these parts with desires or “dreams” of a future result
which their union will effect? That which is true in this conception of
legislative Ideas is that when the parts come together there is mutual
reaction, and the resultant of the whole is something very unlike
the mere addition of the items, just as water is very unlike oxygen
or hydrogen; further, the connexus of the whole impresses a peculiar
direction on the development of the parts, and the law of Epigenesis
necessitates a serial development, which may easily be interpreted as
due to a preordained plan.

113. In a word, this conception of Type only adds a new name to the
old difficulty, adding mist to darkness. The law of Epigenesis,
which is simply the expression of the material process determined by
the polarity of molecules, explains as much of the phenomena as is
explicable. A lost limb is replaced by the very processes, and through
the same progressive stages as those which originally produced it. We
have a demonstration of its not being reformed according to any Idea
or Type which exists apart from the immanent properties of the organic
molecules, in the fact that it is not reformed at once, but by gradual
evolution; the mass of cells at the stump are cells of embryonic
character, cells such as those which originally “crystallized” into
muscles, nerves, vessels, and integument, and each cell passes through
all its ordinary stages of development. It is to be remembered that so
intimately dependent is the result on the determining conditions, that
any external influence which disturbs the normal course of development
will either produce an anomaly, or frustrate the formation of a new
limb altogether. One of my tritons bit off the leg of his female;[56]
the leg which replaced it was much malformed, and curled over the back
so as to be useless; was this according to the Idea? I cut it off, and
examined it; all the bones were present, but the humerus was twisted,
and of small size. In a few weeks a new leg was developed, and this
leg was normal. If the Idea, as a ruling power, determined the growth
of this third leg, what determined the second, which was malformed?
Are we to suppose that in normal growth the Idea prevails, in abnormal
the conditions? That it is the polarity of the molecules which at
each moment determines the group those molecules will assume, is well
seen in the experiment of Lavalle mentioned by Bronn.[57] He showed
that if when an octohedral crystal is forming, an angle be cut away,
so as to produce an artificial surface, a similar surface is produced
spontaneously on the corresponding angle, whereas all the other angles
are sharply defined. “Valentin,” says Mr. Darwin, “injured the caudal
extremity of an embryo, and three days afterwards it produced rudiments
of a double pelvis, and of double hind limbs. Hunter and others have
observed lizards with their tails reproduced and doubled. When Bonnet
divided longitudinally the foot of the salamander, several additional
digits were occasionally formed.”[58] Where is the evidence of the Idea
in these cases?

114. I repeat, the reproduction of lost limbs is due to a process which
is in all essential respects the same as that which originally produced
them; the genesis of one group of cells is the necessary condition
for the genesis of its successor, nor can this order be transposed.
But--and the point is very important--it is not every part that can be
reproduced, nor is it every animal that has reproductive powers. The
worm, or the mollusk, seems capable of reproducing every part; the crab
will reproduce its claws, but not its head or tail; the perfect insect
of the higher orders will reproduce no part (indeed the amputation of
its antennae only is fatal), the salamander will reproduce its leg,
the frog not. In human beings a muscle is said never to be reproduced;
but this is not the case in the rare examples of supplementary fingers
and toes, which have been known to grow again after amputation.
The explanation of this difference in the reproductive powers of
different animals is usually assigned to the degree in which their
organisms retain the embryonic condition; and this explanation is made
plausible by the fact that the animals which when adult have no power
of replacing lost limbs, have the power when in the larval state. But
although this may in some cases be the true explanation, there are
many in which it fails, as will be acknowledged after a survey of the
extremely various organisms at widely different parts of the animal
series which possess the reproductive power. Even animals in the same
class, and at the same stage of development, differ in this respect.
I do not attach much importance to the fact that all my experiments
on marine annelids failed to furnish evidence of their power of
reproducing lost segments; because it is difficult to keep them under
conditions similar to those in which they live. But it is significant
that, among the hundreds which have passed under my observation, not
one should have been found with a head-segment in the process of
development, replacing one that had been destroyed; and this is all the
more remarkable from the great tenacity of life which the mutilated
segments manifest. Quatrefages had observed portions of a worm, after
gangrene had destroyed its head and several segments, move about in the
water and avoid the light![59]

115. A final argument to show that the reproduction is not determined
by any ruling Idea, but by the organic conditions and the necessary
stages of evolution, is seen in the reappearance of a tumor or cancer
after it has been removed. We find the new tissue appear with all the
characters of the normal tissue of the gland, then rapidly assume one
by one the characters of the diseased tissue which had been removed;
and there as on is, that the regeneration of the tissue is accompanied
by the same abnormal conditions which formerly gave rise to the tumor:
the directions of “crystallization” are similar because the conditions
are similar. In every case of growth or regrowth the conditions being
the same, the result must be the same.

116. It seems a truism to insist that similarity in the results must be
due to similarity in the conditions; yet it is one which many theorists
disregard; and especially do we need to bear it in mind when arguing
about Species. I will here only touch on the suggestive topic of the
analogies observed not simply among animals at the extreme ends of the
scale, but also between animals and plants where the idea of a direct
kinship is out of the question.

My very imperfect zoölogical knowledge will not allow me to adduce a
long array of instances, but such an array will assuredly occur to
every well-stored mind. It is enough to point to the many analogies
of Function, more especially in the reproductive processes--to the
existence of burrowers, waders, flyers, swimmers in various classes--to
the existence of predatory mammals, predatory birds, predatory
reptiles, predatory insects by the side of herbivorous congeners,--to
the nest-building and incubating fishes; and in the matter of Structure
the analogies are even more illustrative when we consider the widely
diffused spicula, setæ, spines, hooks, tentacles, beaks, feathery
forms, nettling-organs, poison-sacs, luminous organs, etc.; because
these have the obvious impress of being due to a community of substance
under similar conditions rather than to a community of kinship. The
beak of the tadpole, the cephalopod, the male salmon, and the bird,
are no doubt in many respects unlike; but there is a significant
likeness among them, which constitutes a true analogy. I think there
is such an analogy between the air-bladder of fishes and the tracheal
rudiment which is found in the gnat-larva (_Corethra plumicornis_).[60]
Very remarkable also is the resemblance of the _avicularium_, or
“bird’s-head process,” on the polyzoon known popularly as the Corkscrew
Coralline (_Bugula avicularia_), which presents us in miniature
with a vulture’s head--two mandibles, one fixed, the other moved by
muscles visible within the head. No one can watch this organ snapping
incessantly, without being reminded of a vulture, yet no one would
suppose for a moment that the resemblance has anything to do with
kinship.

117. Such cases are commonly robbed of their due significance by being
dismissed as coincidences. But what determines the coincidence? If we
assume, as we are justified in assuming, that the _possible directions_
of Organic Combination, and the resultant forms, are limited, there
must inevitably occur such coincident lines: the hooks on a Climbing
Plant will resemble the hooks on a Crustacean or the claws of a Bird,
as the one form in which under similar external forces the more solid
but not massive portions of the integument tend to develop. I am too
ill acquainted with the anatomy of plants to say how the hooks so
common among them arise; but from examination of the Blackberry, and
comparison of its thorns with the hooks and spines of the Crustacea,
I am led to infer that in each case the mode of development is
identical--namely, the secretion of chitine from the cellular matrix of
the integument.

Another mode of evading the real significance of such resemblances
is to call them analogies, not homologies. There is an advantage in
having two such terms, but we ought to be very clear as to their
meaning and their point of separation. Analogy is used to designate
similarity in Function with dissimilarity in Structure. The wing
of an insect, the wing of a bird, and the wing of a bat are called
analogous, but not homologous, because their anatomical structure is
different: they are not constructed out of similar anatomical parts.
The fore-leg of a mammal, the wing of a bird, or the paddle of a
whale, are called homologous, because in spite of their diverse uses
they are constructed out of corresponding anatomical parts. To the
anatomist such distinctions are eminently serviceable. But they have
led to some misconceptions, because they are connected with a profound
misconception of the relation between Function and Organ. Embryology
teaches that the wing of the bird and the paddle of the whale are
developed out of corresponding parts, and that these are not like the
parts from which the wing of an insect or the flying-fish will be
developed; nevertheless, the most cursory inspection reveals that the
wing of a bird and the paddle of a whale are very unlike in structure
no less than in function, and that their diversities in function
correspond with their diversities in structure; whereas the wing of the
insect, of the bird, and of the bat, are in certain characters very
similar, and correspondingly there are similarities in their function.
It is, however, obvious that the resemblance in function is strictly
limited to the resemblance in anatomical structure; only in loose
ordinary speech can the flight of an insect, a bird, or a bat be said
to be “the same”: it is different in each--the weight to be moved, the
rapidity of the movement, the precision of the movements, and their
endurance, all differ.


NATURAL SELECTION AND ORGANIC AFFINITY.

118. It is impossible to treat of Evolution without taking notice
of that luminous hypothesis by which Mr. Darwin has revolutionized
Zoölogy. There are two points needful to be clearly apprehended before
the question is entered upon. The first point relates to the lax use
of the phrase “conditions,” sometimes more instructively replaced by
“conditions of existence.” Inasmuch as Life is only possible under
definite relations of the organism and its medium, the “conditions of
existence” will be those physical, chemical, and physiological changes,
which _in_ the organism, and _out_ of it, _co-operate_ to produce the
result. There are myriads of changes in the external medium which have
no corresponding changes in the organism, not being in any direct
relation to it (see § 54). These, not being co-operant conditions,
must be left out of the account; they are not conditions of existence
for the organism, and therefore the organism does not vary with their
variations. On the other hand, what seem very slight changes in the
medium are often responded to by important changes in the vital
chemistry, and consequently in the structure of the organism. Now the
nature of the organism at the time being, that is to say, its structure
and the physico-chemical state of its tissues and plasmodes, is the
main _condition_ of this response; the same external agent will be
powerful, or powerless, over slightly different organisms, or over the
same organism at different times. Usually, and for convenience, when
biologists speak of conditions, they only refer to external changes.
This usage has been the source of no little confusion in discussing
the Development Hypothesis. Mr. Darwin, however, while following the
established usage, is careful in several places to declare that of the
two factors in Variation--the nature of the organism and the nature of
the conditions--the former is by far the more important.

118_a_. A still greater modification of terms must now be made. Instead
of confining the “struggle for existence” to the competition of rivals
and the antagonism of foes, we must extend it to the competition and
antagonism of tissues and organs. The existence of an organism is not
only dependent on the external existence of others, and is the outcome
of a struggle; but also on the internal conditions which co-operate in
the formation of its structure, this structure being the outcome of a
struggle. The organism is this _particular_ organism, differing from
others, because of the particular conditions which have co-operated.
The primary and fundamental struggle must be that of the organic
forces at work in creating a structure capable of pushing its way
amid external forces. The organism must find a footing in the world,
before it can compete with rivals, and defend itself against foes.
Owing to the power of reproduction, every organism has a potential
indefiniteness of multiplication; that potential indefiniteness is,
however, in reality restricted by the supply of food, and by the
competition of rivals for that supply. The multiplication of any one
species is thus kept down by the presence of rivals and foes: a balance
is reached, which permits of the restricted quantities of various
species. This balance is the result of a struggle.

Now let me call attention to a similar process in the formation of the
organism itself. Every organite, and every tissue, has a potential
growth of indefinite extent, but its real growth is rigorously limited
by the competition and antagonism of the others, each of which has
its potential indefiniteness, and its real limits. Something, in the
food assimilated, slightly alters the part which assimilates it. This
change may be the origin of other changes in the part itself, or in
neighboring parts, stimulating or arresting the vital processes. A
modification of structure results. Or there may be no new substance
assimilated, but external forces may call a part into increased
activity--which means increased waste and repair; and this increase
here is the cause of a corresponding decrease somewhere else. Whatever
the nature of the change, it finds its place amid a complex of changes,
and its results are compounded with theirs. When organites and tissues
are said to have a potential indefiniteness of growth, there is
assumed a potential indefiniteness in the pabulum supplied: _if_ the
pabulum were supplied, and _if_ there were no antagonism thwarting its
assimilation, growth would of course continue without pause, or end;
but in reality this cannot be so. For, take the blood as the vehicle
of the pabulum--not only is its quantity limited, and partly limited
by the very action of the tissues it feeds, but even in any given
quantity there is a limit to its composition--it will only take up a
limited quantity of salts, iron, albumen, etc.; no matter how abundant
these may be in the food. So again with the plasmodes of the various
tissues--they have each their definite capacities of assimilation. What
has already been stated respecting chemical affinity (§ 20) is equally
applicable to organic affinity; as the presence of fused iron in the
crucible partially obstructs the combination of sulphur and lead, so
the presence of connective tissue partially obstructs the combination
of muscle protoplasm with its pabulum.

118 _b_. Owing to the action and reaction of blood and plasmode, of
tissues on tissues, and organs on organs, and their mutual limitations,
the growth of each organism has a limit, and the growth of each organ
has a limit. Beyond this limit, no extra supply of food will increase
the size of the organism; no increase of activity will increase the
organ. “Man cannot add a cubit to his stature.” The blacksmith’s arm
will not grow larger by twenty years of daily exercise, after it has
once attained a certain size. Increase of activity caused it to enlarge
up to this limit; but no increase of activity will cause it to pass
this limit. Why? Because here a balance of the co-operating formative
forces has been reached. Larger muscles, or more muscle-fibres, demand
arteries of larger calibre, and these a heart of larger size; with
the increase of muscle would come increase of connective tissue; and
this tissue would not only compete with the muscle for pabulum, but
by mechanical pressure would diminish the flow of that pabulum. And
why would connective tissue increase? Because, in the first place,
there is a formative association between the two, so that owing to a
law, not yet understood, the one always accompanies the other; and,
in the second place, there is a functional association between the
two, a muscle-fibre being _inoperative_ unless it be attached to a
tendon, or connective tissue; it will contract _out_ of the body
although separated from its tendon or other attachment; but _in_ the
body its contraction would be useless without this attachment. We must
bear in mind that muscle-fibres are very much shorter than ordinary
muscles; according to the measurements of W. Krause they never exceed
4 _cm_ in length, and usually range between 2 and 3 _cm_; their fine
points being fixed to the interstitial connective tissue, as the whole
muscle is fixed to its tendon. The function of the muscle is thus
dependent on a due balance of its component tissues; if that balance
is disturbed the function is disturbed. Should, from any cause, an
excess of muscle-fibre arise, the balance would be disturbed; should an
encroachment of connective tissue, or of fat, take place, there would
be also a defect of function.

Here we have the co-operation and limitation of the tissues
illustrated; let us extend our glance, and we shall see how the
co-operation and limitation of the organs come into play, so that
the resulting function depends on the balance of their forces. The
contractile power of each individual muscle is always limited by the
resistance of antagonists, which prevent the muscle being contracted
more than about a third of its _possible_ extent, i. e. possible when
there are no resistances to be overcome. Not only the increasing
tension of antagonist muscles, but the resistance of tendons, bones,
and softer parts must be taken into account. Thus, the increase of
the blacksmith’s muscular power would involve a considerable increase
in all the tissues of the arm; but such an increase would involve a
reconstruction of his whole organism.

Whenever there is an encroachment of one tissue on another, there
is a disturbance of the normal balance, which readily passes into a
pathological state. If the brain is overrun with connective tissue, or
the heart with fatty tissue, we know the consequences. If connective
tissue is deficient, epithelial runs to excess, no longer limited by
its normal antagonist, and pus, or cancer, result.

118_c_. It is unnecessary here to enlarge on this point. I have
adduced it to show that we must extend our conception of the struggle
for existence beyond that of the competition and antagonism of
organisms--the external struggle; and include under it the competition
and antagonism of tissues and organs--the internal struggle.
Variability is inherent in organic substances, as the result of
their indefiniteness of composition (§ 45_b_). This variability is
indefinite, and is rendered definite by the competition and antagonism,
so that every particular variation is the resultant of a composition
of forces. The forces in operation are the internal and external
conditions of existence--i. e. the nature of the organism, and its
response to the actions of its medium. A change may take place in
the medium without a corresponding response from the organism; or the
change may find a response and the organism become modified. Every
modification is a selection, determined by laws of growth; it is the
resultant of a struggle between what, for want of a better term, may
be called the _organic affinities_--which represent in organized
substances what chemical affinities are in the anorganized. Just as
an organism which has been modified and thereby gained a superiority
over others, has by this modification been _selected_ for survival--the
selection being only another aspect of this modification--so one
tissue, or one organ, which has surpassed another in the struggle
of growth, will thereby have become selected. Natural Selection,
or survival of the fittest, therefore, is simply the metaphorical
expression of the fact that any balance of the forces which is best
adapted for survival will survive. Unless we interpret it as a
shorthand expression of _all_ the internal and external conditions of
existence, it is not acceptable as the origin of species.

118_d_. Mr. Darwin has so patiently and profoundly meditated on the
whole subject, that we must be very slow in presuming him to have
overlooked any important point. I know that he has not altogether
overlooked this which we are now considering; but he is so preoccupied
with the tracing out of his splendid discovery in all its bearings,
that he has thrown the emphasis mainly on the external struggle,
neglecting the internal struggle; and has thus in many passages
employed language which implies a radical distinction where--as I
conceive--no such distinction can be recognized. “Natural Selection,”
he says, “depends on the survival under various and complex
circumstances of the best-fitted individuals, but has no relation
whatever to the primary cause of any modification of structure.”[61]
On this we may remark, first, that selection does not _depend_ on
the survival, but _is_ that survival; secondly, that the best-fitted
individual survives because of that modification of its structure
which has given it the superiority; therefore if the primary cause
of this modification is not due to selection, then selection cannot
be the cause of species. He separates Natural Selection from all the
primary causes of variation, either internal or external--either as
results of the laws of growth, of the correlations of variation, of
use and disuse, etc., and limits it to the slow accumulations of such
variations as are profitable in the struggle with competitors. And for
his purpose this separation is necessary. But biological philosophy
must, I think, regard the distinction as artificial, referring only
to one of the great factors in the production of species. And for
this reason: Selection only comes into existence in the modifications
produced either by external or internal changes; and the selected
change cannot be developed further by mere inheritance, unless the
successive progeny have such a disposition of the organic affinities
as will repeat the primary change. Inherited superiority will not by
mere transmission become greater. The facts which are relied on in
support of the idea of “fixity of species” show at any rate that a
given superiority will remain stationary for thousands of years; and
no one supposes that the progeny of an organism will vary unless some
external or internal cause of variation accompanies the inheritance.
Mr. Darwin agrees with Mr. Spencer in admitting the difficulty of
distinguishing between the effects of some definite action of external
conditions, and the accumulation through natural selection of inherited
variations serviceable to the organism. But even in cases where the
distinction could be clearly established, I think we should only see an
_historical_ distinction, that is to say, one between effects produced
by particular causes now in operation, and effects produced by very
complex and obscure causes in operation during ancestral development.

118_e_. The reader will understand that my criticism does not pretend
to invalidate Mr. Darwin’s discovery, but rather to enlarge its
terms, so as to make it include all the biological conditions, and
thus explain many of the variations which Natural Selection--in the
restricted acceptation--leaves out of account. Mr. Darwin draws a broad
line of distinction between Variation and Selection, regarding only
those variations that are favorable as selected. I conceive that all
variations which survive are by that fact of survival, _selections_,
whether favorable or indifferent. A variety is a species in formation;
now Selection itself is not a cause, or condition, of variation, it is
the _expression_ of variation. Mr. Darwin is at times explicit enough
on this head: “It may metaphorically be said that Natural Selection
is daily and hourly scrutinizing throughout the world the slightest
variations; rejecting those that are bad, preserving and adding up
all that are good; silently and insensibly working, whenever and
wherever opportunity offers, at the improvement of each organic being
in relation to its organic and inorganic conditions of life.”[62] But
the metaphorical nature of the term is not always borne in mind, so
that elsewhere Natural Selection is said to “act on and modify organic
beings,” as if it were a positive condition and not the expression
of the modifying processes. Because grouse are largely destroyed by
birds of prey, any change in their color which would render them less
conspicuous would enable more birds to escape; but it is obvious that
this change of color will be due to Organic Affinity; and only when
the change is _effected_ will there have been that selection which
_expresses_ it. Mr. Darwin’s language, however, is misleading. He
says: “Hence Natural Selection might be most effective in _giving_ the
proper color to each kind of grouse, and in _keeping_ that color when
once acquired.” This is to make Selection an agent, a condition of
the development of color; which may be accepted if we extend the term
so as to include the organic changes themselves. Again: “Some writers
have imagined that Natural Selection _induces variability_, whereas it
only implies the _preservation_ of such variations as are beneficial to
the being under its conditions of life.” It, however, is made to imply
more than this, namely, the accumulation and further modification of
such variations. “The mere existence of individual variability and of
some well-marked varieties, though necessary as the foundation, helps
us but little in understanding how species arise in nature. How have
all those exquisite adaptations of one part of the organization to
another part, and to the conditions of life, and of one organic being
to another being, been perfected?” My answer to this question would
be: By Organic Affinity, and the resulting struggle of the tissues and
organs, the consequences of which are that very _adaptation_ of the
organism to external conditions, which is expressed as the _selection_
of the structures best adapted. The selections are the results of the
struggle, according to my proposed extension of the term “struggle.”
Mr. Darwin defines the struggle: “The dependence of one being on
another, and including (what is more important) not only the life of
the individual but success in leaving progeny.” This definition seems
defective, since it omits the primary and more important struggle
which takes place between the organic affinities in operation. To
succeed in the struggle with competitors, the organism must have first
acquired--by selection--a superiority in one or more of its organs.

118_f_. A little reflection will disclose the importance of keeping
our eyes fixed on the internal causes of variation, as well as on the
external conditions of the struggle. Mr. Darwin seems to imply that the
external conditions which cause a variation are to be distinguished
from the conditions which accumulate and perfect such variation, that
is to say, he implies a radical difference between the process of
variation and the process of selection. This, I have already said, does
not seem to me acceptable; the selection, I conceive, to be simply the
variation which has survived.[63]

If it be true that a Variety is an incipient Species and shows
us Species in formation, it is in the same sense true that a
variation is an incipient organ. A species is the result of a slowly
accumulating divergence of structure; an organ is the result of a
slowly accumulating differentiation. At each stage of differentiation
there has been a selection, but we cannot by any means say that this
selection was determined by the fact of its giving the organism a
superiority over rivals, inasmuch as during all the early stages,
while the organ was still in formation, there could be no advantage
accruing from it. One animal having teeth and claws developed will
have a decided superiority in the struggle over another animal that
has no teeth and claws; but so long as the teeth and claws are in an
undeveloped state of mere preparation they confer no superiority.

118_g_. Natural Selection is only the expression of the results of
obscure physiological processes; and for a satisfactory theory of such
results we must understand the nature of the processes. In other words,
to understand Natural Selection we must recognize not only the facts
thus expressed, but the factors of these facts,--we must analyze the
“conditions of existence.” As a preliminary analysis we find _external
conditions_, among which are included not only the dependence of the
organism on the inorganic medium, but also the dependence of one
organism on another,--the competition and antagonism of the whole
organic world; and _internal conditions_, among which are included not
only the dependence of the organism on the laws of composition and
decomposition whereby each organite and each tissue is formed, but also
the dependence of one organite and one tissue on all the others--the
competition and antagonism of all the elements.

The changes wrought in an organism by these two kinds of conditions
determine Varieties and Species. Although many of the changes are due
to the process of natural selection brought about in the struggle
with competitors and foes, many other changes have no such relation
to the external struggle, but are simply the results of the organic
affinities. They may or they may not give the organism a greater
stability, or a greater advantage over rivals; it is enough that they
are no disadvantage to the organism, they will then survive by virtue
of the forces which produced them.

119. The position thus reached will be important in our examination
of the Theory of Descent by which Mr. Darwin tentatively, and his
followers boldly, explain the observed resemblances in structure and
function as due to blood-relationship. The doctrine of Evolution
affirms that all complex organisms are evolved by differentiation from
simpler organisms, as we see the complex organ evolved from simpler
forms. But it does not necessarily affirm that the vast variety of
organisms had one starting-point--one ancestor; on the contrary, I
conceive that the principles of Evolution are adverse to such a view,
and insist rather on the necessity of innumerable starting-points. Let
us consider the question.

That the Theory of Descent explains many of the facts must be admitted;
but there are many which it leaves obscure; and Mr. Darwin, with
that noble calmness which distinguishes him, admits the numerous
difficulties. Whether these will hereafter be cleared away by an
improvement in the Geological Record, now confessedly imperfect, or
by more exhaustive exploration of distant countries, none can say;
but, to my mind, the probability is, that we shall have to seek our
explanation by enlarging the idea of Natural Selection, subordinating
it to the laws of Organic Affinity. It does not seem to me, at present,
warrantable to assume Descent as the sole principle of morphological
uniformities; there are other grounds of resemblance beyond those of
blood-relationship; and these have been too much overlooked; yet a
brief consideration will disclose that similarity in the physiological
laws and the conditions of Organic Affinity must produce similarity
in organisms, independently of relationship; just as similarity in
the laws and conditions of inorganic affinity will produce identity
in chemical species. We do not suppose the carbonates and phosphates
found in various parts of the globe, or the families of alkaloids and
salts, to have any nearer kinship than that which consists in the
similarity of their elements and the conditions of their combination.
Hence, in organisms, as in salts, morphological identity may be due
to a community of conditions, rather than community of descent. Mr.
Darwin justly holds it to be “incredible that individuals identically
the same should have been produced through Natural Selection from
parents _specifically distinct_,” but he, since he admits analogous
variations, will not deny that identical forms might issue from parents
having widely different origins, provided that these parent forms
and the conditions of their reproduction were identical, as in the
case of vegetable and animal resemblances. To deny this would be to
deny the law of causation. And that which is true of identical forms
under identical conditions is true of similar forms under similar
conditions. When History and Ethnology reveal a striking uniformity in
the progression of social phases, we do not thence conclude that the
nations are directly related, or that the social forms have a common
parentage; we conclude that the social phases are alike because they
have had common causes. When chemists point out the uniformity of type
which exists in compounds so diverse in many of their properties as
water and sulphuretted or selenetted hydrogen, and when they declare
phosphoretted hydrogen to be the congener of ammonia, they do not mean
that the one is descended from the other, or that any closer link
connects them than that of resemblance in their elements.

In the case of vegetal and animal organisms, we observe such a
community of elementary substance as of itself to imply a community in
their laws of combination; and under similar conditions the evolved
forms must be similar. With this community of elementary substance,
there are also diversities of substance and of co-operant conditions;
corresponding with these diversities there must be differences of
form. Thus, although observation reveals that the bond of kinship does
really unite many widely divergent forms, and the principle of Descent
with Natural Selection will account for many of the resemblances and
differences, there is at present no warrant for assuming that all
resemblances and differences are due to this one cause, but, on the
contrary, we are justified in assuming a deeper principle which may be
thus formulated: All the complex organisms are evolved from organisms
less complex, as these were evolved from simpler forms; the link which
unites all organisms is not always the common bond of heritage, but the
uniformity of organized substance acting under similar conditions.

It is therefore consistent with the hypothesis of Evolution to admit a
variety of origins or starting-points, though not consistent to admit
the sudden appearance of complex Types, such as is implied in the
hypothesis of specific creations.

119 _a_. The analogies of organic forms and functions demand a more
exhaustive scrutiny than has yet been given them. Why is it that
vessels, nerves, and bones _ramify_ like branches, and why do these
branches take on the aspect of many crystalline forms? Why is it that
cavities are constantly prolonged in ducts, e. g. the mouth succeeded
by the œsophagus, the stomach by the intestines, the bladder by the
urethra, the heart by the aorta, the ovary by the oviduct, and so
on? Why are there never more than four limbs attached to a vertebral
column, and these always attached to particular vertebræ? Why is
there a tendency in certain tissues to form tubes, and in these tubes
commonly to assume a muscular coat?[64] To some of these queries an
answer might be suggested which would bring them under known physical
laws. I merely notice them here for the sake of emphasizing the fact
that such analogies lie deeply imbedded in the laws of evolution, and
that what has been metaphorically called organic crystallization will
account for many similarities in form, without forcing us to have
recourse to kinship. To take a very simple case. No one will maintain
that the crystalline forms of snow have any kinship with the plants
which they often resemble. Mr. Spencer has noticed the development
of a wing-bearing branch from a wing of the _Ptilota plumosa_, when
its nutrition is in excess. “This form, so strikingly like that of the
feathery crystallizations of many inorganic substances, proves to us
that in such crystallizations the simplicity or complexity of structure
at any place depends on the quantity of matter that has to be polarized
at that place in a given time. How the element of time modifies the
result, is shown by the familiar fact that crystals rapidly formed
are small, and that they become larger when they are formed more
slowly.”[65]

It may be objected, and justly, that in the resemblance between
crystals and organisms the analogy is purely that of form, and usually
confined to one element, whereas between organisms there is resemblance
of substance no less than of form, and usually the organisms are alike
in several respects. The answer to this objection is, that wherever
there is a similarity in the causal conditions (substance and history)
there must be a corresponding similarity in the results; if this
similarity extends to only a few of the conditions, the analogy will
be slight; if to several, deep. But whether slight or deep we are not
justified, simply on the ground of resemblance, in assuming, short of
evidence, that because they are alike, two organisms are related by
descent from a common ancestor.

120. Let us glance at a few illustrations. It has been urged as a
serious objection to Mr. Darwin’s hypothesis,[66] that it fails to
explain the existence of phosphorescent organs in a few insects; and
certainly, when one considers the widely different orders in which
these organs appear, and their absence in nearly related forms, it
is a difficulty. In noctilucæ, earthworms, molluscs, scolopendra,
and fireflies, we may easily suppose the presence of similar organic
conditions producing the luminosity; but it requires a strong faith to
assign Descent as the cause.[67] We may say the same of the electric
organs possessed by seven species of fish, belonging to five widely
separated genera. Although each species appears to have a limited
geographical range, one or the other is found in almost every part
of the globe. These organs occupy different positions, being now on
each side of the head, now along the body, and now along the tail;
and in different species they are innervated from different sources.
Their intimate structure also varies; as appears from the remarkable
investigations of Max Schultze.[68] They cannot, therefore, be
homologous. How could they have arisen? Not by the slow accumulations
of Natural Selection, because, until the organs were fully formed, they
could be of no advantage in the struggle; hence the slow growth of
the organ must have proceeded without the aid of an advantage in the
struggle--in each case from some analogous conditions which produced
a differentiation in certain muscles. The fundamental resemblance to
muscles was pointed out by Carus long ago. It has been insisted on by
Leydig:[69] and Owen says, “The row of compressed cells constituting
the electric prism of the Torpedo offers some analogy to the row of
microscopic discs of which the elementary muscle fibre appears to
consist.”[70] We must not, however, forget that these resemblances are
merely such as suggest that the electric organ is a _differentiation_
of the substance which elsewhere becomes muscular, and that Dr.
Davy was justified in denying the organ to be muscular.[71] That it
is substituted for muscle cannot be doubted. Now, although we are
entirely ignorant of the conditions which cause this differentiation of
substance which elsewhere becomes muscular, but here becomes electric
organs, we can understand that, when once such a development had
taken place, if it in any way profited the fish in its struggle for
existence, Natural Selection would _tend_ to its further increase and
propagation. So far Mr. Darwin carries us with him; but we decline
proceeding further. The development of these organs in fishes so widely
removed, does not imply an ancestral community. It is interpretable as
mere growth on a basis once laid; and therefore would occur with or
without any advantage in the struggle with rivals. The similarity in
concurrent conditions is quite enough to account for the resemblance
in structure. This, with his accustomed candor, Mr. Darwin admits. “If
the electric organs,” he says, “had been inherited from one ancient
progenitor thus provided, we might have expected that all electric
fishes would be specially related to each other. Nor does Geology at
all lead to the belief that formerly most fishes had electric organs
which most of their modified descendants have lost.”

121. It may seem strange that he should urge a difficulty against
his hypothesis when it could be avoided by the simple admission that
even among nearly allied animals great differences in development
are observable, and the electric organs might be ranged under such
diversities. But Mr. Darwin has so thoroughly wrought out his scheme,
that he foresees most objections, and rightly suspects that if this
principle of divergent development be admitted, it will cut the ground
from under a vast array of facts which his hypothesis of Descent
requires.

The sudden appearance of new organs, not a trace of which is
discernible in the embryo or adult form of organisms lower in the
scale,--for instance, the phosphorescent and electric organs,--is
like the sudden appearance of new instruments in the social organism,
such as the printing-press and the railway, wholly inexplicable
on the theory of Descent,[72] but is explicable on the theory of
Organic Affinity. For observe: if we admit that differentiations
of structure, and the sudden appearance of organs, can have arisen
spontaneously--i. e. not hereditarily--as the outcome of certain
changed physical conditions, we can hardly refuse to extend to the
whole organism what we admit of a particular organ. If, again, we
admit that organs very similar in structure and function spontaneously
appear in organisms of widely different kinds--e. g. the phosphorescent
and electric organs--we must also admit that similar resemblances may
present themselves in organisms having a widely different parentage;
and thus the admission of the spontaneous evolution of closely
resembling organs carries with it the admission of the spontaneous
evolution of closely resembling organisms: that the protoplasm of
muscular tissue should, under certain changed conditions, develop
into the tissue of electric organs, is but one case of the law that
organized substance will develop into organisms closely resembling each
other when the conditions have been similar.

122. It is to be remarked that Mr. Darwin fixes his attention somewhat
too exclusively on the adaptations which arise during the external
struggle for existence, and to that extent neglects the laws of organic
affinity; just as Lamarck too exclusively fixed his attention on the
influence of external conditions and of wants. Not that Mr. Darwin can
be said to overlook the organic laws; he simply underestimates the part
they play. Occasionally he seems arrested by them, as when instancing
the “trailing palm in the Malay Archipelago, which climbs the loftiest
trees by the aid of exquisitely constructed hooks, clustered around
the ends of the branches, and this contrivance no doubt is of the
highest service to the plant; but as there are nearly similar hooks
on many trees which are not climbers, the hooks on the palm may have
arisen from unknown laws of growth, and have been subsequently taken
advantage of by the plant undergoing further modification and becoming
a climber.”

123. I come round to the position from which I started, that the
resemblances traceable among animals are no proof of kinship; even a
resemblance so close as to defy discrimination would not, in itself,
be such a proof. The absolute identity of chalk in Australia and in
Europe is a proof that there was absolute identity in the formative
conditions and the constituent elements, but no proof whatever that the
two substances were originally connected by genesis. In like manner
the similarity of a plant or animal in Africa and Europe may be due
to a common kinship, but it may also be due to a _common history_. It
is indeed barely conceivable that the history, from first to last,
would ever be so rigorously identical in two parts of the globe as
to produce complex identical forms in both; because _any_ diversity,
either in structure or external conditions, may be the starting-point
of a wide diversity in subsequent development; and the case of organic
combinations is so far unlike the inorganic, that while only one form
is possible to the latter (chalk is either formed or not formed), many
forms are possible to organic elements owing to the complexity and
indefiniteness of organic composition. But although forms so allied as
those of Species are not readily assignable to an identical history
in different quarters of the globe, it is not only conceivable, but
is eminently probable, that Orders and Classes have no nearer link of
relationship than is implied in their community of organized substance
and their common history. The fact that there is not a single mammal
common to Europe and Australia is explicable, as Mr. Darwin explains
it, on the ground that migration has been impossible to them; but it
is also explicable on the laws of Evolution--to have had mammals of
the same species and genera would imply a minute coincidence in their
history, which is against the probabilities. Again, in the Oceanic
Islands there are no Batrachians; but there are Reptiles, and these
conform to the reptilian type. Mr. Darwin suggests that the absence of
Batrachia is due to the impossibility of migration, their ova being
destroyed by salt water. But may it not be due to the divergence
from the reptilian type, which was effected elsewhere, not having
taken place in these regions? When we find the metal Tin in Prussia
and Cornwall, and nowhere else in Europe, must we not conclude that
in these two countries, and nowhere else, a peculiar conjunction of
conditions caused this peculiar evolution?

124. The question at issue is, Are the resemblances observable
among organic forms due to remote kinship, and their diversities
to the divergences caused by adaptation to new conditions? or
are the resemblances due to similarities, and the diversities to
dissimilarities in the _substance and history_ of organic beings?
Are we to assume one starting-point and one centre of creation, or
many similar starting-points at many centres? So far from believing
that all plants and animals had their origin in one primordial cell,
at one particular spot, from which descendants migrated and became
diversified under the diverse conditions of their migration, it seems
to me more consistent with the principle of Evolution to admit a vast
variety of origins more or less resembling each other; and this initial
resemblance will account for the similarities still traceable under
the various forms; while the _early differences_, becoming intensified
by development under different conditions, will yield the diversities.
The evolution of organisms, like the evolution of crystals, or the
evolution of islands and continents, is determined, 1st, by laws
_inherent in the substances evolved_, and, 2d, by relations to the
medium in which the evolution takes place. This being so, we may
_à priori_ affirm that the resultant forms will have a community
strictly corresponding with the resemblance of the substances and
their conditions of evolution, together with a diversity corresponding
with their differences in substance and conditions. It is usually
supposed that the admission of separate “centres of creation” is
tantamount to an admission of “successive creations” as interpreted by
the majority of those who invoke “creative fiats.” But the doctrine
of Evolution, which regards Life as making its appearance _consequent
upon a concurrence of definite conditions_, and regards the specific
forms of Life as the necessary consequences of special circumstances,
must also accept the probability of similar conditions occurring at
different times and in different places. Upon what grounds, cosmical
or biological, are we to assume that on only _one_ microscopic spot of
this developing planet such a group of conditions was found--on only
one spot a particle of protein substance was formed out of the abundant
elements, and under conditions which caused it to grow and multiply,
till in time its descendants overran the globe? The hypothesis that
all organic forms are the descendants of a single germ, or of even
a few germs, and are therefore united by links of kinship more or
less remote, is not more acceptable than the hypothesis that all
the carbonates and phosphates, all the crystals, and all the strata
found in different parts of the globe, are the _descendants of a
single molecule_, or a few molecules; or,--since this may seem too
extravagant,--than that the various maladies which afflict organic
beings are, in a literal sense, members of _families_ having a nearer
relationship than that of being the phenomena manifested by similar
organs under similar conditions--a conception which might have been
accepted by those metaphysical pathologists who regarded Disease as
an entity. Few philosophers have any hesitation in supposing that
other planets besides our own are peopled with organic forms, though,
from the great differences in the conditions, these forms must be
extremely unlike those of our own planet. If separate worlds, why not
separate centres? The conclusion seems inevitable that wherever and
whenever the state of things permitted that peculiar combination of
elements known as organized substance, there and then a centre was
established--Life had a root. From roots closely resembling each other
in all essential characters, but all more or less different, there have
been developed the various stems of the great tree. Myriads of roots
have probably perished without issue; myriads have developed into forms
so ill-adapted to sustain the fluctuations of the medium, so ill-fitted
for the struggle of existence, that they became extinct before even our
organic record begins; myriads have become extinct since then; and the
descendants of those which now survive are like the shattered regiments
and companies after some terrific battle.

125. There seems to me only one alternative logically permissible to
the Evolution Hypothesis, namely, that all organic forms have had
either a single origin, or else numerous origins; in other words, that
a primordial cell was the starting-point from which all organisms
have been successively developed; or that the development issued
from many independent starting-points, more or less varied. This is
apparently not the aspect presented by the hypothesis to many of its
advocates; they seem to consider that if all organic forms are not the
lineal descendants of one progenitor, they must at any rate be the
descendants of not more than four or five. The common belief inclines
to one. Mr. Darwin, whose caution is as remarkable as his courage, and
whose candor is delightful, hesitates as to which conclusion should
be adopted: “I cannot doubt,” he says, “that the theory of descent,
with modifications, embraces all the members of the same class. I
believe that animals have descended from, at most, only four or five
progenitors, and plants from an equal or lesser number. Analogy would
lead me one step further, namely, to the belief that all animals and
plants have descended from some one prototype. But analogy may be a
deceitful guide.”

126. I cannot see the evidence which would warrant the belief that Life
originated solely in one microscopic lump of protoplasm on one single
point of our earth’s surface; on the contrary, it is more probable that
from innumerable and separate points of this teeming earth, myriads
of protoplast sprang into existence, _whenever_ and _wherever_ the
conditions of the formation of organized substance were present. It is
probable that this has been incessantly going on, and that every day
new protoplasts appear, struggle for existence, and serve as food for
more highly organized rivals; but whether an evolution of the lower
forms is, or is not, still going on, there can be no reluctance on
the part of every believer in Evolution to admit that when organized
substance was first evolved, it was evolved at many points. If this be
so, the community observable in organized substance, wherever found,
may as often be due to the fact of a common elementary composition as
to the fact of inheritance. If this be so, we have a simple explanation
both of the fundamental resemblances which link all organisms together,
and of the characteristic diversities which separate them into
kingdoms, classes, and orders. The resemblances are many, and close,
because the forms evolved had a similar elementary composition, and
their stages of evolution were determined by similar conditions.
The diversities are many, because the forms evolved had from the
first some diversities in elementary composition, and their stages of
evolution were determined under conditions which, though similar in
general, have varied in particulars. Indeed, there is no other ground
for the resemblances and differences among organic beings than the
similarities and dissimilarities in their Substance and History; and,
whether the similarities are due to blood-relationship, or to other
causes, the results are the same. There is something seductive in the
supposition that Life radiated from a single centre in ever-increasing
circles, its forms becoming more and more various as they came under
more various conditions, until at last the whole earth was crowded
with diversified existences. “From one cell to myriads of complex
organisms, through countless æons of development,” is a formula of
speculative grandeur, but I cannot bring myself to accept it; and I
think that a lingering influence of the tradition of a “creative fiat”
may be traced in its conception. May we not rather assume that the
earth at the dawn of Life was a vast germinal membrane, every slightly
diversified point producing its own vital form; and these myriads upon
myriads of forms--all alike and all unlike--urged by the indwelling
tendencies of development, struggled with each other for existence,
many failing, many victorious, the victors carrying their tents into
the camping ground of the vanquished. The point raised is the immense
improbability of organized substance having been evolved only in one
microscopic spot; if it were evolved at more than one spot, and under
slightly varying conditions, there would necessarily have arisen in
these earliest formations the _initial_ diversities which afterwards
determined the essential independence and difference of organisms.

129. Let us for a moment glance at the resemblances and diversities
observable in all organisms. All have a _common basis_, all being
constructed out of the same fundamental elements: carbon, hydrogen,
nitrogen, and oxygen; these (the organogens, as they are named),
with varying additions of some other elements, make up what we know
as Organic Substance, vegetal and animal. Another peculiarity all
organisms have in common, namely, that their matter is neither solid
nor liquid, but viscid. Beside this community of _Substance_ we must
now place a community of _History_. All organisms grow and multiply by
the same process; all pass through metamorphic stages ending in death;
all, except the very simplest, differentiate parts of their substance
for special uses, and these parts (cilia, membranes, tubes, glands,
muscles, nerves) have similar characters in whatever organism they
appear, and their development is always similar, so that the muscles or
nerves of an intestinal worm, a lobster, or a man, are in structure and
history fundamentally alike. When, therefore, we see that there is no
biological character of fundamental importance which is not universal
throughout the organic world, when we see that in Structure and History
all organisms have a community pervading every variety, it is difficult
not to draw the conclusion that some hidden link connects all organisms
into one; and when, further, it is seen that the most divergent forms
may be so arranged by the help of intermediate forms only slightly
varying one from the other, that the extreme ends--the monad and the
man--may be connected, and a genealogical tree constructed, which
will group all forms as modified descendants from a single form, the
hypothesis that kinship is the bidden link of which we are in search
becomes more and more cogent.

130. But now let the other aspect be considered. If there is
an unmistakable uniformity, there is also a diversity no less
unmistakable. The chemical composition of organic substances is
various. Unlike inorganic substances, the composition of which is
rigorously definite, organic substances are, within narrow limits,
variable in composition (§ 45).

I pass over the resemblances and differences observed in the earliest
stages of development, marked as they are, and direct attention to the
fact, that down at what must be considered the very lowest organic
region, we meet with differences not less striking than those met with
in the highest, we find structures (if structures they may be called),
which cannot be affiliated, so widely divergent is their composition.
The structureless vibrio, for example, is not only capable of living
in a medium destitute of Oxygen, but is, according to M. Pasteur,
actually killed by oxygen; whereas the equally simple bacteria can
no more dispense with Oxygen than other animals can. Consider for a
moment the differences implied in the fact that one organism cannot
even form an enveloping membrane to contain its protoplasm, whereas
another contrives to secrete an exquisite shell; yet between the
naked Rhizopod and the shelled Rhizopod our lenses and reagents fail
to detect a difference. One Monad can assimilate food of only one
kind, another Monad assimilates various kinds.[73] What a revelation
of chemical differences appears in the observations of M. Pasteur
respecting the vibrio and bacteria, in a fermentescible liquid--the
former beginning the putrid fermentation which the latter completes!
We cannot doubt that some marked difference must exist between the
single-celled organism which produces alcoholic fermentation, and that
which produces acetic fermentation, and that again which produces
butyric fermentation; and if we find distinctions thus established
at the lowest region of the organic series, we need not marvel if
the distinctions become wider and more numerous as the series becomes
more diversified. The structure and development of an organism are
dependent on the affinities of its constituent molecules, and it is
a biological principle of great importance which Sir James Paget
insists on, when he shows how “the existence of certain materials
in the blood may determine the formation of structures in which
they may be incorporated.”[74] _Any_ initial diversity may thus
become the starting-point of a considerable variation in subsequent
evolution.[75] Thus, supposing that on a given spot there are a dozen
protoplasts closely resembling each other, yet each in some one detail
slightly varying; if this variation is one which, by its relations to
the external medium, admits of a difference in the assimilation of
materials present in the medium, it may be the origin of some _new
direction_ in development, and the ultimate consequence may be the
formation of a shell, an internal skeleton, a muscle, or a nerve.
Were this not so, it would be impossible to explain such facts as
that chitine is peculiar to the Articulata, cellulose to Molluscoida,
carbonates of lime to Mollusca and Crustacea, and phosphates to
Vertebrata--all assimilated from the same external medium. But we
see that from this medium one organism selects the materials which
another rejects; and this selection is determined by the nature of the
structure: which assimilates only those materials it is _fitted_ to
assimilate. We hear a great deal of Adaptation determining changes of
structure and function, and are too apt to regard this process as if it
were not intimately dependent on a corresponding structural change. By
no amount of external influence which left the elementary composition
of the structure unchanged, could an organism with only two tissues
be developed into an organism with three or four. By no supply or
stimulus, could an animal incapable of assimilating peroxide of iron
acquire red blood corpuscles, although it might have the iron without
the corpuscles; nor could an oyster form its shell unless capable of
assimilating carbonate of lime. For myriads of years, in seas and
ponds, under endless varieties of external conditions, the amœbæ have
lived and died without forming a solid envelope, although the materials
were abundant, and other organisms equally simple have formed envelopes
of infinite variety. In all the seas, and from the earliest ages,
zoophytes have lived, and assumed a marvellous variety of shapes and
specialization of functions; but although some of them have acquired
muscles, none have acquired true nerves, none bone. Ages upon ages
rolled on before fishes were capable of forming bone; and thousands are
still incapable of forming it, though living in the same waters as the
osseous fishes.

131. “Looking to the dawn of life,” says Mr. Darwin (repeating an
objection urged against his hypothesis), “when all organic beings, as
we imagine, presented the simplest structure, how could the first steps
in advancement, or in the differentiation and specialization of parts
have arisen? I can make no sufficient answer; and can only say that,
as we have no facts to guide us, all speculation would be baseless and
useless.”

Where Mr. Darwin hesitates, lesser men need extra caution; but I
must risk the danger of presumption, at least so far as to suggest
that while an answer to this question is difficult on that dynamical
view of Evolution which regards Function as determining Structure,
it is less difficult on the statico-dynamical view propounded in
these pages; the difficulty which besets the explanation when all the
manifold varieties of organic forms are conceived as the successive
divergences from an original starting-point, is lessened when a variety
of different starting-points is assumed, in each of which some initial
diversity prepared the way for subsequent differentiations; just as
we know that between the ovum of a vertebrate and the ovum of an
invertebrate, similar as they are, there is a diversity which manifests
itself in their subsequent evolution. If Function is determined by
Structure, and Evolution is the product of the two, it is clear that
the different directions in the lines of development will have their
origin in structural differences, and not in the action of external
circumstances, unless these previously bring about a structural change.
The action of the medium on the organism is assuredly a potent factor
which Biology cannot ignore: but the organism itself is a factor, and
according to its nature the influence of the medium is defined. (§ 118.)

132. Quitting for a moment the track of this argument, let us glance
at the resemblances and differences observable in Plants and Animals,
because most people admit that these have separate origins. The
resemblances are scarcely less significant than those existing among
animals. Both have a similar basis of elementary composition; not only
are both formed out of protoplasts with similar properties, but in both
the first step from the protoplasm to definite structure is the Cell.
And the life of this Cell is remarkably alike in both, its phases of
development being in many respects identical; nay, even such variations
as obtain in the cell-membranes are curiously linked together by a
community in the formative process.[76] In both Plants and Animals
we find individuals constituted--1st, by single cells; 2d, by groups
of cells undistinguishable among each other; and 3d, by groups of
differentiated cells. In both we find colonies of individuals leading
a common life. In both the processes of Nutrition and Reproduction
are essentially similar; both propagate sexually and asexually; both
exhibit the surprising phenomena of parthenogenesis and alternate
generations. In both there are examples of a free-roving embryo which
in maturity becomes fixed to one spot, losing its locomotive organs
and developing its reproductive organs. In both the development of the
reproductive organs is the climax which carries Death. So close is the
analogy between plant-life and animal-life, that it even reaches the
properties usually held to be exclusively animal; I mean that even
should we hesitate to accept Cohn’s discovery of the muscles in certain
plants,[77] we cannot deny that plants exhibit Contractility; and
should we refuse to interpret as Sensibility the phenomena exhibited by
the Sensitive Plants, we cannot deny that they present a very striking
analogy to the phenomena of Sensibility exhibited by animals.

133. It is unnecessary to continue this enumeration, which might easily
be carried into minute detail. A chapter of such resemblances would
only burden the reader’s mind, without adding force to the conclusion
that a surprising community in Substance and Life-history must be
admitted between Plants and Animals. This granted, we turn to the
differences, and find them no less fundamental and detailed. Chemistry
tells us nothing of the differences in the protoplasms from which
animals and plants arise; but that initial differences must exist is
proved by the divergence of the products. The vegetable cell is not
the animal cell; and although both plants and animals have albumen,
fibrine, and caseine, the _derivatives_ of these are unlike. Horny
substance, connective tissue, nerve tissue, chitine, biliverdine,
creatine, urea, hippuric acid, and a variety of other products of
evolution or of waste, never appear in plants; while the hydrocarbons
so abundant in plants are, with two or three exceptions, absent from
animals. Such facts imply differences in elementary composition; and
this result is further enforced by the fact that where the two seem
to resemble, they are still different: the plant protoplasm forms
various cells, but never forms a cartilage-cell or nerve-cell; fibres,
but never a fibre of elastic tissue; tubes, but never a nerve tube;
vessels, but never a vessel with muscular coatings; solid “skeletons,”
but always from an organic substance (_cellulose_), not from phosphates
and carbonates. In no one character can we say that the plant and the
animal are identical; we can only point throughout the two kingdoms to
a great similarity accompanying a radical diversity.

134. Having brought together the manifold resemblances, and the no
less marked diversities, we must ask what is their significance? Do
the resemblances imply a community of origin, an universal kinship?
If so, the diversities will be nothing more than the divergences
which have been produced by variations in the Life-history of the
several groups. Or--taking the alternative view--do the diversities
imply radical differences of origin? If so, the resemblances will be
nothing more than the inevitable analogies resulting from Organized
Substance being everywhere somewhat similar in composition, and similar
in certain phases of evolution. To state the former position in the
simplest way, we may assume that of two masses of protoplasm having
a common parentage, one, by the accident of assimilating a certain
element not brought within the range of the other, thereby becomes so
differentiated as to form the starting-point of a series of evolutions
widely divergent from those possible to its congener; and at each stage
of evolution the introduction of a new element (made possible by that
stage) will form the origin of a new variation. It is thus feasible to
reduce all organic forms to a primordial protoplasm, in the evolutions
of which successive differentiations have been established. On the
other hand, it is equally feasible to assume that the existence of
radical differences must be invoked to account for the possibility of
the successive differentiations.

135. The hunt after resemblances has led to much mistaken speculation;
and with reference to the topic now before us, it may be urged,
that although by attaching ourselves to the points of community, in
disregard of the diversities, we may make it appear that all animals
have a common parentage, and that plants and animals are merely
divergent groups of the same prototype, a rigorous logic will force us
onwards, and compel us to admit that a kinship no less real unites
the organic with the inorganic world. For upon what principle are we
to pause at the cell or protoplasm? If by a successive elimination
of differences we reduce all organisms to the cell, we must go on
and reduce the cell itself to the chemical elements out of which it
is constructed; and inasmuch as these elements are all common to the
inorganic world, the only difference being one of synthesis, we reach a
result which is the stultification of all classification, namely, the
assertion of a kinship which is universal. We must bear in mind that
all things may be reduced to a common root by simply disregarding their
differences. All things are alike when we set aside their unlikeness.

136. Suppose, for the sake of illustration, we regard an Orchestra
in the light of the Development Hypothesis. The various instruments
of which it is composed have general resemblances and particular
differences, not unlike those observable in various organisms; and
as we proceed in the work of classification we quickly discover that
they may be arranged in groups analogous to the Sub-kingdoms, Classes,
Orders, Genera, and Species of the organic world. Each group has its
cardinal distinction, its initial point of divergence. All musical
instruments resemble each other in the fundamental character of
producing Tone by the vibrations of their substance. This may be called
their organic basis. The first marked difference which determines the
character of two sub-kingdoms (namely, instruments of Percussion and
Wind instruments) arises from a difference in the method of impressing
the vibrations; and the grand divisions of these sub-kingdoms arise
from the nature of the vibrating substances. Each type admits of many
modifications, but the primary distinction is ineffaceable. We can
conceive the Pipe modified into a Flute, a Flageolet, a Clarionet,
a Hautbois, a Bassoon, or a Fife, by simple accessory changes; to
modify the Pipe into a Trumpet, and thus produce the peculiar _timbre_
of the trumpet, would be impossible except by the _substitution_
of a new material; by replacing the wood with metal we may adhere
to the old Type, but we have created a new Class. (Attention is
requested to this point, because the current views respecting the
transmutation of tissues, which seem to lend a decisive support to the
hypothesis of the transmutation of species are very commonly vitiated
by the confusion of transformation with substitution. No anatomical
element is _transformed_ into another specifically different--an
epithelial-cell into a nerve-cell, for instance--but one anatomical
element is frequently _substituted_ for another.) To convert the Pipe
or the Trumpet into a Violin or a Drum would be impossible. We can
follow the modifications of a Tambourine into a Drum or Kettle-drum,
but no modifications of these will yield the Cymbals. That is to say,
the vibrating materials--wood, metal, parchment, and the combination
of wood and strings--have peculiar properties, and the instruments
formed of such materials must necessarily from the very first belong
to different groups, each subdivision of the groups being dependent on
some characteristic difference in methods of impressing the vibrations,
or in the materials. Although all musical instruments have a common
property and a common purpose, we do not regard them as transformations
of one primitive instrument; their kindred nature is a subjective
conception; the analogies are numerous and close, but we know their
origin. It is obvious that men being pleased by musical tones, have
been led by their delight to construct instruments whenever they have
discovered substances capable of musical vibrations, or methods of
impressing such vibrations. By substituting the bow for the plectrum or
the fingers, they may have changed the Lyre into the Violin, Viola,
Violoncello, and Bass. (It seems historically probable that the real
origin of the Violin class was an instrument with one string played on
by a bow.) By grouping together Pipes of various sizes they got the
Panpipes; by substituting metal and enlarging the blowing apparatus
they got the Organ. By beating on stretched parchment with the finger,
they got the Tambourine and Tom-Tom; by doubling this and using a stick
they got the Drum. By beating metal with metal they got the Cymbals; by
beating wood they got the Castanets.

137. The application of this illustration is plain. Just as a
wind-instrument is incapable of becoming a stringed instrument, so
a Mollusc, with all its muscles unstriped, and its nervous system
unsymmetrical, is incapable of becoming a Crustacean, with all its
muscles striped and its nervous system symmetrical. Indeed there
are probably few biologists of the present day who imagine the
transmutation of one kind into the other to be possible; but many
biologists assume that both may have been evolved from a common root.
The point is beyond proof; yet I think there is a greater probability
in the assumption that both were evolved from different roots. At any
rate, one thing is certain; a divergence could only have been effected
by a series of _substitutions_; and the question when and how these
substitutions took place is unanswerable: one school believes them to
have been creative fiats, the other school believes them to have been
transmutations.

138. When we see an annelid and a vertebrate resembling each other in
some special point which is not common either to their classes or to
any intermediate classes--as when we see the wood-louse (_Oniscus_)
and the hedgehog defend themselves in the same strange way by rolling
up into a ball--we cannot interpret this as a trace of distant
kinship. When we see a breed of pigeons and a breed of canaries
turning somersaults, and one of the Bear family (_Ratel_) given to the
same singular habit, we can hardly suppose that this is in each case
inherited from a common progenitor. When we see one savage race tipping
arrows with iron, and another, ignorant of iron, using poison, there is
a community of object effected by diversity of means; but the analogy
does not necessarily imply any closer connection between the two races
than the fact that men with similar faculties and similar wants find
out similar methods of supplying their wants. Even those who admit that
the human race is one family, and that the various peoples carried with
them a common fund of knowledge when they separated from the parent
stock, may still point to a variety of new inventions and new social
developments which occurred quite independently of each other, yet are
strikingly alike. Their resemblance will be due to resemblance in the
conditions. The existence, for example, of a religious worship, or a
social institution, in two nations widely separated both in time and
space, and under great historical diversities, is no absolute proof
that these two nations are from the same stock, and that the ideas have
the same parentage. It may be so; it may be otherwise. It may be an
analogy no more implying kinship than the fact of ants making slaves
of other ants (and these the black ants!) implies a kinship with men.
Given an organization which in the two nations is alike, and a history
which is in certain characteristics analogous, there must inevitably
result religious and social institutions having a corresponding
resemblance. I do not wish to imply that the researches of philologists
and ethnologists are misdirected, or that their conclusions
respecting the kinship of mankind are to be rejected; I only urge the
consideration that perhaps too much stress is laid on community of
blood, and not enough on community of conditions.


RECAPITULATION.

139. The various lines of argument may here be recapitulated. The
organic world presents a spectacle of endless diversity, accompanied by
a pervading uniformity. The general resemblances in forms and functions
are more or less masked by particular differences. The resemblances, it
is said, may be all due to kinship, all the living individuals having
descended from a primordial cell; and at each stage of the descent the
adaptations to new conditions may have issued in deviations from the
ancestral form, while the process of Natural Selection giving stability
to those variations which best fitted the organism in the struggle of
existence, has made greater and greater gaps, and produced more marked
diversities among the descendants. This is the Darwinian Theory: “On my
theory unity of Type is explained by unity of Descent.”

140. By the general consent of biologists, this theory is held to
explain many if not all the observed facts. It is a very luminous
suggestion; but it requires an enlargement so as to include Organic
Affinity; and when once this fundamental principle is admitted, it
brings with it very serious doubts as to the theory of Descent.
We are then entitled to assume that many of the most striking
resemblances, instead of being due to kinship, are due simply to the
general principle that similar causes must have similar effects, and
that organic substances having a very close resemblance, organized
substances must have similar stages of evolution under similar
conditions; and thus organs will necessarily take on very similar forms
in very different organisms (for example, the eye of the cephalopod
and the eye of the vertebrate), and organisms having widely different
parentage may closely resemble each other. If we are entitled to
assume that protoplasm appeared not in one microscopic spot alone, but
in many places and in vast quantities--and this is surely the more
justifiable assumption--then we must also admit that these germinal
starting-points were from the first, or very shortly afterwards,
differentiated by variations in their elementary composition. Now we
know that a very minute change in composition may lead to immense
differences in evolution. Thus the descendants of two slightly
different progenitors may, by continual differentiation, become very
markedly unlike; yet, because of the original resemblance of their
substances, they will reveal a pervading similarity.

While it is thus conceivable that all organisms may resemble each
other, and all differ, owing to the similarities and diversities in the
“conditions of existence” (and among those conditions that of descent
is of wide range), it is not very readily conceivable how advantage
in the external struggle could have determined the varieties of form
and function, because many differentiations give no superiority in the
struggle. As Mr. St. George Mivart urges, “Natural Selection utterly
fails to account for the conservation and development of the minute and
rudimentary beginnings, the slight and infinitesimal commencements of
structures, however useful those structures may afterwards become.”[78]
And this is undeniable on the supposition that Natural Selection is an
agency not identical with the variations of growth, but exclusively
confined to the accumulation of favorable variations.

141. In estimating the two hypotheses--First, of Descent from one
primordial germ, and the modifications _due_ to Natural Selection, or,
as I should say, _expressed_ in Selection; and Secondly, of Descent
from innumerable germs having initial differences, which differences
radiated into the marked modifications, there is this superiority to
be claimed for the first, that it is more easily handled as an aid to
research, and is therefore more decidedly useful. The laws of Organic
Affinity are at present too obscure for any successful application.
I only wish to point out that the theory of Descent is an imaginary
construction of what _may have been_ the process of species-formation,
not a transcription of the process observed. It constructs an imaginary
Type as progenitor of a long line of widely different descendants. The
annelid which is taken as the ancestor of the vertebrates is not any
annelid known either to zoölogists or geologists, but a generalized
and imaginary type. So daringly liberal is the imagination in endowing
the ancestor with whatever may be required for the descendants, that
Mr. Darwin thinks it _probable_, from what we know of the embryos
of vertebrates, that these animals “are the modified descendants
of some ancient progenitor which was furnished in its adult state
with branchiæ, a swim-bladder, four simple limbs, and a long tail,
all fitted for an organic life,” (p. 533); and Dr. Dohrn conceives
the original type to have contained within itself all that has been
subsequently evolved in the highest vertebrate, the other and less
elaborate organisms being mere degradations from this type.[79] This
use of the imagination, although not without advantages, is also not
without dangers. It may direct research, it must not be suffered to
replace research.




PROBLEM II.

THE NERVOUS MECHANISM.

    “All the functions of the nervous system are as dependent upon its
    structure and nature, as the accurate indication of time upon the
    construction of the chronometer.”--PROCHASKA.

    “Unser Wissen wird nie vollendet, ist und bleibt Stückwerk; dessen
    Ergänzung das Streben und Hoffen der forschenden Denker bleiben
    wird für alle Zeit.”--RADENHAUSEN, _Osiris_.

                    “Our nimble souls
    Can spin an insubstantial universe
    Suiting our mood, and call it possible,
    Sooner than see one grain with eye exact,
    And give strict record of it.”
                      GEORGE ELIOT, _The Spanish Gypsy_.

    “If we compare the teachings of our books with what Nature is
    constantly showing, we find there is no agreement between those two
    sources of learning.”--BROWN SÉQUARD.




THE NERVOUS MECHANISM.




