CHAPTER I.

THE PROBLEM STATED.


1. The peculiarity of the Reflex Theory is its exclusion of Sensibility
from the actions classed as reflex; in consequence of which, the
actions are considered to be “purely mechanical.”

No one denies that most of the reflex actions often have conscious
sensations preceding and accompanying them, but these are said not
to be essential to the performance of the actions, because they may
be absent and the actions still take place. It is notorious that we
breathe, wink, swallow, etc., whether we are conscious of these actions
or not. Our conclusion therefore is that these peculiar states of
Consciousness are _accessory_, not essential to the performance of
these actions. The fact is patent, the conclusion irresistible. But
now consider the equivoque: because an action takes place without our
being conscious of it, the action is said to have had no sensation
determining it. This, which is a truism when we limit Consciousness to
one of the special modes Of Sensibility, or limit sensation to this
limited Consciousness, is a falsism when we accept Consciousness as
the total of all combined sensibilities, or Sensation as the reaction
of the sensory mechanism. That a reflex action is determined by the
sensory mechanism, no one disputes; whether the reaction of a sensory
mechanism shall be called a sensation or not, is a question of terms.
I have shown why it must be so called if anything like coherence is to
be preserved in physiological investigations; and I have more than once
suggested that the fact of intellectual processes taking place at times
with no more consciousness than reflex actions, is itself sufficient to
show that a process does not lapse from the mental to the mechanical
sphere simply by passing unconsciously.

Inasmuch as an organism is a complex of organs, its total function must
be a complex of particular functions, each of which may analytically
be treated apart. Vitality is the total of all its physiological
functions, and Consciousness the total of all its psychological
functions. But inasmuch as it is only in its relation to the whole that
each part has functional significance, and cannot therefore be isolated
in reality, as it is in theory--cannot live by itself, act by itself,
independently of the organism of which it is an organ, there is strict
accuracy in saying that no particular sensation can exist without
involving Consciousness; for this is only saying that no sensory organ
can react without at the same time involving a reaction of the general
sensorium. But since this general sensorium is simultaneously affected
by various excitations each of which is a force, every sensation,
perception, emotion, or volition is a _resultant_ of the composition
of these forces; and as there can be only one resultant at a time, to
be replaced by another in swift succession, this one represents the
_state_ of Consciousness, and this state may or may not be felt under
the peculiar _mode_ named “Consciousness,” in its special meaning. In
other words, the reaction of a sensory organ is always sentient, but
not always consentient.

2. Let us illustrate this by the sensation of musical tone. When
we hear a tone we are affected not only by the fundamental tone,
representing the vibrations of the sounding body as a whole, but
also by the harmonics or overtones, representing the vibrations of
the several parts of that whole. It is these latter vibrations which
give the tone its timbre, or peculiar _quality_; and as the harmonics
are variable with the variable structure of the vibrating parts, two
bodies which have the same fundamental tone may have markedly different
qualities. There are some tones which are almost entirely free from
harmonics; that is to say, their harmonics are too faint for our ear to
appreciate them, though we know that the vibrations must be present.
Apply this to the excitations of the sensorium. Each excitation will
have its fundamental feeling, and more or less accompanying thrills of
other feelings: it is these thrills which are the harmonics, giving to
each excitation its specific quality; but they may be so faint that no
specific quality is discriminated. A fly settles on your hand while you
are writing, the faint thrill which accompanies this excitation of your
sensory nerve gives the specific sensation of tickling, and this causes
you to move your hand with a jerk. If your attention is preoccupied,
you are said to be unconscious of the sensation, and the jerk of
your hand is called a reflex action; but if your attention is not
preoccupied, or if the thrill is vivid, you are said to be conscious
of the sensation, and the action is no longer reflex, but volitional.
Obviously here the difference depends not on the sentient excitation by
an impression on the nerve, but on the state of the general sensorium
and its consequent reaction. Had not the impression been carried to the
sensorium, no movement would have followed the fly’s alighting on your
hand, because no sensation (sensory reaction) would have been excited;
the hypothesis of a purely mechanical reflex is quite inadmissible.

3. Or take another case. It sometimes happens that we fall asleep
while some one is reading to us aloud. The sounds of the reader’s
voice at first awaken the familiar thrills which give the tones their
quality, and the words their significance; but gradually as sleep
steals over us, the organism ceases to react thus; the words lose more
and more of their significance, the tones lose more and more of their
harmonics; at last we pass into the state of unconsciousness--we cease
to hear what is read. But do we cease to feel? We have not _heard_,
but we have been _affected_ by the sounds. Not by distinguishable
sensations; nevertheless a state of the general Sensibility has been
induced. To prove that we have been affected is easy. Let the reader
suddenly cease, and if our sleep be not too profound, we at once awake.
Now, unless the sound of his voice had affected us, it is clear that
the cessation of that could not have affected us. Or let us suppose
our sleep to be unbroken by the cessation of the sound; even this will
not prove that we have been unaffected by the sounds, it will merely
prove that those sounds, or their cessation, did not excite a conscious
state. For let the reader, in no louder tone, ask, “Are you asleep?”
and we start up, with round eyes, declaring, “Not at all.” Nay, should
even this question fail to awaken us, the speaker need only utter some
phrase likely to excite a thrill--such as, “There’s the postman!” or,
“I smell fire!” and we start up.

I remember once trying the experiment on a wearied waiter, who had
fallen asleep in one of the unoccupied boxes of a tavern. His arm
rested on the table, and his head rested on his arm: he snored the
snore of the weary, in spite of the noisy laughter and talk of the
guests. I called out “Johnson,” in a loud tone. It never moved him. I
then called “Wilson,” but he snored on. No sooner did I call “waiter,”
than he raised his head with a sleepy “_yessir_.” Now, to suppose, in
this case, that he had _no_ sensation when the words “Johnson” and
“Wilson” reached his ears, but had a sensation when the word “waiter”
reached his ears, is to suppose that two similar causes will not
produce a similar effect. The dissyllable “Johnson” would excite as
potent a reaction of his sensory organ as the dissyllable “waiter”;
but the thrills--the reflex feelings--were different, because the word
“Johnson” was not associated in his mind with any definite actions,
whereas the word “waiter” was so associated as to become an automatic
impulse.[231]

4. Two sisters are asleep in the same bed, and a child cries in the
next room. The sounds of these cries will give a similar stimulus
to the auditory nerve of each sister, and excite a similar sensory
reaction in each. Nevertheless, the one sister sleeps on undisturbed,
and is said not to hear the cry. The other springs out of bed, and
attends to the child, because she being accustomed to attend on the
child and soothe it when crying, the primary sensation has excited
secondary sensations, thrills which lead to accustomed actions. Could
we look into the mind of the sleeping sister, we should doubtless find
that the sensation excited by the child’s cry had merged itself in
the general stream, and perhaps modified her dreams. Let her become a
mother, or take on the tender duties of a mother, and her vigilance
will equal that of her sister; because the cry will _then_ excite a
definite reflex feeling, and a definite course of action. But this very
sister, who is so sensitive to the cry of a child, will be undisturbed
by a much louder noise; a dog may bark, or a heavy wagon thunder along
the street, without causing her to turn in bed.[232]

Although during sleep the nervous centres have by no means their
full activity, they are always capable of responding to a stimulus,
and sensation will always be produced. When the servant taps at your
bedroom door in the morning, you are said not to hear the tap, if
asleep; you do not perceive it; but the sound reaches and rouses you
nevertheless, since when the second tap comes, although no louder, you
distinctly recognize it. In etherized patients, sensation is constantly
observed returning before any consciousness of what is going on
returns. “I was called,” says Mr. Potter, “to give chloroform to a lady
for the extraction of ten teeth. The first five were extracted without
the slightest movement, but as the operation proceeded, sensation
returned, and I was obliged to use considerable force to keep her in
the chair during the extraction of the last tooth. She came to herself
very shortly after, and was delighted to find she had got over all her
troubles without having felt it the least in the world.”[233]

5. We do not see the stars at noonday, yet they shine. We do not see
the sunbeams playing among the leaves on a cloudy day, yet it is by
these beams that the leaves and all other objects are visible. There
is a general illumination from the sun and stars, but of this we are
seldom aware, because our attention falls upon the illumined objects,
brighter or darker than this general tone. There is a sort of analogy
to this in the general Consciousness, which is composed of the sum of
sensations excited by the incessant simultaneous action of internal
and external stimuli. This forms, as it were, the daylight of our
existence. We do not habitually attend to it, because attention falls
on those particular sensations of pleasure or of pain, of greater
or of less intensity, which usurp a prominence among the objects of
the sensitive panorama. But just as we need the daylight to see
the brilliant and the sombre forms of things, we need this living
Consciousness to feel the pleasures and the pains of life. It is
therefore as erroneous to imagine that we have no other sensations than
those which we distinctly recognize--as to imagine that we see no other
light than what is reflected from the shops and equipages, the colors
and splendors which arrest the eye.

The amount of light received from the stars may be small, but it is
present. The greater glory of the sunlight may render this starlight
inappreciable, but it does not render it inoperative. In like manner
the amount of sensation received from some of the centres may be
inappreciable in the presence of more massive influences from other
centres; but though inappreciable it cannot be inoperative--it must
form an integer in the sum.

6. The reader’s daily experience will assure him that over and above
all the particular sensations capable of being separately recognized,
there is a general stream of Sensation which constitutes his feeling
of existence--the Consciousness of himself as a sensitive being. The
ebullient energy which one day exalts life, and the mournful depression
which the next day renders life a burden almost intolerable, are
feelings not referable to any of the particular sensations, but arise
from the massive yet obscure sensibilities of the viscera, which form
so important a part of the general stream of Sensation. Some of these
may emerge into distinct recognition. We may feel the heart beat, the
intestines move, the glands secrete; anything _unusual_ in their action
will force itself on our attention.

“What we have been long used to,” says Whytt, “we become scarcely
sensible of; while things which are new, though much more trifling,
and of weaker impression, affect us remarkably. Thus he who is wont to
spend his time in the country is surprisingly affected, upon first
coming into a populous city, with the noise and bustle which prevail
there: of this, however, he becomes daily less sensible, till at length
he regards it no more than they who have been used to it all their
lifetime. The same seems to be the case also with what passes within
our bodies. Few persons in health feel the beating of their heart,
though it strikes against their ribs with considerable force every
second; whereas the motion of a fly upon one’s face or hands occasions
a very sensible and uneasy titillation. The pulsation of the great
_aorta_ itself is wholly unobserved by us; yet the unusual beating of a
small artery in any of the fingers becomes very remarkable.”

7. A large amount of sensation is derived from the muscular sense, yet
we are not aware of the nice adjustments of the muscles, regulated by
this sensibility, when we sit or walk. No sooner are we placed in an
exceptional position, as in walking on a narrow ledge, than we become
distinctly aware of the effort required to preserve equilibrium. It is
not the novelty of the position which has increased our sensibility;
that has only caused us to attend to our sensations. In like manner,
the various streams of sensation which make up our general sense
of existence, separately escape notice until one of them becomes
obstructed, or increases in impetuosity. When we are seated at a
window, and look out at the trees and sky, we are so occupied with the
aspects and the voices of external Nature, that no attention whatever
is given to the fact of our own existence; yet all this while there
has been a massive and diffusive feeling arising from the organic
processes; and of this we become distinctly aware if we close our
eyes, shut off all sounds, and abstract the sensations of touch and
temperature--it is then perceived as a vast and powerful stream of
sensation, belonging to none of the special Senses, but to the System
as a whole. It is on this general stream that depend those well-known
but indescribable states named “feeling well” and “feeling ill”--the
_bien être_ and _malaise_ of every day. Of two men looking from the
same window, on the same landscape, one will be moved to unutterable
sadness, yearning for the peace of death; the other will feel his soul
suffused with serenity and content: the one has a gloomy background,
into which the sensations excited by the landscape are merged; the
other has a happy background, on which the sensations play like
ripples on a sunny lake. The tone of each man’s feeling is determined
by the state of his general consciousness. Except in matters of pure
demonstration, we are all determined towards certain conclusions as
much by this general consciousness as by logic. Our philosophy, when
not borrowed, is little more than the expression of our personality.

8. Having thus explained the relation of particular sensations to the
general state of Consciousness considered as the function of the whole
organism, we may henceforward speak of particular sentient states, as
we speak of particular organs and functions, all the while presupposing
that the organs and functions necessarily involve the organism, since
_apart_ from the organism they have no such significance. The reaction
of a sensory organ is therefore always a sentient phenomenon. Apart
from the living organism there can be no such vital reaction, but only
a physical reaction. It is commonly supposed that sensation is simply
the molecular excitation of the cerebrum; yet no one will maintain
that if the cerebrum of a corpse be excited, by a galvanic current
sent through the optic nerve, for instance, this excitation will be a
sensation. Whence we may conclude that it is not the physical reaction
or stimulus which constitutes sensation, but the physiological reaction
of the living organism.

9. Now this is the point which the advocates of the Reflex Theory,
implicitly or explicitly, always deny. Let us trace the origin of the
fallacy, if possible. When we remove the eye from a recently killed
animal, and let a beam of light fall on it, the pupil contracts. This
is a purely mechanical action; no one would suggest that a sensation
determined it. When we remove the leg, and irritate its nerve, the leg
is jerked out. This is also a purely mechanical action. When we remove
the brain from an animal, and pinch its toes, the leg is withdrawn
or the pincers are pushed aside. Is this equally a purely mechanical
action? And if not, why not?

The Reflex Theory would have us believe that all three cases were
mechanical, at least in so far as they were all destitute of sentient
co-operation, the ground for this conclusion being the hypothesis that
the brain is the exclusive seat of sensation. The Reflex Theory further
concludes that since these, and analogous actions, are performed when
the brain is removed, they, being thus independent of sentience, may
be performed when the brain is present without any co-operation of
sentience. The grounds for this conclusion being the facts that in
the normal state of the organism there are many actions of which we
are sometimes conscious, and at other times unconscious; and some
actions--such as the dilatation and contraction of the pupil--of which
we are never conscious. This observation of parts detached from the
organism seems confirmed by observation of actions passing in our
own organisms, both converging to the conclusion that the actions in
question are purely mechanical, involving no sentience whatever. We are
taught, therefore, that there is besides the sentient mechanism, to
which all conscious actions are referred, a reflex mechanism, to which
all unconscious actions are referred. The cerebro-spinal axis, acting
as a whole, constitutes the first; the spinal axis, acting without the
co-operation of the cerebrum, constitutes the second.

10. Before proceeding with our exposition of the theory it may be
well to state two considerations which must be constantly in view. If
it should appear that there is any reasonable evidence for refusing
to limit Sensibility to the cerebrum--and this evidence I shall
adduce--the Reflex Theory must obviously be remodelled. Nor is this
all. We might see overwhelming evidence in favor of the hypothesis that
the cerebrum is the exclusive seat of Sensibility, and still reject as
a fallacy the conclusion that because certain actions can be performed
in the absence of the cerebrum, therefore those actions in the normal
organism are likewise performed without cerebral co-operation. I
mean that it is a fallacy to conclude from the contractions of the
pupil, and the jerking of the leg, when eye and leg are detached
from the organism, that therefore when eye and leg form integral
parts of the organism, such contractions and jerkings are mechanical
reflexes without sentient conditions. And the fallacy is analogous
to that which would conclude from the observations of a mechanical
automaton, that similar appearances in a vital organism were equally
automatic and mechanical. So long as both sets of phenomena are
apprehended simply as they appear to the sense of sight, they may be
indistinguishable; but no sooner do we apprehend them through other
modes, and examine the _modes of production_ of the phenomena, than
we come upon cardinal differences. A limb detached from the organism
is like a phrase detached from a sentence: it has lost its vital
significance, its functional value, in losing its connection with the
other parts. The whole sentence is necessary for the slightest meaning
of its constituent words, and each word is a language-element only
when ideally or verbally connected with the other words required to
form a sentence; without subject, predicate, and copula, no sentence
can be formed. So the organic connexus of parts with a living whole is
necessary for the simplest function of each organ; and a limb, or any
other part, is a physiological element only when (ideally or really)
an integral of a vital whole. The organism may be truncated by the
removal of certain parts, as the sentence may be abbreviated by the
removal of certain phrases; but so long as subject, predicate, and
copula remain, there is a meaning in the sentence; and so long as the
organic connexus needful for vitality remains, there will be vital
function. The eye detached from the organism is no longer a part of
the living whole, it no longer lives, its phenomena cease to be vital,
its movements cease to have sentient conditions. The movements of the
pupil may seem to be the same as those of the living eye; but when we
come to examine their modes of production, we learn that they are not
the same. The stimulus of light falling on the eye in the two cases
necessarily has a different effect, because the effect is the result of
the co-operating causes, and the co-operation in the one case is that
of a lifeless organ, in the other that of a living organism. So long as
the eye forms an integral part of the organism, every stimulus acting
on the eye necessarily acts on the organism, and every reaction of the
organ is necessarily conditioned by the state of the organism. Further,
every stimulation of a sensory nerve necessarily affects the general
sensorium, since the whole nervous system is structurally continuous
and functionally co-operant. (See Prob. II. § 16.) Therefore, the
stimulation of the eye, although too faint to be discriminated as a
conscious sensation, must enter as a sentient tremor into the general
stream of Sentience; and although we have no test delicate enough to
reveal this operation, we know the _obverse_ operation of conscious
sensation on the movements of the pupil--in surprise, for example, the
pupil is dilated.

11. There are still stronger reasons for asserting that the spinal
reflexes are necessarily conditioned by the general state of the
sensorium, so that in the normal organism we cannot legitimately
exclude them from Sentience; and the Reflex Theory is therefore
unphysiological, even on the hypothesis that the cerebrum is the
exclusive seat of Sensibility. This hypothesis, however, seems to
me untenable; and all the observed facts which it is invented to
explain admit of a far more consistent explanation. It is irrational
to suppose that a limb, detached from the body, _felt_ the stimulus
which caused its muscles to contract. The limb is not a living
organism, having a sentient mechanism in its nervous mechanism. Not
less irrational is it to suppose that when the limb forms an integral
part of a living organism, with a sentient mechanism of nerves and
nerve-centres, this organism does not react on the stimulus which
excites the muscles of the limb to contract; nor, pursuing the same
train of reasoning, is it irrational to suppose that when this living
organism has been mutilated, and certain parts destroyed, which do
not in their destruction prevent the connexus of the rest, but leave
intact a sentient mechanism of nerves and nerve-centres, then also this
truncated organism still reacts as a whole, still feels the stimulus
which causes the muscles of the limb to contract. Hypothesis for
hypothesis, we may at least say that the one is as reasonable as the
other. And I shall be disappointed if, when the reader has gone through
all the evidence hereafter to be adduced, he does not conclude that
the hypothesis which assigns Sensibility to the nervous mechanism as a
whole is not the more acceptable of the two.

12. Let us now pursue our exposition of the Reflex Theory. All that
we have endeavoured to establish respecting the essential identity of
the processes in conscious and unconscious states, and voluntary and
involuntary actions,--an identity which does not exclude differences of
degree corresponding with these different terms,--is ignored or denied
in the Reflex Theory. Whereas I suppose all processes to be reflex
processes, some of them having the voluntary, others the involuntary
character, physiologists generally distinguish the involuntary as
reflex, and invent for this class a special mechanism. According to
Marshall Hall, who originated the modern form of this theory, actions
are divisible into four distinct classes: the _voluntary_, dependent
on the brain; the _involuntary_, dependent on the irritability of
the muscular fibre; the _respiratory_, wherein “the motive influence
passes in a _direct line_ from one point of the nervous system to
certain muscles”; and the _reflex_, dependent on the “true spinal
system” of _incident-excitor_ nerves, and of _reflex-motor_ nerves.
These last-named actions are produced when an _impression_ on the
sensitive surface is conveyed, by an excitor-nerve, to the spinal
cord, and is there _reflected_ back on the muscles by a corresponding
motor-nerve. In this process _no_ sensation whatever occurs. The action
is purely reflex, purely _excito-motor_--like the action of an ordinary
mechanism.[234]

Müller, who shares with Marshall Hall the glory of having established
this classification, thinks that although the absence of sensation is
a characteristic of the reflex actions, these actions may be, and are
at times, accompanied by sensation. “The view I take of the matter is
the following: Irritation of sensitive fibres of a spinal nerve excites
primarily a centripetal action of the nervous principle conveying the
impression to the spinal cord; if the centripetal action can then be
continued to the _sensorium commune_, a true sensation is the result;
if, on account of division of the cord, it cannot be communicated to
the sensorium, it still exerts its whole influence upon the cord; in
both cases a reflex motor action may be the result.”[235]

13. It is needless nowadays to point out that the existence of a
distinct system of excito-motor nerves belongs to Imaginary Anatomy;
but it is not needless to point out that the Imaginary Physiology
founded on it still survives. The hypothetical process seems to me not
less at variance with observation and induction, than the hypothetical
structure invented for its basis. We have already seen that what
Anatomy positively teaches is totally unlike the reflex mechanism
popularly imagined. The sensory nerve is not seen to enter the spinal
cord at one point, and pass over to a corresponding point of exit; it
is seen to enter the gray substance, which is continuous throughout the
spinal cord; it is there lost to view, its course being untraceable.
Nor does the physiological process present the aspect demanded by the
theory: it is not that of a direct and uniform reflexion, such as
would result from an impression on one spot transmitted across the
spinal cord to a corresponding motor-nerve. The impression is sometimes
followed by one movement, sometimes by another very different movement,
each determined by the state of neural tension in the whole central
system.

Even the facts on which the Reflex Theory is based are differently
interpreted by different physiologists. Van Deen, for instance,
considers that Reflexion takes place without Volition, but not
without Sensation; and Budge, that it takes place without perception
(_Vorstellung_). And when it is remembered that most of the reflex
actions will be accompanied by distinct consciousness whenever
attention is directed to them, or the vividness of the stimulation
is slightly increased, it becomes evident that the absence of
Consciousness (discrimination) is not the differentia of Reflex action.

14. Nor can the absence of spontaneity be accepted as a differentia.
_All_ actions are excited by stimulation, internal or external. What
are called the spontaneous actions are simply those which are prompted
by internal, or by not recognizable stimuli; and could we see the
process, we should see a neural change initiated by some stimulation,
whether the change was conscious and volitional, or unconscious and
automatic. The dog rising from sleep and restlessly moving about,
is acting spontaneously, whether the stimulation which awakens him
be a sensation of hunger, a sensation of sound, the sharp pain of a
prick, or a dash of cold water. If he wags his tail at the sight of
his master, or wags it when dreaming, the stimulation is said to be
spontaneous; but if after his spinal cord has been divided the tail
wags when his abdomen is tickled, the action is called reflex. In all
three cases there has been a process of excitation and reflexion.

15. The advocates of the Reflex Theory insist that spontaneity is
always absent in brainless animals; whence the conclusion that the
brain is the exclusive organ of sensation. But the fact asserted is
contradicted by the evidence. No experimenter can have failed to
observe numberless examples of spontaneity in brainless animals. Many
examples have already been incidentally noticed in previous pages. Let
me add one more from my notes: I decapitated a toad and a triton, and
divided the spinal cord of another triton and a frog. At first the
movements of the decapitated animals were insignificant; but on the
second day the headless toad was quite as lively as the frog; and the
headless triton little less so than his companion with cord divided
but brain intact. I have, at the time of writing this, a frog whose
cord was divided some weeks ago. He remains almost motionless unless
when touched; he is generally found in the same spot, and in the same
attitude to-day as yesterday, unless touched, or unless the table be
shaken. He occasionally moves one of the forelegs; occasionally one of
the hind-legs; but without changing his position. If he were brainless,
this quiescence would be cited in proof of the absence of spontaneity
in the absence of the brain; but this conclusion would be fallacious,
and is seen to be so in the spontaneous movements of his companion who
has _no_ brain.

16. With spontaneity is associated the idea of volition, and with
volition _choice_. Now I admit that it is complicating the question to
ask any one to conceive a headless animal choosing one action rather
than another; but it is equally difficult to reconcile ourselves to
the idea of “choice” in contemplating the actions of a mollusc. In
what sense we can speak of the volition of a mollusc or an insect has
already been considered (p. 408). When a man in a fit of coughing
seizes a glass of water to allay the tickling in his throat, we have
no hesitation in declaring this to be volitional--and the remedy to
be _chosen_. But when a brainless animal adopts some _unusual_ means,
after the failure of the usual means, to allay an irritation, we still
hesitate to call the action volitional. I see, however, no objection to
calling it the adaptation of a sensitive mechanism which is markedly
unlike any inorganic mechanism.

Place a child of two or three years old upon his back, and tickle
his right cheek with a feather. He will probably move his head away.
Continue tickling, and he will rub the spot with his right hand,
_never_ using the left hand for the right cheek, so long as the right
hand is free; but if you hold his right hand, he will use the left.
Does any one dispute the voluntary character of these actions?

Now compare the actions of the sleeping child under similar
circumstances, and their sequence will be precisely similar. This
contrast is the more illustrative, because physiologists generally
assume that in sleep consciousness and volition are _suspended_.
They say: “The brain sleeps, the spinal cord never; volition and
sensation may be suspended, but not reflex action.” This proposition is
extremely questionable; yet it is indispensable to the reflex theory;
because unless sensation and volition _are_ suspended during sleep, we
must admit that they can act, without at the same time calling into
activity that degree of sensibility which is supposed to constitute
consciousness. The child moves in his sleep, defends himself in his
sleep; but he is not “aware” of it.

“Children,” says Pflüger, “sleep more soundly than adults, and seem
to be more sensitive in sleep. I tickled the right nostril of a
three-year-old boy. He at once raised his right hand to push me away,
and then rubbed the place. When I tickled the left nostril he raised
the left hand. I then softly drew both arms down, and laid them close
to the body, embedding the left arm in the clothes, and placing on it a
pillow, by gentle pressure on which I could keep the arm down without
awakening him. Having done this I tickled his left nostril. He at once
began to move the imprisoned arm, but could not reach his face with
it, because I held it firmly though gently down. He now drew his head
aside, and I continued tickling, whereupon he raised the _right_ hand,
and with it rubbed the _left_ nostril--an action he never performed
when the left hand was free.”

17. This simple but ingenious experiment establishes one important
point, namely, that the so-called reflex actions observed in sleep
are determined by sensation and volition. The sleeping child behaves
exactly as the waking child behaved; the only difference being in
the energy and rapidity of the actions. If the waking child felt and
willed, surely the sleeping child, when it performed precisely similar
actions, cannot be said to have felt nothing, willed nothing? It is
not at one moment a sentient organism, and at the next an insentient
mechanism.

It is possible to meet this case by assuming that the child was nearly
awake, and that a dim consciousness was aroused by the tickling, so
that the cerebral activity was in fact awakened. But, plausible as
this explanation may be (and I am the more ready to admit it because I
believe the brain always co-operates when it is present), it altogether
fails when we come to experiments on decapitated animals. If any one
will institute a series of such experiments, taking care to compare the
actions of the animal before and after decapitation, he will perceive
that there is no more difference between them than between those of the
sleeping and the waking child.

18. Even more striking is the following experiment, devised by Pflüger,
which I have verified, and varied, many times: A frog is decapitated,
or its brain is removed.[236] When it has recovered from the effect of
the ether, and manifests lively sensibility, we place it on its back,
and touch, with acetic acid, the skin of its thigh just above the
_condylus internus femoris_. (Let the reader imagine his own shoulder
burnt at the point where it can be reached with the thumb of the same
arm, and he will realize the operation.) No sooner does the acid begin
to burn than the frog stretches out the _other_ leg, so that its body
is somewhat drawn towards it. The leg that has been burnt is now bent,
and the back of the foot is applied to the spot, rubbing the acid
away--just as your thumb might rub your shoulder. This is very like
the action of the tickled child, who always uses the right hand to rub
the right cheek, unless it be held; but when the child’s right hand is
prevented from rubbing, the left will be employed; and precisely this
do we observe with the brainless frog: prevent it from using its right
leg, and it will use its left!

This has been proved by decapitating another frog, and cutting off
the foot of the leg which is to be irritated. No sooner is the acid
applied, than the leg is bent as before, and the stump is moved to and
fro, as if to rub away the acid. But the acid is not rubbed away, and
the animal becomes restless, as if trying to hit upon some other plan
for freeing himself of the irritation. And it is worthy of remark that
he often hits upon plans very similar to those which an intelligent
human being adopts under similar circumstances. Thus, the irritation
continuing, he will sometimes cease the vain efforts with his stump,
and stretching that leg straight out, bends the _other_ leg over
towards the irritated spot, and rubs the acid away. But, to show how
far this action is from one of “mere mechanism,” how far it is from
being a direct reflex of an impression on a group of muscles, the
frog does not _always_ hit even on this plan. Sometimes it bends its
irritated leg more energetically, and likewise bends the body towards
it, so as to permit the spot to be rubbed against the flank--just as
the child, when both his hands are held, will bend his cheek towards
his shoulder and rub it there.

19. It is difficult to resist such evidence as is here manifested. The
brainless frog “chooses” a new plan when the old one fails, just as
the waking child chooses. And an illustration of how sensations guide
and determine movements, may be seen in another observation of the
brainless frog, when, as often happens, it does not hit upon either of
the plans just mentioned, but remains apparently restless and helpless;
if under these circumstances we perform a part of the action for it,
_it will complete what we have begun_: if we rub the irritated leg, at
some distance from the spot where the acid is, with the foot of the
other, the frog suddenly avails itself of this _guiding sensation_, and
at once directs its foot to the irritated spot.

In these experiments on the triton and the frog, the evidence of
sensation and volition is all the stronger, because the reactions
produced by irritations are not uniform. If when a decapitated animal
were stimulated it always reacted in _precisely the same way_, and
never chose _new means_ on the failure of the old, it would be
conceivable to attribute the results to simple reflex action--i. e. the
mechanical transference of an impulse along a prescribed path. It is
possible so to conceive the breathing, or the swallowing mechanism: the
impression may be directly reflected on certain groups of muscles. But
I cannot conceive a machine suddenly striking out new methods, when the
old methods fail. I cannot conceive a machine thrown into disorder when
its accustomed actions fail, and in this disorder suddenly lighting
upon an action likely to succeed, and continuing _that_; but I can
conceive this to be done by an organism, for my own experience and
observation of animals assures me that this is always the way new lines
of action are adopted. And this which is observed of the unmutilated
animal, I have just shown to be observed of the brainless animal;
wherefore the conclusion is, that if ever the frog is sentient, if
ever its actions are guided by sensation, they are so when its brain is
removed.

20. Schröder van der Kolk thinks that Pflüger was deceived in
attributing sensation and volition to the frog, because the reflex
actions are, he says, so nicely adapted to their ends, that they are
undistinguishable from voluntary actions. The mechanism is such that,
by means of the communications established between various groups of
cells, all these actions adapted to an end may be excited by every
stimulus. But I deny the fact. I deny that all the actions are awakened
by every stimulus. Only some few are awakened, and those are not
always the same, nor do they follow the same order of succession. One
decapitated frog does not behave exactly like another under similar
circumstances; does not behave exactly like himself at different
seasons; unlike a machine, he manifests spontaneity in his actions, and
volition in the direction of his actions.

21. The reader will notice that my illustrations show these actions of
the brainless animal to have the same external characters as those of
the unmutilated animals. I am therefore not here concerned to prove
the psychical nature of these actions, unless it be granted that the
unmutilated animal has sensation and volition. This of course can
only be inferred, not proved. But the inference must not be allowed
in the one case and refused in the other. Young rabbits and puppies
when taken from their mothers manifest discomfort by restless movement
and whining. Do they feel the discomfort they thus express? If ever
rabbits and puppies may be said to feel, we must answer, Yes. Well,
if the brain be removed from rabbits and puppies, precisely similar
phenomena are observed when these young animals are taken from
their mothers. “I observed the motions, which seemed the result of
discomfort, quickly cease when I warmed the young rabbit by breathing
on it. After a while it was completely at rest, and seemed sunk in
deep sleep; occasionally, however, it moved one of its legs without
any external stimulus having been applied, and this not spasmodically,
but in the manner of a sleeping animal.”[237] Is this cessation of
the restlessness, when warmth is restored, not evidence of sensation?
We see an infant restless, struggling, and squalling; and we believe
that it is hungry, or that some other sensations agitate it; it is
put to the breast, and its squalls subside; or a finger is placed in
its mouth, and it sucks that, in a peaceful lull, for a few moments,
to recommence squalling when the finger yields no satisfaction. If we
accept these as signs of sensation, I do not see how we can deny such
sensation to the brainless animal which will also cease to cry, and
will suck the delusive finger.

22. One of the earliest advocates of the Reflex Theory sums up
his observations in these words: “It is clear that brainless
animals, although without sensation, because not endowed with
mind, nevertheless, by means of external impressions which operate
incessantly on them, perform all the acts and manifest all the activity
of the sentient animal; everything that is effected sensationally
and volitionally, they effect by means of the organic forces of the
impressions.”[238] Call Sensibility one of the organic forces, if you
please, but so long as the acts performed are not only the same as
those of a sentient animal, but are performed by the same mechanism,
they have every claim to the character of sensational acts which can be
urged in the case of these animals when the brain is present. And the
only reason on which this claim is disputed is the assumed loss of all
sensation with the loss of the brain. Here, therefore, lies the central
point to be determined.




