CHAPTER II.

THE solemnities, ceremonies, rites of their cremation or interment,
so solemnly delivered by authors, we shall not disparage our reader
to repeat. Only the last and lasting part in their urns, collected
bones and ashes, we cannot wholly omit or decline that subject, which
occasion lately presented, in some discovered among us.

In a field of Old Walsingham, not many months past, were digged up
between forty and fifty urns, deposited in a dry and sandy soil, not a
yard deep, nor far from one another.--Not all strictly of one figure,
but most answering these described; some containing two pounds of
bones, and teeth, with fresh impressions of their combustion; besides
the extraneous substances, like pieces of small boxes, or combs
handsomely wrought, handles of small brass instruments, brazen nippers,
and in one some kind of opal.

Near the same plot of ground, for about six yards compass, were digged
up coals and incinerated substances, which begat conjecture that this
was the _ustrina_ or place of burning their bodies, or some sacrificing
place unto the _Manes_, which was properly below the surface of the
ground, as the _aræ_ and altars unto the gods and heroes above it.

That these were the urns of Romans from the common custom and place
where they were found, is no obscure conjecture, not far from a Roman
garrison, and but five miles from Brancaster, set down by ancient
record under the name of Branodunum. And where the adjoining town,
containing seven parishes, in no very different sound, but Saxon
termination, still retains the name of Burnham, which being an early
station, it is not improbable the neighbour parts were filled with
habitations, either of Romans themselves, or Britons Romanized, which
observed the Roman customs.

Nor is it improbable, that the Romans early possessed this country.
For though we meet not with such strict particulars of these parts
before the new institution of Constantine and military charge of the
count of the Saxon shore, and that about the Saxon invasions, the
Dalmatian horsemen were in the garrison of Brancaster; yet in the time
of Claudius, Vespasian, and Severus, we find no less than three legions
dispersed through the province of Britain. And as high as the reign
of Claudius a great overthrow was given unto the Iceni, by the Roman
lieutenant Ostorius. Not long after, the country was so molested, that,
in hope of a better state, Prastaagus bequeathed his kingdom unto Nero
and his daughters; and Boadicea, his queen, fought the last decisive
battle with Paulinus. After which time, and conquest of Agricola, the
lieutenant of Vespasian, probable it is, they wholly possessed this
country; ordering it into garrisons or habitations best suitable with
their securities. And so some Roman habitations not improbable in these
parts, as high as the time of Vespasian, where the Saxons after seated,
in whose thin-filled maps we yet find the name of Walsingham. Now if
the Iceni were but Gammadims, Anconians, or men that lived in an angle,
wedge, or elbow of Britain, according to the original etymology, this
country will challenge the emphatical appellation, as most properly
making the elbow or _iken_ of Icenia.

That Britain was notably populous is undeniable, from that expression
of Cæsar.[AM] That the Romans themselves were early in no small
numbers--seventy thousand, with their associates, slain, by Boadicea,
affords a sure account. And though not many Roman habitations are now
known, yet some, by old works, rampiers, coins, and urns, do testify
their possessions. Some urns have been found at Castor, some also
about Southcreak, and, not many years past, no less than ten in a
field at Buxton, not near any recorded garrison. Nor is it strange to
find Roman coins of copper and silver among us; of Vespasian, Trajan,
Adrian, Commodus, Antoninus, Severus, &c.; but the greater number of
Dioclesian, Constantine, Constans, Valens, with many of Victorinus
Posthumius, Tetricus, and the thirty tyrants in the reign of Gallienus;
and some as high as Adrianus have been found about Thetford, or
Sitomagus, mentioned in the _Itinerary_ of Antoninus, as the way from
Venta or Castor unto London. But the most frequent discovery is made at
the two Castors by Norwich and Yarmouth at Burghcastle, and Brancaster.

[AM] “Hominum infinita multitudo est creberrimaque; ædificia fere
Gallicis consimilia.”--_Cæsar de Bello. Gal._, lib. v.

Besides the Norman, Saxon, and Danish pieces of Cuthred, Canutus,
William, Matilda, and others, some British coins of gold have been
dispersedly found, and no small number of silver pieces near Norwich,
with a rude head upon the obverse, and an ill-formed horse on the
reverse, with inscriptions _Ic. Duro. T.;_ whether implying Iceni,
Durotriges, Tascia, or Trinobantes, we leave to higher conjecture.
Vulgar chronology will have Norwich Castle as old as Julius Cæsar;
but his distance from these parts, and its Gothick form of structure,
abridgeth such antiquity. The British coins afford conjecture of early
habitation in these parts, though the city of Norwich arose from the
ruins of Venta; and though, perhaps, not without some habitation
before, was enlarged, builded, and nominated by the Saxons. In what
bulk or populosity it stood in the old East-Angle monarchy tradition
and history are silent. Considerable it was in the Danish eruptions,
when Sueno burnt Thetford and Norwich, and Ulfketel, the governor
thereof, was able to make some resistance, and after endeavoured to
burn the Danish navy.

How the Romans left so many coins in countries of their conquests
seems of hard resolution; except we consider how they buried them
under ground when, upon barbarous invasions, they were fain to desert
their habitations in most part of their empire, and the strictness
of their laws forbidding to transfer them to any other uses: wherein
the Spartans were singular, who, to make their copper money useless,
contempered it with vinegar. That the Britons left any, some wonder,
since their money was iron and iron rings before Cæsar; and those of
after-stamp by permission, and but small in bulk and bigness. That so
few of the Saxons remain, because, overcome by succeeding conquerors
upon the place, their coins, by degrees, passed into other stamps and
the marks of after-ages.

Than the time of these urns deposited, or precise antiquity of these
relicks, nothing of more uncertainty; for since the lieutenant of
Claudius seems to have made the first progress into these parts, since
Boadicea was overthrown by the forces of Nero, and Agricola put a
full end to these conquests, it is not probable the country was fully
garrisoned or planted before; and, therefore, however these urns might
be of later date, not likely of higher antiquity.

And the succeeding emperors desisted not from their conquests in these
and other parts, as testified by history and medal-inscription yet
extant: the province of Britain, in so divided a distance from Rome,
beholding the faces of many imperial persons, and in large account;
no fewer than Cæsar, Claudius, Britannicus, Vespasian, Titus, Adrian,
Severus, Commodus, Geta, and Caracalla.

A great obscurity herein, because no medal or emperor’s coin enclosed,
which might denote the date of their interments; observable in many
urns, and found in those of Spitalfields, by London, which contained
the coins of Claudius, Vespasian, Commodus, Antoninus, attended with
lacrymatories, lamps, bottles of liquor, and other appurtenances of
affectionate superstition, which in these rural interments were wanting.

Some uncertainty there is from the period or term of burning, or the
cessation of that practice. Macrobius affirmeth it was disused in his
days; but most agree, though without authentic record, that it ceased
with the Antonini,--most safely to be understood after the reign of
those emperors which assumed the name of Antoninus, extending unto
Heliogabalus. Not strictly after Marcus; for about fifty years later,
we find the magnificent burning and consecration of Servus; and, if
we so fix this period or cessation, these urns will challenge above
thirteen hundred years.

But whether this practice was only then left by emperors and great
persons, or generally about Rome, and not in other provinces, we hold
no authentic account; for after Tertullian, in the days of Minucius,
it was obviously objected upon Christians, that they condemned the
practice of burning.[AN] And we find a passage in Sidonius, which
asserteth that practice in France unto a lower account. And, perhaps,
not fully disused till Christianity fully established, which gave the
final extinction to these sepulchral bonfires.

[AN] “_Execrantur rogos, et damnant ignium sepulturam._”--_Min. in Oct._

Whether they were the bones of men, or women, or children, no authentic
decision from ancient custom in distinct places of burial. Although not
improbably conjectured, that the double sepulture, or burying-place of
Abraham, had in it such intention. But from exility of bones, thinness
of skulls, smallness of teeth, ribs, and thigh-bones, not improbable
that many thereof were persons of minor age, or woman. Confirmable also
from things contained in them. In most were found substances resembling
combs, plates like boxes, fastened with iron pins, and handsomely
overwrought like the necks or bridges of musical instruments; long
brass plates overwrought like the handles of neat implements; brazen
nippers, to pull away hair; and in one a kind of opal, yet maintaining
a bluish colour.

Now that they accustomed to burn or bury with them, things wherein
they excelled, delighted, or which were dear unto them, either as
farewells unto all pleasure, or vain apprehension that they might use
them in the other world, is testified by all antiquity, observable
from the gem or beryl ring upon the finger of Cynthia, the mistress of
Propertius, when after her funeral pyre her ghost appeared unto him;
and notably illustrated from the contents of that Roman urn preserved
by Cardinal Farnese, wherein besides great number of gems with heads
of gods and goddesses, were found an ape of agath, a grasshopper, an
elephant of amber, a crystal ball, three glasses, two spoons, and
six nuts of crystal; and beyond the content of urns, in the monument
of Childerick the first, and fourth king from Pharamond, casually
discovered three years past at Tournay, restoring unto the world much
gold richly adorning his sword, two hundred rubies, many hundred
imperial coins, three hundred golden bees, the bones and horse-shoes of
his horse interred with him, according to the barbarous magnificence
of those days in their sepulchral obsequies. Although, if we steer by
the conjecture of many a Septuagint expression, some trace thereof may
be found even with the ancient Hebrews, not only from the sepulchral
treasure of David, but the circumcision knives which Joshua also buried.

Some men, considering the contents of these urns, lasting pieces and
toys included in them, and the custom of burning with many other
nations, might somewhat doubt whether all urns found among us, were
properly Roman relicks, or some not belonging unto our British, Saxon,
or Danish forefathers.

In the form of burial among the ancient Britons, the large discourses
of Cæsar, Tacitus, and Strabo are silent. For the discovery whereof,
with other particulars, we much deplore the loss of that letter which
Cicero expected or received from his brother Quintus, as a resolution
of British customs; or the account which might have been made by
Scribonius Largus, the physician, accompanying the Emperor Claudius,
who might have also discovered that frugal bit of the old Britons,
which in the bigness of a bean could satisfy their thirst and hunger.

But that the Druids and ruling priests used to burn and bury, is
expressed by Pomponius; that Bellinus, the brother of Brennus, and King
of the Britons, was burnt, is acknowledged by Polydorus, as also by
Amandus Zierexensis in _Historia_ and Pineda in his _Universa Historia_
(Spanish). That they held that practice in Gallia, Cæsar expressly
delivereth. Whether the Britons (probably descended from them, of like
religion, language, and manners) did not sometimes make use of burning,
or whether at least such as were after civilized unto the Roman life
and manners, conformed not unto this practice, we have no historical
assertion or denial. But since, from the account of Tacitus, the Romans
early wrought so much civility upon the British stock, that they
brought them to build temples, to wear the gown, and study the Roman
laws and language, that they conformed also unto their religious rites
and customs in burials, seems no improbable conjecture.

That burning the dead was used in Sarmatia is affirmed by Gaguinus;
that the Sueons and Gathlanders used to burn their princes and great
persons, is delivered by Saxo and Olaus; that this was the old German
practice, is also asserted by Tacitus. And though we are bare in
historical particulars of such obsequies in this island, or that the
Saxons, Jutes, and Angles burnt their dead, yet came they from parts
where ’twas of ancient practice; the Germans using it, from whom they
were descended. And even in Jutland and Sleswick in Anglia Cymbrica,
urns with bones were found not many years before us.

But the Danish and northern nations have raised an era or point of
compute from their custom of burning their dead: some deriving it from
Unguinus, some from Frotho the great, who ordained by law, that princes
and chief commanders should be committed unto the fire, though the
common sort had the common grave interment. So Starkatterus, that old
hero, was burnt, and Ringo royally burnt the body of Harold the king
slain by him.

What time this custom generally expired in that nation, we discern no
assured period; whether it ceased before Christianity, or upon their
conversion, by Ausgurius the Gaul, in the time of Ludovicus Pius, the
son of Charles the Great, according to good computes; or whether it
might not be used by some persons, while for an hundred and eighty
years Paganism and Christianity were promiscuously embraced among
them, there is no assured conclusion. About which times the Danes were
busy in England, and particularly infested this country; where many
castles and strongholds were built by them, or against them, and great
number of names and families still derived from them. But since this
custom was probably disused before their invasion or conquest, and the
Romans confessedly practised the same since their possession of this
island, the most assured account will fall upon the Romans, or Britons
Romanized.

However, certain it is, that urns conceived of no Roman original, are
often digged up both in Norway and Denmark, handsomely described, and
graphically represented by the learned physician Wormius. And in some
parts of Denmark in no ordinary number, as stands delivered by authors
exactly describing those countries. And they contained not only bones,
but many other substances in them, as knives, pieces of iron, brass,
and wood, and one of Norway a brass gilded jew’s-harp.

Nor were they confused or careless in disposing the noblest sort,
while they placed large stones in circle about the urns or bodies
which they interred: somewhat answerable unto the monument of Rollrich
stones in England, or sepulchral monument probably erected by Rollo,
who after conquered Normandy; where ’tis not improbable somewhat might
be discovered. Meanwhile to what nation or person belonged that large
urn found at Ashbury,[AO] containing mighty bones, and a buckler; what
those large urns found at Little Massingham;[AP] or why the Anglesea
urns are placed with their mouths downward, remains yet undiscovered.

[AO] In Cheshire.

[AP] In Norfolk.


