CHAPTER V.

Now since these dead bones have already outlasted the living ones of
Methuselah, and in a yard underground, and thin walls of clay, outworn
all the strong and specious buildings above it; and quietly rested
under the drums and tramplings of three conquests: what prince can
promise such diuturnity unto his relicks, or might not gladly say,

    _Sic ego componi versus in ossa velim?_[BP]

[BP] _Tibullus_, lib. iii. el. 2, 26.

Time, which antiquates antiquities, and hath an art to make dust of all
things, hath yet spared these minor monuments.

In vain we hope to be known by open and visible conservatories, when
to be unknown was the means of their continuation, and obscurity their
protection. If they died by violent hands, and were thrust into their
urns, these bones become considerable, and some old philosophers would
honour them, whose souls they conceived most pure, which were thus
snatched from their bodies, and to retain a stronger propension unto
them; whereas they weariedly left a languishing corpse and with faint
desires of re-union. If they fell by long and aged decay, yet wrapt
up in the bundle of time, they fall into indistinction, and make but
one blot with infants. If we begin to die when we live, and long life
be but a prolongation of death, our life is a sad composition; we
live with death, and die not in a moment. How many pulses made up the
life of Methuselah, were work for Archimedes: common counters sum up
the life of Moses his man. Our days become considerable, like petty
sums, by minute accumulations: where numerous fractions make up but
small round numbers; and our days of a span long, make not one little
finger.[BQ]

[BQ] According to the ancient arithmetick of the hand, wherein
the little finger of the right hand contracted, signified an
hundred.--_Pierius in Hieroglyph._

If the nearness of our last necessity brought a nearer conformity
into it, there were a happiness in hoary hairs, and no calamity in
half-senses. But the long habit of living indisposeth us for dying;
when avarice makes us the sport of death, when even David grew
politickly cruel, and Solomon could hardly be said to be the wisest of
men. But many are too early old, and before the date of age. Adversity
stretcheth our days, misery makes Alcmena’s nights,[BR] and time hath
no wings unto it. But the most tedious being is that which can unwish
itself, content to be nothing, or never to have been, which was beyond
the malcontent of Job, who cursed not the day of his life, but his
nativity; content to have so far been, as to have a title to future
being, although he had lived here but in an hidden state of life, and
as it were an abortion.

[BR] One night as long as three.

What song the Syrens sang, or what name Achilles assumed when he hid
himself among women, though puzzling questions,[BS] are not beyond
all conjecture. What time the persons of these ossuaries entered the
famous nations of the dead, and slept with princes and counsellors,
might admit a wide solution. But who were the proprietaries of
these bones, or what bodies these ashes made up, were a question
above antiquarism; not to be resolved by man, nor easily perhaps by
spirits, except we consult the provincial guardians, or tutelary
observators. Had they made as good provision for their names, as they
have done for their relicks, they had not so grossly erred in the
art of perpetuation. But to subsist in bones, and be but pyramidally
extant, is a fallacy in duration. Vain ashes which in the oblivion
of names, persons, times, and sexes, have found unto themselves a
fruitless continuation, and only arise unto late posterity, as emblems
of mortal vanities, antidotes against pride, vain-glory, and madding
vices. Pagan vain-glories which thought the world might last for ever,
had encouragement for ambition; and, finding no _atropos_ unto the
immortality of their names, were never dampt with the necessity of
oblivion. Even old ambitions had the advantage of ours, in the attempts
of their vain-glories, who acting early, and before the probable
meridian of time, have by this time found great accomplishment of
their designs, whereby the ancient heroes have already outlasted their
monuments and mechanical preservations. But in this latter scene of
time, we cannot expect such mummies unto our memories, when ambition
may fear the prophecy of Elias,[BT] and Charles the Fifth can never
hope to live within two Methuselahs of Hector.[BU]

[BS] The puzzling questions of Tiberius unto grammarians.--_Marcel._
_Donatus in Suet._

[BT] That the world may last but six thousand years.

[BU] Hector’s fame outlasting above two lives of Methuselah before that
famous prince was extant.

And therefore, restless inquietude for the diuturnity of our memories
unto the present considerations seems a vanity almost out of date, and
superannuated piece of folly. We cannot hope to live so long in our
names, as some have done in their persons. One face of Janus holds no
proportion unto the other. ’Tis too late to be ambitious. The great
mutations of the world are acted, or time may be too short for our
designs. To extend our memories by monuments, whose death we daily
pray for, and whose duration we cannot hope, without injury to our
expectations in the advent of the last day, were a contradiction to
our beliefs. We whose generations are ordained in this setting part of
time, are providentially taken off from such imaginations; and, being
necessitated to eye the remaining particle of futurity, are naturally
constituted unto thoughts of the next world, and cannot excusably
decline the consideration of that duration, which maketh pyramids
pillars of snow, and all that’s past a moment.

Circles and right lines limit and close all bodies, and the mortal
right-lined circle[BV] must conclude and shut up all. There is no
antidote against the opium of time, which temporally considereth all
things: our fathers find their graves in our short memories, and sadly
tell us how we may be buried in our survivors. Gravestones tell truth
scarce forty years. Generations pass while some trees stand, and old
families last not three oaks. To be read by bare inscriptions like
many in Gruter, to hope for eternity by enigmatical epithets or first
letters of our names, to be studied by antiquaries, who we were, and
have new names given us like many of the mummies, are cold consolations
unto the students of perpetuity, even by everlasting languages.

[BV] The character of death.

To be content that times to come should only know there was such a
man, not caring whether they knew more of him, was a frigid ambition
in Cardan;[BW] disparaging his horoscopal inclination and judgment
of himself. Who cares to subsist like Hippocrates’s patients, or
Achilles’s horses in Homer, under naked nominations, without deserts
and noble acts, which are the balsam of our memories, the _entelechia_
and soul of our subsistences? To be nameless in worthy deeds, exceeds
an infamous history. The Canaanitish woman lives more happily without a
name, than Herodias with one. And who had not rather have been the good
thief, than Pilate?

[BW] “Cuperem notum esse quod sim non opto ut sciatur qualis sim.”

But the iniquity of oblivion blindly scattereth her poppy, and deals
with the memory of men without distinction to merit of perpetuity.
Who can but pity the founder of the pyramids? Herostratus lives that
burnt the temple of Diana, he is almost lost that built it. Time hath
spared the epitaph of Adrian’s horse, confounded that of himself. In
vain we compute our felicities by the advantage of our good names,
since bad have equal durations, and Thersites is like to live as long
as Agamemnon without the favour of the everlasting register. Who
knows whether the best of men be known, or whether there be not more
remarkable persons forgot, than any that stand remembered in the known
account of time? The first man had been as unknown as the last, and
Methuselah’s long life had been his only chronicle.

Oblivion is not to be hired. The greater part must be content to be as
though they had not been, to be found in the register of God, not in
the record of man. Twenty-seven names make up the first story and the
recorded names ever since contain not one living century. The number
of the dead long exceedeth all that shall live. The night of time far
surpasseth the day, and who knows when was the equinox? Every hour
adds unto that current arithmetick, which scarce stands one moment.
And since death must be the _Lucina_ of life, and even Pagans[108]
could doubt, whether thus to live were to die; since our longest sun
sets at right descensions, and makes but winter arches, and therefore
it cannot be long before we lie down in darkness, and have our light
in ashes; since the brother of death daily haunts us with dying
mementoes, and time that grows old in itself, bids us hope no long
duration;--diuturnity is a dream and folly of expectation.

Darkness and light divide the course of time, and oblivion shares
with memory a great part even of our living beings; we slightly
remember our felicities, and the smartest strokes of affliction leave
but short smart upon us. Sense endureth no extremities, and sorrows
destroy us or themselves. To weep into stones are fables. Afflictions
induce callosities; miseries are slippery, or fall like snow upon
us, which notwithstanding is no unhappy stupidity. To be ignorant of
evils to come, and forgetful of evils past, is a merciful provision
in nature, whereby we digest the mixture of our few and evil days,
and, our delivered senses not relapsing into cutting remembrances, our
sorrows are not kept raw by the edge of repetitions. A great part of
antiquity contented their hopes of subsistency with a transmigration
of their souls,--a good way to continue their memories, while having
the advantage of plural successions, they could not but act something
remarkable in such variety of beings, and enjoying the fame of their
passed selves, make accumulation of glory unto their last durations.
Others, rather than be lost in the uncomfortable night of nothing,
were content to recede into the common being, and make one particle of
the public soul of all things, which was no more than to return into
their unknown and divine original again. Egyptian ingenuity was more
unsatisfied, contriving their bodies in sweet consistences, to attend
the return of their souls. But all is vanity, feeding the wind, and
folly. Egyptian mummies, which Cambyses or time hath spared, avarice
now consumeth. Mummy is become merchandise, Mizraim, cures wounds, and
Pharaoh is sold for balsams.

In vain do individuals hope for immortality, or any patent from
oblivion, in preservations below the moon; men have been deceived even
in their flatteries, above the sun, and studied conceits to perpetuate
their names in heaven. The various cosmography of that part hath
already varied the names of contrived constellations; Nimrod is lost
in Orion, and Osyris in the Dog-star. While we look for incorruption
in the heavens, we find that they are but like the earth;--durable in
their main bodies, alterable in their parts; whereof, beside comets and
new stars, perspectives begin to tell tales, and the spots that wander
about the sun, with Phaeton’s favour, would make clear conviction.

There is nothing strictly immortal, but immortality. Whatever hath no
beginning, may be confident of no end;--all others have a dependent
being and within the reach of destruction;--which is the peculiar of
that necessary essence that cannot destroy itself;--and the highest
strain of omnipotency, to be so powerfully constituted as not to
suffer even from the power of itself. But the sufficiency of Christian
immortality frustrates all earthly glory, and the quality of either
state after death, makes a folly of posthumous memory. God who can
only destroy our souls, and hath assured our resurrection, either
of our bodies or names hath directly promised no duration. Wherein
there is so much of chance, that the boldest expectants have found
unhappy frustration; and to hold long subsistence, seems but a scape
in oblivion. But man is a noble animal, splendid in ashes, and pompous
in the grave, solemnizing nativities and deaths with equal lustre, nor
omitting ceremonies of bravery in the infamy of his nature.

Life is a pure flame, and we live by an invisible sun within us. A
small fire sufficeth for life, great flames seemed too little after
death, while men vainly affected precious pyres, and to burn like
Sardanapalus; but the wisdom of funeral laws found the folly of
prodigal blazes and reduced undoing fires unto the rule of sober
obsequies, wherein few could be so mean as not to provide wood, pitch,
a mourner, and an urn.

Five languages[109] secured not the epitaph of Gordianus. The man of
God lives longer without a tomb than any by one, invisibly interred
by angels, and adjudged to obscurity, though not without some marks
directing human discovery. Enoch and Elias, without either tomb or
burial, in an anomalous state of being, are the great examples of
perpetuity, in their long and living memory, in strict account being
still on this side death, and having a late part yet to act upon this
stage of earth. If in the decretory term of the world we shall not all
die but be changed, according to received translation, the last day
will make but few graves; at least quick resurrections will anticipate
lasting sepultures. Some graves will be opened before they be quite
closed, and Lazarus be no wonder. When many that feared to die, shall
groan that they can die but once, the dismal state is the second and
living death, when life puts despair on the damned; when men shall wish
the coverings of mountains, not of monuments, and annihilations shall
be courted.

While some have studied monuments, others have studiously declined
them, and some have been so vainly boisterous, that they durst not
acknowledge their graves; wherein Alaricus seems most subtle, who
had a river turned to hide his bones at the bottom. Even Sylla, that
thought himself safe in his urn, could not prevent revenging tongues,
and stones thrown at his monument. Happy are they whom privacy makes
innocent, who deal so with men in this world, that they are not afraid
to meet them in the next; who, when they die, make no commotion among
the dead, and are not touched with that poetical taunt of Isaiah.[BX]

[BX] Isa. xiv. 16.

Pyramids, arches, obelisks, were but the irregularities of vain-glory,
and wild enormities of ancient magnanimity. But the most magnanimous
resolution rests in the Christian religion, which trampleth upon pride
and sits on the neck of ambition, humbly pursuing that infallible
perpetuity, unto which all others must diminish their diameters, and be
poorly seen in angles of contingency.[BY]

[BY] The least of angles.

Pious spirits who passed their days in raptures of futurity, made
little more of this world, than the world that was before it, while
they lay obscure in the chaos of pre-ordination, and night of their
fore-beings. And if any have been so happy as truly to understand
Christian annihilation, ecstasies, exolution, liquefaction,
transformation, the kiss of the spouse, gustation of God, and
ingression into the divine shadow, they have already had an handsome
anticipation of heaven; the glory of the world is surely over, and the
earth in ashes unto them.

To subsist in lasting monuments, to live in their productions, to exist
in their names and predicament of chimeras, was large satisfaction unto
old expectations, and made one part of their Elysiums. But all this is
nothing in the metaphysicks of true belief. To live indeed, is to be
again ourselves, which being not only an hope, but an evidence in noble
believers, ’tis all one to lie in St Innocent’s[BZ] church-yard as in
the sands of Egypt. Ready to be anything, in the ecstasy of being ever,
and as content with six foot as the _moles_ of Adrianus.[CA]

[BZ] In Paris, where bodies soon consume.

[CA] A stately mausoleum or sepulchral pile, built by Adrianus in Rome,
where now standeth the castle of St Angelo.

    ----“_Tabésne cadavera solvat,
    An rogus, haud refert._”--LUCAN. viii. 809.




A LETTER TO A FRIEND,

UPON OCCASION OF THE DEATH OF HIS INTIMATE FRIEND.




LETTER TO A FRIEND.


GIVE me leave to wonder that news of this nature should have such heavy
wings that you should hear so little concerning your dearest friend,
and that I must make that unwilling repetition to tell you “_ad portam
rigidos calces extendit_,” that he is dead and buried, and by this time
no puny among the mighty nations of the dead; for though he left this
world not very many days past, yet every hour you know largely addeth
unto that dark society; and considering the incessant mortality of
mankind, you cannot conceive there dieth in the whole earth so few as a
thousand an hour.

Although at this distance you had no early account or particular of his
death, yet your affection may cease to wonder that you had not some
secret sense or intimation thereof by dreams, thoughtful whisperings,
mercurisms, airy nuncios or sympathetical insinuations, which many
seem to have had at the death of their dearest friends: for since
we find in that famous story, that spirits themselves were fain to
tell their fellows at a distance that the great Antonio was dead, we
have a sufficient excuse for our ignorance in such particulars, and
must rest content with the common road, and Appian way of knowledge
by information. Though the uncertainty of the end of this world hath
confounded all human predictions; yet they who shall live to see the
sun and moon darkened, and the stars to fall from heaven, will hardly
be deceived in the advent of the last day; and therefore strange
it is, that the common fallacy of consumptive persons who feel not
themselves dying, and therefore still hope to live, should also reach
their friends in perfect health and judgment;--that you should be so
little acquainted with Plautus’s sick complexion, or that almost an
Hippocratical face should not alarum you to higher fears, or rather
despair, of his continuation in such an emaciated state, wherein
medical predictions fail not, as sometimes in acute diseases, and
wherein ’tis as dangerous to be sentenced by a physician as a judge.

Upon my first visit I was bold to tell them who had not let fall all
hopes of his recovery, that in my sad opinion he was not like to behold
a grasshopper,[110] much less to pluck another fig; and in no long time
after seemed to discover that odd mortal symptom in him not mentioned
by Hippocrates, that is, to lose his own face, and look like some of
his near relations; for he maintained not his proper countenance, but
looked like his uncle, the lines of whose face lay deep and invisible
in his healthful visage before: for as from our beginning we run
through variety of looks, before we come to consistent and settled
faces; so before our end, by sick and languishing alterations, we put
on new visages: and in our retreat to earth, may fall upon such looks
which from community of seminal originals were before latent in us.

He was fruitlessly put in hope of advantage by change of air, and
imbibing the pure aerial nitre of these parts; and therefore, being
so far spent, he quickly found Sardinia in Tivoli,[CB] and the
most healthful air of little effect, where death had set her broad
arrow;[CC] for he lived not unto the middle of May, and confirmed the
observation of Hippocrates of that mortal time of the year when the
leaves of the fig-tree resemble a daw’s claw. He is happily seated
who lives in places whose air, earth, and water, promote not the
infirmities of his weaker parts, or is early removed into regions that
correct them. He that is tabidly[111] inclined, were unwise to pass his
days in Portugal: cholical persons will find little comfort in Austria
or Vienna: he that is weak-legged must not be in love with Rome, nor
an infirm head with Venice or Paris. Death hath not only particular
stars in heaven, but malevolent places on earth, which single out
our infirmities, and strike at our weaker parts; in which concern,
passager and migrant birds have the great advantages, who are naturally
constituted for distant habitations, whom no seas nor places limit,
but in their appointed seasons will visit us from Greenland and Mount
Atlas, and, as some think, even from the Antipodes.[CD]

[CB] “Cum mors venerit, in medio Tibure Sardinia est.”

[CC] In the king’s forests they set the figure of a broad arrow upon
trees that are to be cut down.

[CD] _Bellonius de Avibus._

Though we could not have his life, yet we missed not our desires in his
soft departure, which was scarce an expiration; and his end not unlike
his beginning, when the salient point scarce affords a sensible motion,
and his departure so like unto sleep, that he scarce needed the civil
ceremony of closing his eyes; contrary unto the common way, wherein
death draws up, sleep lets fall the eyelids. With what strife and pains
we came into the world we know not; but ’tis commonly no easy matter
to get out of it: yet if it could be made out, that such who have easy
nativities have commonly hard deaths, and contrarily; his departure was
so easy, that we might justly suspect his birth was of another nature,
and that some Juno sat cross-legged at his nativity.

Besides his soft death, the incurable state of his disease might
somewhat extenuate your sorrow, who know that monsters but seldom
happen, miracles more rarely in physick.[CE] _Angelus Victorius_ gives
a serious account of a consumptive, hectical, phthisical woman, who
was suddenly cured by the intercession of Ignatius. We read not of any
in Scripture who in this case applied unto our Saviour, though some
may be contained in that large expression, that he went about Galilee
healing all manner of sickness and all manner of diseases.[CF] Amulets,
spells, sigils, and incantations, practised in other diseases, are
seldom pretended in this; and we find no sigil in the Archidoxis of
Paracelsus to cure an extreme consumption or marasmus, which, if other
diseases fail, will put a period unto long livers, and at last makes
dust of all. And therefore the Stoics could not but think that the
fiery principle would wear out all the rest, and at last make an end of
the world, which notwithstanding without such a lingering period the
Creator may effect at his pleasure: and to make an end of all things on
earth, and our planetical system of the world, he need but put out the
sun.

[CE] “Monstra contingunt in medicina.” _Hippoc._--“Strange and rare
escapes there happen sometimes in physick.”

[CF] Matt. iv. 23.

I was not so curious to entitle the stars unto any concern of his
death, yet could not but take notice that he died when the moon was in
motion from the meridian; at which time an old Italian long ago would
persuade me that the greatest part of men died: but herein I confess
I could never satisfy my curiosity; although from the time of tides
in places upon or near the sea, there may be considerable deductions;
and Pliny[CG] hath an odd and remarkable passage concerning the death
of men and animals upon the recess or ebb of the sea. However, certain
it is, he died in the dead and deep part of the night, when Nox might
be most apprehensibly said to be the daughter of Chaos, the mother of
sleep and death, according to old genealogy; and so went out of this
world about that hour when our blessed Saviour entered it, and about
what time many conceive he will return again unto it. Cardan[112] hath
a peculiar and no hard observation from a man’s hand to know whether he
was born in the day or night, which I confess holdeth in my own. And
Scaliger[113] to that purpose hath another from the tip of the ear:[CH]
most men are begotten in the night, animals in the day; but whether
more persons have been born in the night or day, were a curiosity
undecidable, though more have perished by violent deaths in the day;
yet in natural dissolutions both times may hold an indifferency, at
least but contingent inequality. The whole course of time runs out
in the nativity and death of things; which whether they happen by
succession or coincidence, are best computed by the natural, not
artificial day.

[CG] “Aristoteles nullum animal nisi æstu recedente expirare affirmat;
observatum id multum in Gallico Oceano et duntaxat in homine
compertum,” lib. 2, cap. 101.

[CH] “Auris pars pendula lobus dicitur, non omnibus ea pars, est
auribus; non enim iis qui noctu sunt, sed qui interdiu, maxima ex
parte.”--_Com. in Aristot. de Animal._ lib. 1.


That Charles the Fifth[114] was crowned upon the day of his nativity,
it being in his own power so to order it, makes no singular
animadversion: but that he should also take King Francis[115] prisoner
upon that day, was an unexpected coincidence, which made the same
remarkable. Antipater, who had an anniversary feast every year upon
his birth-day, needed no astrological revolution to know what day he
should die on. When the fixed stars have made a revolution unto the
points from whence they first set out, some of the ancients thought
the world would have an end; which was a kind of dying upon the day of
its nativity. Now the disease prevailing and swiftly advancing about
the time of his nativity, some were of opinion that he would leave
the world on the day he entered into it; but this being a lingering
disease, and creeping softly on, nothing critical was found or
expected, and he died not before fifteen days after. Nothing is more
common with infants than to die on the day of their nativity, to behold
the worldly hours, and but the fractions thereof; and even to perish
before their nativity in the hidden world of the womb, and before
their good angel is conceived to undertake them. But in persons who
outlive many years, and when there are no less than three hundred and
sixty-five days to determine their lives in every year; that the first
day should make the last, that the tail of the snake should return into
its mouth precisely at that time, and they should wind up upon the day
of their nativity, is indeed a remarkable coincidence, which, though
astrology hath taken witty pains to salve, yet hath it been very wary
in making predictions of it.[CI]

[CI] According to the Egyptian hieroglyphic.

In this consumptive condition and remarkable extenuation, he came to
be almost half himself, and left a great part behind him, which he
carried not to the grave. And though that story of Duke John Ernestus
Mansfield[116][CJ] be not so easily swallowed, that at his death his
heart was found not to be so big as a nut; yet if the bones of a good
skeleton weigh little more than twenty pounds, his inwards and flesh
remaining could make no bouffage,[117] but a light bit for the grave.
I never more lively beheld the starved characters of Dante[CK] in any
living face; an _aruspex_ might have read a lecture upon him without
exenteration, his flesh being so consumed, that he might, in a manner,
have discerned his bowels without opening of him; so that to be
carried, _sexta cervice_[CL] to the grave, was but a civil unnecessity;
and the complements of the coffin might outweigh the subject of it.

[CJ] Turkish history.

[CK] In the poet Dante’s description.

[CL] i.e. “by six persons.”

_Omnibonus Ferrarius_ in mortal dysenteries of children looks for a
spot behind the ear; in consumptive diseases some eye the complexion of
moles; Cardan eagerly views the nails, some the lines of the hand, the
thenar or muscle of the thumb; some are so curious as to observe the
depth of the throat-pit, how the proportion varieth of the small of the
legs unto the calf, or the compass of the neck unto the circumference
of the head; but all these, with many more, were so drowned in a
mortal visage, and last face of Hippocrates, that a weak physiognomist
might say at first eye, this was a face of earth, and that _Morta_[CM]
had set her hard seal upon his temples, easily perceiving what
_caricatura_[CN] draughts death makes upon pined faces, and unto what
an unknown degree a man may live backward.

[CM] Morta, the deity of death or fate.

[CN] When men’s faces are drawn with resemblance to some other animals,
the Italians call it, to be drawn _in caricatura_.

Though the beard be only made a distinction of sex, and sign of
masculine heat by _Ulmus_,[CO] yet the precocity and early growth
thereof in him, was not to be liked in reference unto long life.
Lewis, that virtuous but unfortunate king of Hungary, who lost his
life at the battle of Mohacz,[118] was said to be born without a skin,
to have bearded at fifteen, and to have shown some grey hairs about
twenty; from whence the diviners conjectured that he would be spoiled
of his kingdom, and have but a short life; but hairs make fallible
predictions, and many temples early grey have outlived the psalmist’s
period.[CP] Hairs which have most amused me have not been in the face
or head, but on the back, and not in men but children, as I long ago
observed in that endemial distemper of children in Languedoc, called
the _morgellons_,[CQ] wherein they critically break out with harsh
hairs on their backs, which takes off the unquiet symptoms of the
disease, and delivers them from coughs and convulsions.

[CO] _Ulmus de usu barbæ humanæ._

[CP] The life of man is threescore and ten.

[CQ] See _Picotus de Rheumatismo_.

The Egyptian mummies that I have seen, have had their mouths open, and
somewhat gaping, which affordeth a good opportunity to view and observe
their teeth, wherein ’tis not easy to find any wanting or decayed; and
therefore in Egypt, where one man practised but one operation, or the
diseases but of single parts, it must needs be a barren profession to
confine unto that of drawing of teeth, and to have been little better
than tooth-drawer unto King Pyrrhus,[CR] who had but two in his head.

[CR] His upper jaw being solid, and without distinct rows of teeth.

How the banyans of India maintain the integrity of those parts, I find
not particularly observed; who notwithstanding have an advantage of
their preservation by abstaining from all flesh, and employing their
teeth in such food unto which they may seem at first framed, from their
figure and conformation; but sharp and corroding rheums had so early
mouldered these rocks and hardest parts of his fabric, that a man might
well conceive that his years were never like to double or twice tell
over his teeth.[CS] Corruption had dealt more severely with them than
sepulchral fires and smart flames with those of burnt bodies of old;
for in the burnt fragments of urns which I have inquired into, although
I seem to find few incisors or shearers, yet the dog teeth and grinders
do notably resist those fires.

[CS] Twice tell over his teeth, never live to threescore years.

In the years of his childhood he had languished under the disease of
his country, the rickets; after which, notwithstanding many have become
strong and active men; but whether any have attained unto very great
years, the disease is scarce so old as to afford good observation.
Whether the children of the English plantations be subject unto the
same infirmity, may be worth the observing. Whether lameness and
halting do still increase among the inhabitants of Rovigno in Istria,
I know not; yet scarce twenty years ago Monsieur du Loyr observed
that a third part of that people halted; but too certain it is, that
the rickets increaseth among us; the small-pox grows more pernicious
than the great; the king’s purse knows that the king’s evil grows more
common. Quartan agues are become no strangers in Ireland; more common
and mortal in England; and though the ancients gave that disease[CT]
very good words, yet now that bell[CU] makes no strange sound which
rings out for the effects thereof.

[CT] Ασφαλέστατος καὶ ῥήϊστος, securissima et facillima.--_Hippoc._

[CU] Pro febre quartana raro sonat campana.

Some think there were few consumptions in the old world, when men lived
much upon milk; and that the ancient inhabitants of this island were
less troubled with coughs when they went naked and slept in caves and
woods, than men now in chambers and feather-beds. Plato will tell us,
that there was no such disease as a catarrh in Homer’s time, and that
it was but new in Greece in his age. Polydore Virgil delivereth that
pleurisies were rare in England, who lived but in the days of Henry the
Eighth. Some will allow no diseases to be new, others think that many
old ones are ceased: and that such which are esteemed new, will have
but their time: however, the mercy of God hath scattered the great heap
of diseases, and not loaded any one country with all: some may be new
in one country which have been old in another. New discoveries of the
earth discover new diseases: for besides the common swarm, there are
endemial and local infirmities proper unto certain regions, which in
the whole earth make no small number: and if Asia, Africa, and America,
should bring in their list, Pandora’s box would swell, and there must
be a strange pathology.

Most men expected to find a consumed kell,[119] empty and bladder-like
guts, livid and marbled lungs, and a withered pericardium in this
exsuccous corpse: but some seemed too much to wonder that two lobes of
his lungs adhered unto his side; for the like I have often found in
bodies of no suspected consumptions or difficulty of respiration. And
the same more often happeneth in men than other animals: and some think
in women than in men: but the most remarkable I have met with, was in a
man, after a cough of almost fifty years, in whom all the lobes adhered
unto the pleura, and each lobe unto another; who having also been much
troubled with the gout, brake the rule of Cardan,[CV] and died of the
stone in the bladder. Aristotle makes a query, why some animals cough,
as man; some not, as oxen. If coughing be taken as it consisteth of
a natural and voluntary motion, including expectoration and spitting
out, it may be as proper unto man as bleeding at the nose; otherwise we
find that Vegetius and rural writers have not left so many medicines
in vain against the coughs of cattle; and men who perish by coughs die
the death of sheep, cats, and lions: and though birds have no midriff,
yet we meet with divers remedies in Arrianus against the coughs of
hawks. And though it might be thought that all animals who have lungs
do cough; yet in cataceous fishes, who have large and strong lungs,
the same is not observed; nor yet in oviparous quadrupeds: and in the
greatest thereof, the crocodile, although we read much of their tears,
we find nothing of that motion.

[CV] Cardan in his _Encomium Podagrae_ reckoneth this among the _Dona
Podagræ_, that they are delivered thereby from the phthisis and stone
in the bladder.

From the thoughts of sleep, when the soul was conceived nearest unto
divinity, the ancients erected an art of divination, wherein while
they too widely expatiated in loose and in consequent conjectures,
Hippocrates[CW] wisely considered dreams as they presaged alterations
in the body, and so afforded hints toward the preservation of health,
and prevention of diseases; and therein was so serious as to advise
alteration of diet, exercise, sweating, bathing, and vomiting; and also
so religious as to order prayers and supplications unto respective
deities, in good dreams unto Sol, Jupiter cœlestis, Jupiter opulentus,
Minerva, Mercurius, and Apollo; in bad, unto Tellus and the heroes.

[CW] Hippoc, _de Insomniis_

And therefore I could not but notice how his female friends were
irrationally curious so strictly to examine his dreams, and in this
low state to hope for the phantasms of health. He was now past the
healthful dreams of the sun, moon, and stars, in their clarity and
proper courses. ’Twas too late to dream of flying, of limpid fountains,
smooth waters, white vestments, and fruitful green trees, which are the
visions of healthful sleeps, and at good distance from the grave.

And they were also too deeply dejected that he should dream of his dead
friends, inconsequently divining, that he would not be long from them;
for strange it was not that he should sometimes dream of the dead,
whose thoughts run always upon death; beside, to dream of the dead,
so they appear not in dark habits, and take nothing away from us, in
Hippocrates’ sense was of good signification: for we live by the dead,
and everything is or must be so before it becomes our nourishment. And
Cardan, who dreamed that he discoursed with his dead father in the
moon, made thereof no mortal interpretation; and even to dream that we
are dead, was having a signification of liberty, vacuity from cares,
exemption and freedom from troubles unknown unto the dead.

Some dreams I confess may admit of easy and feminine exposition; he who
dreamed that he could not see his right shoulder, might easily fear
to lose the sight of his right eye; he that before a journey dreamed
that his feet were cut off, had a plain warning not to undertake his
intended journey. But why to dream of lettuce should presage some
ensuing disease, why to eat figs should signify foolish talk, why to
eat eggs great trouble, and to dream of blindness should be so highly
commended, according to the oneirocritical verses of Astrampsychus and
Nicephorus, I shall leave unto your divination.

He was willing to quit the world alone and altogether, leaving no
earnest behind him for corruption or after-grave, having small content
in that common satisfaction to survive or live in another, but amply
satisfied that his disease should die with himself, nor revive in a
posterity to puzzle physic, and make sad mementoes of their parent
hereditary. Leprosy awakes not sometimes before forty, the gout and
stone often later; but consumptive and tabid[CX] roots sprout more
early, and at the fairest make seventeen years of our life doubtful
before that age. They that enter the world with original diseases as
well as sin, have not only common mortality but sick traductions to
destroy them, make commonly short courses, and live not at length
but in figures; so that a sound Cæsarean nativity[CY] may outlast a
natural birth, and a knife may sometimes make way for a more lasting
fruit than a midwife; which makes so few infants now able to endure the
old test of the river,[CZ] and many to have feeble children who could
scarce have been married at Sparta, and those provident states who
studied strong and healthful generations; which happen but contingently
in mere pecuniary matches or marriages made by the candle, wherein
notwithstanding there is little redress to be hoped from an astrologer
or a lawyer, and a good discerning physician were like to prove the
most successful counsellor.

[CX] Tabes maxime contingunt ab anno decimo octavo and trigesi mum
quintum.--_Hippoc._

[CY] A sound child cut out of the body of the mother.

[CZ] Natos ad flumina primum deferimus sævoque gelu dura mus et undis.

Julius Scaliger, who in a sleepless fit of the gout could make two
hundred verses in a night, would have but five[DA] plain words upon his
tomb. And this serious person, though no minor wit, left the poetry of
his epitaph unto others; either unwilling to commend himself, or to be
judged by a distich, and perhaps considering how unhappy great poets
have been in versifying their own epitaphs; wherein Petrarch, Dante,
and Ariosto, have so unhappily failed, that if their tombs should
outlast their works, posterity would find so little of Apollo on them
as to mistake them for Ciceronian poets.

[DA] Julii Cæsaris Scaligeri quod fuit.--_Joseph. Scaliger in vita
patris._

In this deliberate and creeping progress unto the grave, he was
somewhat too young and of too noble a mind, to fall upon that stupid
symptom observable in divers persons near their journey’s end, and
which may be reckoned among the mortal symptoms of their last disease;
that is, to become more narrow-minded, miserable, and tenacious,
unready to part with anything, when they are ready to part with
all, and afraid to want when they have no time to spend; meanwhile
physicians, who know that many are mad but in a single depraved
imagination, and one prevalent decipiency; and that beside and out of
such single deliriums a man may meet with sober actions and good sense
in bedlam; cannot but smile to see the heirs and concerned relations
gratulating themselves on the sober departure of their friends; and
though they behold such mad covetous passages, content to think they
die in good understanding, and in their sober senses.

Avarice, which is not only infidelity, but idolatry, either from
covetous progeny or questuary[120] education, had no root in his
breast, who made good works the expression of his faith, and was big
with desires unto public and lasting charities; and surely where
good wishes and charitable intentions exceed abilities, theorical
beneficency may be more than a dream. They build not castles in the
air who would build churches on earth; and though they leave no such
structures here, may lay good foundations in heaven. In brief, his
life and death were such, that I could not blame them who wished the
like, and almost to have been himself; almost, I say; for though we
may wish the prosperous appurtenances of others, or to be another in
his happy accidents, yet so intrinsical is every man unto himself,
that some doubt may be made, whether any would exchange his being, or
substantially become another man.

He had wisely seen the world at home and abroad, and thereby observed
under what variety men are deluded in the pursuit of that which is not
here to be found. And although he had no opinion of reputed felicities
below, and apprehended men widely out in the estimate of such
happiness, yet his sober contempt of the world wrought no Democratism
or Cynicism, no laughing or snarling at it, as well understanding
there are not felicities in this world to satisfy a serious mind; and
therefore, to soften the stream of our lives, we are fain to take in
the reputed contentations of this world, to unite with the crowd in
their beatitudes, and to make ourselves happy by consortion, opinion,
and co-existimation; for strictly to separate from received and
customary felicities, and to confine unto the rigour of realities,
were to contract the consolation of our beings unto too uncomfortable
circumscriptions.

Not to fear death,[DB] nor desire it, was short of his resolution: to
be dissolved, and be with Christ, was his dying ditty. He conceived
his thread long, in no long course of years, and when he had scarce
outlived the second life of Lazarus;[DC] esteeming it enough to
approach the years of his Saviour, who so ordered his own human state,
as not to be old upon earth.

[DB] Summum nec metuas diem nec optes.

[DC] Who upon some accounts, and tradition, is said to have lived
thirty years after he was raised by our Saviour.--_Baronius._

But to be content with death may be better than to desire it; a
miserable life may make us wish for death, but a virtuous one to rest
in it; which is the advantage of those resolved Christians, who looking
on death not only as the sting, but the period and end of sin, the
horizon and isthmus between this life and a better, and the death of
this world but as a nativity of another, do contentedly submit unto the
common necessity, and envy not Enoch or Elias.

Not to be content with life is the unsatisfactory state of those who
destroy themselves,[DD] who being afraid to live run blindly upon
their own death, which no man fears by experience: and the Stoics had
a notable doctrine to take away the fear thereof; that is, in such
extremities, to desire that which is not to be avoided, and wish what
might be feared; and so made evils voluntary, and to suit with their
own desires, which took off the terror of them.

[DD] In the speech of Vulteius in Lucan, animating his soldiers in a
great struggle to kill one another.--“Decernite letum, et metus omnis
abest, cupias quodcumque necesse est.” “All fear is over, do but
resolve to die, and make your desires meet necessity.”--_Phars._ iv.
486.

But the ancient martyrs were not encouraged by such fallacies; who,
though they feared not death, were afraid to be their own executioners;
and therefore thought it more wisdom to crucify their lusts than their
bodies, to circumcise than stab their hearts, and to mortify than kill
themselves.

His willingness to leave this world about that age, when most men think
they may best enjoy it, though paradoxical unto worldly ears, was
not strange unto mine, who have so often observed, that many, though
old, oft stick fast unto the world, and seem to be drawn like Cacus’s
oxen[121], backward, with great struggling and reluctancy unto the
grave. The long habit of living makes mere men more hardly to part with
life, and all to be nothing, but what is to come. To live at the rate
of the old world, when some could scarce remember themselves young,
may afford no better digested death than a more moderate period. Many
would have thought it an happiness to have had their lot of life in
some notable conjunctures of ages past; but the uncertainty of future
times have tempted few to make a part in ages to come. And surely, he
that hath taken the true altitude of things, and rightly calculated the
degenerate state of this age, is not like to envy those that shall live
in the next, much less three or four hundred years hence, when no man
can comfortably imagine what face this world will carry: and therefore
since every age makes a step unto the end of all things, and the
Scripture affords so hard a character of the last times; quiet minds
will be content with their generations, and rather bless ages past,
than be ambitious of those to come.

Though age had set no seal upon his face, yet a dim eye might clearly
discover fifty in his actions; and therefore, since wisdom is the grey
hair, and an unspotted life old age; although his years come short,
he might have been said to have held up with longer livers, and to
have been Solomon’s[DE] old man. And surely if we deduct all those
days of our life which we might wish unlived, and which abate the
comfort of those we now live; if we reckon up only those days which
God hath accepted of our lives, a life of good years will hardly be a
span long: the son in this sense may outlive the father, and none be
climacterically old. He that early arriveth unto the parts and prudence
of age, is happily old without the uncomfortable attendants of it; and
’tis superfluous to live unto grey hairs, when in precocious temper we
anticipate the virtues of them. In brief, he cannot be accounted young
who outliveth the old man. He that hath early arrived unto the measure
of a perfect stature in Christ, hath already fulfilled the prime and
longest intention of his being; and one day lived after the perfect
rule of piety, is to be preferred before sinning immortality.

[DE] Wisdom, cap. iv.

Although he attained not unto the years of his predecessors, yet he
wanted not those preserving virtues which confirm the thread of weaker
constitutions. _Cautelous_ chastity and _crafty_ sobriety were far from
him; those jewels were _paragon_, without flaw, hair, ice, or cloud in
him; which affords me a hint to proceed in these good wishes, and few
mementoes unto you.

Tread softly and circumspectly in this funambulous[122] track and
narrow path of goodness; pursue virtue virtuously, be sober and
temperate, not to preserve your body in a sufficiency for wanton ends,
not to spare your purse, not to be free from the infamy of common
transgressors that way, and thereby to balance or palliate obscure
and closer vices, nor simply to enjoy health, by all of which you
may leaven good actions, and render virtues disputable, but, in one
word, that you may truly serve God, which every sickness will tell you
you cannot well do without health. The sick man’s sacrifice is but a
lame oblation. Pious treasures, laid up in healthful days, excuse the
defect of sick non-performance; without which we must needs look back
with anxiety upon the last opportunities of health; and may have cause
rather to envy than pity the ends of penitent malefactors, who go with
clear parts unto the last act of their lives, and in the integrity of
their faculties return their spirit unto God that gave it.

Consider whereabouts thou art in Cebe’s[123] table, or that old
philosophical pinax[124] of the life of man; whether thou art still in
the road of uncertainties; whether thou hast yet entered the narrow
gate, got up the hill and asperous way which leadeth unto the house
of sanity; or taken that purifying potion from the hand of sincere
erudition, which may send thee clear and pure away unto a virtuous and
happy life.

In this virtuous voyage let no disappointment cause despondency,
nor difficulty despair. Think not that you are sailing from Lima to
Manilla,[DF] [125] wherein thou mayest tie up the rudder, and sleep
before the wind, but expect rough seas, flaws and contrary blasts; and
’tis well if by many cross tacks and veerings thou arrivest at the
port. Sit not down in the popular seats and common level of virtues,
but endeavour to make them heroical. Offer not only peace-offerings but
holocausts unto God. To serve him singly to serve ourselves were too
partial a piece of piety, not like to place us in the highest mansions
of glory.

[DF] Through the Pacifick Sea with a constant gale from the east.

He that is chaste and continent not to impair his strength or
terrified by contagion will hardly be heroically virtuous. Adjourn
not that virtue until those years when Cato could lend out his wife,
and impotent satyrs write satires against lust, but be chaste in thy
flaming days when Alexander dared not trust his eyes upon the fair
sisters of Darius, and when so many think that there is no other way
but Origen’s.[DG]

[DG] Who is said to have castrated himself.

Be charitable before wealth make thee covetous, and lose not the glory
of the mitre. If riches increase, let thy mind hold pace with them, and
think it is not enough to be liberal but munificent. Though a cup of
cold water from some hand may not be without its reward, yet stick not
thou for wine and oil for the wounds of the distressed, and treat the
poor as our Saviour did the multitude to the reliques of some baskets.

Trust not unto the omnipotency of gold, or say not unto it, thou art
my confidence. Kiss not thy hand when thou beholdest that terrestrial
sun, nor bore thy ear unto its servitude. A slave unto Mammon makes
no servant unto God. Covetousness cracks the sinews of faith, numbs
the apprehension of anything above sense; and only affected with the
certainty of things present, makes a peradventure of things to come;
lives but unto one world, nor hopes but fears another: makes their own
death sweet unto others, bitter unto themselves, brings formal sadness,
scenical mourning, and no wet eyes at the grave.

If avarice be thy vice, yet make it not thy punishment. Miserable men
commiserate not themselves, bowelless unto themselves, and merciless
unto their own bowels. Let the fruition of things bless the possession
of them, and take no satisfaction in dying but living rich. For since
thy good works, not thy goods will follow thee; since riches are an
appurtenance of life, and no dead man is rich, to famish in plenty, and
live poorly to die rich, were a multiplying improvement in madness and
use upon use in folly.

Persons lightly dipt, not grained, in generous honesty are but pale in
goodness and faint-hued in sincerity. But be thou what thou virtuously
art, and let not the ocean wash away thy tincture. Stand majestically
upon that axis where prudent simplicity hath fixed thee; and at no
temptation invert the poles of thy honesty that vice may be uneasy and
even monstrous unto thee; let iterated good acts and long confirmed
habits make virtue natural or a second nature in thee; and since few or
none prove eminently virtuous but from some advantageous foundations
in their temper and natural inclinations, study thyself betimes, and
early find what nature bids thee to be or tells thee what thou mayest
be. They who thus timely descend into themselves, cultivating the good
seeds which nature hath set in them, and improving their prevalent
inclinations to perfection, become not shrubs but cedars in their
generation. And to be in the form of the best of bad, or the worst of
the good, will be no satisfaction unto them.

Let not the law of thy country be the _non ultra_ of thy honesty, nor
think that always good enough that the law will make good. Narrow not
the law of charity, equity, mercy. Join gospel righteousness with legal
right. Be not a mere Gamaliel in the faith, but let the Sermon on the
Mount be thy Targum unto the law of Sinai.

Make not the consequences of virtue the ends thereof. Be not beneficent
for a name or cymbal of applause; nor exact and punctual in commerce
for the advantages of trust and credit, which attend the reputation of
just and true dealing: for such rewards, though unsought for, plain
virtue will bring with her, whom all men honour, though they pursue
not. To have other by-ends in good actions sours laudable performances,
which must have deeper roots, motives, and instigations, to give them
the stamp of virtues.

Though human infirmity may betray thy heedless days into the popular
ways of extravagancy, yet, let not thine own depravity or the torrent
of vicious times carry thee into desperate enormities in opinions,
manners, or actions. If thou hast dipped thy foot in the river, yet
venture not over Rubicon; run not into extremities from whence there
is no regression, nor be ever so closely shut up within the holds
of vice and iniquity, as not to find some escape by a postern of
recipiscency.[126]

Owe not thy humility unto humiliation by adversity, but look humbly
down in that state when others look upward upon thee. Be patient in the
age of pride, and days of will, and impatiency, when men live but by
intervals of reason, under the sovereignty of humour and passion, when
it is in the power of every one to transform thee out of thyself, and
put thee into short madness.[DH] If you cannot imitate Job, yet come
not short of Socrates, and those patient Pagans, who tired the tongues
of their enemies, while they perceived they spit their malice at brazen
walls and statues.

[DH] Iræ furor brevis est.

Let age, not envy, draw wrinkles on thy cheeks; be content to be
envied, but envy not. Emulation may be plausible, and indignation
allowable, but admit no treaty with that passion which no circumstance
can make good. A displacency at the good of others, because they enjoy
it although we do not want it, is an absurd depravity sticking fast
unto nature, from its primitive corruption, which he that can well
subdue were a Christian of the first magnitude, and for ought I know
may have one foot already in heaven.

While thou so hotly disclaimest the devil, be not guilty of Diabolism.
Fall not into one name with that unclean spirit, nor act his nature
whom thou so much abhorrest, that is, to accuse, calumniate, backbite,
whisper, detract, or sinistrously interpret others. Degenerous
depravities and narrow-minded vices! not only below St Paul’s noble
Christian, but Aristotle’s true gentleman.[DI] Trust not with some
that the Epistle of St James is apocryphal, and so read with less fear
that stabbing truth that in company with this vice, “thy religion is
in vain.” Moses broke the tables without breaking the law, but where
charity is broke the law itself is shattered, which cannot be whole
without love that is “the fulfilling of it.” Look humbly upon thy
virtues, and though thou art rich in some, yet think thyself poor
and naked without that crowning grace which “thinketh no evil, which
envieth not, which beareth, believeth, hopeth, endureth all things.”
With these sure graces while busy tongues are crying out for a drop of
cold water, mutes may be in happiness, and sing the “Trisagium,”[DJ] in
heaven.

[DI] See Aristotle’s Ethics, chapter Magnanimity.

[DJ] Holy, holy, holy.

Let not the sun in Capricorn[DK] go down upon thy wrath, but write thy
wrongs in water, draw the curtain of night upon injuries, shut them up
in the tower of oblivion,[DL] and let them be as though they had not
been. Forgive thine enemies totally, without any reserve of hope that
however God will revenge thee.

[DK] Even when the days are shortest.

[DL] Alluding to the tower of oblivion, mentioned by Procopius, which
was the name of a tower of imprisonment among the Persians; whoever was
put therein was as it were buried alive, and it was death for any but
to name him.

Be substantially great in thyself, and more than thou appearest unto
others; and let the world be deceived in thee, as they are in the
lights of heaven. Hang early plummets upon the heels of pride, and
let ambition have but an epicycle[127] or narrow circuit in thee.
Measure not thyself by thy morning shadow, but by the extent of thy
grave; and reckon thyself above the earth, by the line thou must be
contented with under it. Spread not into boundless expansions either
to designs or desires. Think not that mankind liveth but for a few;
and that the rest are born but to serve the ambition of those who make
but flies of men, and wildernesses of whole nations. Swell not into
vehement actions, which embroil and confound the earth, but be one of
those violent ones that force the kingdom of heaven.[DM] If thou must
needs rule, be Zeno’s king, and enjoy that empire which every man gives
himself: certainly the iterated injunctions of Christ unto humility,
meekness, patience, and that despised train of virtues, cannot but
make pathetical impression upon those who have well considered the
affairs of all ages; wherein pride, ambition, and vain-glory, have led
up to the worst of actions, whereunto confusions, tragedies, and acts,
denying all religion, do owe their originals.

[DM] St Matt. xi.

Rest not in an ovation,[DN] but a triumph over thy passions. Chain
up the unruly legion of thy breast; behold thy trophies within thee,
not without thee. Lead thine own captivity captive, and be Cæsar unto
thyself.

[DN] Ovation, a petty and minor kind of triumph.

Give no quarter unto those vices that are of thine inward family, and,
having a root in thy temper, plead a right and propriety in thee.
Examine well thy complexional inclinations. Rain early batteries
against those strongholds built upon the rock of nature, and make
this a great part of the militia of thy life. The politic nature of
vice must be opposed by policy, and therefore wiser honesties project
and plot against sin; wherein notwithstanding we are not to rest in
generals, or the trite stratagems of art; that may succeed with one
temper, which may prove successless with another. There is no community
or commonwealth of virtue, every man must study his own economy and
erect these rules unto the figure of himself.

Lastly, if length of days be thy portion, make it not thy expectation.
Reckon not upon long life; but live always beyond thy account. He that
so often surviveth his expectation lives many lives, and will scarce
complain of the shortness of his days. Time past is gone like a shadow;
make times to come present; conceive that near which may be far off.
Approximate thy latter times by present apprehensions of them: be like
a neighbour unto death, and think there is but little to come. And
since there is something in us that must still live on, join both lives
together, unite them in thy thoughts and actions, and live in one but
for the other. He who thus ordereth the purposes of this life, will
never be far from the next, and is in some manner already in it, by a
happy conformity and close apprehension of it.




NOTES TO THE RELIGIO MEDICI.


1. It was a proverb, “Ubi tres medici duo athei.”

2. A Latinised word meaning a taunt (impropero.)

3. The synod of Dort was held in 1619 to discuss the doctrines of
Arminius. It ended by condemning them.

4. Hallam, commenting on this passage, says--“That Jesuit must be a
disgrace to his order who would have asked more than such a concession
to secure a proselyte--the right of interpreting whatever was written,
and of supplying whatever was not.”--_Hist. England_, vol. ii. p. 74.

5. See the statute of the Six Articles (31 Hen. VIII. c. 14), which
declared that transubstantiation, communion in one kind, celibacy
of the clergy, vows of widowhood, private masses, and auricular
confession, were part of the law of England.

6. In the year 1606, when the Jesuits were expelled from Venice, Pope
Paul V. threatened to excommunicate that republic. A most violent
quarrel ensued, which was ultimately settled by the mediation of France.

7. Alluding to the story of Œdipus solving the riddle proposed by the
Sphynx.

8. The nymph Arethusa was changed by Diana into a fountain, and was
said to have flowed under the sea from Elis to the fountain of Arethusa
near Syracuse.--Ov. _Met._ lib. v. fab. 8.

9. These heretics denied the immortality of the soul, but held that it
was recalled to life with the body. Origen came from Egypt to confute
them, and is said to have succeeded. (See Mosh. _Eccl. Hist._, lib. i.
c. 5. sec. 16.) Pope John XXII. afterwards adopted it.

10. A division from the Greek διχοτομια.

11. The brain.

12. A faint resemblance, from the Latin _adumbro_, to shade.

13. Alluding to the idea Sir T. Browne often expresses, that an oracle
was the utterance of the devil.

14. To fathom, from Latin _profundus_.

15. Beginning from the Latin _efficio_.

16. Galen’s great work.

17. John de Monte Regio made a wooden eagle that, when the emperor was
entering Nuremburg, flew to meet him, and hovered over his head. He
also made an iron fly that, when at dinner, he was able to make start
from under his hand, and fly round the table.--See De Bartas, 6^{me}
jour 1^{me} semaine.

18. Hidden, from the Greek κρυπτω.

19. A military term for a small mine.

20. The Armada.

21. The practice of drawing lots.

22. An account.

23. See Il. VIII. 18--

    “Let down our golden everlasting chain,
    Whose strong embrace holds heaven, and earth, and main.”
        --_Pope_, Il. viii. 26.

24. An argument where one proposition is accumulated upon another, from
the Greek σωρειτης, a heap.

25. Alluding to the second triumvirate--that of Augustus, Antony, and
Lepidus. Florus says of it, “Respublica convulsa est lacerataque.”

26. Ochinus. He was first a monk, then a doctor, then a Capuchin friar,
then a Protestant: in 1547 he came to England, and was very active
in the Reformation. He was afterwards made Canon of Canterbury. The
Socinians claim him as one of their sect.

27. The father of Pantagruel. His adventures are given in the first
book of Rabelais, Sir Bevys of Hampton, a metrical romance, relating
the adventures of Sir Bevys with the Saracens.--Wright and Halliwell’s
_Reliquiæ Antiquæ_, ii. 59.

28. Contradictions between two laws.

29. On his arrival at Paris, Pantagruel visited the library of St
Victor: he states a list of the works he found there, among which was
“Tartaretus.” Pierre Tartaret was a French doctor who disputed with
Duns Scotus. His works were republished at Lyons, 1621.

30. Deucalion was king of Thessaly at the time of the deluge. He and
his wife Pyrrha, with the advice of the oracle of Themis, repeopled the
earth by throwing behind them the bones of their grandmother,--_i.e._,
stones of the earth.--See Ovid, _Met._ lib. i. fab. 7.

31. St Augustine (De Civ. Dei, xvi. 7).

32. απηγξατο (St Matt. xxvii. 5) means death by choking. Erasmus
translates it, “abiens laqueo se suspendit.”

33. Burnt by order of the Caliph Omar, A.D. 640. It contained 700,000
volumes, which served the city for fuel instead of wood for six months.

34. Enoch being informed by Adam the world was to be drowned and
burnt, made two pillars, one of stone to withstand the water, and one
of brick to withstand the fire, and inscribed upon them all known
knowledge.--See Josephus, _Ant. Jud._

35. A Franciscan friar, counsellor to the Inquisition, who visited the
principal libraries in Spain to make a catalogue of the books opposed
to the Romish religion. His “index novus librorum prohibitorum” was
published at Seville in 1631.

36. Printing, gunpowder, clocks.

37. The Targums and the various Talmuds.

38. Pagans, Mahometans, Jews, Christians.

39. Valour, and death in battle.

40. Held 1414-1418.

41. Vergilius, bishop of Salzburg, having asserted the existence of
Antipodes, the Archbishop of Metz declared him to be a heretic, and
caused him to be burnt.

42. On searching on Mount Calvary for the true cross, the empress found
three. As she was uncertain which was the right one, she caused them to
be applied to the body of a dead man, and the one that restored him to
life was determined to be the true cross.

43. The critical time in human life.

44. Oracles were said to have ceased when Christ came, the reply to
Augustus on the subject being the last--

    “Me puer Hebræus divos Deus ipse gubernans
    Cedere sede jubet tristemque redire sub Orcum
    Aris ergo de hinc tacitus discedito nostris.”

45. An historian who wrote “De Rebus Indicis.” He is cited by Pliny,
Strabo, and Josephus.

46. Alluding to the popular superstition that infant children were
carried off by fairies, and others left in their places.

47. Who is said to have lived without meat, on the smell of a rose.

48. “Essentiæ rationalis immortalis.”

49. St Augustine, De Civ. Dei, lib. x., cc. 9, 19, 32.

50. That which includes everything is opposed to nullity.

51. An inversion of the parts of an antithesis.

52. St Augustine--“Homily on Genesis.”

53. Sir T. Browne wrote a dialogue between two twins in the womb
respecting the world into which they were going!

54. Refinement.

55. Constitution another form of temperament.

56. The Jewish computation for fifty years.

57. Saturn revolves once in thirty years.

58. Christian IV., of Denmark, who reigned from 1588-1647.

59. Æson was the father of Jason. By bathing in a bath prepared for him
by Medæa with some magic spells, he became young again. Ovid describes
the bath and its ingredients, _Met._, lib. vii. fab. 2.

60. Alluding to the rabbinical tradition that the world would last for
6000 years, attributed to Elias, and cited in the Talmud.

61. Zeno was the founder of the Stoics.

62. Referring to a passage in Suetonius, Vit. J. Cæsar, sec
87:--“Aspernatus tam lentum mortis genus subitam sibi celeremque
optaverat.”

63. In holding

          “Mors ultima pœna est,
    Nec metuenda viris.”

64. The period when the moon is in conjunction and obscured by the sun.

65. One of the judges of hell.

66. To select some great man for our ideal, and always to act as if he
was present with us. See Seneca, lib. i. Ep. 11.

67. Sir T. Browne seems to have made various experiments in this
subject. D’Israeli refers to it in his “Curiosities of Literature.” Dr
Power, a friend of Sir T. Browne, with whom he corresponded, gives a
receipt for the process.

68. The celebrated Greek philosopher who taught that the sun was a mass
of heated stone, and various other astronomical doctrines. Some critics
say Anaxarchus is meant here.

69. See Milton’s “Paradise Lost,” lib. I. 254--

    “The mind is its own place, and in itself
    Can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven.”

And also Lucretius--

    “Hic Acherusia fit stultorum denique vita.”--iii. 1023.

70. Keck says here--“So did they all, as Lactantius has observed
at large. Aristotle is said to have been guilty of great vanity in
his clothes, of incontinency, and of unfaithfulness to his master,
Alexander II.”

71. Phalaris, king of Agrigentum, who, when Perillus made a brazen bull
in which to kill criminals, placed him in it to try its effects.

72. Their maxim was

    “Nihil sciri siquis putat id quoque nescit,
    An sciri possit quod se nil scire fatetur.”

73. Pope Alexander III., in his declaration to the Doge, said,--“Que
la mer vous soit soumise comme l’epouse l’est à son epoux puisque vous
in avez acquis l’empire par la victorie.” In commemoration of this the
Doge and Senate went yearly to Lio, and throwing a ring into the water,
claimed the sea as their bride.

74. Appolonius Thyaneus, who threw a large quantity of gold into the
sea, saying, “Pessundo divitias ne pessundare ab illis.”

75. The technical term in fencing for a hit--

    “A sweet touch, a quick venew of wit.”
        _Love’s Labour Lost_, act v. sc. 1.

76. Strabo compared the configuration of the world, as then known, to a
cloak or mantle (_chalmys_).

77. Atomists or familists were a Puritanical sect who appeared about
1575, founded by Henry Nicholas, a Dutchman. They considered that the
doctrine of revelation was an allegory, and believed that they had
attained to spiritual perfection.--See Neal’s Hist. of Puritans, i. 273.

78. From the 126th psalm St Augustine contends that Solomon is damned.
See also Lyra in 2 Kings vii.

79. From the Spanish “Dorado,” a gilt head.

80. Sir T. Browne treats of chiromancy, or the art of telling fortunes
by means of lines in the hands, in his “Vulgar Errors,” lib. v. cap. 23.

81. Gypsies.

82. S. Wilkin says that here this word means niggardly.

83. In the dialogue, “judicium vocalium,” the vowels are the judges,
and Σ complains that T has deprived him of many letters that ought to
begin with Σ.

84. If Jovis or Jupitris.

85. The celebrated Roman grammarian. A proverbial phrase for the
violation of grammar was “Breaking Priscian’s head.”

86. Livy says, Actius Nevius cut a whetstone through with a razor.

87. A kind of lizard that was supposed to kill all it looked at--

          “Whose baneful eye
    Wounds at a glance, so that the soundest dye.”
        --_De Bartas_, 6^{me} jour 1{me} sem.

88. Epimenides (Titus x. 12)--

 “Κρῆτες ἀεὶ ψεῦσται κακὰ θηριά γαστέρες αργαὶ.”

89. Nero having heard a person say, “When I am dead, let earth be
mingled with fire,” replied, “Yes, while I live.”--Suetonius, _Vit.
Nero._

90. Alluding to the story of the Italian, who, having been provoked by
a person he met, put a poniard to his heart, and threatened to kill him
if he would not blaspheme God; and the stranger doing so, the Italian
killed him at once, that he might be damned, having no time to repent.

91. A rapier or small sword.

92. The battle here referred to was the one between Don John of Austria
and the Turkish fleet, near Lepanto, in 1571. The battle of Lepanto
(that is, the capture of the town by the Turks) did not take place till
1678.

93. Several authors say that Aristotle died of grief because he could
not find out the reason for the ebb and flow of the tide in Epirus.

94. Who deny that there is such a thing as science.

95. A motto on a ring or cup. In an old will, 1655, there is this
passage: “I give a cup of silver gilt to have this posy written in the
margin:--

    “When the drink is out, and the bottom you may see,
    Remember your brother I. G.”

96. The opposition of a contrary quality, by which the quality it
opposes becomes heightened.

97. Adam as he was created and not born.

98. Meaning a world, as Atlas supported the world on his shoulders.

99. Merriment. Johnson says that this is the only place where the word
is found.

100. Said to be a cure for madness.

101. Patched garments.

102. A game. A kind of capping verses, in which, if any one repeated
what had been said before, he paid a forfeit.




NOTES TO HYDRIOTAPHIA.


103. Just.

104. Destruction.

105. A chemical vessel made of earth, ashes, or burnt bones, and in
which assay-masters try their metals. It suffers all baser ones when
fused and mixed with lead to pass off, and retains only gold and silver.

106. This substance known to French chemists by the name “adipo-cire,”
was first discovered by Sir Thomas Browne.

107. From its thickness.

108. Euripides.

109. Greek, Latin, Hebrew, Egyptian, Arabic defaced by the Emperor
Licinius.




NOTES TO LETTER TO A FRIEND.


110. Will not survive until next spring.

111. Wasting.

112. An eminent Italian Physician, lecturer in the University of Pavia,
died 1576. He was a most voluminous medical writer.

113. An eminent doctor and scholar who passed his time at Venice and
Padua studying and practising medicine, died 1568.

114. Charles V. was born 24th February, 1500.

115. Francis I. of France was taken prisoner at the battle of Pavia,
24th February, 1525.

116. One of the greatest Protestant generals of the seventeenth
century. He died at Zara, 1626.

117. An inflation, or swelling, from the French bouffée.

118. August 20th, 1526. He was defeated by Solyman II., and suffocated
in a brook, by a fall from his horse, during the retreat.

119. The caul.

120. Money-seeking.

121. Cacus stole some of Hercules’ oxen, and drew them into his cave
backward to prevent any traces being discovered. Ovid Fast, 1. 554.

122. Narrow, like walking on a rope.

123. A Greek philosophical writer. This Πιναξ is a representation of a
table where the whole human life with its dangers and temptations is
symbolically represented.

124. Picture.

125. The course taken by the Spanish Treasure ships. See Anson Voyages.

126. A recommencement.

                  “Dulcique senex vicinus Hymetto
    Qui partem acceptæ sava inter vincla cicutæ
    Accusatori nollet dare,”--Juv. Sat. xiii. 185.

127. A small revolution made by one planet in the orbit of another.




BALLANTYNE AND COMPANY, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.




Transcriber's Note


The following errata have been corrected:

  p. viii "coffer of gold." changed to "coffer of gold.”"
  p. 31 "Bevis." missing endnote anchor inserted and
          following anchor renumbered
  p. 32 "Pantagruel's library," extraneous endnote anchor removed
  p. 56 "comtemplations." changed to "contemplations."
  p. 93 "that si" changed to "that is"
  p. 117 "Egyptains" changed to "Egyptians"
  p. 120 "Egyptains" changed to "Egyptians"
  p. 148 "aprehension" changed to "apprehension"
  p. 162 "viii 809" changed to "viii. 809"
  p. 176 "limped" changed to "limpid"
  p. 180 (note) "Decernite lethum" changed to "Decernite letum"
  p. 180 (note) "quodcunqne" changed to "quodcumque"
  p. 186 "Socrates," extraneous endnote anchor removed
  p. 187 "all things.’" changed to "all things.”"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Religio Medici, Hydriotaphia, and the
Letter to a Friend, by Thomas Browne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RELIGIO MEDICI ***

***** This file should be named 586-0.txt or 586-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/586/

Produced by Henry Flower and Judith Boss, Omaha, Nebraska

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


