Chapter II., § 5). A particular impetus was given to magic toward the
end of the last century before Christ and during the first century
of the Christian era, when the rise of many fantastic philosophical
systems greatly promoted and supported the belief in the supernatural
powers of magic. Subsequently, in the middle ages, magic experienced an
accepted and systematic development. These conditions, however, will be
more explicitly referred to later on.

The treatment of the sick through supernatural agencies assumed
quite astonishing dimensions under the Roman emperors. The belief
in magicians was so generally disseminated that even the emperors
themselves and the imperial authorities were almost completely devoted
to it. Thus, for instance, the emperor Hadrian (117-138, A.D.) caused
himself to be treated by physicians who claimed miraculous powers,
and he is said to have written a book on theurgy. In fact, Suidas (62
Julianus) reports that Hadrian, on account of a severe outbreak of
pestilence in Rome, sent for the son of the Chaldean, Julian, who,
simply by the power of his miracles, arrested the progress of the
disease. Under Antoninus Pius official proclamations were made in the
forum, directing the attention of the people to the importance of
magicians (Philostratus, 43), and the emperor Marcus Aurelius even
relates that, when in Caieta, the gods in a dream prescribed a remedy
for the hemorrhagic cough and vertigo from which he was suffering
(“Marcus Aurelius,” Chapter I., § 17, page 11).

But it appears that the magicians finally went too far with their
tricks, and endangered human life by their treatment; so that several
emperors decided upon adopting more rigorous measures against their
knaveries. The emperor Septimius Severus (193-211), altho himself
originally devoted to magic, prohibited, when on a visit in Egypt,
all books which taught curious arts (Aelius Spartianus, “Hadrianus,”
Chapter XV., § 5, page 146). Later the emperor Diocletian took
energetic steps toward abating the mischief done by magical treatment
of the sick, and the magicians were permitted to carry on such arts
only so far as would not be detrimental to the health of the people.
However, this order did not check the magicians any more than it
benefited those who were still tortured and brought to the point
of death by magic quackery. Neither did medical science derive any
advantage whatever from this well-meant but completely abortive effort
of the emperor, for the magic physicians persisted in carrying on
their hocuspocus, and unconcernedly debased the pharmacopœia by the
introduction of nonsensical and loathsome substances. Let us examine
more in detail this department of medical practise among the magicians.

§ 3. =The Medical Practise of the Magicians.=—The magicians adopted
various modes of procedure in the treatment of the sick: they either
attempted, as do our modern quacks, to create the impression, by
administering medicine, that they were actually able to direct the
treatment of the ailing in a rational manner, or they restricted
themselves to various kinds of magical observances.

The drug therapy of the magicians actually utilized everything under
the sun as a remedy. The more out of the way and the less suitable
for a remedy a substance seemed to be, the more likely it was to be
chosen by the magician intent upon healing. For it was always the
main object of these practising quacks to make their treatment as
sensational as possible. In this they succeeded best by employing
the most extraordinary substances as remedies. Thus they made use of
gold, silver, precious stones and pearls, just because these, owing to
their value, were held in great esteem, and their medical application,
therefore, was bound to create a sensation. But the most loathsome
substances were quite as readily employed, for here, too, the most
general attention was bound to be attracted by their application.
Human feces, urine, and menstrual blood were introduced into the
materia medica in such a manner. The awe with which parts of corpses
usually inspired the non-medical part of the public was relied upon by
the magicians to advertise their cures. Thus these quacks administered
powders of human bones to the ailing.

But inasmuch as what is conspicuous and unusual has always enjoyed
an especial esteem with humanity, the incredible remedies of the
magicians naturally found everywhere an abundance of believers; and
as particularly the most nonsensical theory is most tenacious of
life, provided it has been presented in apparent combination with the
miraculous, the medical armamentarium rapidly took on a very peculiar
aspect. Until the present more modern times medicine was condemned
to the encumbrance of this rubbish, this list of odd and loathsome
remedies, whose admission to the pharmacopœia was only due to the whim
of a human mind that constantly hankers after the extraordinary and the
miraculous.

Finally the magic observances to which the magicians resorted in the
treatment of the sick, have shown a remarkable vitality, for they
are in vogue even in modern times, and many sections of our people
even to-day swear unconditionally by the curative efficacy of various
agencies which demonstratively have been derived from the medicine of
the magicians. But now such agencies are no longer ascribed to magic or
sorcery, but they are called “cures by means of sympathy.” And as many
modern people believe that various incomprehensible mystic performances
cause certain mysterious powers, otherwise absolutely unknown, to
exert a curative influence upon certain diseases, so did the ancients
believe exactly the same. This was the origin of exorcism as a remedy
for disease. Exorcism played a conspicuous part in the middle ages as
a means of stopping hemorrhages, and even in these modern times, as is
well-known, this method of cure finds many adherents.

This magic treatment was believed to be especially efficacious if the
exorcisms had been written or engraved upon paper, gold, precious
stones, etc., in which case they were suspended around the neck of
the patient. Countless talismans (from the Arabic _tilsam_, magic
image) and amulets (from the Arabic _hamalet_, trinket) were thus
manufactured, and even to our own time there are survivals of this
medical superstition. Altho these mystic observances are performed in
various ways, and their modifications are practically innumerable, yet
certain radical resemblances are continually appearing among the magic
rites of the most diverse races, and some of these practises have even
persisted up to the present time. Thus the rope of the hung criminal
plays a conspicuous part in antique magic as well as in modern sympathy
treatment; the same importance is attributed to shooting-stars, to
the moon, to crossroads, to certain numerals, such as 3, 7, 9, etc.
It is a highly interesting fact that such conceptions, as remarkable
for their therapeutical associations as for their crass superstition,
are possessed of a vitality which persists for centuries. Peoples,
religions, philosophical systems, political revolutions have risen
and vanished, but the belief in the curative action of the rope of a
hung criminal or the therapeutic significance of the crossroad has
survived. The mystic influence which is exerted by the numerals 3, 7,
9, and still more so by the dreadful 13, upon the life and health of
man, haunts the minds of the multitude in this century of physical
enlightenment exactly as it did in remote antiquity. But we can not
here enter into the reason for these interesting facts, and we must
refer those who desire more detailed information on this subject to the
voluminous literature of superstition.

Furthermore, the belief in magic cures was not more prevalent among
the ancient professors of medicine than among the laity, and even the
most prominent practitioners were not able to emancipate themselves
from this belief. Galen, for instance, who, as is well-known, mastered
the entire literature of antique medicine as none before or after him
has ever done, openly avows his belief in the efficacy of magic cures,
and, what is more remarkable, Galen in this respect has changed from a
Saul to a Paul. He ruefully recalled, later, the condemnatory decree
which he had originally promulgated regarding the magic treatment of
the sick. Let us call to mind how he expresses himself in his essay
on medical treatment in Homer: “Many, as I have done for a long time,
believe that conjurations resemble the fairy tales of old women. But
gradually, and from the observation of obvious facts, I have come to
the conclusion that power is exercised by them; for I have learned
to know their advantages in stings of scorpions, and also in bones
which became lodged in the throat, and which were at once coughed
up as a result of conjuration. Many remedies are excellent in every
respect, and magic formulæ answer their purpose” (“Alexander of
Tralles,” Book 11, Chapter I., Vol. II., page 477). One of the most
prominent post-Galenian physicians also, Alexander of Tralles, openly
avows, with reference to this utterance of Galen, that he himself is
a believer in magic cures, and he says: “If the great Galen, as well
as many other physicians of ancient times, bear witness to this fact
(the efficacy of magic treatment of the sick), why shall we not impart
to you what we have learned from our own experience and what we have
heard from trustworthy friends?” (“Alexander of Tralles,” _ibid._).
Accordingly, his Βιβλία Ἰατρικά was filled with enumerations of the
most various magical cures. But, now, if the classics of antique
medicine have proven themselves to be so friendly to the medical
science of magicians, what was the condition of the mind, then, of
the average physician of ancient times? Is it astonishing if young
and old, high and low, without distinction, were blind adherents of
magical medicine? Thus medical literature of the last century, B.C.,
and especially that of the centuries from the Christian era until
late in the middle ages, was an actual treasury of conjuration and
other mummeries. This description applies specifically to the “Materia
Medica” of Quintus Serenus Samonicus, written in hexameters. It is
true, the magical sequel to this book entailed painful consequences on
the writer, for the emperor Caracalla had the poor author executed
(Ael. Spartian., “Caracalla,” Chapter IV., § 4) merely, as it is
reported, because he dared to advise in his works as a remedy against
intermittent fever the wearing of amulets, a medical expedient which
had been prohibited by the emperor himself.

The work of Sextus Placitus Papyriensis, who lived in the fourth
century, which treats of remedies derived from the animal kingdom,
teems with magic nonsense.

But an actually inexhaustible stock of medical conjurations was
contained in the work of a layman, Marcellus Empiricus. This gentleman,
who had been foreign minister under the emperors Theodosius the first
and the second, had written a thick folio volume on medicaments.
This literary performance, which, according to our ideas, appears to
be very odd for a minister of state, was by no means remarkable in
the fifth century, for the study of medical subjects was, so to say,
fashionable among the laity of that period; in fact, even prelates and
bishops did not think it beneath their dignity to busy themselves with
various medical questions and to write medico-physical books. Thus the
laurels of medical renown haunted our good Marcellus and would not
let him sleep, so that he abridged his hours of official duty to such
an extent that he was able to compile a Materia Medica of thirty-six
apparently never-ending chapters. But if the statesmanship of Marcellus
was on a par with his medical book-making, the two Theodosii could not
have missed the time their cabinet minister stole from them, for his
medical scribbling is an utterly worthless compilation. Not only did
Marcellus copy from medical authors of the most discordant opinion,
but he particularly busied himself in collecting indiscriminately all
the magical nonsense of the ancient times; in fact, it seems that he
was very eager to obtain all this magical rigmarole direct from the
mouth of the people, for he says that he collected his remedies “_ab
agrestibus et plebeiis_.” Accordingly his book is as worthless and
insipid to the physician as it is valuable to the historian, especially
the historian of civilization. Here are a few examples of this medicine
of the magicians:

_Remedy against warts and corns_ (Pliny, Book 28, Chapter IV., § 12,
page 268): “Lie on your back along a boundary line on the twentieth
day of the moon, and extend the hands over the head. With whatever
thing you grasp when so doing, rub the warts, and they will disappear
immediately.”

“Whoever, when he sees a shooting-star, soon afterward pours a little
vinegar upon the hinge of a door, is sure to be rid of his corns.”

_Remedy against headache_ (Pliny, _ibid._): “Tie the rope of a hung
criminal around the forehead.”

_Remedy against bellyache_ (Priscian, physician of the fourth century,
Book 1, Chapter XIV., and Sprengel, Vol. II., page 248): “If any
one suffer from colicky pains he may sit down on a chair and say to
himself: ‘_Per te diacholon, diacholon, diacholon_.’”

“A person who has an attack of colic may take the feces of a wolf,
which, if possible, should contain small particles of bone, enclose
them in a small tube, and wear this amulet on the right arm, thigh, or
hip.”—_Alexander of Tralles_, Book 8, Chapter II., page 374.

“Take the heart from the living lark and wear it as an amulet at the
left thigh.”—_Alexander of Tralles, ibid._

_Remedy against epilepsy_ (advised by the physician, Moschion
Diorthotes. “Alexander of Tralles,” Book 1, Chapter XV., page 570):
“The forehead of an ass is tied to the skin of the patient and worn.”

“Gather iris, peonies, and nightshade when the moon is on the wane,
pack them into linen and wear as an amulet.” Advised by the magician
Osthanes.—_Alexander of Tralles_, Book 1, Chapter XV., page 566.

“Take a nail from a cross and suspend it from an arm of the patient.”
Given by a physician of the second century, A.D., by the name of
Archigenes.—_Alexander of Tralles_, Book 1, Chapter XV., page 566.

“Wear on the finger a jasper of bluish-gray luster.”—Advised by
_Dioscorides_, Book 5, 159.

_Remedy against podagra_ [gout] (“Alexander of Tralles,” Book 12, page
582): “Take a gold leaf and write upon it when the moon is on the
wane: mei, threu, mor, for, teux, za, zon, the, lu, chri, ge, ze, on.
As the sun becomes firm in this name and daily renews itself, so does
this formation also make firm as conditions were previously. Quickly,
quickly, rapidly, rapidly. For behold! I call the great name in which
becomes firm again what was destined to die: Jas, azyf, zyon, threux,
dain, chook. Make this formation firm as it has been, quickly, quickly,
rapidly, rapidly. This document must be covered with the tendon of a
crane, enclosed in a capsule, and worn by the patient at his heel.”

_Remedy against diseases of the eye_ (advised by Sextus Placitus
Papyriensis. Magnus, “Ophthalmology of the Ancients,” page 597): “If
the right eye becomes afflicted with glaucoma, rub it with the right
eye of the wolf, and, similarly, the left eye with the left eye of the
wolf.”

In photophobia (fear of light) “Wear as an amulet an eye which
was taken from a live crab.”—_Quintus Serenus Samonicus._ Magnus,
“Ophthalmology of the Ancients,” page 595.

With pains of the eye the patient must, with a copper needle, put out
the eyes of a green lizard caught on a Jupiter day, during a moon that
is on the wane, in the month of September. The eyes must be worn in a
golden capsule, as an amulet around the neck (_Marcellus Empiricus_.
Magnus, “Ophthalmology of the Ancients,” page 602.)

The above illustrations are surely sufficient to give the reader an
idea of the medicine of the magicians. At the same time they show the
great similarity which exists between these ancient magic cures and the
sympathetic cures of our people at the present day.

§ 4. =Ancient Medicine and Magic.=—But how is it possible that the
ancient physicians, and even the most enlightened minds among them,
should not only have tolerated such a crass medical superstition as the
above examples have shown us, but should even have incorporated them in
their works? Incomprehensible, however, as this fact may appear to the
modern practitioner, it becomes conceivable if the condition of antique
medicine and of the medical profession of ancient times is considered.

In the first place, ancient medical science adopted an entirely
different mode of diagnostico-theoretical method than that employed
by professors of medicine in modern times. Ancient natural science
(compare also Chapter V. of this work), as well as ancient medicine,
obtained their scientific views exclusively by deduction—_i.e._, they
deduced individual results from general presumptions, or, rather, they
construed, by reason of some general presumption, the physico-medical
consequences which were to follow from such a general supposition. If
this attempt to obtain an insight into physical processes is extremely
hazardous, it becomes still more precarious when the manner and means
in which these general presumptions were arrived at were primarily of
an entirely hypothetical nature. It is true, no fundamental objection
can be raised to this method, as even modern natural science and
medicine, despite the fact that their methods of investigation in a
diagnostico-theoretical respect scarcely admit of material objections,
can not do without hypothesis. But hypothesis is not always mere
hypothesis. It is well known that there are hypotheses which, even in
the minds of the most conscientious investigators, are not inferior to
that knowledge which is obtained by experiment and observation, whereas
other hypotheses again present the distinct stamp of insufficiency and
makeshift. The trustworthiness and the heuristic value of an hypothesis
depend upon the quality of the diagnostico-theoretical process by means
of which it was obtained. If this process has been such as physical
investigation is bound to insist upon, the hypothesis thus arrived
at is fully justified to supply the still absent data with regard
to the phenomena in question. This, however, can be accomplished by
hypothesis only when the latter is not set forth until it plainly
appears that, in spite of a conscientious and orderly arrangement of
observation after observation, of experiment upon experiment, without
the admission of logical loopholes, full data in regard to the nature
of the phenomena is not forthcoming. In such a case we may consider
as actually proven by hypothesis what observation and systematic
experiment, continuous and logical, were intended to prove, and
failed. However, this inductive hypothesis is alone entitled to be
considered in medicine. Naturally, such an inductive hypothesis was not
thought of by the ancients, as the inductive method of investigation
was generally quite unknown to them. The process by which ancient
medicine usually attempted to find its hypothesis was by an argument
from analogy. Each and every point of resemblance, however superficial,
between two phenomena was considered sufficient by the ancient
naturalists to warrant the assumption that analogous phenomena in the
most various domains were most certainly proven to possess similar
points of resemblance. And upon the basis of such an insecure method
of deduction—which, moreover, was selected entirely at the option of
the observer—the ancient investigator erected the boldest hypotheses.
Thus, for instance, the atomic theory of Leucippus and Democritus is
an hypothesis which rests upon the basis of a conclusion from analogy.
The motes which appear in the rays of the sun led these two ancient
investigators to the conception that, like the particles of dust
sporting in the air, the primary component parts of everything that
exists in the entire universe consisted of similar particles.[2]

      [2] Lucretius, Book 2, Verse 113, _sqq._

It appears that Epicurus arrived at his theory of light (according to
which, as is well known, images of things were brought to the senses by
delicate but absolutely objective small pictures which were detached
from the surface of things in a continuous current) by the fact
that many animals—for instance, snakes—shed their skins. The theory
of humoral pathology, one of the most important advances in medical
science, was based on a conclusion from analogy and arrived at by the
deductive method.

The diagnostico-theoretical lines in which antique medicine moved
were bound—and this is the point of importance in this case—to exert
a determining influence upon medical criticism. For medico-physical
criticism can only appear in closest connection with the prevailing
condition of the respective sciences, being really nothing else but
a precipitate from them. Thus the ancient physicians were compelled
to take an entirely different position toward magical medicine than
we moderns, educated in the school of inductive methods, have always
taken. The probable and similar, the supposable and possible, in which
deductive medicine found its data, working on the lines of argument
from analogy, were necessarily bound to find expression also in the
character of medical critique, and it was impossible, therefore,
for the ancient physician to detect anything absurd or contrary to
experience in hypotheses which the practitioner of to-day at once
brands as nonsensical and superstitious.

We are not in the least justified, therefore, in speaking disparagingly
of Galen and Alexander of Tralles because they believed in magical
medicine and applied it in their practise. As no human being can
jump out of his skin, so is he unable to get beyond the intellectual
advancement of his time. As the ancient physicians were also unable to
do this, accordingly they were believers in the magical medicine.

But there is still a second point which explains the remarkable
position taken by ancient physicians in relation to magical
medicine—namely, the fact that the conception of miracle and magic
were essentially different in the ancient world from what they are at
present. The belief in the interference of spirits and supernatural
beings in terrestrial matters, and the manifestations of their
influence exerted in manifold ways—sometimes for good, sometimes
for evil—had been widely disseminated from the earliest times, and
we encounter them in all periods of classic antiquity. This belief
in demons had become incorporated in the systems of many leading
philosophers of antiquity. Now if the world were filled with demons the
natural consequence was that their activity would manifest itself in
various ways. It was necessary, therefore, that man should always be
prepared to experience manifestations which more or less violated the
customary order of terrestrial happenings, and for this reason nothing
that could be styled a miracle really existed for him. A miracle could
not be conceived in its full modern sense until it was realized that
the course of all natural phenomena was nothing but the expression of
eternal and changeless laws. However, it was not until comparatively
late that this conception became generally disseminated; thus, for
instance, it was considered as self-evident, even in the latest periods
of the middle ages and during the first beginnings of modern times,
that divine influence could always, and actually did always, cause an
alteration in the course of the functions of the body. In fact, there
is an amazingly large number of people even in our time who believe
this, and for whom, therefore, the conception of miracles, especially
of miraculous healing, is to-day on about the same level as that on
which it stood in the time of Galen and Alexander of Tralles.

Thus we must admit that the ancient physicians were by no means below
the standard of civilization and culture attained during their period
if they believed in the possibility of extraordinary cures effected
by means extraneous and unscientific in their treatment of the sick,
and, accordingly, they supported such methods. However, this belief
in miraculous medicines on the part of the ancient physician was
always restricted to certain limits. It is true, the conception was
always adhered to that this or that magical agency, or this or that
magical action, might exert an influence upon the disease; but such
a belief never led them to omit any strictly medical measures of a
surgical or gynecological nature. On the contrary, the intelligent
physicians of antiquity firmly insisted that the actions of the surgeon
and of the gynecologist were not to be hampered by any metaphysical
considerations; thus, for instance, Soranus demanded most energetically
that the midwife should be “ἀδεισιδαίμων” (without fear of any
demon)—_i.e._, she was not to be superstitious, but free from any
imputation which would render her curative interposition objectionable.

The profession of the magicians, due to the persecutions to which they
became subject under the Christian emperors Valens, Valentinian, and
Theodosius, became considerably less prominent during the predominance
of Christianity, but the ideas upon which it had been erected in
ancient times still survived; in fact, these ideas were even to a
certain extent systematically elaborated during the middle ages, and at
this time a distinction was made between higher and lower, or white
and black, magic. The white magic busied itself with good spirits, the
black magic with the bad ones. Magicians, therefore, who operated by
the aid of the devil, and even in medicine called in the assistance of
the devil, were called “necromancers.” For the first time magic became
amalgamated with certain philosophical speculations and also with
Christian-dogmatic constituents. The methods adopted by magic medicine
under these conditions are so peculiar and are so close to the boundary
lines between philosophy and religion that we are really not quite
certain whether to relegate it to the domain of one or of the other.
But as the fundamental parts of these methods were actually supplied by
philosophy, we propose to defer this discussion for the present, and
to take up here another form of medical superstition which was derived
exclusively from religion—namely, “sleep in the temple.”

§ 5. =Sleep in the Temple.=—One of the generally practised methods
of medical science during the period of Hellenic civilization which
was still fully under the influence of theism—_i.e._, for at least
two or three centuries before the Hippocratic era—was what was known
as “temple sleep.” In fact, this method must be considered a sign
of a faith distinctly deep and sincere, a faith naive and childlike
indeed; but as a sign of such a faith this method is actually pathetic.
No taint of superstition could be found in it at the early period
referred to. It was still the pure and unadulterated expression of the
generally prevailing conception that human art is to no purpose in any
case of disease, and aid must be found with the gods—with those gods
who regulate and personally execute all terrestrial phenomena down to
the minutest details. Temple sleep was not degraded into superstition
until medicine had come to the conclusion that the phenomena of disease
were not evidence of an interference by supernatural power in the
functions of the body, but disturbances of the function of the body
caused exclusively by natural causes. In accordance with this view,
which first found its fullest and clearest exposition in the _corpus
hippocraticum_, it would seem absolutely necessary for temple sleep to
lose all recognition from the art of healing. However, this not being
the case, it was bound to deteriorate into an act of superstitious
mummery, and the principal blame for this sad decadence is to be laid
primarily upon the priests. It was their duty especially to lead into
the path of truth the patients who persisted in crowding into the
temples in the spirit of naive and childlike piety. They sealed their
own condemnation as fosterers of superstition when they failed to
do this duty, and endeavored rather, by every means in their power,
to confirm the multitude in their ancient belief that the gods were
practising medicine. Non-Christian as well as Christian priests played
this rôle for many centuries with equal ability and equal perseverance,
as will be seen from the following brief history of temple sleep.

The belief in the efficacy of temple sleep had already been thoroughly
shaken during the time of the great Hippocrates; therefore, in
the sixth century, B.C., the laughing philosopher of Hellenism,
Aristophanes, the satirical contemporary of Hippocrates, in Act II.,
verses 654 to 750, of his comedy Πλοῦτος, severely criticizes the
manner and method in which temple sleep was employed. Let us listen
to the words in which the poet describes what happened in the temple
during the observance of this rite.

The god Æsculapius, accompanied by his daughter Panakeia, appears in
the temple to examine in person the patients gathered there. The first
one he meets is a poor wretch, Neokleides, who, being blear-eyed,
expects cure from the god. The medically skilled Æsculapius smears
upon the inverted lids of this patient a salve which causes such pain
that the poor fellow will probably never seek his help again. The
second patient met by the god is the blind god, Πλοῦτος (_i.e._,
Wealth Personified). Here the conduct of Æsculapius is entirely
different from that which he adopted when treating poor Neokleides.
Now he carefully strokes the head of the patient, then produces a
linen cloth and carefully touches the lids with it. He then calls
his daughter Panakeia, who winds a red cloth round the head of blind
Wealth. Now Æsculapius whistles, and two mighty serpents appear, glide
under the purple cloth, and lick the eyes of the patient. Shortly
afterward the god regains his sight.

This passage is a cutting satire on practises which undoubtedly
prevailed in the Greek temples as early as the sixth century, B.C.
But, nevertheless, it took a long time before the patients lost
their belief in the miraculous efficacy of temple sleep, and the
priesthood continually strove to revive, by the mysterious stories
of various kinds they recounted to doubters, the belief in temple
sleep. The sixth of the marble votive tablets which were found in
the temple of Æsculapius at Epidaurus shows the kind of miraculous
reports invented by the priests. The latter were in the habit of
inscribing upon these tablets reports of cures that had occurred in
their sanctuary, for the benefit of the visitors of the temple and for
the still greater benefit of the medical historians; but it is quite
probable that the priesthood, intent upon curing, were encouraged in
their medico-literary attempts only by the silent hope of creating
an abundant supply of patients by such miraculous reports. The above
tablet, No. 6—which probably dates from the third century, B.C.—tells
us that a blind man by the name of Hermon, a native of Thasos, had
recovered his sight by sleeping in the Epidaurean temple of Æsculapius.
However, it appears that this man Hermon had been a miserable wretch,
for he disappeared without having expressed his thanks in hard cash.
Naturally such ingratitude provoked the god, and summarily he blinded
the thankless individual again. It required a second temple sleep
before the god condescended to become helpful once more. But our tablet
does not mention anything about the amount of the remuneration paid by
our friend Hermon who had been twice cured of blindness; neither is
this at all necessary. The miraculous tablet, even without stating the
price, doubtless made sufficient impression upon the minds even of the
most parsimonious of future patients.

Altho, therefore, the more enlightened among the Greeks recognized,
as early as in the sixth century, B.C., the futility of temple sleep
as a means of healing, the ancient world never relinquished it
entirely. We encounter it again in the later periods of antiquity.
Thus, for instance, Suetonius and other ancient authors tell us that
two patients, one blind, the other lame, one day approached the
emperor Vespasian, who happened to be in Alexandria, asking him to
spit into the eyes of the one and to stroke the paralyzed limbs of
the other; for they had been notified in temple sleep that they would
be restored to health if only the emperor would deign to perform the
above-mentioned manipulations. But Vespasian was an enlightened ruler
who, in spite of his imperial dignity, did not have much confidence in
the medical qualities of his saliva and of his hands, and accordingly
unceremoniously dismissed both supplicants. This caused great terror
among the priests of Serapis and among the courtiers, for obviously
they had interpreted this affair solely as intended _in majorem
Vespasiani gloriam_. The emperor was importuned, therefore, kindly to
aid the unfortunate, but he persisted in his refusal. Probably he was
right in fearing the loss of his prestige should the imperial medical
powers prove unequal to the task of curing disease. Not until the
priests solemnly vouched for the truthfulness of the dream-sending god
Serapis, and declared a failure of the imperial cure to be impossible,
did Vespasian’s stubbornness relent. Now he spat, and rubbed the
paralyzed limbs, and the blind saw, and the paralytic arose and walked.

§6. =Church Sleep.=—When, subsequently, the ancient religions died out,
and had left the world as an heritage to Christianity, temple sleep had
by no means died out also. On the contrary, after the lapse of three
centuries, it again came into favor with the Christian priests. And the
use of it now was scarcely less in favor than it had been a thousand
years previous in the world of the ancient Greeks. Let us mention a few
examples. The first four stories are taken from the works of Gregory of
Tours.

Mummolus, who came to the court of Justinian (527 to 565) as the
ambassador of King Theudebert, suffered greatly from calculi of the
urinary bladder, and during this journey he became subject to an attack
of renal colic. Things went badly with poor Mummolus, and he was in
a great hurry to make his will. Whereupon he was advised to pass one
night sleeping in St. Andrew’s Church, at Pateras, for St. Andrew had
performed many miraculous cures in this place. No sooner said than
done. Mummolus, greatly tormented by pain and fever, and despairing
of life, had himself placed upon the stone flags of the sanctuary,
and waited there for the things that were to happen. Suddenly, toward
midnight, the patient awoke with a violent desire to urinate, and
discharged in a natural manner a calculus which, as St. Gregory assures
us, was so enormous that it fell with a loud clatter into the vessel.
From that hour Mummolus was hale and hearty, and joyfully started on
his journey homeward.

In Brioude, the capital of the present department Haute-Loire, there
was a woman named Fedamia, who had been paralyzed for years. In
addition to this, she was penniless, and her relatives, therefore,
brought her to the Church of St. Julian, who enjoyed a great reputation
in Brioude, in order that, even if she did not become cured, she might
at least make some money by begging at the church door. For eighteen
years she had lived thus when, one Sunday night, while she slept in
the colonnade adjoining the church, a man appeared who took her by the
hand and led her toward the grave of St. Julian. On arriving there she
uttered a fervent prayer, and in a moment felt as if a load of actual
chains fell from her limbs. All this, it is true, happened in a dream,
but when the patient awoke she was hale and hearty, and was able, to
the amazement of the assembled multitude, to walk, with loud prayers,
to the grave of the saint.

A certain man, deaf, dumb, and blind, known by the name of Amagildus,
also tried the sleep in the Church of St. Julian, at Brioude. But it
appears that this saint was not always quite accessible to the wishes
of the sick. It is true, Amagildus was not obliged, like Fedamia of
the previous narrative, to pass eighteen years in the basilica, but,
nevertheless, he had to sleep for a full year in the colonnade of the
church before the curative power of the holy martyr delivered him from
his ailment.

Veranus, the slave of one of the clergy under Gregory, was so violently
attacked by gout that he was absolutely unable to move for an entire
year. Thereupon his master pledged himself to advance the afflicted
slave to the priesthood if St. Martin would be willing to cure him. To
accomplish this cure the slave was carried to the church, and there
placed at the feet of the saint. The poor wretch had to remain there
for five long days, and it seemed as tho St. Martin had forgotten all
about him. Finally, on the sixth day, the patient was visited by a man
who seized his foot and drew it out straight. The slave rose to his
feet in terror, and perceived that he was cured. For many years he
served St. Martin as a priest.

But the most wonderful cure was that of the German emperor Henry II.,
called “The Saint” (1002 to 1024). This emperor, who was of Bavarian
stock, suffered greatly from the stone, and had retired to the Italian
cloister Monte Cassino, inasmuch as this cloister during that period
justly enjoyed an extraordinary medical reputation. But whether the
monks of Monte Cassino, altho well versed in medical art, did not have
sufficient confidence in their ability to treat an emperor, or whether
they were induced by some other reason, is not known; however, instead
of submitting the imperial patient to the operations of terrestrial
medicine, they surrendered him to the providence of heaven, and
more particularly to the sympathy of St. Benedict. This saint fully
justified the confidence that was placed in him, for, during an acute
period in the patient’s sufferings, he appeared in his own holy person,
and with his own holy hands he performed the necessary operation, and,
after having pressed the stone that he had removed from the bladder
into the hand of the sleeping emperor, he retired heavenward. But he
took care from his heavenly residence to attend to the prompt healing
of the operation wound, and this was surely very good of St. Benedict.
In fact, his entire behavior during this case was extremely proper and
laudable; for is it not much more fitting that the imperial bladder
should be delivered from its disagreeable visitor, the stone, at the
hands of a saint than by those of mortal beings, even if those mortal
beings were the pious and medically skilled monks of Monte Cassino?[3]

The form in which we encounter the Christian temple sleep in the above
stories is as like as two peas to that practised in the Hellenic
temples. They are distinguished merely by the fact that the Greek gods
generally hastened to the assistance of the patients after the latter
had spent one night in the temple, whereas the Christian saints often
allowed years to pass before the patient, who was crying for aid,
secured relief.

      [3] Compare Leibnitz, Script. Brunsvic, Vol. I., page 525.
      Sprengel, Vol. II., page 91.

Christianity has, however, created one variation of the temple sleep,
and this is the sleep which is taken, altho outside of the church, at
any place whatever, but with invocation of the saints. This sleep was
said to be exactly as efficacious as that taken in the church itself,
provided the patient had fervently prayed before falling asleep, and
had particularly remembered the saint whose assistance he required.
The two following narratives, which are also taken from the works of
Gregory of Tours, may serve as significant examples of this variety of
temple sleep.

Alpinus, Count of Tours, was so tormented for years by a pain in his
foot that life had no further joys for him, so that, sleepless and
without appetite, he took to his bed. Again and again had he, in
secret prayer, appealed to St. Martin for relief. So one day the Count
suddenly falls into a deep sleep, during which St. Martin appears to
him, making the sign of the cross over the diseased foot. Thereupon the
pain suddenly left him, and Alpinus was able to leave his couch, fully
cured. In this case the saint showed himself extremely considerate
toward the sick count, in that he was attired in a smart uniform when
paying his visit. It was his intention, obviously, in choosing this
costume to gratify the martial tastes of the nobleman; for St. Martin,
when visiting patients, by no means always affected this warlike array,
as will be seen from the following story.

A certain woman was so severely afflicted with campsis of the fingers
that she completely lost the use of her hands. Even a visit to the
church which was consecrated to St. Martin in Tours had brought her no
relief. The patient was obliged to leave the sanctuary with her fingers
still diseased. But it seems that this patient was actually of a very
contented disposition; for when, upon her return, away from Tours, she
lay down to her first night’s rest, she thanked God that at least her
life was spared, and that she had been permitted to see the grave of
St. Martin. Affected by so much modesty, St. Martin appeared to her in
her sleep, and, like to St. Benedict in the case of the emperor Henry,
with his own holy hands he performed somewhat of an operation upon the
patient, in that he stretched her bent fingers in such a manner that
the tense tendons were evidently torn; for Gregory tells us that, under
the treatment described, blood flowed from the straightened fingers of
the woman. But St. Martin had entirely discarded his martial attire
upon this visit. Evidently such a garb did not seem to him appropriate
when visiting a female patient; he therefore appeared before the
patient in a purple cloak with a cross in his hand.

However, the medical activity of the saints was by no means restricted
to cases of church slumber, but was manifested in the most various
forms.

§ 7. =Medical Saints.=—Some saints had a decided predilection for
medical specialties, and for that reason paid a particular attention to
certain varieties of disease. Thus, St. Anna espoused ophthalmology;
St. Jude cured coughs; St. Valentine, epilepsy; St. Catherine of Siena,
the plague. Not even our domestic animals were forgotten by the saints.
Thus, St. Roch of Montpellier distinguished himself especially by his
skill as a veterinarian.

Various were the ways of obtaining the medical aid of this or that
saint. The most simple was probably that the patient attended mass in
the church of his town, and, at the same time, made an offering to
the saints. More difficult was it to undertake a pilgrimage to one
or the other of the saints who enjoyed a medical reputation; this
was generally done on the birthday of the celestial physician. It
seems that the saint was especially inclined on this day to practise
medicine; at least, the chroniclers report that great numbers of the
most difficult cases were successfully treated on such days.

A very efficacious method of securing medical treatment from saints was
considered to be the placing of the patient in the church during the
day in the space between the altar and the grave of the saint. The bed
of the mortally sick, fever-racked patient was placed there, and for
days was compelled to remain here wrestling with death. This was done,
for instance, with the dying Countess Eborin. In case severe epidemics
were prevalent, it is likely that the churches very often resembled
actual hospitals. Then dozens of beds with their patients were set up
in the churches, and many a one who was in good health when he entered
the church to say his prayers probably returned home with the germ of a
pestilence acquired in the sanctuary.

But the saints, as we have seen, were by no means always so anxious
or in such a hurry to manifest their medical skill. They often made
the patient wait for years for their aid. The church, therefore, made
practical arrangements to meet every requirement. Larger buildings were
erected close to the church intended for the reception of patients.
Here those who were hoping to find help could obtain shelter and food,
and were, therefore, able to rest quietly, and to await the moment when
heavenly aid might appear. This arrangement proved to be extremely
practical, especially because a good many individuals felt themselves
cured only so long as they remained in the proximity of the saint, but
became reafflicted as before when they returned to their homes.

But as the slumber and the protracted sojourn in the ecclesiastical
hostelries was, nevertheless, rather uncomfortable, especially in
consideration of the difficulties and dangers which were involved in
traveling during the middle ages, it was absolutely necessary to invent
a means of administering the medical aid of the saints in such a way as
was always accessible to the patient. This was managed by the use of
relics.

§8. =Cult of Relics.=—It was believed that God had endowed the bodies
of martyrs who died for the Christian faith, or of saints distinguished
by extraordinary piety, with a miraculous power of extraordinary
efficacy, and not only the mortal relics of the martyrs and saints were
wonder-working, but actually all objects which had come in contact with
the persons of saints during their life as well as after their death.
All such objects were possessed of curative power. Let us listen to
what Gregory of Tours says under this head: “The miracles which our
Lord God deigned to bring about through St. Martin, his servant, once a
pilgrim in the flesh, he causes to be repeated daily, to strengthen the
confidence of the faithful; for now he endows his tomb with precisely
the same wonder-working power as was exhibited by the saint himself
while still among us. Who will now persist in doubting the former
miracles when he observes their continuation in the present day, when
he sees the lame walk, the blind receive their sight, devils cast
out, and every variety of disease cured by the help of the saint?”
(“Bernoulli,” page 287).

The statement of such a luminary of the Church as Gregory of Tours has
undoubtedly gained ecclestiastical credence for the medical efficacy
not only of the tomb of St. Martin, but of all the relics relating to
that saint. It remained only to distribute the superior medical power
which was contained in the holy tombs and relics in such a form as
would enable all patients, wherever they happened to be, to make use of
them. This task, apparently most difficult, was settled very easily.
It was discovered that everything which came in contact with a relic
actually absorbed a sacred and miraculous power contained in the same,
and what had been absorbed was by no means imponderable. Quite the
contrary. Something of material substance, and, therefore, physically
demonstrable, passed from the relic into the objects surrounding it.
It was indeed a celestial fluid, but, nevertheless, of so terrestrial
a nature that the priests were able to demonstrate its transference
by means of a common pair of scales. Thus it was customary that the
silk shreds which were deposited by the pilgrims upon the tomb of the
apostle Peter were weighed before they were placed there and weighed
again after their removal. This weighing always and without exception
indicated a considerable increase in their weight. The pilgrim then
could travel homeward and be thoroughly consoled, as the scale had
demonstrated to him the amount of miraculous power contained in his
silk rag. It was really astonishing, under some circumstances, what
an enormous amount of curative fluid could flow from such a holy tomb
into a single terrestrial object. This was what happened to a king of
the Suavians. He had a sick son, for whose cure every remedy had proved
unavailing. He at last sent an embassy to Tours to obtain a relic of
St. Martin, but this relic was destined to be manufactured with the
assistance of the embassy. The priests were quite willing to comply
with the desire of their royal petitioner, and thus a piece of silk,
duly weighed beforehand, was placed upon the tomb of St. Martin. After
this silk had remained for one night upon the holy sepulchre, and the
embassy had knelt beside praying fervently, the silk absorbed so much
curative power that the register of the scale was raised to its highest
possible notch.

Knowing, then, that any desired object could be saturated with the
miraculous power contained in a relic, they used to apply this
celestial power through medicaments, and to accomplish this a number
of methods were in use. The most popular was to scrape the tombstones
on the graves of the saints as thoroughly as possible. The powder
thus obtained was then put into water or wine, and thus a medicine
was acquired which possessed an astonishing curative power. It was
efficacious even in the severest ailments of the body. Let us listen to
what Gregory of Tours has reported concerning the medicinal virtues of
such tombstone potions.

He says: “Oh, indescribable mixture, incomparable elixir, antidote
beyond all praise! Celestial purgative (if I may be permitted to
use the expression), which throws into the shade every medical
prescription, which surpasses in fragrance every earthly aroma, and
is more powerful than all essences; which purges the body like the
juice of scammony, clears the lungs like hyssop, and the head like
sneezewort; which not only cures the ailing limbs, but also, and this
is much more valuable, washes off the stains from the conscience!”

According to this extensive power of the tombstone powder, it is by no
means astonishing that Gregory of Tours, when traveling, always carried
a box of this miraculous powder with him, so that he was able at once
to heal the patients that surrounded him. I was not able to obtain
from the literary sources at my disposal any data as to whether the
direct licking off of the tombstones might not have been still more
efficacious than the all-healing extract. Gregory does, however, report
that he was cured of a tumor of the tongue and lips by merely licking
the railing of the tomb of St. Martin and kissing the curtain of the
temple.

Another very efficacious remedy was the charred wick of the wax candles
which had burned in the church. This wick was pulverized, and in this
manner a very powerful curative powder was obtained which, when taken,
acted in a manner similar to that of the watery or vinous tombstone
infusion.

The wax which dripped from candles that were placed near the holy
sepulchre was also credited with many medicinal virtues, but it seems
that it was employed more as an external than an internal remedy.

The water which had been used before Easter to clean the altar of
the saints was also considered to be a famous remedy. If such water
was employed in washing a patient he recovered at once, and this was
the happy experience of Countess Eborin. This exhalted patient was
suffering so severely that she believed her hour had come. She was then
quickly removed to the church of St. Martin, and thoroughly washed
with the water that had been used in washing the altar. And, behold!
the disease disappeared, and let us hope that the overjoyed countess
afterward enjoyed many years of life.

Oil from lamps hung in holy places was also a favorite remedy, but it
appears that it was principally used for anointing. However, when mixed
with holy water, it furnished a remedy which could be administered to
diseased cattle with a prospect of positive cure.

Water which was obtained by boiling the covers in which the relics were
wrapped also yielded a very efficacious medicine. Thus, for instance,
Gregory of Tours caused a silk cover, in which a piece of the cross
of Christ had been wrapped, to be thoroughly boiled, and he then
administered this decoction to patients; the curtains which were used
as ornaments over holy graves also displayed an extremely beneficent
effect upon the sick. If an individual suffering from headache touched,
for instance, the carpet which was placed over the resting-place of St.
Julian, the pain ceased. But if a patient was afflicted with abdominal
pains, all that was necessary to relieve him at once was to pull a
thread from this, the above-named carpet, and to apply it to his
rebellious digestive apparatus.

However, it was not necessary for the priests, under some
circumstances, personally to take the trouble of manufacturing
miraculous medicines from relics. There existed some holy graves which
were so accommodating that they furnished, of their own accord, the
holy material that was required for the treatment of the sick. Thus
the chronicler records that the grave of the evangelist John exuded a
sort of white manna, which, owing to its wonder-working curative power,
was distributed all over the world. A similar product was yielded by
the grave of the Apostle Andrew on the festival day of that saint. A
precious oil scented like nectar also sprang from the resting-place of
this man of God.

We see, therefore, that the sacred pharmacopœia teemed with remedies,
and that they were quite extensively employed is shown sufficiently by
the history of the saints and, above all, by the works of Gregory of
Tours. The latter, in particular, offer an actually inexhaustible mine
of information concerning the medical activity of Christian saints.

It does not, however, appear that this medical activity enjoyed the
confidence of priests or of laymen to such an extent that the services
of a professional physician were entirely discarded. It is true,
Gregory of Tours expresses himself in reference to the terrestrial
physicians in a manner which is by no means complimentary, for he says:

“What are they (the physicians) able to accomplish with their
instruments? Their office is rather to cause pain than to alleviate
it; if they open the eye and cut into it with pointed lancets, they
surely cause the agony of death to come in sight before assisting in
the recovery of vision, and if all precautionary measures are not
thoroughly carried out the power of sight is lost forever. Our beloved
saint, however, has only one instrument of steel, and that is his will,
and only one salve, and that is his curative power.”

But in spite of this want of confidence in physicians, Gregory of Tours
did not hesitate eventually to interfere quite extensively with the
practise of the saints by the employment of ordinary medicine.

At least, he frequently did so when he felt sick himself. Thus, one
day, when he was afflicted with severe bellyache, he employed warm
poultices and baths, and only when the refractory abdomen gave him no
rest, after a continuance of this treatment for six days, did Gregory
apply to St. Martin. When, at another time, Gregory was affected
with so severe an attack that his death was believed to be imminent,
he caused himself at first to be treated according to all the rules
of medical science, and not until improvement failed to appear, did
he think of the aid of the saints. Then he spoke to his physician as
follows: “Well, you have exhausted all remedies of your art, you have
used up all your powers and juices, but the remedies of this world do
not help him who is destined to die. Only one thing remains for me to
do. I shall tell you the great remedy: take some stone powder from the
grave of St. Martin and prepare it for me.”

The healing of the sick by the power of the saints and through relics
was in favor throughout the middle ages, and even in the sixteenth
century it was so generally in vogue that a physician by the name
of Wyer (1515 to 1588) considered it expedient to demonstrate the
incredibility of such heavenly interference.

It is by no means my intention to hold solely dogmatic Christendom of
the middle ages and the Christian priest responsible for the monstrous
superstition into which, according to the above description, Christian
religion had degenerated in the domain of medicine. This superstition
resulted from the cooperation of quite incongruous factors; but we
can by no means exempt the Christian priest entirely from blame, in
that he assisted very materially in furthering it. For we must bear in
mind that the Christian cloister of the middle ages was not only the
last refuge of humanistic culture, but the science of medicine found
an asylum of preeminent importance within its precincts. Medicine had
taken refuge in the cloister from the storms and tribulations which
followed the political collapse of antiquity and from the excitement of
national migrations, and had here attained a high degree of perfection.
In fact, we may contend, without exaggeration, that at certain periods
of the middle ages the Christian monastery had the importance as a
medical school which was later on claimed by the university; for the
Christian monks not only nursed the sick and practised medicine,
but also took an interest in its scientific development. They were
well acquainted with the medical classics of ancient times, such as
Hippocrates, Herophilus, Dioscorides, Galen, Paul of Ægina, and others,
as well as with the ancient medical celebrities of second and third
rank. Briefly, medical knowledge in its entirety was contained in
the cloisters of the middle ages; the cloisters, indeed, furnished a
considerably larger quota of the medical profession than the laity. In
such a state of affairs it might have been expected that the monks and
priests should have applied their extensive medical knowledge to combat
the terrible abuses which had invaded medicine in connection with the
names and the bones of the saints. But this they never did, neither
during the middle ages or later on. Priesthood has never seriously
attempted to promote medical enlightenment. On the contrary, plenty of
writings exist in which the crassest superstition in medico-physical
affairs was defended by the clergy, who quite frequently exhibit the
same spirit while practising medicine. Medical relief obtained by
entirely terrestrial remedies they speedily placed to the credit of the
saints, as was done, for instance, by the monks of Monte Cassino, when
(as we have seen above) they persuaded the emperor Henry II. that not
the temporal hands of the friar physicians had performed an operation
for stone upon him, but that St. Benedict in person had, with his own
holy hands, extracted the stone from the imperial bladder.

By leading the laity, in numerous cases and against their better
knowledge and conscience, to believe that the aid of the saints, and
of the relics originating from them, was far superior to medical
services, the Christian priests of the middle ages have on their part
contributed quite a considerable share to the horrors of medical
superstition. It is true, we must not overlook the fact that monks
and priests of the middle ages were the product of their time, in the
same manner as we of modern times are the product of our period. And
as the middle ages formed an era of miracles, of demons, devils, and
witches, numerous members of the clergy, as children of their time,
surely had an essentially different opinion of the belief in miracles
and demons from that which we have. The conception of miracles was
entirely different during the middle ages from what it is in modern
times; for the sincere and firm belief in the omnipotence of the one
God, which with Christianity had taken possession of the world, had
firmly fixed in the Christian mind of that period the idea that God
was able at any moment to manifest his omnipotence by changing the
course of terrestrial phenomena, and actually did manifest it. Thus to
a Christian of the middle ages it did not appear miraculous that an
alteration in the course of natural law should occur. It was considered
quite conceivable that the same natural phenomena should spring from
one cause to-day and from a different one to-morrow, according to
the pleasure of God; it would have been just as inconceivable to the
early Christians, and to their later coreligionists of the middle
ages, that all natural processes are carried into effect according to
eternally unalterable laws, beyond the interference of divinity, as
it is incomprehensible to us to conceive that God would at any time
change a law of nature in favor of one or the other mortal being.
The conception of miracle during the first sixteen centuries of the
Christian era was entirely different from that of the subsequent era.
We must not, therefore, gauge the ideas of priests and laymen of those
centuries who believed in medical miracles by the same standard as
that by which we judge those who to-day still persist in admitting the
existence of medico-physical wonder or miracle. It is highly probable
that, under conditions as described above, many Christian monks and
priests vacillated between the requirements of faith and the results of
their own medical knowledge. The medieval scholar’s feeling drew him to
one side, his intelligence to the other, and thus he became destitute
of a firm hold—the intellectual sport of his period and of his
environment. That prominent lights of the Church could become subject
to such vacillations we learn from Gregory of Tours, who attempted to
cure bodily ailments at one time with the medicaments of professional
medicine, at other times with the saving means of the celestial
drug-store; who at one time deprecated the art of temporal physicians
in favor of medically skilled saints, at other times fled to human
medicine for refuge.

Finally the position of the medically learned monk and priest with
reference to the general public, during the middle ages, was by no
means an easy or an agreeable one. The people clung with invincible
tenacity to the belief in demons and miracles. Ancient as well as
Christian philosophy was firmly pledged to a belief in demons, whose
existence was supported by the sacred testimony of the Gospel. It is
not astonishing, therefore, that the people should cling to their
belief in various forms of supernatural interference with the functions
of organic beings, and thus it may frequently have happened that a
medically enlightened priest, fearing the opposition of a people eager
after celestial medicine, sacrificed his scientific convictions to the
caprices of a mistaken faith. Unfortunately, only a few had in them the
making of a scientific martyr, and the history of Christianity teaches
us that it is much easier to be a martyr of faith than a martyr of
science.

But what has been stated thus far will by no means acquit the Christian
priest of blame which he incurred by favoring medical superstition;
such acquittal would be radically futile. But we mean to show that the
conduct of the servants of our faith, altho not pardonable, is quite
explicable. The historian, in order to present to his readers the
relation which had gradually formed between Christianity and medical
superstition, must show himself prosecutor and defendant at the same
time.

Equally with dogma and priesthood, theistic belief also has been a
powerful instrument in the furthering of medical superstition, and this
point we shall next consider.

§9. =Theistic Thought as the Fosterer of Medical Superstition.=—Altho
the theist, by accepting a physico-mechanical interpretation of natural
phenomena, abandoned his main position, yet the theistic belief by no
means became obsolete—_i.e._, the belief that God, unrestricted by
natural laws, personally directed terrestrial manifestations still
held its ground. This belief remained dominant in many minds, in spite
of all that philosophers and naturalists said in regard to the forms
and life of organic structures. The vitality which this belief has
shown during the development of our race is actually astonishing. In
spite of the wide acceptance of the physico-mechanical theory of life,
the belief that God, without regard to natural laws, unceasingly
interfered with the course of natural events, and, consequently,
also with the conditions of the human body, has not only remained
active, but has even succeeded in recovering an extensive part of its
lost ground. We shall soon see that this is a repetition of what has
occurred during all periods of human development. Even to-day, when the
mechanical theory of life has won its greatest triumphs, and more than
twenty centuries have passed since the great Hippocrates preached a
theory of medicine, purified from all theistic and theurgic accretions,
individuals are still met with who presuppose the therapeutic activity
of God in all cases of disease as a self-evident fact. Such a condition
of opinion, history teaches us, always prevails at periods, during
which a craving for religious excitement becomes excessively acute.
It is either a new form of religion which so preoccupies the public
mind and the intelligence that all phenomena are conceived of as in
closest relationship with God, or else some individual appears who,
carried away by religious enthusiasm, teaches that the existence of
nature independent of God is not admissible, and succeeds in enlisting
numerous followers under his banner. Under similar conditions theistic
belief had occasionally succeeded in regaining its supremacy in
the domain of medicine. In taking up the consideration of some such
instances we can only treat them briefly, as an exhaustive handling of
this most interesting material would carry us too far away from our
present subject.

The belief that God was the best physician, not only of the soul but
of the body also, was deepened by the dissemination of Christianity.
The sincerity of faith among the Christians of the first century was so
intense that a great number of them believed that their bodily welfare
could not be watched over more carefully than when it was commended
exclusively to the care of God in all cases of sickness. Accordingly,
they entirely neglected medical aid and treated all diseases only
by prayers, by anointing, and by laying on of hands. This mode of
treatment corresponds to what is contained in the epistle of James
v : 14-16—

“Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the church; and
let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord:

“And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise
him up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him.

“Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that
ye may be healed. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
availeth much.”

The extent of this treatment by prayer is shown by the fact that even
prominent fathers of the Church—for instance, St. Benedict (died
543)—were addicted to it.

Moreover, an attempt was made to increase the therapeutic value of
prayer by various accessories and aids. Thus the Gospel was placed upon
the affected part of the body, or clothing of a particularly pious man
was spread over the patient. It appears that the sudarium and the coat
of the apostle Paul were held to possess such healing power, and were,
therefore, frequently employed as instruments of healing. Thus we read
in the Act of the Apostles xix : 12—“So that from his body were brought
unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases departed from
them, and the evil spirits went out of them.”

In fact, medical superstition went so far that it divined a potent
curative virtue even in the shadow of the apostle Peter. Thus, Acts
v : 15—“Insomuch that they brought forth the sick into the streets,
and laid them on beds and couches, that at least the shadow of Peter
passing by might overshadow some of them.”

Probably we shall not be wrong in regarding this procedure as the
origin of that relic cult which was destined to attain such astonishing
dimensions in medical practise.

The mode of treatment by means of prayer was, perhaps, intimately
connected with the idea that bodily ailments were divinely ordained to
make the wrath of God distinctly perceptible by man. This conception of
pathological processes was a very ancient one. We meet with it among
the Egyptians, and we read in the book of Exodus that God visited upon
Pharaoh and his people various bodily afflictions, such as pestilence,
black smallpox, death, as in the case of the first-born. Afterward
Christianity adopted this view of sickness as providential, and the
belief assumed very peculiar forms and dimensions in the middle
ages. In those times any disease occurring epidemically was actually
considered to be an act of retribution on the part of the divine
being, a scourge with which God punished sinful Christians. Thus,
for instance, syphilis, which originated in Naples in 1495, during
the struggle between the reigning house of Aragon and the French,
was instantly declared to be the chastisement of God. The emperor
Maximilian declares, in an edict issued August 7, 1495, at Worms:
“_Quod novus ille et gravissimus hominum morbus nostris diebus exortus,
quem vulgo malum Francicum vocant, post hominum memoriam inauditus
sæpe grassetur, quæ nos justissimæ Dei iræ merita debent admonere_”
(Gregorovius VII., 386, foot-note 1).

But it is very astonishing to observe the causes which aroused the
wrath of God so mightily that countless numbers of men were swept
away. Thus, for instance, the pious Bishop of Zeeland, Peter Paladius,
assures us that miliary fever, that terrible disease which devastated
Europe five times from 1486 to 1551, was sent by God, who was angry at
the excessive passion for finery which prevailed at that time. Medical
science, as founded on theism, assumed menacing forms, where, in the
middle ages, it associated itself with magic, but as we shall more
exhaustively enlarge upon this point in Chapter IV. we need merely
refer here to that part of our work.

It is indeed surprising that the above-mentioned manifestations all
occurred in periods in which medicine had already acknowledged the
physico-mechanical interpretation of all organic processes; but the
strangeness of this fact is enhanced by the consideration that, even
in recent times, and even at the present moment, there have been, and
are, individuals who not only preach the doctrine that medicine is
bound to be subordinate to Christian faith, but also find adherents to
their dogmas, and find them in surprising numbers. Recently we have
learned from two exceedingly instructive examples to what extremes the
sentiment of fanatical religion may lead men so soon as they shake off
the steadying influence of physico-mechanical ideas in their theory of
life. Then Theocracy strives for an exclusive ascendancy in the domain
of medicine, as is distinctly shown by the position taken by Mrs. Eddy,
with her “Christian Science,” and Rev. John Alexander Dowie, with his
“Christian Catholic Church of Zion.”

If we first of all examine the system of Mrs. Eddy, we find it an
absurd farrago of undigested philosophical odds and ends, illogical
medical aphorisms, and shallow investigation, which reaches its pitch
of folly in the belief that disease has no real foundation in the
material tissues of the body, but should be explained as arising
exclusively from certain conditions of the mind. In accordance with
this conception, which has been borrowed from a natural philosophy long
since relegated to oblivion, the services both of physician and physic
are to be rejected, and the treatment of the sick is to be carried on
in such a manner that the patient, under supervision of an individual
expert in such affairs, is merely to fix his mind on the spiritual, or
divine, principle inherent in himself.

We are by no means astonished that a person to whom the laws of
thought are entirely unfamiliar, and who is not very much burdened
with knowledge of any other kind, should advance such confused and
preposterous theories as those of Mrs. Eddy. History teaches us that
human beings have arisen at all periods, in all ranks of life, and in
cold blood have given currency to the wildest of theories. But the most
interesting point is that at this day when, as we might believe, the
advances in physical science have enlightened to some extent even the
most unintellectual, Mrs. Eddy is able to find adherents, especially
among the best classes of society, and to find them in such numbers
that the authorities have been compelled to interfere in repressing the
practises of this medical superstition. I purposely say interesting,
and not “astonishing” or “wonderful,” because the historian, whatever
domain he undertakes to investigate, will always discover that
stupidity has at all times been a power superior to all the influences
of culture and learning. Mrs. Eddy, with her Christian Science, proves
to us that even in this era of scientific enlightenment, this truth
remains incontrovertible.

Rev. John Alexander Dowie, with his Christian Catholic Church of Zion,
must be judged from an entirely different view-point than Mrs. Eddy.
It is true, this latter-day saint arrives at exactly the same end as
Mrs. Eddy—namely, at the absolute rejection of professional treatment,
medical as well as surgical. But he arrives at this theory, which
so closely concerns both his own health and that of his adherents,
by an entirely different way from that taken by the Eddy woman. An
unquestioning belief, which in its naïveté is almost touching, leads
him to hold that all utterances of the Old as well as of the New
Testament are direct revelations of God. The further consequence
of this constancy of faith is the desire to believe and to follow
everything that is contained in the Bible, to the widest extent and
with the closest adherence to the wording of the book. And as the book
of Exodus, xv : 26, states, “I am the Lord that healeth thee,” and in
the Epistle to James, v : 14-16, prayer is recommended as the best
remedy in diseases, Dowie concludes that prayer must be resorted to as
the sole means of treating and curing all forms of disease. Prayer is
declared by him to be much more efficacious, in surgical cases, than
the skill of the most experienced operator.

Dowie, therefore, occupies exactly the same standpoint as the
Christians of the first centuries after Christ, who also believed
that prayer would render the best assistance in all ailments of the
body. Twenty centuries, therefore, with all their immense advance in
the training of thought and in the recognition of nature, have not
been able to rid humanity of the conception that the omnipotence of
God, among many other manifestations, is to busy itself in the daily
regulation of the human body with all its numerous functions. Wherever
this conception obtains a firm foothold superstition, with its acts of
miraculous healing, never fails to follow. Accordingly, all historic
periods of our cultural development, in which the theocratic belief has
been on the ascendant, are characterized by an excessive development of
medical superstition.




