
  SUPERSTITION
  IN MEDICINE




  SUPERSTITION
  IN MEDICINE

  BY
  PROF. DR. HUGO MAGNUS

  AUTHORIZED TRANSLATION FROM
  THE GERMAN, EDITED BY
  DR. JULIUS L. SALINGER

  _Late Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine, Jefferson Medical
  College; Physician to the Philadelphia General Hospital, etc._

  [Illustration]

  FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
  NEW YORK AND LONDON
  1908




  COPYRIGHT, 1905, BY
  FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
  [_Printed in the United States of America_]
  Published, April, 1905




PREFACE


The history of medicine is closely interlinked with the development
of theology. The errors of one are for the most part reflected in
the mistakes of the other. No matter how obscure and dark the origin
of either, whether derived from ignorance and superstition or not,
the ultimate achievement alone must be taken into consideration. We
do not reject chemistry because it originated in alchemy, we do not
disregard astronomy because its roots are entwined with the teachings
of astrology, and so in theology and medicine we look to the final
issue. The statements set forth in this book should not be construed
as reflecting the development of theology or medicine at the time, but
as the belief of the people existing in these periods. Philosophy may
have been pure, but if the mind of man was faulty the responsibility
must not be laid at the door of science. It is the function of the
historian truthfully to depict the thought and spirit of the time of
which he writes. This has been attempted in the present work. It is not
a criticism of a system, but a criticism of man. There can be no doubt
that absurd superstitions are still existent for which the twentieth
century will be severely criticized in time to come. Thus the words of
our martyred President may well be used as a motto for this book: “With
malice towards none, with charity for all.”

The last chapter of this book has been added by the translator, as it
seemed necessary for the full discussion of the subject.

    JULIUS L. SALINGER.

  PHILADELPHIA, Pa.




CONTENTS


                                                           PAGE
    I. WHAT IS MEDICAL SUPERSTITION?                          1

   II. THEISM IN ITS RELATION TO MEDICINE AND IN ITS
       STRUGGLE WITH THE PHYSICO-MECHANICAL THEORY OF LIFE    7

  III. RELIGION THE SUPPORT OF MEDICAL SUPERSTITION          23

   IV. THE INFLUENCE OF PHILOSOPHY UPON THE FORM AND
       ORIGIN OF MEDICAL SUPERSTITION                        89

    V. THE RELATIONS OF NATURAL SCIENCE TO MEDICAL
       SUPERSTITION                                         128

   VI. INFLUENCE EXERTED UPON THE DEVELOPMENT OF
       SUPERSTITION BY MEDICINE ITSELF                      185

  VII. MEDICAL SUPERSTITION AND INSANITY                    191

       BIBLIOGRAPHY                                         201




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                           PAGE
  CIRCLE OF PETOSIRIS                                       141

  CIRCLE OF PETOSIRIS                                       143

  THE TABLE OF DEMOCRITUS                                   145

  THE RELATION OF THE PARTS OF THE HUMAN BODY TO THE SIGNS
  OF THE ZODIAC                                             159

  VENESECTION IN ITS ASTRONOMICAL CONNECTION                175




I

WHAT IS MEDICAL SUPERSTITION?


Faith and superstition are twin brothers. Altho the former leads
humanity to its sublimest ideals and the latter only presents us with
a caricature of human knowledge, both are children of the same family.
Both originate in a sense of the inadequacy of human science in regard
to natural phenomena. The fact that the most important processes of
organic life can not be traced to their ultimate origin, but that their
investigation will soon lead to a point of irresistible opposition to
further analysis, has always called forth a feeling of impotency and
dependence in the human mind. This consciousness of being dependent
upon factors which are entirely beyond human understanding has thus
given rise to the metaphysical need of reflecting upon these mysterious
factors, and bringing them within reach of human comprehension.
Humanity, in attempting to satisfy such a metaphysical requirement
from an ethical standpoint, created faith, which subsequently found
expression in the various forms of religion. It is not within the
scope of this essay to consider how far Divine revelations have
been vouchsafed on this subject. Superstition undoubtedly entered
the scene when, simultaneously with these, endeavors were made to
consider and to explain physical processes from the standpoint of
such metaphysical requirements. It is true that this did not, at
first, lead to a marked contrast between faith and superstition;
for a period existed in which faith and superstition—_i.e._, the
metaphysical consideration of ethical values and the metaphysical
consideration of the entire phenomena of life—were not only equivalent,
but even merged into one conception. This occurred in an age in which
mankind considered all terrestrial processes, whether they were of
a psychical or of a material nature, as immediately caused by the
steady interference of supernatural powers—a period during which the
deity was held responsible for all terrestrial phenomena. During
this period faith became superstition, and superstition, faith. A
separation did not take place until some especially enlightened minds
began to evolve the idea that it would be more reasonable to explain
natural phenomena—temporal becoming, being, and passing away—by
natural rather than by supernatural causes. The reaction against
this better interpretation, the tenacious adherence to the original
association of terrestrial manifestations with metaphysical factors,
created the superstition of the natural sciences. The birth of
superstition in the Greek world must be placed about the seventh
century, B.C., the period during which Thales of Miletus came forward
with his endeavor to explain natural processes in a natural manner.
This attempt of the Milesian is the initiation of a rational scientific
conception of natural manifestations, and the ancient theistic
consideration of nature became superstition only in opposition to
such a view. It follows, then, that what holds good with regard to
the interpretation of natural manifestations in general holds good in
medicine especially. Here, also, superstition came into question only
when, besides the original theistic conception of the functions of the
body and besides the metaphysical treatment of the sick, a valuation
of the normal as well as of the morbid phenomena of the human organism
came into vogue which took into account terrestrial causes. Not until
this stage was reached did theism and theurgy lose their title and
become superstition; until then they could claim fullest acceptance in
medicine as thoroughly logical consequences of the prevailing theory
of life. This took place, so far as Greek medicine was concerned,
at about the end of the sixth century, B.C. The Corpus Hippocraticum
already shows us Greek medicine as being purified from all theistic
sophistications and only reckoning with natural causes. When this
separation must have taken place for pre-Greek, Indian, Assyrian, and
Egyptian culture can not be at present determined with certainty. For
the Egyptian and Babylonico-Assyrian manuscripts, so far known, show
an intimate admixture of true observation of nature with theistic
speculations—_i.e._, a treatment of medicine which, altho it took
account of physico-natural manifestations, was still deeply tinctured
with superstition.

According to what we have stated, medical superstition might be defined
as follows: “Belief that the normal as well as the pathological
manifestations of organic life may be explained and eventually
treated, without consideration of their physical nature, by means of
supernatural agencies.”

Medical superstition varies according to the kind and the origin of
these supernatural causes, and therefore appears in the greatest
variety of forms. If these causes were looked for in celestial regions,
medical superstition became vested with the religious garb, and its
source was in the religious cult; but if the belief prevailed that
God shared the domination of the world with other mysterious elements,
such as were embodied in different forms in accordance with the various
philosophical systems, medical superstition bore a philosophical and
mystical stamp whose origin is revealed in the history of philosophy.
But if certain mysterious powers hidden in the womb of nature or active
above the earth were considered to influence human life, medical
superstition assumed a physical character. However, it frequently
followed that the above three factors acted simultaneously or in
varying combinations, or certain other elements which were inherent
in human nature cooperated. For this reason it is sometimes not quite
easy to decide as to the source from which this or that form of
medical superstition principally derived its persistent currency. But,
nevertheless, it is our intention to divide our subject in accordance
with the sources from which the several forms of medical superstition
spring, as it is absolutely impossible to obtain a satisfactory view
of the extensive material without first attempting a systematic
arrangement of the data at hand.

But before attempting to inquire why the purest and most valuable
fountains of all human knowledge—religion, philosophy, and natural
science—have at the same time become sources of medical superstition,
it will be advisable to explain the character which medical science had
assumed under the exclusive domination of theism, and how conditions
shaped themselves when physico-mechanical philosophy appeared and began
to do battle with the theistic conception of life. These conditions
played such a special part in the development of medico-physical
superstition that it becomes necessary first to examine their power and
tendency before attempting to contemplate medical superstition proper.




