VII

MEDICAL SUPERSTITION AND INSANITY


The history of medicine is conjoined with the evolution of theology
to an extent which makes them almost inseparable, and this may
best be seen from a study of the management of the insane, which
is a continuous record of cruelty based upon medico-theological
superstition. Perhaps the most heartrending chapter of unphilosophical
theology teems with the narration of thousands of unfortunate
beings murdered, tortured, and mishandled by the finesse in the
interpretation of Biblical texts. The greatest triumph of modern
medicine has consisted in unfettering the views of effete centuries,
born of superstition and misconception, and in placing the treatment
of the insane upon a humane, often even a curative, plane. As other
afflictions of humanity were attributed to the agency of evil spirits,
this was particularly the case with insanity; for if the evil one found
it an easy task to control the corporeal acts of humanity, his power
over the mental functions of the person afflicted was even greater.
Hence, it was not the person who acted, but the evil spirit in him.
Thus, the devil and his minions were the specific pathogenic agents.

This conception was not universal, for history shows us that clear
thinkers, far in advance of their times, had an almost correct view
of the nature of insanity—namely, that it was due to an affection of
the mind. Among such men were Hippocrates, Aretæus, Soranus, Galen,
Aurelianus, etc., and some of the Mohammedan physicians. These apostles
of science taught that insanity was a disease of the brain, and the
most efficient remedy, mild, palliative treatment.

The belief which had flourished in most of the Oriental religions from
remote antiquity, that the power of evil demons was the active cause
of disease, particularly that lunacy was due to diabolic possession,
became rooted in the early Christian Church and flourished for eighteen
centuries, each leaf of this malignant plant representing countless
unfortunates sacrificed to superstition. Later it was thought that the
moon had a direct influence upon perturbation of the mind; hence, the
term “lunacy” developed.

These doctrines gained special credence in the first centuries after
Christ by the dissemination under the Church Fathers of the story
of the miracles which they claimed had been performed by Jesus of
Nazareth. Did not the Savior cast out devils? Did He not cure madness?
The very word “epilepsy” shows by its derivation, ἐπίληψις (to seize
upon), that possession was the presumable nature of the malady.

The noble work accomplished by the “pagan” pioneer alienists was
discredited or forgotten, and the Church originated a process by which
the possessed were to be treated. This method of treatment was derived
purely from theologic sources, tempered with sufficient dogma. At first
the treatment was gentle, in accordance with the spirit of the great
physicians of antiquity, and if the afflicted one was not violent he
was permitted to attend public worship. Sacred salves and holy water,
the breath or the spittle of the officiating priest, the touching of
relics, or a visit to holy places, were the principal therapeutic
agents employed. These methods, even if they did no good (sometimes
merely the consolation of a kind word from the priest had a beneficial
effect), certainly did no harm, even tho such practises were factors in
the spread of superstition.

This mild form of treatment did not, however, long continue. Soon
measures were directed toward driving out the evil spirit from the
possessed. This was attempted in various ways; first, by exorcism, in
the period of Justin Martyr, and continued up to almost recent times
(see Lecky, “History of European Morals”). “From the time of Justin
Martyr for about two centuries, there is, I believe, not a single
Christian writer who does not solemnly and explicitly assert the
reality and frequent employment of this power.”

One of the chief attributes of the devil was pride, therefore attempts
were made by exorcism to pierce this vulnerable point in the armor of
the evil one, and the foulest, vilest epithets were used to attain this
end. It is impossible to-day to print these expressions, even in a work
of scientific character, and it is better, perhaps, to refer such as
are especially interested in them to the _Manuale Benedictionum_, by
the Bishop of Passau, published in 1849, and similar works. Adjuvants
to this form of treatment consisted in “frightening” the devil by
long words, difficult to pronounce, commonly derived from Oriental
languages, by the administration of malodorous and filthy “drugs,” and
similar practises.

It was claimed that many devils were thus driven out, and the annals of
the Church contain numerous records of persons cured in this manner.
“The Jesuit Fathers at Vienna, in 1583, glorified in the fact that
in such a contest they had cast out twelve thousand, six hundred and
fifty-two living devils” (White). The prevalence of these ideas to
such a degree in the minds of the people may be noted from the fact
that, in the churches themselves, such scenes are carved in stone and
depicted on canvas. Medieval drama teemed with similar conceptions,
and this condition of affairs prevailed for over one thousand years,
unfortunately not in this harmless manner, but supplemented by great
cruelty, which forms, perhaps, the most terrible chapter in the history
of medical superstition.

The subtleties of theologic interpretation soon evolved a more
comprehensive method of dealing with the “possessor” and the possessed.
As an appeal to pride was ineffectual and noxious drugs unavailing,
it was found necessary to whip the devil out, or the unfortunate
individuals were imprisoned, and as a refinement of this treatment they
were even tortured. Thus the jailer for a long time played the part
of a specialist in lunacy, with the clergy in consultation. Places in
which the insane were confined were known as “fool towers” and “witch
towers.”

This state of things was not altered with the dawn of the Reformation.
The writings of Luther conclusively show his ideas in regard to
possession and witchcraft, and these views under Calvin reached
enormous development. Even Cotton Mather, in many respects far in
advance of his times, and who himself had known persecution, was not
emancipated from these delusions, and Salem has many a story to tell of
possession and witch-baiting. It is true we may quite properly consider
these views as the thought of the times, but, in many other respects,
Luther, Calvin, and Mather were in advance of their period, and,
therefore, a justification for their actions is not quite apparent.
Marcus Aurelius also was much superior to his age, yet was grateful to
his teachers that they taught him to disregard superstition in all its
various forms.

It is not unlikely that conditions of this kind frequently led to
epidemics—if not of actual insanity, at least to hysteria—which not
rarely developed in cities, nunneries, and monasteries; thus the
epidemics in Erfurt in 1237, in the Rhine countries in 1374, and many
others (see Hirsch).

It is rather remarkable that while such views and practises prevailed
in the Christian Church, the followers of Mohammed not only held
different views, but adopted a mode of treatment of the insane which
laid the foundation of modern therapeutics in diseases of the mind.
In the twelfth century, in Bagdad, a palace called the “Home of Mercy”
was built, in which the insane were confined, examined every month, and
released as soon as they had recovered. An asylum in Cairo was founded
in 1304, while the first Christian asylum expressly for the mad is
noted in 1409 (Lecky).

But science fought its way through the barriers of ignorance,
misdirected zeal, and superstition. Altho there were physicians and
“magicians,” who conformed to the views of the Church, the seed sown by
the earlier schools of medicine slowly but surely began to put forth
shoots, and the result was a tree of knowledge, the fruit of which
may be observed in every modern insane asylum of the world, where
the unfortunate sufferer is treated with kindness and skill, which,
fortunately, often results in cure.

Scientific reason frequently rebelled against the “insane
superstition,” at first mildly, but constantly increasing in strength,
until an effectual protest was finally raised by John Weir, of Cleves,
who was soon followed by Michel de Montaigne. And now a battle royal
was waged between the adherents of theology and the disciples of the
“resurrected” truth, and once more in the history of the world was
demonstrated the correctness of the saying, that “truth crushed to
earth shall rise again.” All over the world the warfare was carried,
and at the end of the eighteenth century new champions arose—Jean
Baptiste Pinel in France, and William Tuke in England. Their followers
are legion, and in the book of life, in letters of gold, many a name
has been written of those who trod in the footsteps of these pioneers.
Theology no longer interferes in the treatment of the insane; in fact,
it would be manifestly unjust not to mention that many Christian
theologians subsequently joined in the noble work of lunacy reform, and
aided progress greatly.

How great this progress in the treatment of the insane can best be
appreciated by some of the older physicians in practise to-day. Who
does not remember the chains, the strait-jacket, the dark locked cells
of the insane asylum? These conditions existed not very many years ago,
and altho the novels of Charles Reade are no doubt greatly exaggerated
in regard to the conditions he portrayed in insane asylums, yet _more
than a grain of truth_ is probably contained in them. The books did
much to bring about reforms in England and elsewhere.

Modern alienists have wrought wonders; their successful operations
are not published in the daily press, but any visitor who knows what
an insane asylum was fifty years ago, and who spends a few hours in
a modern hospital for the treatment of lunatics, will observe what
appears but little short of the miraculous. Imagine two thousand
or more insane persons dining in a large hall, upon the table a
tablecloth, and the insane using knife and fork in a decorous manner,
and when the visitor is told that the “violent ward” is also present,
and is asked to single these out from among the many, and fails (as
he invariably does), the results attained by science, above all other
measures, are strikingly apparent.




BIBLIOGRAPHY


  Ælius Spartianus. De Vita Hadriani. Caracalla. In Peter: Scriptores
    Historiæ Augustæ. Lipsiæ, 1884.

  Alexander von Tralles. Original Text und Uebersetzung von
    Puschmann. Wien, 1878-79.

  Almansoris. Astrologiæ propositiones ad Saracenorum regem. Basileæ,
    1551.

  Aristophanis Comoediæ. Ed. Bergh. Lipsiæ, 1878-78.

  Aureli Augustini. De divinatione daemomum. Corpus scriptorum
    ecclesiasticorum latinorum. Ed. Zycha. Vindobonæ, 1900.

  Bartisch, Ὀφθαλμοδουλεῖα. Das ist Augendienst. Dresden, 1583.

  Baur. Apollonius von Tyana und Christus. Tübingen, 1832.

  Bernoulli. Die Heiligen der Merowinger. Tübingen, 1900.

  Berthelot. La chemie des anciens et du moyen âge. Paris, 1889.

  Bethem. Centiloquium. Basileæ, 1551.

  Bouché-Leclercq. L’astrologie grecque. Paris, 1899.

  Cæsarius Heisterbacensis. Dialogus miraculorum. Ed. Strange. Cöln,
    1851.

  Campbell, Thompson. The Reports of the Magicians and Astrologers of
    Nineveh and Babylon in the British Museum. London, 1900.

  Delitzsch. Babel und Bibel. Leipzig, 1903. Batavi. Jahrbücher für
    klassische Philologie. 16. Supplementband. Leipzig, 1888.

  Erastus, Thomas. De Astrologia divinatrice epistolæ. Basileæ, 1580.

  Ermerius. Anecdota medica graeca. Lugd. Batovorum, 1840.

  Eunapius Sardianus. De vitis philosophorum et sophistorum. Ed.
    Hieronymus Cammelin. Coloniæ Allobrogum, 1616.

  Fühner. Lithotherapie. Berlin, 1902.

  Galeni Opera omnia. Ed. Gottlieb Kühn. Leipzig, 1821-33.

  Gregorii Turonici historiæ Francorum libri decem. Paris, 1561.

  Gregorovius. Geschichte der Stadt Rom im Mittelalter. Stuttgart,
    1886-96.

  Gregorovius. Der Kaiser Hadrian. 3. Aufl. Stuttgart, 1884.

  Häser. Lehrbuch der Geschichte der Medicin und der epidemischen
    Krankheiten. 3. Bearbeitung. Jena, 1875-82.

  Hansen. Zauberwahn, Inquisition und Hexenprocess im Mittelalter.
    Historische Bibliothek. Band XII. München und Leipzig, 1900.

  Harnack. Medicinisches aus der ältesten Kirchengeschichte. Leipzig,
    1892.

  Hermetis Centum aphorismorum liber. Basileæ, 1551.

  Hippocrates. Sämmtliche Werke. In’s Deutsche übersetzt von
    Fuchs. München, 1895, 1900.

  Hoffmann. De Potentia diaboli in corpore. Halæ, 1703.

  Hoffmann. Medicus politicus. Halæ, 1746. Deutsch von Ansbach.
    Leipzig, 1753.

  Jacobi Forliviensis egregia et subtilis expositio cum quæstionibus
    supra aureum capitulum de generatione embrionis. Venedig, 1502.

  Josephi Flavii opera. Ed. Destinon et Niese. Band VI. Berlin, 1894.

  Klenke. Wie müssen Dämonenglauben, Besessensein und
    Kerner-Eschenmayer’sche Gespenstererscheinungen nach dem
    heutigen Standpunkt der Physiologie und Psychologie erklärt
    werden? Leipzig, 1840.

  Krusch. Passiones vitæque sanctorum ævi Merovingici et antiquorum
    aliquot. In Monumenta Germaniæ historica Tomus III. u. IV.
    Hannoveræ, 1896, 1902.

  Lecky. Geschichte des Ursprungs und Einflusses der Aufklärung in
    Europa. Übersetzt von Dr. Jolowicz. Leipzig und Heidelberg, 1868.

  Lehman. Aberglaube und Zauberei von den ältesten Zeiten an bis in
    die Gegenwart. Deutsche autorisierte Ausgabe von Dr. Petersen.
    Stuttgart, 1898.

  Livius. Ab urbe condita. Ed. Weissenborn-Müller. Leipzig, 1891 _ff._

  Lucrez. De rerum natura. Ed. Brieger. Lipsiæ, 1899.

  Magnus. Medicin und Religion. Abhandlungen zur Geschichte der
    Medicin. Herausg. von Magnus, Neuburger, Sudhoff. Heft I.
    Breslau, 1902.

  Magnus. Die Augenheilkunde der Alten. Breslau, 1901.

  Magnus. Metaphysische Krankenbehandlung. Medicin-geschichtliche
    Studien über Gesundbeten und verwandte Bestrebungen. Breslau,
    1902.

  Dietrich. Papyrus magica musei Lugdunensis

  Marci Manilii. Astronomicon. Basileæ, 1551.

  Moehsen. Beschreibung einer Berliner Medaillen-Sammlung.
    Gedächtnissmünzen berühmter Aerzte. Berlin und Leipzig, 1781, I.
    u. II.

  v. Oefele. Verbotene Aderlasstage in der Keilschriftcultur. Wiener
    Medicinische Blätter, 1902, No. 10.

  Petersen. Hauptmomente in der geschichtlichen Entwickelung der
    medicinischen Therapie. Kopenhagen, 1877.

  Philostratus. Opera. Ed. Kayser. Leipzig, 1870-71.

  C. Plini secundi Naturalis historiæ libri XXXVII. Recensuit Sillig.
    Hamburgi et Gothæ, 1851-58.

  Plutarchi Chaeronensis Moralia. Rec. Bernardakis. Lipsiæ, 1888.

  Porphyrii de abstinentia. Ed. de Roer. Trajecti ad Rhenum, 1767.

  Priscianus Theodorus. Euporiston. Ed. Rose. Leipzig, 1894.

  Ptolemäus. Quadripartitum. Basileæ, 1551.

  Ptolemäus. Centiloquicum. Basileæ, 1551.

  Puschmann. Handbuch der Geschichte der Medicin. Jena, 1902-03.

  Rantzovius. Catalogus Imperatorum, regum ac principum qui artem
    astrologicam amarunt et exercuerunt. Lipsiæ, 1581.

  Rantzovius. Tractatus astrologicus. Francofurti, 1533.

  v. Ringseis. System der Medicin. Regensburg, 1841.

  Sextus Empiricus. Πρὸς μαθηματικους. Ed. Becker. Berlin, 1842.

  Soranus Ephesius. Frauenkrankheiten und Geburtshülfe. Uebersetzt
    von Lüneburg und mit med. Noten versehen von Chr. Huber.
    München, 1894.

  Sprengel. Versuch einer pragmatischen Geschichte der Arzneykunde.
    Halle, 1821-1828.

  Stich. Μάρκοὐ Αντονίνου ἐις ἑαυτον. Lipsiæ, 1882.

  Stöffler. Calendarium romanum magnum. Oppenheim, 1518.

  Sudhoff. Zur Geschichte der Lehre von den kritischen Tagen im
    Krankheitsverlaufe. Wiener med. Wochenschrift, 1902, No. 5 ff.

  Sudhoff. Medicinisches aus babylonisch-assyrischen
    Astrologen-Berichten. Die medicinische Woche, 1901, No. 41.

  Sudhoff. Jatromathematiker, vornemlich im 15. und 16. Jahrhundert.
    Abhandl. zur Geschichte der Medicin. Herausgegeben von Magnus,
    Neuburger, Sudhoff. Heft II. Breslau, 1902.

  Suidas, Lexicon. Ed. Bekker. Berlin, 1854.

  Villoison. Anecdota græca. Venetiis, 1781.

  Wierus. De dæmonum præstigiis et incantationibus libri VI. Basileæ,
    1566 und 1577. Amstelodami, 1664.

  Winckler. Die Gesetze Hammurabis, Königs von Babylon. In: Der alte
    Orient. Jahrgang 4, Heft 4. Leipzig, 1902.

  Windelband. Geschichte der alten Philosophie. Handbuch der
    klassischen Alterthums-Wissenschaft. Herausg. von J. von Müller.
    Band V., Abth. 1. München, 1894.




Transcriber’s note


Words in italics were surrounded with _underscores_ and words in small
capitals with all capitals.

The following corrections were made, on page

   18 “conspiculously” changed to “conspicuously” (becomes
      conspicuously prominent)
   30 “explicity” changed to “explicitly” (will be more explicitly
      referred to)
   57 “Julien” changed to “Julian” (led her toward the grave of
      St. Julian)
   77 “guage” changed to “gauge” (gauge the ideas of priests)
   91 “Ephesus(500” changed to “Ephesus (500” (the absurd theory which
      Heraclitus of Ephesus (500 B.C.) has propounded)
  116 “invidual” changed to “individual” (to plague an individual
      being)
  192 “person the” changed to “the person” (it was not the person who
      acted)
  196 “manasteries” changed to “monasteries” (nunneries, and
      monasteries)
  203 “autorisirte” changed to “autorisierte” (Deutsche autorisierte
      Ausgabe).

Otherwise the original was preserved, including inconsistent
hyphenation and possible errors in languages other than English,
for example the capitalisation in Greek sentences.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Superstition in Medicine, by Hugo Magnus

