III

RELIGION THE SUPPORT OF MEDICAL SUPERSTITION


Religion undoubtedly plays the most conspicuous part in the history
of medical superstition. Religious teaching, of whatever character,
has fostered medical superstition more than any other factor of
civilization. Not only has religion called forth and nourished medical
superstition, but it has also defended it with all the influence at its
disposal. Indeed, it has not infrequently happened that those who were
reluctant to believe in the blessings of a medical theory ridiculously
perverted by religion were exposed to persecution by fire and sword.
And this not only from one or other religious denomination, for all
religious believers, without exception, had proved to be the most
assiduous promotors of medical superstition; so that we are probably
not wrong in designating priesthoods in general, whatever their creed,
as the most prominent embodiment of medical superstition during certain
periods of the world’s history. But the details will be learned from
the following paragraphs:

§ 1. =Priesthood the Support of Medical Superstition.=—The principal
reason for a not quite reputable activity in the chosen representative
of a deity is probably the fact that, with the appearance of a
physico-mechanical contemplation of the world, the theistic theory of
life, which until then had exclusive sway, was forced into a pitched
battle with a newly formulated definition of nature. This struggle was
carried on principally by the priesthood, who, as a matter of fact,
had most to lose from the ascendency of a new theory of life which
only reckoned with natural factors. They indeed had been the means,
until then, of procuring for the people the assistance of the gods
in all bodily ailments, as they had been the exclusive depositories
of physical knowledge. And it could scarcely be expected that the
priesthood would at once willingly relinquish the extensive supremacy
hitherto exercised by it as the oracle of divine guidance in all
medico-physical questions; for humanity has always considered the
possession of authority much more delightful than submission, and the
ruler has always objected most energetically to any attempt which
disputes his rule. This was precisely what was done by priests of all
creeds when the mechanico-physical theory of life began to supersede
the obsolete dreams of theistic medicine. Fair-minded persons will
surely allow that such action was natural. But they can not approve of
the methods resorted to, unless they belong to those who feel bound
always to discern nothing but what is sacred in every action of a
servant of heaven.

In order to wage war most effectively against the physico-mechanical
theory of life, the priesthood at once claimed for themselves the power
of completely controlling nature. They made the people believe that
the celestials had bestowed upon them the faculty of dominating nature
in the interests of the sick, and that all powers of the universe, the
obvious ones as well as those mysteriously hidden in the depths of
nature, were obedient to sacerdotal suggestions. The servant of heaven
professed that he could regulate the eternal processes of matter, with
its becoming, being, and passing away, quite as irresistibly as his eye
was able to survey the course of time in the past, present, and future.

Equipped with these extensive powers, a priest necessarily appeared
to the people not only as physician, but also as a miraculous being
crowned with the halo of the supernatural. And this was the rôle he
actually played in many ancient religions. With the peoples of Italy
the priest appeared—at a period, indeed, which was previous to the
beginning of Rome—as physician, prophet, interpreter of dreams,
raiser of tempests, etc. He held exactly the same offices among the
Celtic tribes in Gaul and Britain. His position was the same in the
Oriental world, and by the Medians and the Persians especially were
priests considered to be persons endowed with supernatural powers.
We may notice that members of a certain Median tribe formed the
sacerdotal caste, and bore the name of “Magi.” However, this name,
which originally was confined to the priestly order, obtained, in the
course of time, a distinctly secular meaning. Very soon many cunning
fellows arrived at the conclusion that the trade of a sacerdotal
physician and conjurer might bring a profitable livelihood to its
professor, even if this professor were not a priest but a layman. Thus
there arose a special profession of sorcerers, miracle workers, and
medicine-men, who protested with solemn emphasis that they were able
to cure all physical as well as psychical ailments of their fellow
men as thoroughly as the priests had done. But in order to bestow
the required consecration upon this art, these gentlemen usurped the
venerable name of the above-mentioned Median sacerdotal caste and
called themselves “Magi.” Thus it happened that the name “Magus”
(magician), which originally served to designate a distinct sacerdotal
caste, deteriorated into a designation of charlatans and swindlers.
This could never have occurred unless the priests had prostituted their
sublime profession and degraded it to various kinds of discreditable
medico-physical deceptions. This alone is why priesthood is responsible
for the rise of the magicians, of these worthless fakirs. But if Pliny
(Book 30, Chapter I., § 2) attempts to rank magic as an offshoot of
medicine, he is justified in doing so only in so far as the priest,
during the theistic period, was also the physician, as is well known.
Only from this point of view is it possible to trace a genetic relation
between medicine and magic. But medicine in itself has not taken
the slightest part in the promotion of magic and the success of its
unsavory reputation. Indeed, our science has suffered too much through
the practise of magic to burden itself with the paternity of this
disreputable child of civilization.

It appears that the name of the Celtic priests (“druids”) had become
subject to the same abuse as the name of the Median priests of
sacerdotal caste. Thus we learn of female fortune-tellers of the
third century, A.D., who call themselves “druidesses.” But it seems
that this application of the word “druid” has remained a local
one and strictly limited, whereas the expression “magician,” quite
generally employed, became, in the course of time, the designation of
charlatans and medical impostors. For these swindlers, who carried on
medico-physical hocuspocus, and who claimed to exercise supernatural
powers, were called “magicians” during the entire period of classic
antiquity, and we find the same use of the word in the middle ages, and
sometimes also in more modern times.

But this profession of magician, which sprang from priesthood, has
largely promoted superstition in medicine, and was particularly
instrumental in bringing it into extraordinary repute. It is our
intention to concern ourselves a little more minutely with magicians
and magic.

§2. =The Spread of the Word “Magic.”=—How and when magic was
transplanted from its Oriental home to the Occident can not be
determined with certainty; for the Greeks, as well as all antique
peoples, probably all nations, had a belief in ghosts and demons, in
fortune-telling, and in sorcery. But it appears, nevertheless, that
the ancient civilized peoples of the Orient, and particularly the
Persians, cultivated the magic arts with especial devotion, and it
is more than probable that it was from the East that the prevailing
cult of magic had been imported into the West. Pliny, for one, tells
us (Book 30, Chapter I., § 8) that magic was brought to Europe by
a certain Osthanes, who accompanied King Xerxes on his military
expedition against Greece. This man Osthanes, as Pliny reports further,
is said to have disseminated the seeds of this supernatural art (_velut
semina artis portentosæ insparsit_) wherever he went, and with such
success that the Hellenic peoples were actually mad after it, and
prominent men traveled through parts of the Orient, there to acquire
personally and thoroughly these magic arts, thus, as was the case with
Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, and Plato. In fact, it is said of
Democritus that he opened the tomb of a celebrated magician—Dardanus of
Phœnicia—that he might restore to publicity the mysterious writings of
the latter. It appears, moreover, that Alexander the Great entertained
an implicit belief in magic—at least, Pliny reports that during his
wars he was always accompanied by a celebrated magician.

Magic arts were likewise in favor among the Romans. Even Nero attempted
to master the secrets of magic, altho unsuccessfully (Pliny, Book 30,
