Chapter XII., Vol. I., page 118), that eclipses of certain stars were
considered to be pregnant with mischief. This superstitious conception
has, in some cases, actually caused severe general calamities. Thus,
for instance, the Sicilian campaign ended unfortunately for the
Athenians only because their general, Nicias, under a superstitious
apprehension concerning an eclipse, failed to put to sea. And as this
campaign was the cause to Athens of a partial loss of Greek hegemony,
we may safely say that astrology had a decisive share in the fall of
Athens (Pliny, Book 2, Chapter XXIII.).

The appearance of comets, like eclipses of the sun and the moon, were
also reputed to be ominous among the ancients. Comets were considered
heavenly mischief-makers of the worst kind, and almost every sort
of calamity was ascribed to them. A calamity was supposed to assume
various aspects, according to the position and form of the comet.
Under some circumstances, however, they were said to prognosticate
many events advantageous to mankind (Pliny, Book 2, Chapter XXIV.).
Thus Augustus considered a comet, which was seen for an entire week at
the northern quarter of the heavens at the onset of his rule, during
performances which were given in honor of Venus genetrix, to be his
lucky star.

However, not only such extraordinary appearances in the sky as comets,
eclipses of the sun and the moon, played a conspicuous part in medical
superstitions of the ancients. Even those celestial phenomena which
occur with a regularity fixed by natural law, such as the revolution
of the sun and the moon, were considered highly important events in
therapeutic art. Thus, affections of the eye in man and beast were said
to increase and to decrease with the moon (Pliny, Book 2, Chapter XLI.).

All acute diseases were believed to be controlled by the moon, whereas
chronic affections were thought to be under the influence of the sun.
In fact, everything that happened to man was brought in immediate
relationship with appearances in the canopy of heaven. Thus, for
instance, it is stated by Marcus Manilius, the well-known author of an
astronomical didactic poem dedicated to the Emperor Augustus:

    “Omnis cum coelo fortunæ pendeat ordo.”

In the thirteenth chapter of the second book the poet maintains that
each part of the human body is subordinate to a distinct sign of the
zodiac. Thus, for instance, the head to Aries, etc.

Altho the further development of Occidental as well as Oriental
astrology drew its resources from the primeval Assyrian, Babylonian,
and Egyptian doctrines, yet from the second century, A.D., the
astronomic work of Ptolemy and the exhaustive description of antique
medicine by Galen derive their inspiration from _Medicina Astrologica_.
Whatever these two great masters were able to report of the dependence
of the functions of the body upon celestial bodies was from then on,
without further inspection and examination, acknowledged to be true
by the great majority of physicians. Only occasionally this or that
practitioner is bold enough to oppose the intrusion of astrologic
vagaries into the art of healing; among these radicals was the
philosophically trained physician, Sextus Empiricus, who lived about
the year 193, A.D. However, this protest of brave Sextus, as well as
all subsequent ones, scarcely had any influence upon the astrological
development of medicine. Astrology could not be arrested on its road
to the domination of the world, and until the seventeenth century it
controlled the thought of physicians with the same invincible sway that
it exercised over the mental life of all other professions and classes.
Medico-astrological superstition had become legalized, and this in
spite of the fact that Galen himself at last expressed his distrust of
the _Medicina Astrologica_, and at least endeavored to extenuate his
part in its dissemination.

Let us now scrutinize more minutely the condition of _Medicina
Astrologica_ in the second century, A.D. The works of Ptolemy, the
“Iatromathematica” of the mysterious Hermes Trismegistus, and the third
book of Galen’s writing on the “critical days” furnish sufficient
material for outlining the medico-astrological system of that period.

In the first place, the method by which the authors of that
period instilled their astrologic dotage into the minds of their
contemporaries varied considerably. Either astrological remarks were
here and there interspersed in a work on medical or on astronomical
subjects, as was the case, for instance, in the “Opus Quadripartitum”
of Ptolemy and also in Galen’s book on the “critical days,” or
astrology was treated as a special science in the form of a connected
system, as is done, for instance, in the “Iatromathematica” of Hermes
Trismegistus. Such textbooks of astrology obtained publicity in large
numbers from about the fourteenth century on. Whoever may be inclined
to cast a glance into the learned work of Sudhoff will be astonished to
observe the extent to which iathromathematics flourished in the second
half of the middle ages and at the turning-point of the Renaissance.
Still another form was to impart to the public their astrological
doctrines in the form of short sentences. We find nothing in such works
regarding the intricate calculations and methods by which endeavors
were made to fathom the language of the stars, but astrological results
were communicated in concise, aphoristic sentences. This was done in
the “Centiloquium” of Ptolemy, a work which in a hundred brief sayings
brings an epitome of astrological wisdom to market. The work enjoyed
the highest esteem in the middle ages. Such a book, therefore, would
correspond to that form of modern literary production, which, under
the title “Method of acquiring this or that accomplishment within a
short period,” is advertised to us modern people in the daily press.
Moreover, the “Centiloquium” of Ptolemy had many imitators. Such
a work is found, for instance, in Arabic literature, and contains
astrologic wisdom condensed into 150 brief sentences by the astrologer
Almansor, who furnished the handbook upon request of his ruler; the
Arabian, Bethem, has produced a similar work. We find analogous works
appearing later in the middle ages. Eventually, the doctrines of
astrology were put into neat rhymes; thus, for instance, Heinrich von
Rantzau, who departed this life 1598 as governor of Schleswig-Holstein,
celebrates in 100 well-turned verses the significance of the planets
in relation to the physical and mental welfare of humanity. We shall
again refer to this subject when considering astrology of the middle
ages. The iatromathematic passages in the above-mentioned writings
of Ptolemy, Hermes, and Galen furnished the foundation for all later
astrologico-medical theories. For what the middle ages believed
regarding the medical importance of the sidereal world, especially of
the planets and the zodiac, was nothing but the immediate continuation,
or elaboration, of the astrologic teachings of Ptolemy and other
authors of the first Christian centuries.

In the first place, every portion of the human frame was placed under
the influence of a certain celestial body.

The five planets already known to the ancients, as well as sun and
moon, governed, according to Hermes, the following parts of the body:

    The sun, the right eye.
    The moon, the left eye.
    Saturn, hearing.
    Jupiter, the brain.
    Mars, the blood.
    Venus, taste and smell.
    Mercury, tongue and gullet.

However, the influence which sun, moon, and the planets exercised
upon the human body gradually became more intricate. It was no longer
satisfactory to enumerate relations between the bodies of heaven and
the human organs of such a general nature as given by the above table
of Hermes. All parts and functions of the body were to be brought
into the closest relations with the planets. Thus, for instance, the
celebrated humanist, Marsilius Ficinus, the friend of the Medici (1433
to 1499), depicts most minutely in a book “On Life,” which was much
read in its time, the relations between the body and the planets. This
was also done by Heinrich von Rantzau, in his “Tractus Astrologicus,”
which in its time was very celebrated. There we read regarding these
conditions as follows:

  SATURN governs the spleen, the bladder, the bones, the teeth, and,
    in part, the circulating juices of the body; causes the color of
    the skin of man to be dark yellowish; impedes or promotes growth;
    causes the eyes to be small, and prevents the growth of the beard.

  JUPITER governs the lungs, the ribs, cartilages, the liver,
    arteries, the pulse, and the development of human semen; causes
    the white color of the skin, and gives a good figure.

  MARS governs the bile, kidneys, veins, and sexual organs, and of
    these especially the testicles; makes hair red and the temper
    irascible, and inclined to outrages of various kinds.

  VENUS governs the uterus, the breasts, the sexual organs, the
    spermatic tubes, the loins, and the buttocks; endows man with
    physical beauty, furnishes him with long hair, round eyes, and a
    well-formed face; but it is inexcusable on the part of this star
    that it presented mankind with gonorrhea.

  MERCURY governs all mental processes—memory, imagination, the brain
    with its nerves, the hands, feet, and legs, the bones and the
    bile; causes man to be light-fingered.

  THE SUN governs the brain, nerves, urine, the right eye of the male
    and the left one of the female, the optic nerves, and the entire
    right half of the body; gives a good complexion to man.

  THE MOON governs the brain, mouth, belly, intestines, bladder,
    taste, the organs of reproduction, the left eye of the male, the
    right eye of the female, and the feminine liver, and the entire
    left half of the body.

The signs of the zodiac, like the planets, exert full control over
the various parts of the body. Honest Bartisch, of Königsbrück (1535
to 1606), has given us in his “Eye-Service” an illustration of these
relations. Fig. 4 is a reproduction of this plate of Bartisch.

The sun, moon, planets, and zodiac regulated not only the life of the
various limbs of living man placed under their special care, but their
activity commenced at that moment when the foundation was just about
to be laid for the future bodily existence of a mortal—_i.e._, at the
moment of conception. If, during this critical process, the respective
bodies of the heavens were in an unfortunate conjunction, the members
of the future being, the most primitive forms of which had just been
founded, were bound to suffer. Naturally, however, only those parts of
the body were affected by this destiny which were in the care of stars
that happened to be in unpropitious conjunction at the time.

If the act of conception had passed without evil influence on those
that were actively and passively participating in it, the product of
that hour could by no means be sure that this or that planet would not
maliciously thwart the ease and tranquillity of its embryonic and fetal
life. For sun, moon, and the seven planets each governed one month of
intra-uterine life, as is explained by Jacobus Forliviensis. Saturn
reigns during the first month of pregnancy, Jupiter in the second,
Mars in the third, the sun in the fourth, Venus in the fifth, Mercury
in the sixth, the moon in the seventh; the eighth month is ruled again
by Saturn, and this latter planet now shows itself to be so malicious
that it immediately destroys all life born in the eighth month. Jupiter
again takes control during the ninth month, and, as this star is fond
of warmth and humidity, and, therefore, a friend of life in any form,
no danger is to be feared for a fetus entering the world during this
month. However, after the nine months of pregnancy have passed without
evil interference by the planets, Mars once more is in command, and his
influence helps in accomplishing a normal birth.

After the fetus had successfully passed all dangers which the planets
could cause during the nine months of intra-uterine life, and after
it had successfully matured, the hour of birth might, after all, be
accompanied with other quite severe sidereal complications. For if
any planet was in an unfavorable sign, or if the relations between
the signs of the zodiac and the sun or the moon were not quite in
their regular order, those members which were presided over by the
respective stars were made to suffer. The correct casting of the
medical horoscope, therefore, required the most accurate knowledge
of the minute of birth, with simultaneous occurrences in the canopy
of heaven. Provident fathers, accordingly, were mindful of having
an astrologer, during the hour of birth, in the room in which the
confinement was to take place, so that he might be able to ascertain as
accurately as possible the celestial occurrences which would determine
the bodily welfare of the new-born, and to arrange them for the
horoscope.

[Illustration: FIG. 4—THE RELATION OF THE PARTS OF THE HUMAN BODY TO
THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC]

After the young mortal had safely arrived, and if a fortunate destiny
had placed in his cradle a favorable medical horoscope, both for the
hour during which the first material foundation had been laid for
his life and also for the hour of his birth, he had overcome only a
small part of the troubles which the starry world might be able to
inflict on his bodily welfare. If the various signs of heaven appeared
in unfavorable conjunction, or if the moon entered into any fatal
relations with the signs of the zodiac, members of the body which were
under the influence of the respective celestial bodies were still
imperiled. These dangers might threaten not only one individual, but
they were capable, eventually, even of calling down epidemics and
pestilence upon all humanity. After any form of disease had taken hold
of a person its course, treatment, and termination could be clearly
read in the stars of heaven. It was necessary, above all, to ascertain
the day, hour, and minute when the disease appeared. Unfortunately,
this must have been quite difficult at times; for many diseases begin
so insidiously that the moment of the attack is completely beyond
precise definition. In such a case one did the best that could be done,
and probably took as the moment of attack the first complaints of the
patient regarding his disorder. After the appearance of the disease was
dated in such a manner, the heavenly body, in the ascendant at this
period, was then ascertained; thus, the position and the course and the
phases of the moon, the relations of sun and moon to the twelve signs
of the zodiac, and the planets would be noted. It was necessary to
observe whether the moon was in opposition, quadrature, or conjunction
to the planets while she stood in the sign of this or that figure of
the zodiac. From these observations clear conclusions were first drawn
regarding the general condition, the character, the duration, and the
prognosis of the affection. These conclusions, however, were by no
means satisfactory as yet. An attempt was therefore made to obtain a
much more detailed insight into the causes, complications, and therapy
of the case in question by means of astrology, and such information was
abundantly provided in the _Medicina Astrologica_.

In the first place, the fact that sun, moon, planets, and the signs
of the zodiac shared the rule over the various organs of the body,
and furnished positive intimations regarding the cause of the disease
in question, made it unnecessary for the physician to trouble himself
at all with an examination of the patient in order to ascertain cause
and localization of the affection. One glance at the conjunctions of
the stars was sufficient to show which organ of the patient happened
to be endangered by the celestial constellation. If an individual
complained, for instance, of disturbed digestion, and if the heavenly
body that presided over the liver presented any remarkable phenomena,
naturally only the liver was responsible for the case in question,
and the diagnosis was made. Complications were to be expected if the
stars which controlled the circulation of blood and mucus showed
unfavorable signs. It was even possible for the physician well versed
in astrology to determine in advance the period of time at which the
occurrence of such humoral complications might be expected, as he had
learned that the various hours of the day and of the night were to
exert a powerful influence upon the juices of the body. For instance,
Almanzor explains that the first three hours of day and of night are
in closest relation to the blood, whereas the second quarters of day
and of night hold sway over the yellow, the third over the black
(bile), and the last quarters, finally, over the mucus. However, not
only were the various hours of great importance to the course of the
disease, but certain days of the disease—so-called critical days—were
of still greater significance. It is true, the doctrine of these
critical days was by no means the property of _Medicina Astrologica_,
but the Corpus Hippocraticum already contained a book Περὶ
χρίησὶμων. But the followers of Hippocrates had developed this
theory only from humoro-pathological premises, and Galen, in his work
χρήἱσιμαι ἡμέραι, had only included astrology in order to explain
and to prove the entire doctrine of crises (compare also Sudhoff). He
calculated in accordance with moon weeks and months, and in such a
manner that a week counted six days and seventeen and one-half hours,
and the month of the moon only twenty-six days and twenty-two hours.
The seventh, fourteenth, twentieth, and twenty-seventh days were to
be considered critical days of the first order. “Contemplate,” says
Galen, “the critical days in the course of the moon in the angles of
a geometrical figure of sixteen sides; if you find these angles in a
favorable constellation, the patient will fare well; badly, however,
if evil signs prevail.” But not only were certain hours and certain
days of the week said to exert an important astrological influence upon
the human body, such an influence was ascribed also to certain years.
Such years were called “_Anni Scansiles_”—that is, “climacteric.” The
expression “_Anni Climacterici_” was also used, but this designation
has nothing in common with the modern conception of the climacteric.
It was believed that the condition of the body underwent a thorough
revolution during these climacteric years, and that a new stage, as it
were, of organic life was reached. Heinrich von Rantzau, the astronomic
aristocrat and statesman, accordingly defines the climacteric years
as “_anni, in quibus ad sequentis temporis constitutionem sese vertat
ætas et inflectat_.” Therefore, such years should in themselves harbor
dangers for corporeal existence, and offer no favorable prospect for
the course of diseases.

Two kinds of such climacteric years were distinguished. One kind was
brought about by multiplication with the figure 7, and they were
called _anni hebdomatici_, or _climacterici (stricte sic dicta)_.
Accordingly, these were the years 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 49, 56, 63.
These nine years formed the _climactericus parvus_, whereas the years
77, 84, 91, 98, 105, 112, 119, 126 were called the _climactericus
magnus_. A multiplication which extended further, to 171, reached
the _climactericus maximus_. The other kind of climacteric years was
obtained by multiplication with 9, and such years were called _anni
enneatici_, or _decretorii_. These were the years 9, 18, 27, 36, 45,
54, 63, 72, 81, 90, 99, 108, etc.

However, these climacteric years did not all present the same dangers,
but the peril inherent in them varied considerably. It was determined
by the multiplicator, and here especially the 3 and the 7 played a
very fatal rôle. The 21st year of life (3 × 7), and the 27th (3 × 9),
were one grade higher in the scale of dangers than those obtained by
other multiplicators. Still more dangerous were those years arrived at
by ascending in spaces of three hebdomads; therefore, the 21st year
of life—_i.e._, the period of three hebdomads—namely, 3 × 7; the 42d
year, as a period of 2 × 3 hebdomads—_i.e._, 2 × 21; the 63d year of
life, as a period of 3 hebdomads—_i.e._, 3 × 21; 84 = to 4 × 21; 105
= 5 × 21, etc. The 49th year of life and the 56th year of life were
said to be still more dangerous than these years obtained from the
period of three hebdomads. It is true, the cause of the danger is quite
obvious in the case of the 49th year; it was the ominous 7 × 7 which
here gave rise to forebodings. And it was not quite comprehensible what
caused the bad reputation of innocent 56; Rantzau fails to give us a
sufficient explanation.

But the most dangerous climacteric year was the 63d, for this was made
up of 7 × 9. It was, therefore, an _annus hebdomaticus_ and, at the
same time, also an _annus enneaticus_, for it belonged both to the
class of those climacteric years which were formed by the multiplier 7,
as also to that which were obtained by the multiplier 9. It was most
natural, therefore, that a period of life which from two sides was
fraught with danger, like the unfortunate 63d year of life, was bound
to appear equally suspicious to the healthy and to the sick. It is
probable that this year was, therefore, called _androdas_, because, as
Rantzau believes, it debilitates and breaks vitality.

It would appear, moreover, that the climacteric years enjoyed general
consideration in ancient times as well as in the middle ages, for
Rantzau names a number of celebrated men who were said to have
expressed themselves regarding the significance of these years, such as
Plato, Censorinus, Gellius, Philo Judæus, Macrobius, Cicero, Boëtius,
St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, Bede, Georgius Valla, and others. Not
satisfied with this statement, Rantzau also mentions in his catalog
a multitude of prominent men who all departed this life in their 63d
year, and thus, as he believes, had established the dangerousness of
this year by their death.

It is probable, therefore, that the 63d birthday was celebrated with
great apprehension during the entire middle ages, and the respective
individual did not draw an easy breath until after the ominous year had
been successfully passed.

However, the stars knew not only how to tell particulars regarding
the probable course and possible complications of diseases, but they
also gave information regarding very special forms of affections. It
was possible, thus, to learn from them at what time diseases of the
eye were to be feared, when mental diseases were threatening, when
hemorrhages were to be expected, etc. The astrologically trained
physician was able to obtain prompt information from the stars
regarding contingent surgical accidents; for there existed various
conjunctions of the celestial bodies, according to Ptolemy, which
surely pointed to wounds, fractures of bones, burns, concussions, and
other lesions. In fact, it was possible to see in advance, from the
celestial phenomena, what limbs would be exposed to forcible injury;
thus, certain conjunctions of the planets were said to prognosticate
with certainty wounds of the head; others, of the face; others, again,
of the hands and feet, of the fingers and toes, of the arms and legs,
of the trunk and neck. Astrology, moreover, was not satisfied with the
prognostic and diagnostic activity which we have just mentioned, but it
also interfered in therapy, internal as well as external.

Regarding, in the first place, internal medicinal treatment, the
astrologer knew how to give positive information about the same; for
all terrestrial beings, of an organic as well as of an inorganic
nature, were under the influence of the sun, the moon, of the planets,
and of the signs of the zodiac. The stars imparted certain powers to
the planets, to animals, and to all structures of the inorganic world.
If, therefore, it were known what stars happened to appear in the
vault of heaven at the beginning of the disease or of its treatment,
it was only necessary seriously to consider the organic and inorganic
structures under their supervision, and the remedies required for a
successful control of the disease were presently at hand. But if the
healer wished to be absolutely certain what medicaments to choose, the
phases of the moon and the condition of the sun were also to be taken
into consideration. Some remedies could be administered only when the
moon was in a particular relation to certain planets or stars of the
zodiac. These remedies were principally emetics and purges.

Similarly to the internal clinician, so also in surgery, the healer
was entirely dependent upon the conjunction of the stars. The primeval
Babylonian directed that the body must not be touched with iron during
certain conjunctions of the stars, and this was also prescribed in
all cases of _Astrologica Medica_. It appears, however, that this
direction obtained less general surgical recognition, but referred
principally to blood-letting. Even to this limited extent it implied
a high-handed interference with the art of the ancient as well as of
the medieval physician; for venesection occupied an entirely different
position among therapeutic measures during that period than it does
to-day. Whereas modern medicine does not consider blood-letting
necessary, except in the rarest cases, ancient as well as medieval
professors of medicine believed that they could under no circumstances
dispense with it; in fact, it is probable that until the seventeenth
century there was scarcely any form of disease the treatment of which
would have been possible without withdrawal of blood. An actual
system of blood-letting had been elaborated under the influence of
humoro-pathological opinions. Every vein that could be reached with
the lancet was acted upon, and the school of medicine of the period
was punctiliously careful in teaching which vessel presented the most
suitable point of attack for the hand of the physician in this or that
form of disease. The therapeutic subtleties which were thus brought to
light are beyond description. Thus, a withdrawal of blood from veins on
the right side of the body was said to yield an essentially different
effect from left-sided venesection, and each individual vein of the
body promised a special advantage which was peculiar to this one vein.
The physician of that period surely had enough to do to bear in mind
all the numerous therapeutic effects which he was to achieve by the
opening of the various veins. To facilitate this difficult art to a
certain degree special figures were designed—so-called venesection
manikins, in which the numerous points for bleeding were most carefully
annotated. Fig. 5 (page 175) shows such a picture. It indicates no less
than 53 different localities for venesection, and as each and every
one of them again implied four or five, or possibly even more, methods
of blood-letting, we may consider that there were many hundreds of
different possibilities for phlebotomy. If it was easy to become lost
in the labyrinth of this blood-thirsty therapy, the difficulty of a
methodical application of venesection was very materially increased by
astrology; for astrology differentiated between, first, favorable, then
doubtful, and, finally, unfavorable days for venesection, basing this
opinion upon certain positions between sun, moon, and planets. Then the
various ages of life had also different days for venesection; days, for
instance, which promised to be exceptionally successful for venesection
in the young, offered very unfavorable prospects to the aged. Thus,
for instance, the period from the first quadrature of the moon to
the opposition was said to be excellent for bleeding in adolescence,
whereas this period was by no means inviting for phlebotomy in those
who had reached the senile period. The chances for venesection became
rather intricate in their different aspects. Thus, for instance,
Stöffler taught:

                  {the sun prohibits venesection two
                  {days before and one day after.
  Conjunction of  {
  the moon with   {        }prohibits venesection one
                  {Saturn  }day before and one day
                  {Mars    }after.

  Quadrature of   {Sun     }prohibits venesection
  the moon with   {Saturn  }twelve hours before and
                  {Mars    }twelve hours after.

  Opposition of   {Sun     }prohibits venesection one
  the moon with   {Saturn  }day before and one day
                  {Mars    }after.

We see, therefore, that the physician of that time was compelled to
be well-versed in astronomy unless he meant to commit grave mistakes
against the doctrines of _Medicina Astrologica_. Such sins could
eventually become rather dangerous to the physician, for the code of
Hammurabi (about 2200, B.C., ruler of Babylon) threatens the operator,
for not quite unobjectionable surgical procedures, with the loss of his
hands (Winckler, page 33, § 218).

In order to satisfy the astrological requirement of the physician most
thoroughly, there arose in the middle ages a very peculiar literature.
Under the name of an almanac or calendarium, thick folio volumes
appeared, which enumerated, in long tables, the various positions of
the planets and of the signs of the zodiac, so that the astrologer was
enabled to note the fate of mankind rapidly and easily. The contents
of such calendaria are beyond description. Apart from remarks which
referred to all occurrences of civil life, was stated the exact period
when to have the hair cut, when venesection was to be performed, when
to draw teeth, when to take a bath, etc. Even the proper time for
prayer was indicated by such a calendarium. According to the experience
of Peter of Abano, the conjunction of the moon with Jupiter in the
Dragon was sure to effect an answer to prayer. Hieronymus Cardanus
had discovered, with the aid of astrology, that a request was sure to
be complied with if a prayer was offered to the Virgin Mary on the
first day of April, at 8 A.M. (Möhsen, Vol. II., page 423). Physicians
excelled in the compilation of such calendaria, especially during the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Professors, forensic physicians,
surgeons—in fact, all representatives of medical art—were equally
intent upon instructing the public by calendaria in regard to the most
various branches of _Medicina Astrologica_; thus, for instance, David
Herliz, physician at Prenzlau, supplied Pomerania, Mecklenburg, and
the Margravate of Brandenburg with calendars for fifty years, from the
year 1584. The Marburg professor of medicine, Victorinus Schönfelder,
played a similar rôle during the same period for western Germany. The
physician, as almanac-maker, is probably one of the most wonderful
results of medical superstition, and this aberration of medicine clung
so firmly to the people that, even in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, certain days of the year were considered as especially
favorable for venesection, and the calendars took particular pains to
call the attention of the public most emphatically to good days for
blood-letting.

[Illustration: FIG. 5—VENESECTION IN ITS ASTRONOMICAL CONNECTION]

=Explanation of Fig. 5=

  _A._ The astronomic signs which are noted on the different parts
  of the body indicate the signs of the zodiac, under the special
  influence of which the respective members of the body are said to
  be.

  _B._ The numerals which are found at the most varied parts of the
  body refer to indications for venesection, as stated below. In
  these localities, which are characterized by figures, blood was
  drawn for the most various affections, namely in:

   1. Pains of the eyes and head; affections of the face,
        including eruptions.

   2. Affections of the head; mental disturbances.

   3. Affections of the eye of various kinds.

   4 and 5. Pains in the ears; lachrymation.

   6 and 7. Tinnitus aurium; tremor of the head.

   8. Disturbances of hearing.

   9. Heaviness of the head; flow from the eyes. Venesection here
        also renders memory more acute, as well as the activity of
        the brain in general.

  10. Heaviness of the head.

  11. Ulcers of the lips and of the gums.

  12. The veins of the palate are to be opened in eruptions in
        the face, in toothache, in affections of the palate and of
        the mouth, heaviness of the head.

  13. Neuralgia and toothache.

  14. Headaches, mental disturbances.

  15. To render the memory more acute.

  16. In all affections of the mouth or of the chest.

  17. Fetid breath.

  18. Pains in the jaws; fœtor e naso; eruptions of the face.

   19. Neuralgia of the head; eruptions.

  20. Disturbances in the chest of various kinds.

  21. Flow from the eyes; headache; epilepsy.

  22. Diseases of the chest of various kinds, including dyspnea;
        headache; stitches in the side.

  23. Diseases of the liver, injuries to the right side of the
        body; nosebleed.

  24. Affections of the head and the eyes; pains in the
        shoulder-blades; coryza.

  25. Pains in the heart, in the sides, and in the mouth.

  26. Spasms in the fingers; pains in the spleen and in the
        limbs; epistaxis; stitches in the liver.

  27. Pains of the central parts of the body.

  28. Affections of the lower portions of the body.

  29. Heart-disease.

  30. To render vision more acute, and to strengthen the
        dexterity of the body.

  31. Headache, fever, various kinds of cataract, glaucoma, etc.;
        cloudiness of the sclera; inflammations of the tongue and
        of the pharynx.

  32. Pains of the head, lungs, spleen.

  33. Diseases of the blood; chlorosis; jaundice; affections of
        the head; stitches in the right side. Blood-letting in this
        locality purifies liver, spleen, breast.

  34. Same as 32.

  36. Affections of the spleen, meningeal inflammation;
        hemorrhoids; stitches in the left side; renal affections;
        dysmenorrhea.

  37. Affections of the spleen and of the bladder.

  38. Dropsy; disturbances of digestion; ulcers of long standing.

  39. Melancholia; venesection in this locality strengthens
        the kidneys.

  40. Hemorrhoids; strangury; disturbances of digestion;
        affections of the bladder and of the sexual organs.

  41. Venesection here acts upon the proper condition of the body
        in general.

  42. Diseases of the kidney, bladder, stone, testicles.

  43. Venesection here strengthens the gait.

  44. All kinds of pains of the lower extremities, such as
        arthritis, gout; also in dysmenorrhea.

  45. Affections of the sexual organs; diseases of the kidney and
        bladder.

  46. Diseases of the testicles.

  47. Disturbances of menstruation; sterility of women;
        affections of the bladder and spleen.

  48. Various kinds of diseases of the feet.

  49. Dysmenorrhea; eruptions in the face and on the legs.

  50. Apoplexy; paralysis.

  51. Ophthalmia; skin diseases; cough; oppression of the chest.

  52. Dysmenorrhea; affections of the testicles; costal pains.

  53. Ophthalmia; dysmenorrhea; amenorrhea; skin eruptions.

Such therapy, detached entirely from the actual requirements of the
case and based only upon observation of the sky, was bound to be
attended with the most unfortunate results. The suffering public was
frequently but little cheered by the assistance of its physicians, and
often felt the desire to find out what another physician could do. It
appears that such a condition occurred quite frequently, for Ptolemy,
in number 57 of his “Centiloquium,” gives special directions under
what astral conditions such a change of physician could take place. He
says: “_Cum septimum locum atque ejus dominum in ægritudine afflictum
videris, medicum mutato._” It appears certain, accordingly, that a
general change of physicians was inaugurated by the public so soon as
the above conjunction was noted in the sky.

Those who desired to be very careful in the choice of their physician
did not change only when the conjunction of the stars recommended it as
advisable, but they also attempted to ascertain the horoscope of the
newly chosen medical adviser, for medical wisdom was found in greatest
abundance in a man whose aspects showed a certain form. “_Perfectus
medicus erit, cui Mars et Venus fuerint in sexta_,” says Almansor.

This condition of _Astrologia Medica_ was such as to weigh like
an oppressive nightmare upon mankind, not only for centuries but
for thousands of years, and in this way medical superstition has
slaughtered more human beings than the most bloody wars ever did.

However, astrology has not always ruled our kind with equal strength.
There were periods during which belief in the fate-determining power of
the stars was more dominant, and others in which it was feebler. The
ancient world, which was blindly devoted to all kinds of superstition,
had also cherished and fostered astrology. But when the ancient theory
of life was demolished later on, and the Christian God of love had
taken possession of the world, the belief in the fate-determining power
of the stars was shaken, and centuries, followed during which _Medicina
Astrologica_, altho it did not by any means disappear entirely, was
forced more or less to the rear. Astrology did not become resurrected
until scholasticism and dogmatism had held back the activity of
the mind from independent investigation, thus bringing about the
intellectual darkness which for centuries prevailed. This use of
astrology truly forms one of the most wonderful pages in the history of
the development of our race, for an actual _furor astrologicus_ seized
upon the world in the course of the thirteenth century. The movement
originated at the court of Emperor Frederick II. The great Ghibelline
was so positive and so enthusiastic an adherent of all astrologic
doctrines that he did not decide upon any undertaking until he had
first learned the opinion of the stars regarding his enterprise. It was
his firm belief that the stars prophesied for him a political rôle
which was to shake the entire world, and of his astrological prediction
he apprised his adversary, the pope, in the following words:

    Fata volunt, stellaeque docent, animumque volatus,
    Quod Fridericus ego malleus orbis ero.

But if a ruler of high mental gifts is always destined to exert a
powerful influence upon his epoch, how much more telling is this
influence when the contemporaries of such a monarch lead a mental
life, fettered by so many religious, philosophical, and physical
prejudices as undeniably dominated mankind during the reign of
the great Hohenstaufen. If these conditions were of the greatest
advantage to astrology in general, circumstances shaped themselves
most favorably for _Medicina Astrologica_ in particular. Very soon
after the death of the star-learned Hohenstaufen emperor, two highly
talented physicians bound themselves body and soul to astrology—namely,
Arnald Bachuone, called also, after his birthplace, Villanueva,
Arnaldus Villanovanus or Arnald of Villanova (1235-1312), and Petrus,
called also, after his birthplace, Abano near Padua, Petrus de Apono
or Petrus Aponensis (1250-1315). From that time until the seventeenth
century the most eminent representatives of all the sciences and
professions devoted themselves to the doctrines of astrology. In the
excellent work of Sudhoff is cited a notable number of physicians—by
no means the most unskilful of their day—who confessed themselves to
be iatromathematicians (_i.e._, _medici astrologici_). Astrology,
and with it _Medicina Astrologica_, reigned supreme at most of the
princely courts from the thirteenth to the seventeenth centuries. The
Hohenstaufen, Frederick II., was, as we have seen, an implicit adherent
to astrologic doctrines; likewise the Visconti in Milan. The royal
court of Aragon in Palermo offered a sheltering asylum to astronomy
and to astrology. Alfonso X. of Castile was so enthusiastic a friend
of scientific astronomy that he ordered the planet-tables of Ptolemy
to be restored, with an outlay of enormous costs, by fifty astronomers
called by him to Toledo. German princes, such as Elector Joachim of
Brandenburg, Albrecht, Elector of Mayence, Landgrave William of Hesse,
Duke Albrecht of Prussia, not only adhered to the predictions of the
stars, but they also subscribed to the statements of astrological
medicine. Thus, for instance, Thomas Erastus (died 1583) the well-known
opponent of Paracelsus, tells us that, as body-physician to the
reigning count of Henneberg, he was not permitted to begin a course
of treatment until he had consulted the stars. The German emperor,
Charles V., was quite as constant a friend of the astrologists; he
was instructed in astrology by his teacher, the subsequent pope,
Hadrian VI. The court of Denmark was the center of astrological
teachings under Frederick II., as no less a personage than Tycho de
Brahe was active there. But not only rulers favored astrology, it met
with implicit belief from highly enlightened scholars, statesmen, and
naturalists. Thus, Melanchthon was so convinced an adherent of all
astrological doctrines that he was incessantly active in their favor by
mouth and by pen. And when fatal disease had finally seized upon him,
he was soon satisfied as to the issue, in that Mars and Saturn happened
to be in conjunction (Möhsen, Vol. II., page 416).

However, men were not wanting who courageously took up the battle
against astrological delusions. Thus, for instance, the friend of
Lorenzo of Medici, the learned Count Pico of Mirandola (1463-1494);
also Girolamo Fracastori (1483-1553), who is known by his didactic poem
on syphilis, opposed astrology.

If we now ask how it was possible that a superstition like astrology
could for centuries dominate Occidental medicine, and was even able
to influence the best minds in its favor, an answer to this question
will not be as difficult as might appear at first glance. The very
best and the most enlightened minds are always particularly affected
by what is enigmatical and mysterious in the phenomena of life. They
perceive the narrow limits set to our cognition of nature much more
acutely and deeply than the average mind. This consciousness of the
insufficiency of our own knowledge, joined with an ardent desire after
a broadening of our understanding, tends to turn the mind in strange
directions. The result of clearer self-knowledge in this modern epoch
of ours is an adverseness to any form of romantic fancy, and is likely
to end in a sad resignation that may result in pessimism. But the
middle ages, with their exuberant confidence and faith, their belief in
wonders, and their romantic ideas, did not suffer to any great extent
from scientific apathy. A sharply defined, mystic tendency helped to
overcome what was inadequate in the cognition of nature. And for this
reason do we find this mystic tendency prominent, especially in those
representatives of that period who, owing to their mental capacity,
were bound to perceive their defective insight into the manifestations
of life much more intensely than this was felt by the average persons
of narrower intellect.

The conditions thus described, as well as the diagnostico-theoretical
principles on which medicine and natural sciences were based in
antiquity and in the middle ages, until late in the eighteenth century
led many mentally gifted men to consider astrology rather a refuge from
the current defective conception of natural phenomena than a false
doctrine.




