VI

INFLUENCE EXERTED UPON THE DEVELOPMENT OF SUPERSTITION BY MEDICINE
ITSELF


As ancient, medieval, and some more modern theories of medicine have
traveled over the same diagnostico-theoretical roads as did the natural
science of those periods, they were naturally subject to the same
errors and aberrations. But the consequences of their errors differed
materially. Whereas natural science, in the early and middle ages,
with its faulty diagnostico-theoretical method, too frequently had
recourse to supernatural factors to explain terrestrial phenomena, and
thus created superstition instead of elucidation, the pathology of
ancient as well as of medieval medicine avoided as much as possible
any recourse to miraculous agencies in explaining the pathological
phenomena of the body. This it was forced to do for the sake of
self-preservation. For what would have become of the physicians with
their art, which was of a purely material kind, working as it did with
drug and knife, if they themselves had traced disease to supernatural
causes? No one, under such conditions, would have had any dealings
with mundane medical science. It is true, there have been times when
such a state of things actually existed. The physician, with his
earthly appliances, was always led astray as soon as metaphysical ideas
had victoriously entered pathology. History affords numerous examples
of this. The cult of relics, the belief in astrology during half of the
middle ages, show plainly to what a degrading position the physician
was reduced as soon as a pathology reckoning with earthly factors was
replaced by a metaphysical theory of disease. Then the physician was
either completely thrust aside—ἀλλ’ ὠθεῖται μὲν ἒξω νοσοῦντος ὁ
ἰατρός, as says Plutarch (“Superstition,” Vol. I., page 412)—or he
was forced to submit to a disgraceful interference. All schools of
medicine, therefore, from the humoral pathology of the followers of
Hippocrates to the so-called parasitism of the nineteenth century,
have avoided as much as possible the acknowledgment that supernatural
influences were active as pathological factors. Various as the
principles of the countless medical schools may have been, they were
all united in assuming as the starting-point of their speculations some
material process of the body itself, in accordance with which they
applied their therapeutic agencies.

Sometimes, it is true, it would seem as tho medicine, under some
circumstances, had recourse to supernatural factors in explaining
various phenomena of physiological as well as pathological conditions;
as, for instance, in the primeval pneuma-doctrine, or in those
conceptions which attribute to a mental or psychical principle a
far-reaching influence upon the performance of all bodily functions.
Upon closer investigation, however, we shall find that the pneuma,
or spirit, the soul, or whatever else the mysterious mainspring
of all phenomena of life may be called, was by no means conceived
of by medicine as immaterial or supernatural. On the contrary!
Medicine, as often as it required a spiritual something to explain
the manifestations of the body, has always regarded this unknown
quantity as thoroughly substantial. It has not, indeed, been possible
to determine more precisely the material nature of this great unknown,
altho such attempts are by no means wanting in Democritus, Galen, and
others; still it was always considered a corporeal thing. Supernatural
qualities were ascribed to it only after death, but so long as the soul
animated the body, united with the latter, it was a terrestrial being,
and as such obeyed the laws of terrestrial substance. It was possible
for medical science, therefore, to reckon with it in the explanation
of pathological processes without necessarily expecting a reproach that
supernatural agencies were called in for assistance.

Medicine, therefore, altho it has traveled the same
diagnostico-theoretical road as natural science, has not, like the
latter, directly produced superstition. It is true, it has called
forth innumerable erroneous hypotheses. But a wrong hypothesis, altho
it may be nonsensical to the utmost and give rise to the most serious
practical consequences, is by no means superstition; for both error
and superstition—so far as it is a question of medical matters—are two
radically different conceptions, because the former concerns itself
only with natural, the latter with supernatural factors.

Yet it is quite conceivable that the dissemination of an intellectual
principle can be furthered and promoted without overt advocacy of the
principle itself, and this was the relation that existed for thousands
of years between medicine and superstition; for we learn from this
investigation that the representatives of medicine were too often ready
to admit all kinds of superstitious views into medicine. Whenever
religion, philosophy, and natural science have seriously attempted to
influence medicine in a manner promoting superstition, medical science
yielded to these attempts, and this is the only reproach which can be
justly laid at the door of our science.

However, this reproach is mitigated if we consider that medicine did
not accord a home to superstition of its own free will, or even from
a predilection for the heresies of other disciples, but it did so
under compulsion; for the religious, the philosophical, the physical
views which forced the entrance of superstition into medical science
were almost always the views of a formidable party. It is a fact
sufficiently demonstrated by history that powerful and far-reaching
predilections of the popular mind resistlessly hurry along whatever is
in their path. Such mental currents are the products of their period;
they are the immediate result of the general sentiment and feeling
of their time, and for this very reason they successfully overcome
resistance. The opinion of a single individual may raise a protest
against the spirit of the age, but this resistance is always bound to
be in vain. The opinion of a single individual, even if it actually
represents the truth, is absolutely powerless to resist the spirit of
the age which, with elemental force, compels obedience. Therefore, the
courageous, truth-seeking resistance which was offered to the heresies
of _Medicina Astrologica_ by Pico of Mirandola and Girolamo Fracastori
was bound to be futile, because astrology was a genuine child of its
time, and therefore held irresistible sway over thought and sentiment.

If religion and philosophy so often interfered with the development of
medicine, this was only possible because the general tendency of the
contemporary mind was thoroughly absorbed in this or that religious or
philosophical idea. For each domain of human activity must needs be a
mere reflection of the tendency which guides the mind of its period.
This is a law which, with iron force, dominates the development of
culture. Superstition in medicine, therefore, was bound to flourish and
thrive whenever it harmonized with the spirit of the age.

This law, tho it may have checked the development of our science,
nevertheless holds out the certain promise of a period, the
intellectual power of which will thoroughly clear away all relics of
superstition, which, still persisting in the minds of the many, drives
them to the faith-curist and to the quack.




