IV

  THE INFLUENCE OF PHILOSOPHY UPON THE FORM AND ORIGIN OF MEDICAL
    SUPERSTITION


The idea that philosophy has exerted any material influence upon
superstition in medicine may appear strange to many. For how can
it be possible that the science which teaches the laws of thought,
which regulates our entire mental activity and guides it in the right
direction, which points out to us the intricate path of medical
theory and diagnosis—how is it possible that just this science should
either take or have taken part in misleading or obscuring our medical
perception? We do not by any means intend to impute any such effect to
philosophy. Quite the contrary! We are thoroughly aware of the great
influence which philosophy is entitled to claim in all sciences without
exception, and for this reason we believe that modern representatives
of medical science would be much better off if they were a little less
at variance with philosophy than they actually are.

In the wide realm of philosophy there are only certain points where
we can detect a tendency to promote the development of medical
superstition. This tendency appears in all endeavors which are made to
explain natural phenomena solely in a speculative manner, or to build a
theory of life upon a base of pure assumptions. Whenever such attempts
were made manifest, and impressed philosophy into their service under
the name of natural philosophy, it resulted in the wide predominance of
medical superstition.

It is well known that all prae-Socratic philosophy aimed at the
discovery of a single principle as underlying and explaining all the
phenomena of nature. But in spite of this very apparent tendency,
it can scarcely be accused of promoting medical superstition; for
prae-Socratic philosophy busied itself in speculations concerning
terrestrial phenomena. Earth and air, fire and water, cold and heat,
coming into being and passing away, are the things in which it
endeavored to find the elemental basis of nature with its multiform
phenomena. But upon the study of medicine these endeavors exercised,
for the time being, a liberalizing influence. They emancipated it
from the repressive grasp of theism, and opened up the way for an
exclusively natural explanation of all processes of the body, in
health as well as in sickness. Unfortunately the apparatus, or organon,
which philosophy furnished to science in its terrestrial phenomena was
a very questionable one, investigation of the conclusion from analogy
and the deductive method being of extremely little value, either in
medical diagnosis or the pursuit of natural science. For this reason
medicine was bound to be encumbered with countless badly founded
hypotheses. But other monstrous guesses at truth could not fail to
become current. Let us consider, for instance, the absurd theory which
Heraclitus of Ephesus (500 B.C.) has propounded as to the relations
between wine and the human soul. As the soul, according to this
philosopher, naturally was a fiery vapor, and the drier and the more
fiery it remained the better, the excessive use of alcohol would not
be advisable, in that the abundant infusion of fluids causes the soul
to become wet, which would be harmful to its fiery nature, as fire and
moisture are always incompatible. Who will venture to deny that it was
from his opinion regarding the use of wine that Heraclitus acquired his
sobriquet of “Whining Philosopher”?

But curious as were all the hypotheses with which Hellenic natural
philosophy foisted upon medicine, they should by no means be confounded
with superstition, for even a baseless hypothesis is far removed
from superstition. Otherwise, medicine and superstition would be
almost identical conceptions, for baseless hypotheses have at no time
been wanting in our science. Superstition, so far as its sources are
found in philosophy, did not enter medical science until philosophy
sought for an explanation of the various processes of life not only
in material but also in immaterial forces. And as Indian as well as
Persian philosophy, in the earliest period of its existence known to
us, had already found in demons the immaterial elements which to a
great extent control the processes of life in man, it will be seen that
the relations between philosophy and medical superstition are quite
old. The Hellenic poets and philosophers, Homer, Hesiod, Empedocles,
Democritus, and Plato, elaborated this immemorial doctrine of demons
and introduced it into Greece. But the recognition of immaterial,
supernatural curative factors did not attain any considerable and
determining influence in ancient medicine until the year 150 B.C.,
when, under the eager advocacy of Alexandrian Jews, Oriental and
Occidental doctrines became amalgamated to a coherent system of
theosophic and medical mysticism. Medicine suffered greatly for
centuries from this mysticism, which prevailed late in the middle
ages and even up to more recent times. The center of all the various
forms under which speculations in the philosophical and theosophical
domain made their appearance was Alexandria, the great central point
of culture in which the civilization of the Orient and the Occident
were united in the evolution of a new theory of life. But that the
birthplace of developments so momentous for the future of medicine
should be Alexandria almost suggests the thought that the writers of
history were indulging in a satire upon medical science; for it is well
known that Alexandria was the very place where medical enlightenment
and the progress of ancient medicine won their greatest triumphs under
the renowned anatomists, Herophilus and Erasistratus.

Such speculations in theosophical and medical domains at first were
most eagerly entered upon by the Jewish sects of the Essenians, or
Essenes, and Therapeutæ. According to the description which Josephus
(Book 2, Chapter II., page 13) has left us of these two sects,
they were theosophical communists. We, as physicians, however, are
principally interested in the position they took with regard to our
profession, and that was one of indifference. They believed that they
should not obtain their knowledge of the body, either in health or in
disease, by observation, on which physicians relied. They believed
they could actually learn the art of healing from a study of their old
Sacred Scriptures. For that reason they especially applied themselves
to make a diligent examination of these Holy Scriptures. They believed
that they were able, by various allegorical interpretations of
different letters and words, as well as by subtle explanations of this
or that sentence, to acquire the knowledge necessary for the treatment
of their patients. Those, however, who had become imbued with this
wisdom of dotage in an especial degree, claimed the possession of
numerous miraculous powers—for instance, that of prediction. But as
they also believed in the existence of beings who, while they were
lower than God, at the same time were higher than man, they had, ready
at hand, the rarest resources to draw upon for the practise of their
juggling feats of miraculous medicine. The belief in these mystical
doctrines took the most extravagant forms. Thus, for instance, it was
believed that a man by the evacuation of feces offered an insult to
divinity (τὰς αὐγὰς ὑβρίζειν τοῦ θεοῦ, says Josephus, lib. 2,
