II

  THEISM IN ITS RELATION TO MEDICINE AND IN ITS STRUGGLE WITH
    THE PHYSICO-MECHANICAL THEORY OF LIFE


As we explained in Chapter I., the development of all peoples has
passed through a period during which medico-physical knowledge found
expression exclusively in the teachings of religion. By theism we
mean the system which endeavors to explain natural phenomena by
supernatural causes. However, this view of nature, with its tinge
of religion, did not as yet show any trace of superstition. It was
rather the only justifiable conception of nature and thoroughly in
keeping with the power of comprehension of man, until it began to
dawn upon the mind that natural phenomena might be due to natural
causes. This was the period of which we stated, in the beginning of
this investigation, that faith became superstition and superstition
became faith. It was during this time that the powers above were held
accountable for all bodily ailments of mankind. It was their task most
carefully to observe the functional processes of the human body in
all its phases, and to protect their undisturbed continuance. But as
the inhabitants of heaven, like the inhabitants of the earth, were
subject to whims, it happened very often, unfortunately, that they
attended to their task of protecting the undisturbed development of
the vegetative as well as the animal functions of the body in a very
unsatisfactory manner, sometimes, in fact, even purposely neglecting
it. Thus disturbances occurred in the regular course of organic life,
and this brought diseases into the world. If, therefore, the gods were
directly responsible for the appearance of disease, it was palpably
their duty to effect its elimination. Thus it came about that pathology
and therapy were exclusively attended to by the gods. But in what light
they regarded these medical duties of theirs, and how they performed
them, were matters subject to very varying considerations, as expounded
by the different religions of antiquity. The Babylonian considered the
great god Marduk the expeller of all maladies, whereas Urugal, Namtor,
and Nergal were recognized gods of pestilence.

Similar ideas prevailed among the Egyptians. The cat-headed goddess
Bubastis was believed to deal out to mothers the blessings of
fertility. Ibis showed an especial interest in those human beings who
were troubled with disturbances of digestion, and this interest found
benevolent expression in the invention of the clyster.

With the Greeks also the gods rendered services to diseased humanity.
Thus Apollo invented the art of healing, and if his time permitted he
occasionally lent a hand when difficulties beset the entrance into this
world of a young mortal. But, as a rule, it was the duty of Aphrodite
to attend to such cases, just as, in fact, she was responsible for
everything that referred to love, no matter whether it was a question
of the esthetic or the pathological part of that passion. Athene was
the specialist in ophthalmology, and it seems that she did not fare
badly with this occupation. A temple was dedicated to her by Lycurgus,
whom, as it appears, she healed of a sympathetic affection of the
eyes; and, besides, she won by her ophthalmological activity various
ornamental epithets, such, for instance, as ὀφθαλμίτις, etc.

It was quite natural, in view of the exclusively theistic conception
which in those times preoccupied the human mind, that the priests were
the sole possessors of physico-medical knowledge; and naturally so.
For when we consider the theory of life that prevailed at that period,
who could have been better qualified to give information to men
regarding their own body as well as regarding nature in general, than
the priest, the mortal representative of immortal gods? And who better
qualified than the priest to invoke the aid of the heavenly powers
in all bodily ailments? Thus it was the unavoidable consequence of
the theistic theory of life that the priest was the physician as well
as the representative of physical knowledge and also the helper and
adviser in all mundane exigencies. Whether bodily or psychic troubles
afflicted individuals, whether an entire population groaned under
heavy chastisements like pestilence, aid and deliverance were always
sought in the sanctuary of the gods, from the infallible priest. And
the priests were always equal to the occasion; they have always, in a
masterly manner, known the art of satisfying the medico-physical needs
of their suppliants. For the religions of all civilized peoples—and
Christianity by no means occupies an exceptional position in this
respect—have always endeavored most strenuously to keep physical as
well as medical thought in strictest dependence upon their doctrines
and dogmas. To attain this end various ceremonies, customs, and dogmas
were relied upon to keep the priests in a position to secure the
assistance of the gods for humanity harassed by pain and affliction.
These sacred observances were strange, and varied with the various
religious systems. According to the primeval cult of Zoroaster, all
evils, consequently also all diseases, were derived from the principle
of darkness which was embodied in the person of Ahriman, and only the
sacerdotal caste of the magicians who sprung from a special Median
tribe was able to heal them. But it was by no means easy to become a
member of this caste and to acquire the magic powers pertaining to
it alone. It was necessary before gaining mastery over the powers
of nature to become initiated into the mysteries of Mitra. However,
after priestly consecration had once been bestowed, the individual
thus honored bore the proud title “Conqueror of Evil,” and was able to
practise medicine. As the most essential constituent of every medical
treatment, the divine word was applied in the form of mysterious
exorcisms, sacred hymns, and certain words which were considered
specially curative in effect, particularly the word “Ormuzd,” the name
of the highest god, in whose all-embracing power of healing great
confidence was placed.

The Sumerians, the precursors of Babylonico-Assyrian culture, ascribed
a considerable and important rôle to dreams. They were considered to
bring direct medical advice from the gods, and it became the office
of the sacerdotal physician to interpret the dream in such a way as to
alleviate the sufferings of the dreamer.

The ancient Greek culture also conceded a conspicuous medical
significance to dreams, and even arranged a system of its own, that of
the temple sleep, in order always to obtain prophesying dreams from
the gods. The patient, after the obligatory offering, was required to
remain a night in the temple, and his dream during this night was the
medical advice of the divinity in its most direct form. But only the
priest was able to interpret a dream obtained in such a manner, and to
extract medical efficacy from it. But as it occasionally happened that
a too prosaic and phlegmatic patient did not dream at all, the priest
was benevolent enough to intercede. He was always promptly favored by
the gods with a suggestive dream.

The medical function of the priests had reached a peculiar development
during the first centuries of Rome. This was manifest especially in
the time of public calamities, such as pestilence, war, etc. When
such events reached dimensions which threatened the existence of the
republic, attempts were made to gain the favor of the gods by most
curious ceremonies. The celestials were simply invited to take part
in an opulent banquet. The first divine feast of such a character
was celebrated in Rome in the sixth century, B.C., on account of a
great epidemic. Apollo, Latona, Diana, Hercules, Mercury, and Neptune
were most ceremoniously invited to take part in a religious banquet
which lasted for eight days. The images of the gods were placed upon
magnificently cushioned couches, and the tables were loaded with
dainties. Not only the gods, but the entire population, were invited;
every one kept open house, and whoever wished to do so could feast
at the richly prepared boards of the wealthy. Even the pronounced
enemies of the house were allowed to enter and to enjoy the dainties
without fear of hostile remarks; indeed, it was deemed advisable in the
interests of public hygiene to unchain the prisoners and to liberate
them. But if the gods, in spite of the most opulent entertainments,
did not have any consideration, and if pestilence, military disaster,
failure of crops, or whatever was the immediate cause of popular
anxiety, continued to persist with unabated fury, endeavors were made
by theatrical performances to provide as much as possible for the
amusement of the gods. Such plays, at first, consisted only in graceful
dances, with flute accompaniments, and from these simple beginnings,
according to Livy, Book 7, Chapter II., the drama is said to have
developed all those variations which characterized the scenic art of
antiquity. There can be no doubt that even the stage of modern times is
of religio-sanitary origin—a peculiar fact which modern patrons of the
theater scarcely ever dream of.

An attempt was eventually made to increase the delight of the gods in
such amusements by a number of novel devices. For instance, it was
stipulated that the performances instituted to ward off the invasion of
Hannibal were to cost 333,333⅓ copper asses. But if, nevertheless,
the gods were not sufficiently propitiated by banquets, dances, and
playing of the flute, and if they could not be prevailed upon by such
pastimes to remove the pestilence or other calamity, a dictator was
named who, if possible, on September 13th, drove a nail into the temple
of Jupiter to appease divine indignation. It appears that this was
a primeval custom of the Etruscans; at least, it is reported by the
Roman author, Cincius, that such nails could be seen in the temple of
the Etruscan goddess Nortia. This nail therapy was resorted to by the
Romans, for instance, during the terrible plague which raged in the
fifth century, B.C., and of which the celebrated Furius Camillus died.

Wonderful as all the described procedures seem to us, and closely
as they may conform to the modern conception of superstition, at the
time they originated they were considered as quite removed from that
superstition with which we so closely identify them to-day. For the
period which saw the above events was an era of exclusive theism, and
for that reason divine sleep, divine feasts, the sacred performances,
and all the other peculiar means which were employed to secure medical
aid of the gods, were well-established features of religious worship.
The stigma of superstition was not set upon them as yet. And this state
of things naturally persisted so long as the theistic theory of life
stood unchallenged.

This absolute reign of theistic theory dominating human life through
the above-described therapeutic ideas was followed by an epoch in which
theism was forced to divide its authority with a powerful rival—namely,
the physico-mechanical theory of life. The struggle between both these
systems was ushered in, for the Hellenic as well as for the Occidental
world of civilization, by the appearance of Ionian philosophy. Even in
our own day this struggle is still going on in many minds. This much,
at least, is certain: that superstition has always been especially
active in medicine in areas of civilization where the theistic idea
has gained the ascendency.

The deadly struggle between theistic and physico-mechanical theories of
life in the realm of medicine has found no place in the experience of
Hellenic and Roman antiquity. The change in opinion was rather wrought
by a gradual recession from the idea that the gods interfered with the
proper course of man’s bodily functions. This conviction resulted from
a progressive growth of his physico-mechanical knowledge, and became
established at least as far as the thoughts and the opinions of the
physicians were concerned. That the other classes, in particular the
representatives of religion, did not so peaceably acquiesce in this
mechanical conception of life we shall soon explain in Chapter III.
It was different, however, with the art of healing itself. Even the
Corpus Hippocraticum reveals to us a medicine which had been purified
from all theistic admixtures, and from the publication of this work
(_i.e._, from about the fifth century, B.C., up to the overthrow of the
ancient period—_i.e._, until about the fifth or sixth century, A.D.)
no further attempt to refer the cause of disease and the treatment of
disease to the gods of the ancient heavens is noticed in medical works.
On the contrary, that great efforts were made to look for the nature
of disease in the mechanical conditions of the body is proven by a
number of the most various medical doctrines. The extensive work of
Galen, that antique canon of medicine, which dates back to the second
century, A.D., disavows all theism and all theurgy, and relies solely
upon physico-mechanical methods: observation, experiment, dissection.
Antique religion and antique medicine had effected a reconciliation—a
reconciliation, however, in which neither party was to acknowledge
a complete defeat; but the result was an amicable settlement, in
which their just dues were given both to the theistic and to the
physico-mechanical theories of life. The point of agreement upon which
this settlement, or, to express it better, compromise, was made was
teleology.

By teleology we understand the conception that all earthly existence
is created by a supreme power in accordance with a preconceived plan,
and that, accordingly, all organic life, in form and action, is most
perfectly adapted to the task prescribed for it by this power. This
conception was absolutely indispensable to antique medicine; for it
allowed the adherents of the theistic theory without hesitation to
consider man as a product of the creator, which was distinguished in
all directions and which bore witness of the wisdom of God, a position
which precluded the assumption, which was impossible according to the
antecedent medical observations, that disease came from God. For it
seemed quite plausible, according to the physico-mechanical theory of
life, that disease might be a product of a number of adverse, purely
earthly conditions, an assumption not involving the slightest doubt of
the wisdom and creative power of the gods. This teleological doctrine,
which runs like a red thread through all ancient philosophy, becomes
conspicuously prominent in Galen. Every section of the powerful work
of Galen—anatomy, as well as physiology, pathology, and therapy—bear
witness to the most confident teleological conception, a conception
which in the end culminates in the verdict (“Use of the Parts,” Book
11, Chapter XIV.): “The creator of nature has disclosed his benevolence
by wise care for all his creatures, in that he has bestowed upon each
one what is truly of service to it.”

This teleological idea of all earthly becoming, being, and passing away
was henceforth destined to be a permanent factor in human speculation.
Christianity received it as a possession from antique civilization, and
only the philosophy and natural science of modern times have been able
to threaten its permanence. Biology, as of modern creation, teaches
us that all natural phenomena owe their existence to natural causes,
that the natural world is subject to natural laws. And, accordingly,
teleology, as we encounter it in the works of the heathen Galen and
in the writings of the Christian Church Fathers, has turned out to
be superstition, which, however, must by no means be classed with
the vagaries of mere medico-physical superstition. In coming to this
decision, however, we must beware of rash generalization. In this
connection we refer only to that kind of teleology which dominated the
world previous to the teachings of Descartes and Spinoza, and previous
to the advent of modern natural science, with its biological methods.
Whether, after all, a theory of life might be possible which, while
avoiding the reproach of superstition, might be traced to teleological
prepossessions, is a question we can not here discuss. It is admittedly
true that the deeper we penetrate into the secrets of nature the more
energetically the existence of a marvelous, intelligent will manifests
itself as permeating all domains of nature. However, if this fact is
not denied on principle, as modern materialism denies it, and proper
allowance is made for it, a rehabilitation of teleology as a necessary
factor of our theory of life would be the logical consequence. Of
course, this teleology would bear a stamp entirely different from
that of antiquity and of the middle ages, which is recognized to be
superstition. It should not pretend to include the consideration of the
entire organic world, but confine its conclusions to the last links
in the chain of experience and argument which science has forged from
natural phenomena. Now this could be accomplished, in our opinion, even
without apprehension of interfering with the indispensable requirements
of modern naturalists: “The terrestrial world in its forms and
processes is governed solely by terrestrial laws.” What the appearance
of such a teleology should be is expressed by William Hartpole Lecky in
the following:

“This conception, which exhibits the universe rather as an organism
than a mechanism, and regards the complexities and adaptations it
displays rather as the results of gradual development from within
than of an interference from without, is so novel, and at first sight
so startling, that many are now shrinking from it in alarm, under
the impression that it destroys the argument from design, and almost
amounts to the negation of a Supreme Intelligence. But there can,
I think, be little doubt that such fears are, for the most part,
unfounded. That matter is governed by mind, that the contrivances
and elaborations of the universe are the products of intelligence,
are propositions which are quite unshaken, whether we regard these
contrivances as the result of a single momentary exercise of will,
or of a slow, consistent, and regulated evolution. The proofs of a
pervading and developing intelligence, and the proofs of a coordinating
and combining intelligence, are both untouched, nor can any conceivable
progress of science in this direction destroy them. If the famous
suggestion, that all animal and vegetable life results from a single
vital germ, and that all the different animals and plants now existent
were developed by a natural process of evolution from that germ, were
a demonstrated truth, we should still be able to point to the evidence
of intelligence displayed in the measured and progressive development,
in those exquisite forms so different from what blind chance could
produce, and in the manifest adaptation of surrounding circumstances
to the living creature, and of the living creature to surrounding
circumstances. The argument from design would indeed be changed; it
would require to be stated in a new form, but it would be fully as
cogent as before. Indeed, it is, perhaps, not too much to say that the
more fully this conception of universal evolution is grasped, the more
firmly a scientific doctrine of Providence will be established, and the
stronger will be the presumption of a future progress.”[1]

      [1] “History of the Rise and Influence of the Spirit of
      Rationalism in Europe,” Vol. I., Chapter III., pages 294-295.
      Compare also Magnus, “Medicine and Religion,” page 24, _sqq._

In such a manner, despite the fact that in teleology the point of
agreement between theistic and physico-mechanical medical thought has
been now found, theism, in the course of the history of our science,
continually attempted new attacks upon the physical tendency in
medicine; and with each assault superstition in medicine, as well as in
the natural sciences, was most palpably exposed.

After having satisfied ourselves in this second chapter regarding
theism and its attitude with reference to the physico-mechanical theory
of life, we shall now enter upon the consideration of the various
forms of medical superstition, and it is our intention, as stated in
the first chapter, so to arrange the enormous material at hand as to
discuss medical superstition according to the sources from which it has
sprung. We shall begin by pointing out the intimate relations which
have prevailed between the teachings of religion and superstition.




