V

THE RELATIONS OF NATURAL SCIENCE TO MEDICAL SUPERSTITION


The point of view from which man has regarded nature for thousands of
years up to modern times has been such as to promote most effectually
the development of superstition; for the idea that a satisfactory
insight into the character of natural phenomena can be obtained only
by means of adequate experiments, and of observation perfected by the
employment of the inductive reasoning and ingenious instruments, is
comparatively recent. Natural science applying such means is scarcely
two hundred years old. Fit instruments for the observation of nature
existed only to a limited extent up to the eighteenth century, and,
besides, their complete efficiency left much to be desired. The
attempts to wrest from Nature her secrets by means of experiment were
but feeble and unsuccessful. Altho the ancients, as is shown by the
writings of Hippocrates, Galen, and others, had some knowledge of
vivisection, they had practised it to a most limited extent. During
the middle ages and the period of the Renaissance comparatively few
physical experiments were made. Whatever researches in natural science
were then undertaken were intended much less for the investigation of
nature than for fantastic and superstitious purposes—as, for instance,
the investigations of alchemy and astrology.

It is quite obvious that, under such circumstances, a number of
superficial, imperfect, and distorted observations crept into the
theoretic system of natural science.

However, this was not all; the diagnostico-theoretical method, by
means of which antiquity, the middle ages, and even the greatest part
of more modern times, had seen the natural sciences treated, was
radically wrong. Man did not feel his way carefully from experiment
to experiment, from observation to observation, until the general
principle was found which inductively comprised a number of phenomena
under one uniform principle of law, but the principle which was at
the bottom of phenomena was fixed upon a speculative basis, and in
accordance with this principle the phenomena were interpreted—as was
done, for instance, in medicine in the case of humoral pathology. And
as this speculatively constructed principle was obtained exclusively by
a method dangerous to the cognition of natural sciences, by conclusion
from analogy, naturally the most fantastic and adventurous conceptions
soon became accepted in the realm of natural philosophy. But natural
philosophy once lost in such a labyrinth, an aberration of the
perceptive powers can not fail to follow—at least, in certain domains
of nature. As a matter of fact, this fallacious perception promptly
made its appearance, and has proved the stumbling-block of science
from its earliest days up to the present times. Occultism, mysticism,
or whatever the names may be of the various forms of superstition,
have sprung from these erroneous conceptions of natural science. It
may even be contended that no variety of superstition exists which is
not somehow connected with a distorted observation or explanation of
nature. However interesting these considerations may be, we can not
here pursue them any further.

Such investigations belong to the history of superstition in general,
and any one who desires more detailed information is referred to the
enormous literature of the subject. We can here consider only those
relations which prevail, or have prevailed, between superstition and
natural science, and principally the influence which was thus exerted
upon the art of healing by astronomy.

Astronomy and medicine became most intimately connected during the
earliest periods of human civilization. The literature of cuneiform
inscriptions shows us that the attempt to bring the stars into
connection with human destinies is primeval, and reaches back to the
ancient Babylonian age, even to the Sumero-Accadic period (Sudhoff,
_Med. Woche._ 1901, No. 41). How primeval peoples came to connect
their destinies with the heavenly bodies and their orbits is explained
so lucidly by Troels-Lund (page 28, etc.) that we shall cite his
descriptions, even if they are rather long for quotation. He says: “The
Chaldean history of creation is inscribed upon seven clay tablets. On
the fifth tablet we read: ‘The seventh day He instituted as a holy day,
and ordained that man should rest from all labor.’ Why just seven?
Because the holy number seven of the planets imperceptibly shone
through the work of creation, and was imperceptibly impressed upon the
entire order of thought. We are here at the decisive epoch at which
the planets for the first time gave an impetus to human conception,
the effects of which were to persist for thousands of years. This was
repeated a second time when Copernicus, in dealing especially with the
orbit of the planets, founded the still-prevailing conception of the
universe.

“For the theory of creation could be reconciled with the phenomenon of
sun and moon moving in their regular courses. They were in this case
no longer, as had been assumed until then, individual living beings
and divinities, but lights kindled by a mighty God, and intended to
move day and night, in an established order, under the dome of heaven.
But the other five planets! It was unnecessary to be a Chaldean on the
Babylonian Tower in order to feel amazement at these. Every one who
had ever followed with his eye their courses for a few nights during a
caravan journey, every one who, lying awake, had occasionally attempted
to read the time from the only clock of the night—the star-covered
canopy of heaven—was bound to have noticed their peculiarities as
to light and course. They did not shine uniformly, but sometimes
intensely, at other times faintly, and entirely different was their
radiance from that of other stars—reddish, greenish, bluish. And their
course was at one time rapid, at other times slow; then backward or
oblique; sometimes they disappeared entirely. Necessarily they appeared
inexplicable not only to the inexperienced observer, but to a still
higher grade of intellect—that of the most experienced Chaldean;
for, altho their periods could possibly be calculated, their courses
beggared all geometrical figures. These confused paths could be
explained only in one manner—namely, as the expression of an arbitrary
will, the manifestations of an independent life. The courses of the
planets furnished the astronomic proof that the heavenly bodies were
animated. The universe was more than created, it was godhead itself in
living activity.

“How this point of view broadened and cleared everything! The world
assumed the shape of an enormous hall upon which divine power, divine
will, continuously acted from above. Farthest down was the world of
the elements. In boundless distances above it moved the moon and the
six other planets, each one in its transparent heaven. In the highest
height, finally, revolved the canopy of impervious heaven, into which
constellations were ranged in shapes that resembled animals (Tablet
V., verse 2). Apparently these rotations did not have anything in
common with each other; a power which passed through them from above
moved these elemental worlds. Did not daily experience of their rising
determine winter, storm, drought, etc.? Thus the processes on earth
only reflected and repeated the course of these divine and heavenly
bodies; yea, divine will itself. But their order of movement varied.
Sun and moon with their regular courses spin, as it were, the firm
warps and woofs; the other five are instrumental in producing what is
changeable and apparently accidental. Unitedly in their course through
heaven the seven weave the threads of fate. Silently they weave the
design of terrestrial life. Upon them depend not only summer and
winter, rain and drought, but also the life and death of every living
being; as determined by the constellation of their birth, such is each
man, so will he live. Never do the heavenly bodies repeat precisely the
same relative positions, and, therefore, never are two years, two days,
two human beings, two leaves, completely identical.”

So far Troels-Lund.

Much as we agree with what Troels-Lund says, yet we believe that the
decisive motive which led humanity to bring their bodily welfare into
closest connection with the starry canopy of heaven was suggested by
the powerful influence which the sun exerts upon the bodily welfare
of all life. As this life-giving power of the sun had a conspicuous
share in the origin of primeval sabianism, so also it exerted a similar
influence upon the development of astrology; for it must have been
obvious to even the most stupid observer that his well-being depended
to a great extent upon the action of the sun. From this perception
to the idea that other heavenly bodies were also intended to exert a
decisive influence upon things terrestrial was only a short step for
the ancient civilized peoples; for here the conclusion from analogy was
actually so closely and so enticingly under every one’s nose that all
he had to do was but to pitch upon the powers which rule all earthly
life and neatly box them up in a well-constructed system. But as the
conclusion from analogy was always considered in the ancient world
as the most certain, never-failing path to knowledge, it was readily
followed in this connection also. And thus astrology, like the greater
part of medico-physical knowledge, was based, we think, upon the
treacherous ground of a conclusion _per analogiam_.

Besides, our opinion that the warming and vitalizing power of the sun
formed one of the most important factors in the origin of astrology
is confirmed by the utterances of astrologists themselves. Thus, for
instance, Ptolemy points to the sun and moon as the sources of life to
mankind, and Hermes and Almansor repeat the dictum. This is furthermore
proved by the unparalleled popularity which astrology has enjoyed in
all phases of civilization. There is no civilized people, either
of ancient or of modern times, which has not adhered to astrologic
doctrines with the fullest confidence and most unswerving faith.
Babylonians, Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, Germans, Romanians—in short,
all nations—have professed their belief in astrology. Such a conformity
of opinion would, however, be inexplicable amid such a dissimilarity of
religious and cultural ideas as characterized the different peoples,
unless a common principle had decisively influenced all nations in the
same manner. This principle was acknowledged in the influence of the
sun. Every human being was bound to observe the animating power of the
sun on his own bodily sense and from his own observation, and would be
at once led to the conclusion that a similar power resided also in the
other celestial bodies.

This conception, which to a great extent was brought about by
conclusions from analogy, provided a method of inference concerning
various other phenomena. Man meditated, speculated, concluded, until
the required sidereal relation of each organ and each function of the
human body was determined. Thus astrology may serve as one of the
most telling examples of scientific delusions to which the ancient
diagnostico-theoretical methods were bound to lead, with their
conclusions from analogy and their deductive modes of procedure.

The above survey indicates, altho only in very general outlines,
the origin of astrology. We shall now consider more in detail the
acquisition for which the art of medicine is especially indebted to
astrology.

Babylonico-Assyrian civilization possessed in its earliest ages a
well-developed system of astrologic medicine, as is evident from
writings bequeathed to us from antiquity. Campbell-Thompson has
recently published, from the great stock of cuneiform tablets in the
collection of the British Museum, 276 inscriptions of an astrological
nature belonging to the so-called Kouyunjik collection. Sudhoff has
compiled them, so far as they refer to medicine, and has subjected them
to critical analysis. We take the liberty of repeating certain extracts
from these cuneiform tablets, which appear to be the reports which
Assyrian and Babylonian court astrologists made to the king.

Tablet 69_a_ says: “If the wind comes from the west upon appearance of
the moon, disease will prevail during this month.”

Tablet 207: “If Venus approaches the constellation of Cancer, obedience
and prosperity will be in the land ... the sick of the land will
recover. Pregnant women will carry their confinements to a favorable
termination.”

Tablet 163: “If Mercury rises on the fifteenth day of the month, there
will be many deaths. If the constellation of Cancer becomes obscured, a
fatal demon will possess the land and many deaths will occur.”

Tablet 232: “If Mercury comes in conjunction with Mars, there will
follow fatalities among horses.”

Tablet 175: “If a planet becomes pale in opposition to the moon, or if
it enters into conjunction with it, many lions will die.”

Tablet 195: “If Mars and Jupiter come in conjunction, many cattle will
die.”

Tablet 117: “If the greater halo surrounds the moon, ruin will be
visited upon mankind.”

Tablet 269: “If an eclipse of the sun occurs on the twenty-ninth day of
the month of Jypar, there will be many deaths on the first day.”

Tablet 271: “An eclipse at the morning watch causes disease.... If an
eclipse takes place during the morning watch, and lasts throughout the
watch, while the wind blows from the north, the sick in Akkad will
recover.”

Tablet 79: “If a halo surrounds the moon and if Regulus stands within,
women will bear male children.”

Tablet 94: “If sun and moon ... on the fifteenth day ‘answer my prayer’
shall he say ... Let him nestle close to his wife, she shall conceive a
son.”

These few extracts show us the close relations into which
Assyrico-Babylonian culture brought the becoming and passing away of
all animal life with the stellar movement; in fact, as we note from
Tablet 94, the astrologists of this period did not hesitate to intrude
into the most intimate occurrences of married life. It is quite obvious
that, under such circumstances, the Babylonian physician was compelled
to consider very carefully the utterances of the astrologists in
carrying on his practise. It may be possible that we shall obtain still
further information regarding the quality of sidereal therapy from the
numerously discovered cuneiform tablets. We know positively that a
physician was forbidden to perform any surgical operations on certain
days of each month. Thus, for instance, the 7th, 14th, 19th, 21st, and
28th of the month Schall-Elul were unfavorable days for such operations
(Oefele). These directions were especially stringent in regard to
venesection, to which act we shall again refer in greater detail.

When civilization, later on, continued to thrive upon the shores of
the Nile, astrology still found a fertile soil there, and it appears
that here also the name Ἰατρομαθηματικοί has originated, which,
subsequently, was a favorite designation of adherents to the sidereal
art of healing. The astrological prognoses made by the professional
astrologist, Petosiris, for the king Nechepso of Sais are well known.
However, it appears, according to the latest investigations (compare
the excellent work of Sudhoff, page 4, etc.), that these prognoses have
nothing at all to do with that king Nechepso who reigned in the seventh
century, B.C. It seems more probable that some cunning Alexandrian
astrologist of the second century, B.C., fraudulently used the name
of the king as a cover for his work. But however this may be, these
prognoses of Petosiris have considerable value, in that they give us an
insight into the manufacture of such medical prophesies.

The object of these prognoses was primarily to discover the termination
of a disease, whether the patient would die or recover, either soon
or only after the lapse of a certain time—for instance, after seven
days. This was all that Petosiris undertook to predict. All details
regarding treatment, complications, and diagnosis of a case are still
entirely wanting. Petosiris, in making such a prognosis, by no means
relied solely upon the conjunction of certain celestial bodies, but he
employed a rather intricate method, in which mystic numbers, onomancy,
and astrology were important elements. To prognosticate medically
according to this system a circle of numerals was required in the first
place. There existed two different kinds of such circles—one simple,
the other more complicated. Berthelot has furnished us with examples of
both as used by Petosiris.

[Illustration: FIG. 1—CIRCLE OF PETOSIRIS

(After Bouché-Leclercq, p. 539)]

The more simple formula (Fig. 1) consisted of two concentric circles,
the smaller of which was divided into four quadrants. Between both
concentric circles and within the horizontal diameters were inscribed
the words: μέον ζωή; to the right of this: ἡ μικρὰ ζωή; to the left
of the vertical line: ἡ μεναλη ζωή. Under the vertical line was
inscribed: μέσος θάνατος; to the right of this: μικρὸς θάνατος;
and to the left of the vertical line: ὁ μένας θάνατος. Only words
which point to the longer or shorter duration of life, or to the
death-struggle, were therefore employed. The four quadrants of the
enclosed circle, as well as the vertical diameter, contained the
numerals from 1 to 29 in a mystical order, representing the duration of
the moon’s phases. The above (Fig. 1) shows us this astrological circle
of Petosiris.

The second—essentially more complicated—formula consists of three
concentric circles. Various words are inscribed between the first and
second circles, as in Fig. 1. Between the second and third circles, and
in the verticals, the numerals from 1 to 30 are disposed in a mystical
arrangement. Furthermore, these circles are not, as in Fig. 1, divided
into four quadrants, but into eight equal sections. At these points
in which the radii forming the sectors intersect the periphery of the
outermost of the three concentric circles, arched enclosures are raised
which also contain various words.

[Illustration: FIG. 2—CIRCLE OF PETOSIRIS

(After Bouché-Leclercq, p. 540)]

When it was sought, by means of the above-described figures, to
determine the medical future or the life and death of an individual,
this could be accomplished with the aid of the diagram represented in
Fig. 1 in such a manner that the duration of the disease in days, the
numerical value of the name of the patient, and the phases of the moon
were added, and the sum divided by 29. The result thus obtained was
interpreted by referring to the diagram. If this figure happened to be,
for instance, in the right upper quadrant, the patient, altho he would
recover from his illness, would live only for a very short period;
if this number was found in the vertical line, below the horizontal
diameter, the patient was destined to die after a short struggle.

Much more intricate was the use of the astrological apparatus
illustrated in Fig 2. Here the number of the moon’s day, and the
numerical values of the name of the patient were not added, but each
of these figures was separately looked for in the diagram. If the moon
figure was found in the lower, the figure for the name in the upper,
ends of the verticals—_i.e._, where δυσις ὑπόγειος, setting, and
ἀνατολὴ ὑπέργειος, rising, stand—the individual concerned, altho in
danger, finally recovered. If, on the other hand, the moon figure was
discovered in the upper, and the figure for the name in the lower, ends
of the verticals, nothing but evil was in store for the questioner, but
the misfortune appeared under the guise of fortune. If both numbers,
however, were at the upper ends of the verticals, the prospects were
favorable, but bad if both figures occurred below the horizontal line.

A method which is similar to the simple apparatus of Petosiris is
revealed to us in the so-called οφαῖρα Δημοκρίτου. It is contained in
the _Papyrus Magica Musei Lugdunensis Batavia_, published by Dietrich.
Fig. 3 shows the illustration belonging to this method, and also
the Greek directions for use, as given in the papyrus. It will be
noticed that in the method of Democritus recourse is made to a table
of numerals divided by a cross-line into the upper and larger, and a
lower and smaller, section. The upper part contains in three vertical
columns 18, in the lower, 12 figures. To use the table, the day when
the disease began, the numerical value of the name, and the days of the
moon were added, and the sum thus obtained divided by 30. This quotient
was then looked for in the table of numbers. If it was found above the
cross-line, the patient recovered; if below, he succumbed.

[Illustration: FIG. 3—THE TABLE OF DEMOCRITUS]

There existed a great many other methods besides those described above;
for instance, the system of the 12 places, the circle of Manilius, the
method of the mysterious Hermes Trismegistus, the circle of Ptolemy,
etc. However, we can not here enter into a more detailed description of
these forms, and refer those that wish more exhaustive information to
Berthelot, and, above all, to Bouché-Leclercq. Astrology, and, with it,
sidereal medicine, subsequently traveled from its Oriental home into
all civilized countries of the then known world.

As regards Greek and Roman antiquity, astrology in all its forms won a
high reputation both in Greece and Italy. Even the most eminent ancient
physicians, altho they did not unreservedly adopt sidereal medicine,
refrained from disavowing it. Thus we find in the Corpus Hippocraticum,
the chief work of early Greek medicine, passages which betray more
than a friendly feeling toward the astral art of healing. It is true,
expressions are not wanting which sound like a direct disowning of
astrology.

Let us consider for a few moments the attitude of Hippocratic medicine
toward astrology.

As to the rejection of astrologic medicine by the followers of
Hippocrates, we read (“Ancient Medicine,” Chapter I.; in the
translation of Fuchs, Vol. I., page 19): “For this reason I believe
that it [medical art] requires no basis of vain presumption, such as
the existence of invisible and doubtful factors, the discussion of
which, if it should be attempted, necessitates a hypothetic science
of supernatural or of subterrestrial nature; for, if any one should
contend that he knew anything about such a matter, neither he, the
lecturer, nor his hearers would clearly understand whether his
statements were true or not, because nothing exists to which reference
could be had for purposes of verification.”

This surely is a refutation as definite as can be desired of a medicine
which depends upon witchcraft or astrologic vagaries. However, various
other passages of the Corpus Hippocraticum take an exactly contrary
position. For example, we find the following statement (on “Air,
Water, and Locality,” Chapter XVII., in the translation of Fuchs,
Vol. I., page 390): “Attention must be paid to the rise of the stars,
especially to that of Sirius,[4] as well as to the rise of Arcturus,
and, further, to the setting of the Pleiades, for most diseases reach a
crisis during such periods, some of them abating in these days, others
ceasing entirely, or developing into other symptoms and different
conditions.” These words indicate a distinct intention of bringing
prognosis and course of diseases into the closest relations with the
motions of the celestial bodies. In the second chapter of the same book
similar expressions occur: “He who knows how the change of seasons and
the rising and setting of stars take place will also be able to foresee
how the year is going to be. Therefore, any one who investigates these
subjects and predicts coming events will be thoroughly informed as to
each detail of the future; he will enjoy the best of health, and take
as much as possible the right road in art. However, if any one should
be of the opinion that these questions belong solely in the realm of
astronomy, he will soon change his opinion as he learns that astronomy
is not of slight, but of a very essential, importance in medical art.”
Stars and diseases are also brought into mutual relations in the letter
to King Ptolemy (Emerins, page 293).

      [4] This star, in particular, played a rôle in the astrologic
      prognosis of the Egyptians; in fact, in various systems it was
      made the starting-point of medical predictions; for instance,
      in the method of Hermes Trismegistus.

The above quotations refer exclusively to the course of diseases in
relation to the stars, but we find in other passages also distinct
references are made to therapeutic methods; for instance, in
“Aphorisms,” § 4, paragraph 5, we read: “Purging is very difficult
during or before the dog-days.”

It would, indeed, be most remarkable if no astrologic remarks of any
kind were found in the Corpus Hippocraticum, as the idea of close
relation between the celestial bodies and matters terrestrial had
common currency during the Hippocratic period. The songs of Stesichorus
and of Pindar show, for instance (as is also stated by Pliny, Book 3,
