CHAPTER XXVI.

On the morning of Annie and Adelaide's departure for the convent, Mr.
Godfrey had ordered breakfast for himself in his library, and had
summoned Hester to attend him, on the pretext of not feeling well, but
in reality to avoid a parting scene with his children. Hester, on the
other hand, dreaded nothing more than they should depart without
farewell; she had keenly felt Adelaide's words beside her mother's
coffin, but in despite of her efforts could not effect an interview
which should dispel the ill-feeling that oppressed her. Her father's
jealousy of her holding any private intercourse with the rest of the
family on the one hand, and the coldness of Adelaide on the other,
seemed to present insurmountable obstacles. At length she heard the
carriage draw up, and the voices departing; hastily she quitted the
breakfast table, and rushed into the hall. The travellers were already
there; she approached Annie with tears in her eyes. Annie was too sad
herself to be angry just then, she imprinted on her sister's forehead
the silent kiss her gesture pleaded for; but Adelaide went forward and
seated herself in the carriage, waving her hand for a general adieu,
and Hester fell back weeping on her brother's shoulder as the vehicle
drove away from the door.

"O Eugene! I had no hand in this; tell me at least that you believe
me," sobbed the poor girl.

"I do believe you, and so will Adelaide after a time; take comfort,
Hester."

"I cannot, with them all against me. Oh! who could ever dream our love
for each other could melt away to this?"

"It is not, melted a way, dear sister, only obscured; it will one day
return warmer and brighter than ever."

"Then you, you will write to me, you will not cast me off?"

"Never, never will I cast you off! never cease to love you!"

"Then, Eugene, you will help me also; I want to read, to know the
cause of these unhappy divisions."

"And my father?"

"O Eugene! that is the misery my father must not know. Eugene, I love
my father; there can be nothing wrong in that, he has only me now. We
cannot help that; but I must be true to him, I cannot break his heart.
He must not know we correspond or that I read your books, or that I am
thinking on the subjects he hates so much. He need not know it; I am a
woman now, I have a right to my {758} freedom. If I conceal my
thought, it is out of love to him; you know well how it would pain him
were he to suspect I read a work that treats on religion."

"Our correspondence must be secret; then?"

"I fear it must; at least till my father gets over this miserable
prejudice. You can write and send to me under cover to Norah, my
little maid. I will send her to you presently for some books, and now
good-by, my father will be wanting me. Pray for us both, Eugene."

Mr. Godfrey was considerably unhinged by the change that had taken
place in his family, and he watched Hester closely. She had truly said
she was now his last hope. That she was dejected at her mother's death
could not surprise him or any one, but that her sprightliness had
altogether departed, that her energy was depressed, her color faded,
and her appetite gone, were sources of great anxiety. Again he took
her to Yorkshire, to endeavor to reinspire her with interest in the
promotion of the "March of Intellect."

Hester did not feel justified in withdrawing her interest or exertions
from the institutions which she had raised and fostered; but it must
be confessed that these institutions were gradually assuming the
character of mere money-making factories. Mr. Godfrey, dissatisfied
with certain losses, had engaged a man of business to overlook the
whole concern, and in addition to a stipulated sum, this person was to
receive a certain percentage of the profits. This rendered him
particularly sharp-sighted as to doing matters economically; that is,
with the fewest number of hands, at the lowest rate of wages, and
oftentimes employing children in lieu of adults.

"This is altogether, foreign to our first idea," said Hester, "and I
do not approve of it at all."

"It cannot be helped, my dear; no enterprise that will not pay can be
proceeded with in the long run."

"But these children shut up in the close rooms at eight or ten years
of age, for such long hours! it will numb every faculty they possess."

"If their parents are willing to permit it, I do not see what we have
to do with it."

"O father! ignorant people often sell their children, without knowing
the harm they do; but this cannot be the way in which the world is to
improve."

"You were not satisfied with the results of your new plan, which did
not make money. I have put the matter into Mr. Fisher's hands for a
while, because, I know that in his hands, if money is to be made, it
will be made: his talent for business is unrivalled."

"Money is not the principle of progression."

"Nothing can be done without it, at any rate."

These discussions annoyed Mr. Godfrey the more because he felt the
inconsistency between the past idea and the present practice. On the
other hand, Hester was not in possession of the principle she was
seeking; that was acknowledged with regret on her part, though she by
no means gave up the search, and still less rested contented with the
inferior motive of placing all development, all future improvement on
the mere basis of money-making.

Among Mr. Godfrey's friends, one of the most intimate, because the
most scientific after the fashion of this world's science, was a Mr.
Spencer--a gentleman whose works had already acquired for him a great
share of reputation, and who was gradually acquiring great influence
over Mr. Godfrey. He was a man of about five-and-thirty years of age,
being some twelve years older than our Hester, whom he greatly
admired, notwithstanding that he found her mind a little difficult to
understand. Perhaps he liked her the better that she puzzled him, that
she took different views from him. Certain it is that he haunted her
society whenever he could find an excuse, and Mr. Godfrey seemed
particularly well pleased to find them together, as he {759} hoped
that interviews with such a learned man would dissipate any tendency
to religion, especially the Catholic religion, that Hester might be
fostering in consequence of the proclivities of her mother and of the
rest of the family in that direction.

. . . . .

'Twas autumn, a walk through the woods had brought the trio together,
and together they returned to the house; the gusty and fitful wind
scattering in their path the tinted leaves that fell like showers from
the trees beneath which they were passing. Wild clouds were hurrying
through space, as if summoned suddenly to assist at some tempestuous
commotion, and though many miles distant was the sea, the roar of
waves was heard beating on the far-off shore; every sign betokened
that a storm was at hand. The pedestrians hurried to the house, and
scarcely had they reached it, than impulsively they went to the window
to gaze in mute amazement at the scene. A sudden wind was uprooting
trees, unroofing houses, and carrying off all things before it. An old
barn long doomed to be pulled down, which was but awaiting hands to
perform the work, suddenly reeled like a drunken man, and in a few
moments more fell to the ground with a great crash. The servant girls
screamed in the hall, "the men went in for shelter, they must be
crushed to death!" The door was opened that the serving-men might rush
to the rescue, but the wind swept like a tornado through the hall,
tiles were rattling from the house-top, bricks tumbling from the
chimneys. To leave the house was impossible, none could stand against
such a blast. A large boarded roof that was being prepared by the
carpenters was carried off the scaffold, and after being for some time
balanced in the air as if it were a paper kite, fell at length with a
loud splash into the lake some quarter of a mile distant from the spot
whence it was first uplifted. The scene was at once terrific and
sublime, and but for the screams and sobs of the girls, who feared to
have some father, brother, or friend buried beneath the fallen
building, Hester could have enjoyed the spectacle; but she was
occupied in endeavoring to soothe the panic-stricken tremblers, and
for consolation what could she say? She could but stand by and
sympathize, and utter words of hope, meaningless because unfelt. It
was a relief when the storm abated to find that all the men had been
able to quit the building at the first creaking of the rafters, and by
crawling on all fours had reached a place where they lay safely till
the storm had passed--all save one, and he was protected by the manner
in which the beams fell over him, they being prevented from falling
perpendicularly by some obstacles, and formed a sloping defensive
shelter for the young man who happened to find himself in that
particular corner, from which, when the storm abated, he was
extricated by his companions, with no other injury suffered than the
alarm endured for several hours; and in this alarm he had many
sharers, for few of the neighbours could rest in peace until he was
drawn forth unhurt.

A feeling of relief pervaded the party as with closed shutters, drawn
curtains, and every appurtenance of comfort, they drew round the
bright coal fire, which shed a glowing, cheering warmth throughout the
apartment--while the rain which had succeeded to this storm of wind
was pattering against the windows, enhancing the comfort within by a
sense of dreariness without.

"How remorseless is nature!" said Mr. Spence, as at length the silence
which had pervaded the three friends became almost painful; "decay,
change, transition, pain, with transient gleams of beauty, as if to
render the surrounding gloom more painful still, and no escape: how
remorseless is nature!"

"All things have their bright side, I believe," she said, "even so
terrible a storm as to-day's. It is good to feel a grand sensation
sometimes, it stirs up the very depths of one's being."

{760}

"How would it have been if those men had been crushed to death, or
worse, hopelessly maimed for life?"

"That did not happen. Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof."

"But similar events often do happen. The battle-field, the pestilence,
man's evil passions, or the remorseless sea tossing man's feeble bark
in sport against the rocks, cause many a grand sensation that is not
good. See in that newly settled swamp the settler's wife surprised
amid her household drudgeries with a startling shriek, and, hurrying
to the water's edge, to find a rattlesnake coiled round her prattler's
leg, inflicting the painful sting that causes the innocent child to
expire in torture: do you call that good?"

"It does not follow that there is no good because we see it not! The
design of the creation may involve a hidden good to be evolved out of
what seems evil."

"And meantime the longer we pursue our researches, the more we become
convinced that an all-pervading inexorable law governs events by
necessary connection; that there is no resisting the force of this
law, no disarming it. All that we can do is to study it, and take what
comfort we can individually by an intelligent application of it to
ourselves."

"And our neighbor's happiness is to tell for nothing?"

"You will do no good by forcing any system on men for which they are
not prepared," said Mr. Spence. "Ideas remain inoperative when the
civilization or intelligence to which it is addressed is unequal to
its realization; practice does not depend on theories, but on
development, on individual assimilation of the principles, if I may be
permitted to use this word. For instance, moral theories are ever the
same. The Hindoo, the Chinaman, the follower of Zoroaster and the
transcribers of the precepts of Menu, declare with the Jew and the
Christian, that the law is to be honest, virtuous, heedful of others'
pleasure or good, to seek justice, love mercy, reverence age, and
submit to all lawful authority, etc.--each precept requiring a willing
obedience; yet where are the fruits to be found?"

"But do men believe these precepts to be the rule of right?"

"Theoretically they are not disputed, but practically man is made by
the external objects that surround him. Give society a system below
its advancement, it rises superior to it; give it one above it, it
does not come up to it. This is observable in nations. Among the lower
order of French Catholics there is less of bigotry and civilization,
with more of the real charity enjoined by religion, than among the
lower order of Scotch Protestants, despite the theory of their
theology.   [Footnote 206] Again, the Swedes and the inhabitants of
some of the Swiss Cantons are less civilized than the French, and
therefore it avails them little that they three centuries ago adopted
a creed to which the force of habit and the influence of tradition now
oblige them to cling. Whoever has travelled in these countries will
see how little the inhabitants have benefited by their religion, while
in France you will see an illiberal religion accompanied by liberal
views, and a creed full of superstitions professed by a people among
whom superstition is comparatively rare."  [Footnote 206]

  [Footnote 206: See Buckle's Civilization in England.  Vol i. pages
  191-193, from which above is extracted. (There are two references
  and only one footnote on this page.--Transcriber)]

"That would rather go to prove Catholicity to be better than
Protestanism," said Hester; "at least, if liberal views and tolerant
actions be a proof of the advancement of society."

Mr. Godfrey bit his lips, and Mr. Spence, suddenly mindful of certain
proceedings in his friend's family not exactly of the tolerative
description, hastily essayed to cover his mistake:

"Practically," he said, "men's religious demonstrations are a thing
apart from their theory, and are governed by the character of
individual mental development, rather than (what they are assumed to
be) a power governing development."

{761}

"I think that proposition illogical. If religion acts at all, it must
act according to its character as a power. Granting that with many it
is a dead letter, without any action, yet with those it does
influence, its action must be the legitimate result of its doctrine;
and if the civilization resulting from Catholicity is superior, is not
that the superior agency?"

"You forget how the guardians of the Catholic faith have ever
persecuted science; that proves them intolerant."

"Not necessarily. The guardians of a faith, amid a crude, undeveloped
people, may well be jealous of novel notions, dispersed out of their
connexion amid an unthinking, unreflecting populace. If the object is
to raise people from the phase of their present existence to a higher
phase, our late experiments have shown that it needs caution in
disturbing present moral influences. The mass are not philosophers;
they will not travel the whole round of a series to trace the whole
chain of what you call the necessary connection. Were I to begin my
experiment again I should take the highest motive then active on the
mind, and try to build higher on that. The first results of science
are usually destructive, and therefore not fit for the masses;
something must be built up again ere we present it to them. As it is,
these masses seem only to amuse themselves by hurling the stones of
the ruined theory at the world and at each other, destroying much, but
advancing nothing good."

"But philosophy must not be controlled. Science must not be impeded in
its onward march; the hopes of ultimate civilization lie in free
investigation. The evil is transient--the good permanent."

"Yet you admit that a system may be in advance of a people?"

"Yes, and forerunners are martyrs, sacrificed to the ignorance, to the
inaptitude of the age in which they live; yet there is a sort of
necessity for their existence, the law for which is not as yet
discovered. Future ages will probably be more enlightened on this
head. All that we know is, that there is a law for all evolutions, a
practical principle--if we could only trace it--to which every
action, every development may be referred. Statistical tables show us
that even crime follows method. In a given number of people in a given
state of civilization there will be a certain percentage of murders, a
certain percentage of thefts, robberies, and the like; nay, a certain
average number of suicides. You may verify these facts by comparing
the statistical tables of large cities such as London and Paris,
[Footnote 207] for a definite series of years.

  [Footnote 207: See Buckle's Civilization in England. Vol. i. page 17
  _et seq._ ]

"And through what agency is this effected?" asked Hester, in
amazement.

"Nay, that I can scarcely answer save in general terms. The cause of
law, the cause of evolution, the cause of everything is utterly
unknown. The most we can do is to observe phenomena, to class them,
and then note the sequences which form necessary connection together;
in this way we discover the law, but beyond that science can affirm
nothing. The cause we can know nothing, and affirm nothing of, save
its bare existence as the incomprehensible cause of all phenomena. The
sole possible predication is merely that he, or more properly it, is."

"Why, surely the cause is God," said Hester, who, new as she was to a
personal recognition of God's rights to her own devotion, had never
dreamed of doubting, that "absolute intelligence" ruled "as cause."

"God," said Mr. Spence, "is too indefined a term for science, or
rather there are ideas connected with the term which we cannot
scientifically apply to the unknowable. We cannot affirm of this
unknowable that he is either matter or mind; because this would be to
degrade him, by representing him in terms of our finite and human
conceptions. Matter and mind are in fact but phenomena of which the
unknowable is the unknown cause. {762} He is of a far higher nature
than matter or mind, for he is the common cause of both. Of this
nature we can form no idea whatever. We cannot attribute to the
unknowable _reason_; since that would represent him as finite, for all
reasoning is limitation. We cannot affirm of him either justice or
mercy; because these are words borrowed from the human, and to express
the unknown in such terms is anthropomorphism and blasphemy. Such a
religion is but one grade higher than the ancient theologies that
represent God with hands and feet and other human members."

"Stay," said Hester, "I cannot admit all your assumptions. That the
cause is the great I Am, of whose essential being we know nothing, is
doubtless true, as also that finitude cannot comprehend infinitude:
but that it is wrong or blasphemous to speak of him in the language of
earth, I cannot see. We know the expression is inadequate, that it is
metaphorical, an application of the less to signify the greater, but
it is the only voice we have, and the degree of worship depends on the
spirit of reverence which prompts the utterance, as the freedom from
idolatry must depend on the spirit of appreciative love and submission
with which that worship is offered.

"But," said Mr. Spence, "all theologies set out with the great truth,
that the deity is incomprehensible. But they immediately contradict
and stultify themselves by proceeding to assign him attributes. In
this way all religions become suicidal as well as irreligious. The
only true religion is to worship God as the unknown and forever
unknowable. True religion and science agree in this, that the cause of
all phenomena is the unknown. Science, in affirming the cause to be
material or mental, becomes unscientific, just as religion, by
pretending to reveal his nature or attributes, becomes irreligious."

"Pardon me," said Hester, "I think you are begging the question.
Because we know nothing of the interior being of God, it does not
follow that we may not discover the relationships which he wishes to
establish between himself and ourselves, and to the manifestations of
these relationships we may in all reverence and with consistency
assign attributes. Within himself God is the great I Am, unknown and
unknowable to us. Reason, justice, mercy, probably find there, no
exercise. Their exercise is outside in creation; for all creation is
outside God, an expression of his power, as of every other attribute
justly assigned him. Creation itself is limited: man's expression more
so yet: but we do not therefore believe in the limitation of the
deity. We cannot conceive infinity, still less express it; still the
idea exists, and our minds invest the deity with it in reverential
awe, not in blasphemy."

"You have given the modern theology assuming God to be a spirit and a
creative spirit; and assuming also that the creation is a work of his
design. You do not perceive that you make God the author of evil as
well as good, and that you assume matter was created. Now, the
eternity of matter would be no greater enigma than the eternity of
mind; and we do not know whether the cause be 'matter or mind.' It is
unknown, as it is also unknowable."

"Why this is sheer Atheism," said the startled Hester.

"Not so! This doctrine is neither Atheism nor Theism. It is merely the
highest and last formula, at once, of science and religion, ceasing to
represent the unknowable in any conceptions of human thought, and thus
leaving free scope for worship, which (worship) is not assertion, but
humility and transcendent wonder."

"Nay," said Hester; "religion, as far as I can make it out, consists
in acknowledging the relationships which God has established: first,
between himself and man, and secondly, between man and man. Religion,
if true, is a manifestation or revelation if not of God's essential
nature, yet of his will {763} in man's regard. The discrepancies
between our conceptions of what is evil and evil itself may explain
your difficulty about God being the author of evil. It may be that
mere change, mere transition, is not evil, even when accompanied by
some pain. I read yesterday that the only real evil was, a voluntary
act on the part of a rational creature, performed contrary to the
known will of God."

"That is so evidently a theological subtlety," said Mr. Spence,
"science deigns it no reply."

"And yet," said Hester, "your last and highest formula, which refuses
to represent the unknowable in any conception of human thought, bows
down in worship and transcendent wonder to the 'cause' which makes
murder, suicide, and every species of human wickedness result from 'A
Law'!

"Because we believe that ultimately that law will evolve good. It
appears a fact now thoroughly established, that all the organisms we
are acquainted with, have been evolved by a gradual process rather
than produced by a series of special creations, as has been so long
the theory. And the evolution tends upward; that is, to produce new
and more complicated organisms as time speeds on. This must in the end
evolve higher good."

"Do you mean that the lesser is ever producing the greater; and that
in the aggregation of insentient matter life is evolved?"

"Does not the infant grow into the man by the aggregation of
insentient matter assimilated into his being in the shape of food?"

"Yes, but life was there already; character and power, expansion and
development it receives, but no new function."

"That is not so certain; or rather it is certain that evolution
constantly manifests changes, which can only be accounted for on the
ground of a great universal law, a law ever producing diversity of
phenomena in unity of operation."

"But I do not see that it explains anything of the ultimate cause."

"Have I not already said that the cause is unknown and unknowable?"



