XII.

THE MYSTERY OF REDEMPTION.

The next article of the creed, in order, is that which expresses the
Mystery of Redemption: "Crucifixus etiam pro nobis, sub Pontio Pilato,
passus, et sepultus est." "Who was also crucified for us under Pontius
Pilate, who suffered, and was buried." The redemption implies the
incarnation, and is based on it. The incarnation having been already
treated of, in immediate connection with the Trinity, we have only to
proceed with the exposition of the doctrine of satisfaction for sin
and restoration to grace through the sufferings and death of the
Divine Redeemer.

It is no part of the Catholic doctrine that it was necessary for the
second person of the Trinity to take upon himself human nature and
suffer an infinite penalty, in order that God might be able to pardon
sin without violating his justice. All Catholic theologians, from St.
Augustine down, teach that God is free to show mercy and to pardon,
according to his own good pleasure. The reason and end of the
incarnation has been shown already to be something far above this
order of ideas. The incarnation does not of itself, however, imply
suffering or death. We have to inquire, then, why it was that in point
of fact the incarnate Word was manifested as a suffering Redeemer; and
why his death on the cross was constituted the meritorious cause of
the remission of sin and restoration of grace.

The church has never made any formal definition of her doctrine on
this point, and it is well known various have been the theories
regarding it maintained at different times. We shall endeavor to
present a view which appears to us adequate and intelligible; without,
however, claiming for it any certainty beyond that of the reasons on
which it is based.

The original gift of grace not having been due to Adam, or to any one
of his ordinary descendents, injustice, the restoration of that gift,
when lost, was not due. Aside from the incarnation, there was no
imperative reason why Adam and his race should not have been left in
the state to which they were reduced by the original transgression.
God, having determined to accomplish the incarnation in the human
race, owed it to himself to complete this determination, in spite of
all the sins which he foresaw would be committed by men. The foreseen
merits of Christ furnished an adequate motive for conferring any
degree of grace upon any or all men, he might seek to be fitting and
necessary for the fulfillment of his eternal purposes. It was not
necessary, however, that the Son of God should suffer or die in order
to merit grace for mankind. By the define decree, indeed, the shedding
of his blood and his death was made the special meritorious act in
view of which remission of sins and grace are conferred. But all the
acts of his life had the same intrinsic worth and excellence, which
was simply infinite on account of the divine principle of imputability
to which they must be referred. There must have been some reasons,
therefore, of fitness, on account of which it was determined that
Jesus Christ should suffer death for the human race.

{653}

We may find one of these reasons in the law of suffering and death
which God had imposed, out of a motive of pure love, on the whole
human race. This law was, indeed, promulgated under the form of a
penalty, but in its substance it was a real blessing. The way to
heaven through the path of penance and by the gate of death is a sure
and safer way then the one in which Adam was first placed; it is one,
also, affording higher and more extensive scope for virtue, heroism,
and merit. It was, therefore, fitting that the chief and prince of the
human race should go before  his brethren in this way of sufferings.
"For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all
things, who brought many sons to glory, to perfect, by suffering, the
author of their salvation." [Footnote 179] As a particular consequence
of this general law, heroes, patriots, reformers, prophets, and
saints, have always been especially exposed to suffering and to
violent modes of death. They have been obliged to sacrifice themselves
to their own fidelity to conscience and to that sacred cause to which
they have been devoted. And this sacrifice of life has consecrated
their memories in the hearts of their fellow-men more than any other
acts of intellectual or moral virtue, however brilliant. It was
fitting, therefore, that the Saint of saints, the Saviour of the
world, should not exempt himself from the peril of death, to which the
very character of his mission exposed him.

  [Footnote 179: Heb, II. 10.]

Another reason for the suffering of the Divine Mediator, is found in
the manifestation thereby made of the love of God in Christ to the
human race. There is no need of dwelling on this, or of noticing other
reasons of a similar kind which have been so frequently and so fully
developed by others.

We pass on, therefore, to the consideration of the final and highest
reason for the death of Jesus Christ, the expiation of sin.

The true and only possible notion of expiation or satisfaction is that
which apprehends it as a compensation for the failure to perform some
obligatory act, by performing another act of at least equal value in
the place of it. Every noble soul, when conscious of having been
delinquent, desires to repair the injury which has been done, as well
as to redeem its own honor, by some act which shall, if possible, far
exceed the one which it failed to perform. The same principle impels
those who have a high sense of honor to make reparation tor the
delinquencies of others with whom they are closely related in the same
family, the same society, or the same nation. Now, the human race has
been delinquent in making a proper return to God for the infinite boon
of grace. The fall of man and the innumerable sins of the individuals
of the human race have deprived Almighty God of a tribute of glory
which was due to him, and have brought ignominy upon mankind as a
race. Although, therefore, Almighty God might provide for the
glorification of the elect who are to share with the Incarnate Word in
his divine privileges, by an act of pure mercy; it is far more
glorious both to God and man that a superabundant satisfaction should
be made for the injury which has been done to the Creator by the
marring of his creation, and a superabundant expiation accomplished of
the disgrace which man has incurred. It was, therefore, an act of
divine wisdom and love in God to determine that this satisfaction and
expiation should be made by the second person of the Trinity in his
human nature. The Incarnate Word, being truly man, identified with the
human race, and its chief, necessarily made its honor and its disgrace
his own. Although he could redeem his brethren without any cost to
himself, his solicitude for their honor and glory would not permit him
to do it. He desired that they should enter heaven on the most
honorable terms, without any of the humiliation of the delinquency of
the race attaching to them, but, on the contrary with the {654}
exulting consciousness that every stain of dishonor had been effaced.
Therefore, as their king and chief, he fulfilled the most sublime work
of obedience to the divine love which was possible; he made the most
perfect possible oblation to God, as an equivalent for his boon of
grace which had been abused by sin. In lieu of that glory which God
would have received from the perfect obedience of Adam and all his
posterity, and that glory which would have been also reflected upon
the human race, he substituted the infinitely greater glory of his own
obedience unto death, even the death of the cross. By this obedience
Jesus Christ merited for the human race the concession of a new grant
of grace, more perfect than the first, by virtue of which not only the
original sin which is common to all men was made remissible to each
individual, but all actual sins were made also pardonable on certain
conditions.

That this statement completely exhausts the true idea of the
satisfaction of Christ, we will not pretend to affirm. It appears to
us, however, sufficient to give a clear and definite meaning to the
language of Scripture and the fathers, and to include all that
Catholic faith requires a Christian to believe.

Jesus Christ having merited by his death the right of conferring grace
without stint or limit upon mankind, and all the grace given after the
fall and before the redemption having been bestowed in the foresight
of his death, every spiritual blessing enjoyed by men is referred to
the death of Jesus Christ as its cause and source. Strictly speaking,
it is only the meritorious cause. By giving himself up to die, he
merited the right to communicate the grace contained in the
incarnation to men, notwithstanding the failure of the father and head
of the race to fulfil the probation on which the transmission of the
grace to his descendants depended. He merited also the right to renew
this grace in those individuals who should lose it after having once
received it, as often as these, without regard to the number or
grievousness of their sins, or the frequency of their lapses. It is,
however, the Holy Spirit; dwelling in the Incarnate Word in the
plenitude of  his being, and communicating to his human nature the
fulness grace, not for itself alone, but for all men; which is the
ultimate and efficient cause of all spiritual life. It is the grace of
the Holy Spirit which actually removes all guilt and stain of sin from
the soul, and constitutes it in the state of justice and sanctity. The
Holy Spirit is, therefore, the efficient cause of justification. The
formal cause is the personal sanctity of each individual. That is,
this personal sanctity is that which makes each one worthy of the
complacency of God, of fellowship with him, and of everlasting life.
The work of the incarnation and redemption must, therefore, produce
its results and attain its consummation through the Holy Spirit as the
sanctifier of the human race. Consequently, the creed, after finishing
it's expression of the Catholic faith so far as the person of Christ
is concerned, proceeds to enunciate it as regards the person and
operation of the Holy Spirit, is sent by Christ to complete his work.
The articles containing this enunciation complete the creed, and bring
man to his final destination.



