CHAPTER XXV.

THE JOURNEY--THE CONVENT.

It was well for Annie that the care of a sister watched over her
during that sad journey, for sometimes her mind seemed almost to have
lost its balance, and she would weep frantically over the loss of her
little ones, as one who would not be comforted; then with a sudden
revolution of feeling she would stop, and say, "Thy will be done, O
Lord," and would begin to say her beads, as Eugene had taught her,
with most edifying resignation. After awhile the thought of her little
ones would make her weep anew, and again the thought of God would
check her tears.

{755}

These alternations were for Annie alone, however. Adelaide felt
unmitigated disgust at the barbarity which could sever a loving mother
from her infants.

"As if those babes were safer with that bigoted, soft-pated Mrs.
Bedford than with my intellectual, high-minded sister!" she thought.
Certainly the duchess's horror of Catholicity had wonderfully abated
of late. There was little said at first between the sisters on that
three days' journey. But once or twice the exclamation on Adelaide's
lips, "My mother a Catholic!" showed which direction her thoughts were
taking. Once, when Annie was a little calmer than usual, she suddenly
asked her: "What made my mother desire to be a Catholic, Annie?"

"The grace of God, as I humbly hope," answered her sister.

"The grace of God! What do you mean by that, Annie?"

"I mean the special provision with which God deigns to bless every
human soul that desires it with knowledge and love of himself. Adam
had this grace conferred on him at his creation. He lost it, not only
for himself, but for us also. But Christ has repurchased it for all
who come to him. My mother heard this voice pleading within her for a
higher life. She listened and obeyed. This is what theologians call
co-operation with grace. The grace of God needs man's co-operation to
be efficacious, because God will not compel the human will. He desires
free service."

"Ah, yes," said the duchess, "all other were a mockery. Nature is
bound by stern, inevitable law; that is easily seen: but intelligent
love must have freedom for its sphere of action, or it ceases to be
the love of intelligence; that, too, I comprehend. I thought your
words intended to convey some mysterious action of God on the soul not
given to all men."

"All do not correspond with it, by a large majority, I fear," said
Annie.

"And think you God speaks to all alike?" asked Adelaide.

"Theologians say that a grace corresponded to merits another,"
answered Annie, "and that one rejected or unused often loses that
grace, so slighted. This, at least, we know: God loves us all, and
places at our option higher degrees of spiritual attainment than we
oftentimes profit by."

"God! What is God?" murmured Adelaide. "Truly a _Deus absconditus_ for
man."

"'He who followeth me walketh not in darkness,' said the Man-God,"
replied Annie. "God was a hidden God for the nations of olden time,
perhaps; but for us, Adelaide, he is God manifested in the flesh! and
to as many as receive him gives he power to become 'sons of God.'"

Where was Adelaide's sharpness at repartee as of old? She meditated
now instead of replying; and Annie solaced her own sorrows by praying
for her sister's conversion. It was in something like tranquillity of
spirit that, she reached the district in which the convent was
situated.

The next day the duchess accompanied her sister to the dwelling of the
sisterhood. They found it even poorer than they had anticipated. When
it had been first contemplated, Eugene had handed over a well-filled
purse to M. Bertolot with strict injunction to, procure everything
needful; but Eugene's idea of what was needed differed from that of
the superioress. "We did not take vows of poverty," she said, "to live
with every elegance like ladies. The spirit of our holy father, St.
Francis, as also that of our beloved mother and foundress, St. Clare,
requires the utmost plainness and poverty compatible with existence."
Eugene's large offering was refused, and when he on his part refused
to replace it in his pocket, it was distributed among the sick poor.

{756}

Euphrasie received her friends with open arms, and conducted them to
the superioress with love and respect. Many of the sisterhood had now
gathered together, and even postulants were not wanting. The
superioress greeted the ladies with calm dignity, and entered with
much feeling into the account given to Euphrasie in her presence of
Mrs. Godfrey's conversion and happy death.

"And am I to understand, dear ladies," said the superioress, "that you
also share these blessed dispositions?"

"Annie is a Catholic," answered the duchess, "and a persecuted one.
Sir Philip has shut the doors on the mother of his children because
she has embraced Catholicity."

Euphrasie, by a sudden impulse, rose and knelt by Annie's side;
kissing her hands and bathing them with her tears. "Now, God be
praised for all his mercies!" she said: "How shall we welcome you,
dear martyr, for his sake?"

Annie could only reply by returning Euphrasie's caresses and
affection. She placed her arm round her friend, and compelled her to
sit by her side.

"Will you ask the reverend mother to let me stay with you awhile, dear
Euphrasie?" she said.

"What! Here? here in the convent? in this poor place?" replied
Euphrasie. "You who have been, cradled in luxury and reared in
abundance? You know not what you ask, dear friend; it is impossible."

Annie looked at the superioress; she read more promise there. "Dear
reverend mother," she said, "Almighty God has seen how unfit I am as
yet to train my beloved children in the narrow path of mortification
and of humiliation, trodden by our Divine Master. He has sent me to
learn it of you. Will you accept me as your disciple in Jesus Christ?
At least, I can promise you reverence and submission."

"You are welcome, most welcome, my daughter," said the superioress,
"and may Almighty God, in his own good time, restore your children to
you, to be brought up in the faith and love of Christ."

"Thank you, dear mother; and if you and the dear sisters will assist
me by your prayers, doubtless he will. He has but sent me here to
school awhile, that I may be able to teach them rightly. I stand as
yet but on the threshold of the church; I have looked in and seen her
glories, but selfish and worldly as I have been from childhood, I
scarce know how to share in her unworldly triumphs."

"Dear cousin," said Euphrasie, "you must not defame yourself. You were
ever kind and generous, and now your humility will surely bring you a
blessing. We will try to make you happy here."

"Indeed, yes," said the superioress, "it is a great consolation to us
to receive you. Your heart, so long accustomed to the incredulity of
the age, needs rest--such rest as is produced by dwelling on the love
of Christ for us. After a while it will become for you a necessity to
reciprocate that love, by pouring yourself out as it were in deeds of
charity and kindness for the pure love of him who died for you. Once
accustomed to converse familiarly with him, you will no longer regard
him as divided from yourself, but as one same self with you, so that
with St. Paul you may be able to exclaim, '_I_ live now, not _I_, but
Christ liveth in me.' Yes, my dear daughter, from him you may hope all
things for your children as well as for yourself. Detach yourself from
this world, seek Christ crucified, that you may repose surely in his
love."

Adelaide listened and wondered. She looked around at the bare walls,
the uncarpeted floor, the plain deal tables, and the common
rush-chairs. "Is the rest of the house like this?" she asked of
herself: "and am I to leave Annie here?"

Begging the superioress to excuse her for an instant, she drew Annie
apart, and urged upon her that it was useless for her to subject
herself to such privations as these.

{757}

"Come home with me, dear Annie, I beg of you."

"Nay, sister, think not so meanly of me, as to deem that I cannot
endure for a few weeks or months, privations which these dear ladies
suffer always."

"Oh! they are nuns, you know."

"But that does not alter, their nature, and once, they were in the
world, rich, titled, honored. I would learn of them what has given
them power thus to trample the world beneath their feet. Leave me for
a while, my sister; if I find the life too hard for me, I will come to
you."

"You promise?"

"I do, believe me, Adelaide."

And with this promise Adelaide was obliged to be content. She prepared
to wend her way homewards. As she rose for that purpose, the
superioress said: "Your grace will have a solitary journey. May I
venture to offer you a book to beguile the tedium of the way?"
Adelaide smilingly assented, and on getting in her carriage, Euphrasie
placed into her hands Avrillon's meditations for every day in Lent.
Absorbed at first in her own thoughts, Adelaide, heeded the book but
little: but after a while, to relieve ennui, she began its perusal,
and was soon astonished at the interest it excited within her breast.


