I.

  "Sing, my tongue, the glorious battle,
    With completed victory rife.
  And above the cross's trophy,
    Tell the triumph of the strife;
  How the world's Redeemer conquered,
    By surrendering of his life.

VIII.

  "Faithful cross, above all other,
    One and only noble tree,
  None in foliage, none in blossom,
    None in fruit, compares with thee;
  Sweetest wood and sweetest iron,
    Sweetest weight sustaining free."

A portion of one of his poems, on the resurrection of our Lord, was
sung in the Church for ten centuries as an Easter hymn. It commences,
Salve festa dies toto venerabilis aevo.  [Footnote 231] In another of
his poems, De Cruce Christi, there occurs a beautiful image of the
Cross as the tree around which the True Vine is clinging:

  "Appensa est vitis inter tua brachia, de qua
  Dulcia sanguineo vina rubore fluunt."  [Footnote 232]

    [Footnote 231: Trench's Sacred Latin Poetry, p. 152.]

    [Footnote 232: For the whole see Trench's Sacred Latin Poetry, p.130.]

{821}

But his most celebrated hymn is the one written on the occasion of the
sending the true cross by the emperor to Radegunda, at the
consecration of a church at Poictiers. It is called Vexilla Regis
prodeunt:

I.

  "The royal banners forward go,
  The cross shines forth with mystic glow,
  Where he in flesh, our flesh who made,
  Our sentence bore, our ransom paid.

  VI.

  "With fragrance dropping from each bough,
  Sweeter than sweetest nectar thou:
  Decked with the fruit of peace and praise,
  And glorious with triumphant lays.

  VIl.

  "Hall, altar! hail, O Victim! Thee
  Decks now thy passion's victory,
  Where life for sinners death endured,
  And life by death for man procured."  [Footnote 233]

  [Footnote 233: Dr. Neale's Mediaeval Hymns.]

Bede the Venerable wrote hymns also; the two best known are the Hymnum
canamus gloriae, and Hymnum canentes martyrum.

We now advance to the last and richest of all the periods of
hymnology, the mediaeval. The list is headed with the royal name of
Robert II. of France, who wrote, hymns, one of which is a Veni Sancte
Spiritus. Peter Damian, the cardinal bishop of Ostia, who died in
1072, wrote many hymns, but the two greatest are De Die Mortis and Ad
perennis vitae fontem.  [Footnote 234] Adam of St. Victor was another
prolific hymn-writer; thirty-six of his productions are extant, and
well known.  [Footnote 235]

  [Footnote 234: Trench's Sacred Latin Poetry, pp. 278, 315. ]

  [Footnote 235: Ibid., pp. 53. 111, 160, 202, 212, 227.]

Peter the Venerable and Thomas à Kempis have also left hymns behind
them. But it was reserved for Archbishop Trench to dig out of the
mouldering relics of the past a hymn written by a monk of Clugny, one
Bernard de Morlaix, the translation of which, by Dr. Neale, has
supplied the church of every denomination with favorite hymns; The
most general name by which it is known is Jerusalem the Golden. The
original is a poem of about three thousand lines, called De Contemptu
Mundi, a melancholy satire upon the corruptions of the times. The
first appearance of it in print, is in a collection of poems, De
Corrupto Ecclesiae Statu, by Flacius Illyricus. We cannot speak too
highly of this poem of Bernard, nor of the merits of Dr. Neale's
translation. The original is written in one of the most difficult of
all metres, technically called "leonini cristati trilices daetylici,"
a dactylic hexameter, divided into three parts, with a tailed rhyme
and rhymes between the two first clauses. Dr. Neale gives a specimen
of this verse in English:

  "Time will be _ending soon_, heaven will be _rending
    soon_, fast we and pray we;
  Come the most merciful; comes the most terrible,
    watch we while may we."

The imagery in the original poem is gorgeous; but Dr. Neale has
exceeded the original  [Footnote 236] in many parts of his
translation'. We add a few gems. The opening lines are--

  "Hora novissima, tempora pessima sunt vigilemus!
  Ecce minaciter imminet arbiter ille supremus.
  Imminet, imminet, ut mala terminet, aequa coronet
  Recta remuneret, anxia liberet aethera donet."

  "The world is very evil,
    The times are waxing late,
  Be sober and keep vigil,
    The Judge is at the gate;
  The Judge that comes in mercy,
    The Judge that comes with might,
  To terminate the evil,
    To diadem the right."

  [Footnote 236: The best edition of this poem is the little shilling
  volume by Dr. Neale, called the Rhythm of Bernard de Morlaix,
  published by Hayes, Lyall-place, Eaton-square. It contains between
  two and three hundred of the original lines, with Dr. Neale's
  complete translation.]

Dr. Neale has proved himself a true poet in this translation; the
rendering is most happy, and the whole version forms one of the finest
sacred poems in the language. The lines--

  "Patria luminis, inscia turbinis, inscia litis.
  Cive replebitur amplificabitur lsraelitis
  Patria splendida, terraque florida, libera spinis
  Danda fidelibus est ibi civibus, hic peregrinis,"

are thus happily rendered--

  "And the sunlit land that reeks not
    Of tempest nor of fight
  Shall fold within its bosom
    Each happy Israelite;
  The home of fadeless splendor,
    Of flowers that fear no thorn,
  Where they shall dwell as children,
    Who here as exiles mourn."

{822}

Then the episode--

  "Sunt radiantia jaspide moenia clara pyropo."

    "With jaspers glow thy bulwarks,
      Thy streets with emeralds blaze,
    The sardius and the topaz
      Unite in thee their rays;
    Thine ageless walls are bonded
      With amethyst unpriced;
    The saints build up its fabric,
      And the corner·stone is Christ.
      * * * * *
    Thou hast no shore, fair ocean!
       Thou hast no time, bright day!
    Dear fountain of refreshment.
      To pilgrims far away.
      * * * * *
    They stand, those halls of Sion,
      Conjubilant with song,
    And bright with many an angel
      And all the martyr throng;
    The Prince is ever in them,
      Their daylight is serene;
    The pastures of the blessed
      Are decked in glorious sheen.
    There is the throne of David,
      And there, from care released,
    The song of them that triumph,
      The shout of them that feast;
     And they who, with their leader,
      Have conquered in the fight,
    For ever and for ever
      Are clad in robes of white."

But we must pause, for to give all the beauties of this poem would be
to transcribe the whole. Another St. Bernard, the well-known abbot of
Clairvaux, was a contemporary with him of Clugny. He was one of the
most influential men of his age, a man far in advance of it; the
adviser of popes and the confidant of kings. Many hymns are attributed
to him, one of the most beautiful being that known as Jesu Dulcis
Memoria. In Trench's Sacred Latin Poetry there is a selection of
fifteen verses, but the original consists of forty-eight verses.
[Footnote 237] It is a fine specimen of the ardent loving poetry so
characteristic of the period. A very beautiful version, or rather
imitation of this poem, is extant in the Harleian MSS., written in the
reign of Edward I., and as it is a very good specimen of the English
of the period, and represents the spirit of the original, we venture
to quote a verse or two.  [Footnote 238]

  [Footnote 237: Sti. Bernardi Clarae Vallensis Opp: Benedictine
  edition, vol. ii., p. 895.]

  [Footnote 238: Printed also in the Percy Society's Publications,
  vol. iv., p. 68.]


