CHAPTER XVII.


EXPERIMENTS OF MORE KINDS THAN ONE.


"Papa," said Hester, "did I not hear you say those pretty farms in
Yorkshire are about to change tenants?"

"You did, my dear."

"Have you any tenants in view for them?"

"No! Has any one applied to you for one, or all of them?"

"I want to be the tenant myself."

"You?"

"Yes, indeed; there are good coals beneath the surface; the district
is well watered; I want to try these new steam engines on a large
scale. I will set up factories and form industrial associations,
governing them myself. I will establish them on the principle of
mutual assistance in forming and promoting a wide-spread intelligence:
my factories shall contain schools, reading-rooms, museums,
observatories, everything that can assist the onward progression of
the race."

{493}

"You will at least spend money, Hester?"

"Not more than if I kept race horses for Ascot, or frequented
Crockford's, which you could well afford to let me do if I were a man.
Not more then I might cost you if I insisted on taking a house house
in town, and on becoming the belle of the season; this would the
neither extravagant nor wonderful; and if I wanted diamonds and
emeralds and sapphires and glittering toys, you would get them all for
me, I know you would, for when did you refuse your Hester anything,
dear father?" said Hester, throwing her white arms around her father's
neck. "But now I want none of of these babyish fancies, I want to do
good in my generation, and my father must help me. We do not spend
half our income in our present mode of living, and money is like
manure you know, it wants spreading. Think of the glory of aiding
'progress.' Think of reigning over a population emancipated from
ignorance by your efforts. Think of forming a nucleus whence freedom
and happiness shall spring, handing down your name as a benefactor
throughout all time; it is a project well fitted to my father s noble
mind."

Mr. Godfrey gazed on his darling, and felt that he could refuse her
nothing; still he paused. "Supposing the necessary expenses incurred,
my Hester, your buildings erected, your villages formed, you have
forgotten one thing; your schemes might be suddenly interrupted, when
you least expected it: those farms are all entailed."

"I forgot that," mused Hester. After awhile she said: "Could not some
arrangement be made with my brother on this subject?"

"I do not know. Is he a likely one, think you, to consent to the
catting off the entail?"

"He might be," said Hester; "he must be badly off now, though I
suppose my mother helps him. Offer him a handsome allowance for life,
from this time out, on condition that the entail be cut off: he might
be induced to accept it."

"He would be a fool if he did," said Mr. Godfrey.

"Nay, father, that is not so certain, if you take into consideration
his present position. He is likely to suffer poverty for many years. I
think I would accept the alternative were I in his place."

Mr. Godfrey could deny nothing to Hester, so he replied:

"Well, I will think of it."

. . . . .

But what had Eugene been doing all this time? Eugene, after his
interview with his sister, went straight to M. Bertolot to inquire
after his aunt and Euphrasie. He was not mistaken in supposing that he
knew where they were, but he would tell nothing more than that they
were in good health and spirits. "I have no authority," he said, "to
divulge their place of abode; in fact, I promised secrecy."

"But how do they live? They have no means!" said Eugene.

"How, but by their labor!"

"Labor! my aunt labor?"

"No, I was wrong in saying their labor; it is Euphrasie who does the
work. Euphrasie gives lessons in French, music, and drawing, and waits
on her mother. De Villeneuve has hopes of recovering their estates for
them. He is now in France negotiating with the emperor to that effect.
He took care of them when they left your sister's and procured
Euphrasie the situation she required, as both she and Madame refused
to live at his expense."

"And did he offer to support them?"

"Well, yes; it appears that he and Euphrasie's father were sworn
brothers in friendship, and de Villeneuve made a solemn promise to the
Comte de Meglior to watch over Euphrasie's well-being. This promise
keeps him in Europe to this day, for he had always a misgiving that
she would not be permanently happy among those not of her faith. We
are expecting de Villeneuve very shortly."

{494}

"And if he succeeds, my aunt will go back to France?"

"Probably; but I am not so sanguine about their success as de
Villeneuve is. Madame is an English-woman, and that will not help her
cause with the emperor just now."

"And meantime Euphrasie works for her daily bread?"

"She does, and is happy in doing so. Euphrasie, my friend, is a
practical Catholic; one whose delight it is to _realize_, to make her
own, the life led by the holy family at Nazareth. I venture to say she
is far happier in sweeping her mother's room and in cooking her
mother's dinner than she would be in a glittering ball-room lit up
with its brilliant chandeliers."

"And does she really descend to these menial offices?" asked Eugene,
in a sort of stupefied amazement.

"Descend! Is it to descend when we aspire to imitate Jesus and Mary?
You are a Catholic, my young friend. You must not look at these things
with the eyes of the world: its false maxims are not the ones which
may guide your ideas. Labor, actual manual labor, was imposed on man
in penalty for sin; its acceptance is part of man's atonement for that
undervaluing of grace which led to the commission of that sin: which
still leads to the commission of daily sins. The avoidance of labor is
a child of pride, one which has occasioned multitudinous disorders
among mankind. But Jesus accepted labor--real, genuine labor: he
worked many years at his father's trade, and Mary kept no servant in
her house at Nazareth; she labored, for she felt that in lowly labor
there is a sanctifying influence, and it is this thought that makes
Euphrasie happy now."

"But she is so unused to actual toil!" said Eugene.

"Not so much as you may suppose," replied his friend. "The good nuns
taught her much that was useful, and even when she was at Estcourt
Hall and Durimond Castle she did much work that was unsuspected. The
produce of her needle clothed the poor, fed the hungry, and many times
defrayed the expense of a mission, when accident brought her in
contact with poor Catholics to whom such ministrations were acceptable
and profitable. All this was done so quietly that I suppose your
family knew nothing about it."

"At least I never heard of it," said Eugene.

Our hero was much depressed by this interview, not merely because he
could gain no clue to abode of his friends, but also because he was as
yet too new to the practice of Catholic principles to acquiesce
cheerfully in the idea of the refined, elegant, accomplished daughter
of a French nobleman toiling for her daily bread, and performing all
the menial services required in the household.

It was with right good-will that he greeted the Comte de Villeneuve on
his return, in the hope through him of seeing something accomplished
that would alter these circumstances. But the comte's embassy had been
unsuccessful; all he had been able to effect was to leave the case
with such other friends as should introduce it at a more favorable
period. But he was not so reserved respecting his friends as M.
Bertolot had been. He deemed that Eugene's position in his own family
should plead exemption for him from the ban of exclusion, and
willingly mediated to obtain an interview view for him with Madame.
Euphrasie was not at home when he called; and Madame greeted him
cordially, though she could not refrain from blaming him for running
counter to his friends about religion.

"What a fuss about a matter of opinion," she said. "But perhaps in
France, before the Revolution, a Protestant might have then as little
acceptable to the aristocracy. They say, too, that this new man, this
emperor, patronizes the Catholic religion also, so I shall not ask
Euphrasie to become a proselyte to English notions; her faith is that
of her country and of her kindred, and my brother ought to {495} have
understood this; but why you, Eugene, should wish to adopt the French
religion, I cannot divine."

"Perhaps religion is neither exclusively French nor English, aunt.
There may be a faith necessary to every nation alike, if it be true
that every man has a soul to save."

"Perhaps so; I do not meddle with these matters," replied the lady. "I
think everyone had better let everybody alone; it must be bad to
quarrel about religion; and as to saving the soul, we know so little
about it that it is quite presumptuous for one person to dictate to
another on that subject. I hope we shall all meet in heaven at last,
though we go there by different roads; for my part, I keep nobody
out."

The entrance Euphrasie prevent its the necessity of a reply.
Euphrasie's greeting was that of one who appreciates high principal.
There were respect and kindness in her manner, but no familiarity, no
approach to intimacy. Eugene felt disappointed, though certainly there
was nothing of which he felt he had a right to complain.

Eugene's visits to his aunt were now frequent, but never could he see
Euphrasie alone; whether from design or accident she avoided receiving
him, save in her mother's presence. Yet daily did his reverence for
her increase. To see the young French girl now, the supporter of the
household, the caterer for its wants, the tender minister to her
mother's manifold demands, none would have dreamed that heretofore
contemplation had absorbed her faculties, and that she was making to
duty the greatest sacrifice she could make in thus exchanging the
cherished practices of devotion for the active employments of life.
She was so cheerful, so almost gay, so unusually animated when the
state of her mother's spirits required it; a stranger might have
concluded that all her life she had been accustomed to this manner of
living.

Suddenly Eugene received a missive which had traced him to many
places, requesting him to meet his father in London.


TO BE CONTINUED.

--------

ORIGINAL.


ON ST. PETER'S DENIAL.


"And the Lord, turning, looked on Peter."


  Lord! wilt thou that I also should deny
        That I am thine?
  Behold, my longing soul cries upward to the sky
        For sight divine!
  All through the silent night in livelong day--
        O grievous lot!--
  I seek to know thee more, and yet am forced to say
        "I know thee not".
  With Peter let these bitter tears confess
        My treachery:
  Yet, Lord, to know thee as thou art I need no less
        A look from thee!

--------

{496}


Translated from the German of Hans Wachenhusen.


CHRIST IS BORN.



"Really I take it unkindly of our pastor that he is continually
speaking ill of us thorns, in the church yonder," said the thorn-bush,
standing by a crumbling stable wall among the castle-ruins near the
village church. "It is very unfair in him. How can he know, for
instance, how the subject may affect me? On the bloody field of
Golgotha, nearly two thousand years ago, there stood my ancestor, a
buckthorn, of whose branches they wove our Saviour's crown. But the
pastor yonder little thinks that I come of that same buckthorn;
[Footnote 149] or that all its lineal descendants bear red blossoms
and weep tears of blood on Christmas night; or that we thorns are ever
renewed like Christ's teachings, being woven in with them?"

  [Footnote 149: Kreuzdorn--Cross-thorn, literally.]

So spake the thorn-bush; and the wind blew through its branches, and
shook them until the snow dropped off.

"Positively, this connection ought to be known!" sighed the
thorn-bush.

But it was just then Christmas eve, and midnight was drawing near.
Therefore did the thorn-bush make these pious reflections, which
should have been cherished on other days too, if the lineage were
really so wonderful as it fancied. Meantime the church-bells were
ringing for the midnight mass, and the good priest passed by, going to
the service of God.

"See, now, how indifferently he goes past me," said the thorn-bush.
"And no wonder, since he knows nothing of my connections! And all the
rest brush by me into the church; and if the Lord God could not see
the things that are hidden, yet would he know his faithful by the
footprints that lead from the houses to the church. But he knows them
all, for he guides their steps. I know, though, two in the village who
have not been to church to-day nor yet this whole year, for they are
right godless men: the gloomy lord of our castle, and Wild Stephen,
whom he turned out of his cottage yesterday because the rent was not
paid. Here lie the poor wife and her half-naked children now in this
ruined stable before which I stand guard. Really I must take a peep
and see how the poor woman and her sick child are getting on," said
the thorn-bush, and stretched up its bought to look in at the broken
window.

But it was dark within, and the night-wind moaned through the damp
walls and the open window. "O God! the creature is so good and so
wretched. Here in this stable are tears and chattering teeth on this
day of Christmas gifts. Now, that is too grievous," sighed the
thorn-bush.

And over the way the church-organ poured out its solemn tones. "Christ
is born," sang the people from the choir and benches. "Christ is
born," cried the watchman from the tower. And our thorn-bush was
right. In that old, deserted stable a poor woman knelt and prayed. Hot
tears ran down her cheeks, her hands were convulsively clasped, and
her eyes rested fixedly on the straw in the old stone manger; for in
that manger lay her youngest born, a half-year old child, sick, and
trembling with ague and cold. The moon shone through the
window-opening upon this group. Her rays fell sympathizingly on the
sick child, but they could not warm him; nor could the mother's breast
do it either, she was herself so icy cold. {497} And through the
chinks of the rotting roof, gaps were covered with snow, fell by
hundred thousands the little glittering snow-stars and played in the
moon-beams, but they gave no light or warmth either.

"Saviour of the world, thou who wert born this night, who didst live
and die for us all, who didst lie to-day in a manger, like this poor
helpless creature, save, oh! save my sick child!" So prayed this poor
woman, and the baby stretched out his little cold hands to his mother
and wept. But her strengths was all gone. She let her weary head sink
on the icy edge of the stone manger; her eyes closed, and a heavy sigh
burst forth from her breast. Days and nights had she watched; days and
nights of bitter misery had she endured; but now she broke down, and
sleep took pity on her wretchedness.

"Poor wife, where is thy husband? Poor baby, where is thy father?"
whispered the thorn-bush pityingly, looking in at the window.

Yes, where was the husband, where was the father? Wild Stephen, for so
the villagers called him, had been turned out of his cottage with his
wife and children the evening before, as we have already said. He
sought a refuge among the neighbors, but they would have nothing to do
with him, for they were afraid of godless Stephen, who never had done
a good thing, so they said. And so he and his had come to this
deserted stable. Then he had rushed away breathless, in spite of the
entreaties of his wife, who dreaded some misfortune. Where, then, was
Wild Stephen? The bells ring out, the organ sounded, the people sang
pious songs in the church, and the good priest stood before the altar
and chanted: "Glory be to God on high, and on earth peace to men of
good-will."

Up in the old castle, in a comfortless room, a man of dark, forbidding
aspect set near the long-extinguished fire. He was the lord of the
castle, a hard-hearted man, feared by every one within the limits of
his estate. The light before him on the table burnt low; his face
looked stiff and motionless, his eyes were closed. It seemed like
sleep, only he looked so very pale. Now, while in the out-buildings of
the court-yard servants hurried to and fro, a man was stealing up the
stairs and through the gloomy corridor. He softly opened the door of
the great room, crept lightly in, and up to the arm-chair where the
landlord slept. The stranger's eyes gleamed with passion, a sneering
smile disfigured his weather-beaten face. He cast one look stealthily
around the room. A knife glistened in one hand, the other grasped that
of the sleeping landlord. The blade quivered--

"Christ is born," saying the people in the church below.

Wild Stephen shrank back, for the hand was icy cold. He had touched a
corpse.

"Christ is born," cried the warder from the tower; for mass was over,
and the people were hastening home.

Stephen's knife fell from his hand. He looked again at the dead man,
and it seemed as if the cold eyes were opening to blast him. Covering
his face with both hands, he fled from the room. No one had seen him
glide into the house; no one saw him now pause before the old stable
and looked in the window--no one but the thorn-bush. Ashy pale,
Stephen gazed into the stable. There he saw his wife kneeling,
motionless as the dead man in the castle yonder, but more lovely; and
gentle and pure as innocence, the child in the manger. Then Stephen,
rushed forward, not knowing whither, rushed through the open
church-door, and sank senseless on the steps of the altar.

Now the pastor was just going home. He came to the thorn-bush and saw
two little boys sitting beneath it in the snow. They were shivering,
and hiding their little red hands in their rags.

"Take them with thee," said the thorn-bush to the pastor. "They are
Wild Stephen's children; they dare not {498} go in-doors for fear
their father may beat them because they have come home empty-handed.
Take them with thee. I cannot warm them; I am so poor and naked."

We know not whether it was the pastor's heart or the thorn-bush that
spoke; but he took the children home with him.

"So, now have I one care the less!" said the thorn-bush to itself.
"Now they are beginning to light up the Christmas tree there--and
there--and again over yonder. What a pity that I'm not stationed under
the windows, for here in this dreary stable there will be nothing to
see."

But the thorn-bush was wrong, for just then the interior of the stable
grew bright with a piercing light. Still knelt the poor woman with
closed eyes, but the sick child waked up and stretched out its little
arms laughing; for the roof opened, and down fluttered, surrounded by
a light cloud, two lovely angels, one of them bearing a little
Christmas tree gleaming with countless lights, the other bringing
costly gifts. And it grew warm in the stable, and the light threw such
a gleam into the street that the thorn-bush wondered within itself.

"There is no hut so poor but Christ is there to-night," it said.

The angels fluttered down, and while one offered the Christmas tree,
the other went to the sick child and laid his hand healingly upon its
breast. Then they flew upward again and vanished; but the light
remained in the stable. In the mean time Wild Stephen lay upon the
cold altar-steps. At last his consciousness returned, and he raised
his head from the stone. A wonderful vision had appeared to him in a
dream, for he had seen two beautiful spirits who, blessing him, walked
by his side: and now, on awaking, he saw them standing by him, and
felt each angel lay a little warm hand in his and lead him from the
church.

It seemed to Stephen as if he still dreamed; as if it were in sleep
that the two little angels led him from the church to the stable where
he knew his poor wife and sorrowing children were. Willingly he let
himself be guided; but when they reached the wretched dwelling, and
everything within looked so warm and bright and pleasant; when he saw
the Christmas presents, he rubbed his eyes, and look down at the
angels who had brought him there and were still standing by his side.
Then Stephen recognized his two other boys, grandly and beautifully
dressed as he had never seen them before.

Still it seemed like a vision. He raised both children in his arms; he
held them close and kissed them--no, it could not be a dream.

"Christ is born," cried the watchmen from the tower. "Ay, born is he,
and within my own soul too!" exclaimed Stephen, and, still holding the
two children, sprang to his wife. He drew her toward him and held her
to his breast. "Jenny," he said, "wake up, Christ is indeed born!"

And she lifted her eyes and looked around in amazement, saying: "What
has happened? Is it really thou, Stephen?--and all this light here! Is
my dream true? I saw two angels bringing a Christmas tree and
beautiful presents, and one of them went to the manger and laid his
hand healingly upon my baby's breast. Yes, yes, it is true, for he is
alive," she explained, taking the smiling child from the manger and
clasping it to her bosom. "Get is true, Stephen," she said, and laid
the baby in his arms. "Our Saviour is born, and he will not let my
child die."

And while they were all looking at the Christmas presents the pastor
stepped from behind the tree, for he it was who had sent the gifts
through two good children of his parish; he it was who had seen Wild
Stephen sink down upon the altar-steps; he it was who had dressed the
little boys so beautifully, and led them to their father in the
church.

{499}

"Christ is born," said the pastor, "and it is his will that even the
poorest dwelling should not be without him to-day; but where he lodges
for the first time, Stephen, is in your heart; cherish him tenderly,
for you know that there is more joy in heaven over one sinner that
repenteth than over ninety-nine just persons."

And all this time the thorn-bush was looking in at the window, its
branches rustled with joy, and, like the cross-thorn on Christmas
night, its boughs put forth violet-red eyes, and wept tears of blood
upon the snow.

The next morning Stephen went to church with his wife and children. In
the meantime something must have passed between them and the pastor,
producing a change in material as well as spiritual matters; for they
were seen clad in modest and suitable attire, going to the Lord's
table with deepest devotion. The villagers passed by the thorn-bush in
their holiday dress, and when they saw the snow underneath it bedewed
as if with ruddy pearls, they cried: "See, now, the buckthorn has
borne red blossoms during the night!"

"Yes," answered the cross-thorn, "for Christ is born indeed. These
thorns know it, for we crowned him in death; and you men should know
it also, for he was crucified for you."

------

From Chambers' Journal.

THE DYING YEAR.


  Scant leaves upon the aspen
    Shake golden in the sun;
  Old Year, thy sins are many,
    Thy sand is almost run.
  The beech-tree, brazen-orange,
    Burns like a sunset down;
  Old Year, thy grave is ready;
    Doff sceptre, robe, and crown.

  The elm, a yellow mountain,
    Is shedding leaf by leaf;
  The rains, in gusts of passion.
    Pour forth their quenchless grief;
  The winds, like banshees mourning.
    Wail in the struggling wood;
  Old Year, put off thy splendor.
    And don thy funeral hood.

  Lay down thy golden glories;
    The bare boughs bar the sky--
  Skeletons wild and warning.
    Quaking to see thee die.
  Thou hast lived thy life, remember;
    Now lay thee down and rest;
  The grass shall grow above thy head,
    And the flower above thy breast.

------

{500}


From The Dublin University Magazine.

THE HOLY LAND.


There can be no doubt that the Mount Moriah where Abraham would have
sacrificed his son is the same spot as the Moriah upon which Solomon
built the temple. "Then Solomon began to build the house of the Lord
at Jerusalem in Mount Moriah" (2 Chron. iii. 1).  [Footnote 150] It is
also probable that it is the same place as the Salem mentioned in
Genesis xiv. 18, of which Melchisedek was king; for in Psalm lxxvi. 2
we read, "In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling-place in
Sion." Josephus calls Melchisedek King of Solyma, a name afterward
altered to Hierosolyma. But the first mention of the name Jerusalem
occurs in Joshua x. 1, where Adoni-zedec is spoken of as "King of
Jerusalem." There are to be gathered from sacred and secular annals
the records of twenty-one invasions of this ancient city by hostile
armies. The first attack was made upon her by the children of Judah,
shortly after the death of Joshua. They fought against Jerusalem, took
it, put it to the fire and sword (Judges i. 1-8); but they were unable
to expel the Jebusites, nor were the children of Benjamin any more
successful, but they both dwelt with the Jebusites in the city; the
Jebusites being probably driven from the lower part to Mount Sion,
where they remained until the time of David, who marched against
Jerusalem, drove them from Mount Sion, and called it the City of
David.

  [Footnote 150: Also confirmed by Josephus, Antiq i, 13-2.]

The Ark of the Covenant was conveyed there, an altar built, and
Jerusalem became the imperial residence, the centre of the political
and religious history of the Israelites. Its glory was enhanced by the
labors of Solomon, but under his son Rehoboam ten tribes revolted, so
that Jerusalem became only the capital of Judah, with whom the tribe
of Benjamin alone remained faithful. During the reign of this king,
Shishak, the Egyptian monarch, invaded the holy city and ransacked the
temple. Then about a hundred years rolled by, when Amaziah was king of
Judah, and Joash of Israel; the latter marched against Jerusalem,
threw down the wall, and the temple was once more rifled of its
treasures. In the next century Manasseh the king was taken captive by
the Assyrians to Babylon but ultimately restored. In consequence of
the strange intermeddling of Josiah, a few years later, when
Pharao-necho, king of Egypt, was on his march, he was killed in
battle, and the latter directed his army toward Jerusalem, and placed
Eliakim on the throne by the name of Jehoiakim. The advance of this
Egyptian king is confirmed by Herodotus.  [Footnote 151]

  [Footnote 151: Herodotus, Euterpe, 159. He also mentions a victory
  gained by him at Magdola, then says that he took the city of Cadytis
  [Greek text]. This city Cadytis is generally accepted as Jerusalem,
  which was called "holy," "_Hakkodesh_." The shekel was marked
  "Jerusalem _Kedusha_," a Syriac corruption of the Hebrew "Kodesh."
  Then the word Jerusalem was omitted, and "Kedusha" only used, which,
  being translated into Greek, became [Greek text] as quoted by
  Herodotus.]

Against Jehoiakim, however, came Nebuchadnezzar, who ravaged the city
more than once, and after a siege of two years, in the reign of
Zedekiah, burned it down, took all the sacred vessels to Babylon with
the two remaining tribes (the other ten were already in captivity);
and now that the temple was destroyed, the city in ruins, and {501}
the people all in bondage, it appeared as if the prediction of her
prophets had already been accomplished. But a time of rejoicing was
yet to come, and though the chosen people did writhe under Babylonish
tyranny, and did hitting their harps on the willows, there was still a
prophet of hope among them in the person of Daniel. This was the time
alluded to in that beautiful psalm composed after their return, in
allusion to an occasion when their persecutors had asked them
tauntingly to sing one of their national songs for their amusement,
the Hebrew words of which, if we may be allowed the expression,
glitter with tears:

  "By the rivers of Babylon there we sat down,
  Yea, we wept when we remembered Zion.
  We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof.
  For there, they that carried us away captive required of us a song;
  And they that wasted us required of us mirth,
  Saying, Sing us one of the songs of Zion.
    How shall we sing the Lord's song
         In a strange land?
         If I forget thee, O Jerusalem,
         Let my right hand forget her cunning;
         If I do not remember thee,
  Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth,
  If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief Joy."

In the time of Cyrus their deliverance came; they were released from
captivity, and there was a mighty "going up" to Jerusalem when the
temple was rebuilt and the sacred vessels which Nebuchadnezzar had
taken away were restored; money, too, was given them, and the works,
after being interrupted for a time by difficulties, were resumed under
Darius Hystaspes and completed. Some time afterward another large body
of Jews came up to the holy city with Ezra, and the capital was once
more active with busy life and once more became glorious.

Alexander the Great marched against the Jews, but was prevented from
entering the city by the intercession of the high priest--a scene
which found its parallel in after-times, when the aged Leo went to the
camp of Attila, and by his entreaties diverted that semi-Christian
barbarian from Rome. After the death of Alexander, Ptolemy, king of
Egypt, surprised the Jews on their Sabbath day, when he knew they
would not fight; he made an easy conquest, and carried off thousands
of Jews into Egypt.

For a hundred years of comparative peace this fated city remained
under the Ptolemies, when it fell into the hands of the Syrians.
Antiochus Epiphanes, their king, after his Egyptian campaigns, finding
his treasure-chest nearly empty, bethought him of sacking the temple
of Jerusalem, marched his army upon the city, pillaged it, slew about
forty thousand people, and sold as many more into slavery. He then
endeavored to exterminate the ceremonial; a pagan altar was set up and
sacrifice made to Jupiter. The Maccabaean revolution broke out, and
the city was ultimately recovered by the hero, Judas Maccabaeus, when
a new phase of priesthood was established, which we shall notice
elsewhere. Things went on thus until about the year 60 B.C., when
Pompey seized the city and massacred twelve thousand Jews in the
temple courts. Thus it fell into the hands of the Romans, against whom
it rebelled, and by whom ultimately, after the most terrible siege
recorded in history, it was taken and subjected to violations over
which the mind even now shudders; its temple was ransacked, violated,
and burned, its priests butchered, pagan rites were celebrated in its
holy place, its maidens were ravished, its palaces burned down, an
unrestrained carnage was carried on, Jews were crucified on crosses as
long as trees could be found to make them, and when the woods were
exhausted they were slain in cold blood. Nearly a million of Jews are
said to have fallen in this terrible conflict. For fifty years after
there is no mention of Jerusalem in history. They kept themselves
quiet, watching eagerly and stealthily for an opportunity of throwing
off the hated Roman yoke. About the year 131 A-D., Adrian, to prevent
any outbreak, ordered the city to be fortified. The Jews rebelled at
once, but were so completely crushed by the {502} year 135 that this
date has always been accepted as that of their final dispersion. The
holy city was then made a Roman colony, the Jews were forbidden to
enter into its walls under pain of immediate death, the very name was
altered to the pagan one of AElia Capitolina, a temple was erected on
Mount Moriah to Jupiter Capitolinus, and Jerusalem was henceforth
spoken of by this pagan name until the days of Constantine, when
pilgrimages were rife, and the Christians began to turn their steps
toward the city whose streets had been hallowed by the footsteps of
Christ. Helena, the emperor's mother, wandered there in penitence,
built a church on the site of the nativity, and agitated Christendom
to its foundations by the announcement of the discovery of the true
cross. Constantine then built a church on the site of the Holy
Sepulcher, and at last the Jews were admitted once a year into the
city of their glory to sing penitential psalms over their degradation.
The sorrows of the place were not yet ended, for in the year 614 the
Persians fell upon Jerusalem, and this time the Christians suffered,
ninety thousand of whom were killed. Then it was retaken by the
Romans, when the Emperor Heraclius marched in triumph through its
streets with the real cross on his shoulders. In 637, however, it fell
into the hands of Arabic Saracens, from whom the Turks took it in
1079. Then came that marvellous agitation of Europe, when she poured
out her millions of devotees to drive the Saracen from the holy land;
and in 1099 Godfrey de Bouillon was proclaimed King of Jerusalem by
the victorious Crusaders. The Christians held it for eighty-eight
years, when Saladin, the sultan of Egypt, wrested it from them in
1187, and they held it until the year 1517, when the Ottoman Turks
seizing upon Jerusalem, made the twenty-first and last invasion which
this devoted city has undergone, and in their hands it still remains.

In the very earliest ages of Christianity people begin to bend their
steps toward Jerusalem and to write their travels. Some of these
variations are extant, and the earliest is called "Itinerarium a
Burdigala Hierusalem usque:" it was written by a Christian of
Bordeaux, who went to the Holy Land in the year 333, about two years
before the church of the Holy Sepulchre was consecrated by Constantine
and his mother Helena. It is to be gleaned also from the works of the
Greek fathers that pilgrimages to Jerusalem were becoming so frequent
as to lead to many abuses. St. Porphyry, after living as a recluse in
Egypt, went to the Holy Land, visited Jerusalem, and finally settled
in the country as Bishop of Gaza. Toward the end of the fourth century
(385), St. Eusebius of Cremona and St. Jerome went there and founded a
monastery at Bethlehem. St. Paula also visited it about the same time.
In the seventh century we have St. Antonius going there and telling us
he admired the beauty of the Jewish women who lived at Nazareth. In
the year 637, the taking of Jerusalem by the Saracens interrupted the
the flow of visitors, but Areulf, a French bishop, went there toward
the end of the century. In the early part of the eighth century the
Anglo Saxons began to go there. Willibald, a relative of Boniface,
paid a visit to Jerusalem in 724. Then the war with the Greeks
interposed, and we do not hear much about the Holy Land until the end
of the eighth century, when, through the friendship of Charlemagne
with Haroun al Raschid, the Christians were once more allowed to go to
the Holy Sepulcher. A monk, called Bernard Sapiens, went in 870, and
wrote anon account of it. Then the celebrated Gerbert, who was
afterward pope, under the title of Sylvester II., went to Jerusalem in
986, came back and wrote a work, in which he made the holy city mourn
her misfortunes and woes, her wasted temples and violated sacred
places; then he appealed to the whole Christian world to go and help
her. France {503} and Italy began to move. The Saracens heard of this
agitation, and interdicted the Christians in their dominions from
worshipping, turned their temples into stables, and threw down the
church of the Holy Sepulcher and others in the year 1008. At the
tidings of this devastation Europe was aroused, and in fact we may
fairly say that Gerbert's book of travel was the first spark that
fired the conflagration of the Crusades. The first narrative we have
of any pilgrim who followed the Crusades is by Saewulf, a Saxon, and a
very interesting narration he has left; he went in the year 1102, was
a monk of Malmesbury Monastery, and is mentioned by the renowned
William of that abbey in his Gesta Pontificum. There are accounts also
in the twelfth century by Benjamin of Tudela; in the fourteenth by Sir
John Mandeville; in the fifteenth by Bertrandon de la Brocquière; and
in the sixteenth by Henry Maundrell.  [Footnote 152]

  [Footnote 152: See Early Travels in Palestine, An interesting
  collection of itineraries and ancient visits to the Holy Land, by
  Mr. Thomas Wright.]

Modern times have multiplied books on the Holy Land, but those
mentioned above are nearly all that are extent of early periods. In
our own day there is a tendency to revive the subject; we have had
many books lately, good, bad, and indifferent, upon Holy
Land--Wanderings in Bible Lands and Scenes, Horeb and Jerusalem, Sinai
and Palestine, Giant Cities of Bashan, Jerusalem as It Is, and many
others, of which we cannot stop to say more than that they are
generally interesting and readable. It would take a wretched writer,
indeed, to make a dull book upon the Holy Land; the subject itself and
the scenes enlist the attention at once. But the last pilgrim who has
returned from that sacred city and emptied his wallet for our
inspection has produced a book not only valuable as an interesting
account of travel, but useful as an excellent commentary upon the
incidents of the Bible and the life and work of our Lord. There have
been many reviews of this book as a book of travel, but it is in this
higher light more particularly that we wish to examine Mr. Hepworth
Dixon's two volumes on the Holy Land. From the very earliest times
down to the present, Jaffa or Joppa seems to be the portal of
Palestine to western travellers, who are, it appears, compelled to
make their _début_ in Palestine in no very dignified manner. The
water-gate of Jaffa, Mr. Dixon tells us, faces the sea, and is "no
more than a slit or window in the wall about six feet square." Through
this narrow opening all importations from the west must be hoisted
from the canoes; "such articles as pashas, bitter beer, cotton cloth,
negroes, antiquaries, dervishes, spurious coins and stones, monks,
Muscovite bells, French clocks, English damsels and their hoops,
Circassian slaves, converted Jews, and Bashi Bazouks." Once safe
through this slit in the wall, the stranger is ushered into a town
whose scenes recall to his imagination the Arabian Nights of his
childhood, so little has the Holy Land changed; the dress of the
people and their customs being so little altered that Haroun, if he
were allowed to take another midnight trip with his vizier, would be
quite at home. Marvellous it is, too, that civilization has left
another peculiarity untouched in Palestine. Mr. Dixon tells us that
after "three months of Syrian travel you will learn to treat a
skeleton in the road with as much indifference as a gentleman in a
turban and a lady in a veil." Whatever dies in the plain lies
there--asses, camels, or men. The travelling baggage of an Arab
includes a winding-sheet, in which he may be rolled by his companion,
if he has one, and covered with sand; bodies are found, too, who, in
the last gasp, had striven to cover their faces with the loose sand.
There is no exaggeration in this statement--the Saxon Saewulf, who
went there in the year 1102, nearly eight centuries ago, draws the
same picture. He says:

{504}

 "Went from Joppa to Jerusalem, two days' journey by a mountainous
 road, very rough and dangerous on account of the Saracens, who lie in
 wait for the Christians to rob and spoil them. Numbers of human
 bodies lie by the wayside, torn to pieces by wild beasts, many of
 whom have been cut off by Saracens; some, too, have perished from
 heat, and thirst for want of water, and others from too much
 drinking."

Travelling in the Holy Land is not mere sport; there are a myriad of
dangers to be avoided and watched for, armed Bedaween are prowling
about, bands of horsemen scour across the plain like clouds over the
sky.

  "Horsemen!" cries Yakoub, reining in. "Hushing the still night, and
  with hands on our revolvers, bending forward toward the dim fields
  on our left hand, we can hear the footfall of horses crushing their
  way through stubble and stones. In a moment while they sounded afar
  off, they are among us; fine dark figures, on brisk little mares,
  and poising above them their bamboo spears. A word or two of parley,
  in which Ishmael has his share, and we are asking each other for the
  news. . . . . Perhaps they consider us too strong to be robbed, for
  a Bedaween rarely thinks it right to attack under an advantage of
  five to one."

At dawn of day they arrive at the spot where once stood Modin, the
birth place of the Maccabees, now a den of robbers, called Latrun.
This spot is a most interesting one, and Mr. Dixon rapidly sketches
the results of the events which were transacted here, showing how from
the Maccabaean revolt sprang the Great Separation, a new kind of
priesthood, and also, for which the influence of the captivity had
already prepared them, the ignoring of the written law of Moses, and
the introduction and veneration of the oral law or tradition of the
elders. The peculiar aspects of the Jews at the time of the Roman
domination and the advent of Christ, their hopes and opinions, may be
traced back to the drama which was played out on this spot. We
propose, then, to pause for a moment to sketch the history of that
period, as it is the keystone to the whole fabric of Jewish
degeneracy.

About half a century before the birth of Christ the Jews had fallen
into the hands of the Romans, and in the writings of Tacitus we have a
description of them, an attempt at investigation into their history,
and a version of Roman opinion upon them, which is the more
interesting as it affords an admirable corroboration of what is
recorded in the Scriptures. Tacitus endeavors very ingeniously to make
them come originally from Crete, on account of their name, Idaeos or
Judaeos, from Mount Ida, in Crete. We must bear in mind that it is
scarcely probable that Tacitus could have read Genesis. Then he
mentions other theories which were in vogue as to the origin of this
strange people, who were beginning to be very troublesome to the
Romans. In the first theory we get a slight trace of the sacred
tradition; certain people, he say, declare that a great multitude in
the reign of Isis overflowed Egypt and discharged themselves into the
lands of Judea and the surrounding neighborhood, some call them a race
of AEthiops, others Assyrians; and we are told there were some even
who claimed for them a far more renowned descent from the [Greek text]
mentioned by Homer, whence they called their great city Hiero-Solyma.
These theories are very ingenious, but they only serve to prove that
the eye of the philosophical historian of the Romans had never rested
on the Jewish records. Still the character he gives of them is the one
they have universally borne in the world; he speaks also of "Moyses,"
who gave them a distinct legislation; he mentions "circumcision" and
their abstinence from certain kinds of meet; he records their national
exclusiveness, their immovable obstinacy, their notion of one God, so
strange to the a pagan mind, and the temple, _without images_, equally
absurd.

Though the Romans treated the Jews, as indeed they did all the people
they conquered, with great forbearance, still they had a sort of
secret dislike for them, and in the {505} and they served them as they
served no other race of people subject to their power. And this
feeling was reciprocated by the Jews, who now more than ever longed
for the advent of the great Deliverer, whom they also more than ever
felt must come in the shape of a warrior, with power and majesty to
sweep these Romans out of the country, and restore Jerusalem to her
former position of splendor and renown. There can be no question that
the political circumstances in which the Jews were placed at the time
of the coming of Christ helped to unfit them for his reception, by
fostering that idea of a great temporal sovereign which had been
implanted in their bosom. But this idea was of much older origin than
their troubles with the Romans. It is an interesting fact that the
Maccabaean revolution, which restored the priesthood, may be looked
upon as the event which first taught the Jews that fatal error. Before
that time they had a more spiritual conception of the Messiah, but the
events which followed in the wake of the heroism of Judas Maccabaeus
changed the whole character of their hopes. Let us review those
circumstances, for it is only by doing so we can properly understand
how the Jews came to be so persistent in their expectations of a great
omnipotent temporal sovereign. Antiochus Epiphanes, upon the death of
his brother, Seleucus Philopator, king of Syria, seized upon the
vacant throne, although Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, was alive at
Rome, where he had been sent as a hostage. In Daniel xi. 21, we glean
that he obtained the kingdom by flattery, which receives some support
from what Livy says about his extravagant rewards (Livy xli. c.20). He
had undertaken several campaigns against Egypt, and was on his return
from one of these, with wasted army and exhausted treasury, when it
occurred to him that if he could only plunder the temple of the Jews,
it would go far to recruit his finances. He turned his army at once
toward Jerusalem, marched upon it, and sacked it. An altar was raised
and sacrifice made to Jupiter in the holy place. Then he endeavored to
abolish the ceremonial, and to introduce pagan worship, when the Jews,
exasperated beyond endurance, were ripe all over the country for
revolt, but dared not rise. At this time, however, there dwelt in a
little village called Modin, not far from Emmaus, a family who were
called the Maccabees, for what reason it is now impossible to
ascertain; but this family, who had lived there in the peaceable
obscurity of village life, were destined to become heroic. It
consisted of an aged father, Mattathias, and five sons. Antiochus
Epiphanes had sent his officers to this village to erect an altar in
the Jewish place of worship for sacrifice to the gods, when Mattathias
boldly declared that he would resist it. The altar was set up, and one
miserable renegade Jew was advancing toward it to make the pagan
offering, when he was slain on the spot by Mattathias. The family then
fled to the wilderness, and concealed themselves; they were soon
joined by others; a band was formed, which gradually increased, until
it became numerous enough to attack towns. Then Mattathias died, and
his son, even more memorable in the history of patriotism, came
forward, and took the command of the gathering confederation, now a
disciplined army. Apollonius was sent against him, whom Judas met
boldly on the field of battle, and slew. The same success attended him
in his encounter with the Syrian general, Seron. Antiochus now saw the
necessity of vigorous measures to prevent the Jews from recovering
their independence; he went to Persia to recruit his treasures, while
Lysias, the regent, sent an army to Judea of 40,000 foot and 7,000
cavalry, which was reinforced by auxiliaries from the provinces, and
even by Jews who were already becoming jealous of the fame of Judas.
The Jewish hero pointed out to his {506} followers the desperate odds
against which they would have to contend, and resolved upon employing
a stratagem. By a forced march he reached a portion of the enemy
encamped at Emmaus and surprised them, with complete success: several
portions of the army were put to flight, and a great booty secured.
Another and more numerous army was sent against him, but with no
success. At the head of 10,000 followers, fired by fanaticism, Judas
put to flight the army of Lysias, 60,000 strong, and marched on
Jerusalem to purify the temple and restore it to its glory. The
festival of Purification was then inaugurated. Day by day the
successes of Judas increased, when Antiochus Eupator, who had
succeeded Antiochus Epiphanes, invaded Judea, and only made peace with
Judas in consequence of dissensions at home. He was murdered by his
uncle, Demetrius, who seized the kingdom and confirmed the peace with
Judas, but took possession of the citadel of Jerusalem, placing his
general, Nicanor, there with troops. Suspicions were then entertained
that treachery was being plotted between Judas and this general; the
matter was pressed, when Nicanor cleared himself, and Judas was
obliged to flee. A battle took place, which he won, and another
victory followed at Beth-horon, in which Nicanor fell. Re-enforcements
strengthened the enemy, and Judas was compelled to retire to Laish
with 3,000 followers, where he was attacked at a disadvantage. Only
800 of his men remained faithful to him, but with these he boldly
encountered the avenging hosts of Demetrius, and found a hero's death
on the field. Though Judas was dead, yet the Maccabaean spirit was not
extinct. Simon and Jonathan, his brothers, rallied their companions,
and took the lead, fortifying themselves in a strong position in the
neighborhood of Tekoa. Jonathan bid fair to equal Judas; he avoided an
open engagement with the Syrians, but kept his position, and harassed
the enemy for the space of two years, when events brought about what
perhaps the slender forces of his army would have never accomplished.
A pretender to the throne of Syria sprang up in the person of
Alexander Balas, the reputed natural son of Antiochus Epiphanes, and a
party was soon found to promote his claim against Demetrius. By this
time Jonathan's little body of troops had been augmented by continued
re-enforcements, and his position was such that to the contending
parties in Syria it became clear that if either could win over this
obstinate Jew to his cause it would decide the matter. Demetrius took
the first step, by making him at once general of the forces in Judea
and governor of Jerusalem; but Jonathan was in no hurry, he suspected
the wily Demetrius, and having received overtures from Alexander
Balas, that if he would espouse his cause he would make him high
priest when he was on the throne of Syria, he yielded. These overtures
were accompanied by the present of a purple robe, and Jonathan, who,
doubtless, saw in the dissensions of his enemies the opportunity for
Jerusalem, accepted the proposition, joined Alexander, who slew
Demetrius in battle, and ascended the throne of Syria. True to his
engagement, he made Jonathan high priest, with the rank of prince, and
did all he could to ensure his fidelity. Jonathan afterward attended
the marriage of Alexander with a daughter of the King of Egypt, at
Ptolemais, where he received many marks of consideration from the
Syrian and Egyptian monarchs. He ultimately fell, however, a victim to
treachery, and was succeeded by his brother Simon, who confirmed the
Jews in their independence in return, for which, in 131 B.C., they
passed a decree, by which the dignity of high priest and prince of the
Jews was made hereditary in the family of Simon. Thus was founded the
long line of Asmonean priests, which remained unbroken down to about
thirty-four years before Christ. The Mosaic principle was set aside,
and {507} from this time the changes came over the Jews and their
institutions which are admirably sketched by Mr. Dixon in the two
chapters on the Great Separation and the Oral Law, which we recommend
to the careful perusal of any one who wishes to form a clear idea of
the origin of the state of Judaism at the time of our Lord. He thus
sums up in a sentence the results of the Maccabaean insurrection:

  "The main issues, then, as regards the faith and policy in Israel of
  that glorious revolt of Modin, w the elevation of a fighting sect to
  power; the general adoption of separative principles; the
  substitution of an explanatory law for the Covenant; a change in the
  divine succession of high priests, and a lawless union of the
  spiritual and secular forces."

The Idyls of Bethlehem form a most interesting chapter: the death of
Rachel, the idyl of Ruth, the episode of Saul, the house of Chimham,
the idyl of Jeremiah, and the birth of our Saviour, are all sketched
in a manner which tends to impress these well-known scenes upon the
mind indelibly. A chapter on Syrian Khans, which throws much light
upon the incident of the birth of Christ, we would like to extract did
not the exigencies of space forbid. The reader will find in the
chapters, The Inn of Bethlehem, The Province of Galilee, Herod the
Great, John the Baptist, and Jewish Parties, an admirable introduction
to those scenes of the life and wanderings of our blessed Lord which
are contained in the second part of the book, and to which we wish to
devote the remainder of this paper.

When speaking of the early life of Jesus, Mr. Dixon takes up the
question of the obscurity of his origin, that favorite point with the
sceptics of all ages, from the "Is not this the carpenter's son?" of
the Jews, down to puerile objections of the German Strauss. He has
shown that it was the custom to teach the youth of all classes some
useful art; and the best born and greatest men in Jewish history had
been instructed in such trades as weaving, tent-making etc. Beside,
certain trades were held in honor. We cannot understand this if we
think of carpentering by the contemptuous estimate of modern life.
That contempt for hand-labor was unknown in the early ages of
Scripture history. Adam dressed the garden, Abel was a keeper of
sheep, Cain a tiller of the ground. Tubal Cain a smith; and so, among
the Jews, it was a reproach to any man if he had not been taught one
of the useful mechanical arts. It was dignified by the Almighty
himself, who, we are told--

  "Called by name Bezaleel, . . . and he hath filled him with the
  spirit of God in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in
  all manner of workmanship, and to devise curious works, to work in
  gold and in silver and in brass, and in the cutting of stones to set
  them, and in carving of wood to make any manner of cunning work. And
  he hath put it in his heart that he may teach." Exod. xxxv. 30-34.

This reverence was cherished by the Jews; carpentering was always
looked upon as a noble occupation; the fact that the carpenter might
have to go into the temple to labor would have rescued that occupation
from contempt. This is a striking peculiarity of eastern life; and
elsewhere the objection of the sceptic to the humble origin of Jesus
has been well answered:

  "The princes of Turkey in Egypt are still instructed in the
  mechanical arts, one being made a brazier, another a carpenter, a
  third a good weaver, and so on. Said Pasha was a good mechanic,
  Ishmael Pasha is not inferior to his brother. Much of the domestic
  life of Israel has been lost to us, but still we know something of
  the crafts in which many of the most famous rabbis and doctors had
  been taught to excel. We know that Hillel practised a trade. St.
  Paul was a tent-maker, Rabbi Ishmael was a needle-maker, Rabbi
  Jonathan a cobbler. Rabbi Jose was a tanner. Rabbi Simon was a
  weaver. Among the Talmudists there was a celebrated Rabbi Joseph who
  was a carpenter. What then becomes of Strauss's inference that
  Joseph must have been a man of low birth--not of the stock of
  David--because he followed a mechanical trade?"   [Footnote 153]

  [Footnote 153: Athenaeum, 27th Jan., 1866.]

{508}

We may conclude this point by adding that among the Jews the only
trades which could prevent a man from attaining to the dignity of high
priest were weavers, barbers, fullers, perfumers, cuppers, and
tanners.

But to return to the life and work of Jesus. His fame was gradually
spreading, and he went about the small towns and hamlets:

  "Capernaum, Chorazin Magdala, Bethsaida, Dalmanutha Gerasa,
  preaching in the synagogues, visiting the fishing-boats and
  threshing-floors, healing the sick, and comforting the poor; gentle
  in his aspect and in his life; wise as a sage and simple as a child;
  winning people to his views by the charm of his manner and the
  beauty of his sayings."

His first aim was to win the Jews from the Oral Law, to convince them
of its emptiness; it is the key to the following scenes graphically
depicted by Mr. Dixon. Christ had gone to Jerusalem for the feast of
Purim, and was walking by the Pool of Bethesda in the sheet market, a
spot he had to pass daily. On the thanks of this pool were crowds of
sick, the halt, aged, and blind, a spectacle sure to attract the eye
of Jesus:

  "It was the Sabbath day.

  "In the temple hard by, these wretches could hear the groaning of
  bulls under the mace, the bleating of lambs under the sacrificial
  knife, the shouting of dealers as they sold doves and shekels.
  Bakers were hurrying through with bread. The captain of the temple
  was on duty with his guards. Priests were marching in procession,
  and crowds of worshippers standing about the holy place. Tongues of
  flame leaped faintly from the altars on which the priests were
  sprinkling blood . . . but the wretches who lay around (the pool) on
  their quilts and rugs, the blind, the leprous, and the aged poor,
  drew no compassion from the busy priests. One man, the weakest of
  the weak, had been helpless no less than thirty-eight years. Over
  this man Jesus paused and said:

  "'Wilt thou be made whole?'

  "'Rabbi, I have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into
  the pool; but while I am coming, another steppeth down before me."

The Compassionate answered him:

  "'Rise, take up thy bed and walk.'

  "At once the life leaped quickly into the poor man's limbs. Rising
  from the ground he folded up his quilt, taking it on his arm to go
  away; but some of the Pharisees seeing him get up and roll his bed
  into a coil, run toward him crying: 'It is the Sabbath day; it is
  not lawful for thee two carry thy bed.' It was certainly an offense
  against the Oral Law."

The Jews had turned the blessing of the Sabbath into a curse.

  "From the moment of hearing the ram's horn, a sacred trumpet, called
  the shofa, blown from the temple wall, announcing that the seventh
  had commenced, he was not allowed to tight a fire or make a bed, to
  boil him a pot; he could not pool his ass from a ditch, nor raise
  and arms in defense of his life . . . A Jew could not quit his camp,
  his village, or his city on the day of rest. He might not begin a
  journey; if going along a road, he must rest from sundown till the
  same event of the coming day. He might not carry a pencil, a
  kerchief a shekel in his belt; if he required a handkerchief for
  use, he had to tie it round his leg. If he offended against one of
  these rules, he was held to deserve the doom awarded to the vilest
  of sinners. Some rabbins held that a man ought not to change his
  position, but that, whether he was standing or sitting when the
  shofa sounded, _he should stand or sit immovable as a stone until
  the Sabbath had passed away_."

Jesus broke the Oral Law that he might bring his followers to a sense
of its degrading spirit, and announced the new truth that "_The
Sabbath is made for man; not and for the Sabbath_." After two very
interesting chapters upon Antipas Herod and Herodias, we have once
upon the Synagogue. Some writers have striven to claim the remotest
antiquity for this institution, but in all probability it might be
dated from the captivity. There would be a natural desire to meet
together away from the pagans, by whom they were surrounded, to pray
to their God, to sing their psalms, and to read the law. This gave
rise to the synagogue, which means no more then a "meeting together;"
but after the Maccabaean insurrection it became a popular institution,
and every little village had its synagogue. Now, as much of the work
of Christ was done in the synagogue, as he loved to go into them and
to take part {509} in their services, it is desirable that we should
have a clear notion of what a synagogue was:

  "A house of unhewn stones taken up from the hillside; squat and
  square of the ancient Hebrew style, having a level roof, but neither
  spire nor tower, neither dome nor minaret to enchant the eye; such
  was the simple synagogue of the Jews in which Jesus taught. . .
  Inside a Syrian synagogue is like one of our parish schools with
  seats for the men, rough sofas of wood half covered with rushes and
  straw; a higher seat stands in the centre like that of a mosque, for
  the elders of the town, a desk for the reader of the day; at the
  south end a closet, concealed by a hanging veil, in which the torah,
  a written copy of the Pentateuch, is kept in the sacred ark. A
  silver lamp is always kept burning, a candlestick with eight arms, a
  pulpit, a reading-desk, are the chief articles of furniture in the
  room. . . . . In olden times women were allowed to enter with the
  men, though they were even then parted from father and son by a
  wooden screen. . . . Before entering a synagogue a man is expected
  to dip his hands into water. . . . Ten persons are necessary to form
  a meeting; every town or city having a synagogue appointed ten men
  called batlanim (men of leisure), who were bound to appear at the
  hour of prayer. . . Higher in office was the chazzan, who took
  charge of the house and scroll. . . The meturgeman was an
  interpreter of the law, whose duty it was to stand near the reader
  for the day, and translate the sacred verses, one by one, from the
  Hebrew into the vulgar tongue. Above him were the elders. . . . When
  the people came in they first bowed to the ark; the elders took
  their places on the raised platform; the rich went up to high seats
  near the ark; the poor sat on wooden sofas, matted with straw. . . .
  A prayer was said, one of the Psalms of David sung. The chazzan
  walked up to the veil, which he drew aside with reverence, lifted
  the ark from its niche, took out the torah, carried the roll round
  the benches, every one striving either to kiss or touch it with his
  palm; the sheliach read the lesson for the day; at its close the
  elder expounded the text in a sort of sermon, when the torah was
  carried back, the prayers began. . . . Every hearer had in those
  times a right to express his opinion of the sacred text, and of what
  it meant."

Our Lord availed himself of this right, which every Jew possessed, of
speaking in the synagogue upon the text which had been read; and Mr.
Dixon has worked up two scenes well known in the career of our Lord,
with all the surrounding incidents and scenery, so graphically and so
accurately that no one could read these descriptions without rising
from them with a clearer and more complete understanding of the simple
statement of the gospel. The gospels were not written as historical
sketches, but as vehicles for the vital truth they contain;
consequently anything that resuscitates the scene and reproduces the
incidents as they took place, with all their peculiar surroundings,
must be of great value in assisting us to comprehend more readily, and
to retain in our minds more vividly the events of our Lord's career.
We think this is more preeminently the characteristic aim and
achievement of this work than of the many others we have read upon the
subject, and we shall instance one, the scene in the synagogue of
Capernaum. The first alluded to was the declaration of Jesus in the
synagogue at Nazareth; but as many of the incidents are included in
this of Capernaum, we content ourselves with giving it somewhat in
detail, as an illustration of the peculiarity we have already
mentioned. Let the reader first peruse the simple statement in the
gospel of St. John, vi. ch., 25 v., to the end, and then the
following; or better still the whole of chapter xvii. in the second
volume of Mr. Dixon's work, called The Bread of Life, and he will rise
from it with a much more vivid conception of one of the most trying
scenes in our Lord's history. On the steps of the synagogue a motley
crowd had collected, eager, excited, and curious, for it was just
after the miraculous feeding of the 5,000, and they were full of it;
they had heard of it in all its stupendous power; it was the miracle
of all miracles most likely to overpower the Jewish mind; it recalled
to them the words of Jehovah:

  "At even ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled
  with bread, and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God."

{510}

And this man, this son of Joseph the carpenter, had fed 5,000 people
on fire barley loaves and two small fishes. They saw the little boat
on the beach in which Jesus had come; they had heard of his walking on
the water that very night; and now the crowd was increasing, for the
country was aroused, and people came flocking from all parts to see
this man who did such marvellous things.

  "Jesus sat in the synagogue in his usual place. The Jews poured in,
  each man and woman making lonely reverence toward the ark. . . , The
  service began with the prayer of sweet incense, after which the
  congregation, the batlanim leading, sang Psalms of David; when these
  were sung, the chazzan, going up to the ark, drew aside the veil and
  took out the sacred roll, which he carried round the aisles to the
  reader of the day, who raised it in his hands, so that all who were
  present could see the sacred text. Then the whole congregation rose.
  . . . Opening the scroll, the reader read out the section or chapter
  for the day. . . . When the lesson was finished the chazzan took the
  scroll from the reader and carried it back to its place behind the
  veil. Then when the roll was restored to the ark, they sang other
  psalms, after which the elder delivered the midrash, an exposition
  of the text which had been read. The time now being come to question
  and be question, all eyes turned on the Teacher who had fed the
  5,000 men. . . . Their questions were Sharp and loud:

  "'Rabbi, when camest thou hither?'

  "'Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye ask me not because ye saw the
  miracles, but because ye ate of the loaves and were filled. Labor
  not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth
  unto everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you, for
  him hath God the Father sealed."

  "Then they asked him:

  "'What must we do that we may work the works of God?'

  "To which he answered, with a second public declaration, that he was
  Christ the Son of God:

  "'This is the word of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath
  sent.'

  "'What sign showest thou that we may see and believe thee! What dost
  thou work?'

  "Full of the great act which many witnesses declared that they had
  seen in the desert beyond the lake, they wished to have it repeated
  before their eyes; so they said to him:

  "'Our fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, as it is written, he
  gave them bread from heaven to eat.'

  "Jesus took up their thought.

  "'Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not the bread from
  heaven, but my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven. For the
  bread of God is that which cometh down from heaven and giveth life
  unto the world.'

  "'Rabbi, evermore give us this bread.'

  "Jesus answered them:

  "' I am the bread of life. He that cometh to me shall not hunger,
  and he that believeth in me shall never thirst. . . . . . For I am
  come down from heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of him
  that sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose
  nothing, but should raise it up at the last day. '. . .

  "The elders, the batlanim, the chazzan gazed into each other's
  faces, and began to murmur against him, just as the men of Nazareth
  had murmured against him.

  "'Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph whose father and mother we
  know? How is it, then, that he saith, I am come down from heaven?"

  "Jesus spoke to them again:

  "Murmur not among yourselves. No man can come to me except the
  Father which sent me draw him; and I will raise him up the last. . . .
  I am the bread of life. . . . . I am the living bread which came
  down from heaven; if any man eat of this bread he shall live
  forever; yea, and the bread that I will give you is my flesh, which
  I will give for the life of the world.'

  "Strange doctrines for Jews to weigh. Then leapt hot words among
  them, and some of those who had meant to believe in him drew back.
  If he were the Christ, the Son of David, the King of Israel, why was
  he not marching on Jerusalem, why not driving out the Romans, why
  not assuming a kingly crown? 'How can this Man give us his flesh to
  eat?'

  "The Lord spoke again, still more to their discontent and chagrin,
  seeing that they wanted an earthly Christ:

  "'Except ye eat of the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood,
  ye have no life in you.'

  "This was too much for many, even for some who had been brought to
  the door of belief. . . . . The service of the synagogue ended, the
  elders came down from the platform, the chazzan put away the sacred
  vessels, the congregation came out into the sun, angry in word and
  mocking spirit. They wanted facts; he had given them truth. They
  hungered for miraculous bread, for a new shower of manna; he had
  offered them symbolically his flesh and blood. They had set their
  hearts on finding a captain who would march against the Romans, who
  would would cause Judas of Gamala to be forgotten, who would put the
  glories of Herod the Great to shame. They had asked him for earth,
  and he had answered them with heaven."

{511}

But the scene was drawing to a close; Jesus went on with his work
after this tumult in the synagogue, opposing himself to the senseless
rites of the Pharisees, defying the oral law, healing the sick, and
preaching to the people. Passing through the country from Galilee a
Syro-Phenecian woman who had heard of him, and perhaps seen him, ran
after him in the road, and besought him to heal her daughter who was a
lunatic. The disciples urged him to send her away, for his life would
not have been safe if he had another conflict with the Jews in that
quarter, and to heal this Gentile woman's child would be sure to bring
them on his track. Turning to the woman, Jesus told her he was sent
only to the lost sheep of Israel; but she persisted, crying, "Lord,
help me!" an evidence of faith which was quite sufficient, and Jesus
turned to her and said, "Great is thy faith, O woman, be it unto thee
as thou wilt." This was a fatal blow to the Jewish exclusiveness, a
Gentile had been called into the church, and the pride of the Jew
humbled forever. On the last Sabbath day which Jesus spent on earth,
he struck another blow at the ceremonial law, by taking his disciples
to dine at the house of one Simon a leper. He had reached Bethany, and
taken up his abode in the house of Martha and Mary, among the outcast
and the poor, for that last seven days now called in the church the
holy week. The scene was an impressive one. The city, as far as the
eye could reach, was one vast encampment, caravans were arriving from
every direction, bringing thousands of Jews to the feast, who,
selecting their ground, drove four stakes into the earth, drew long
reeds round them, and covered them with leaves, making a sort of
bower; others brought small tents with them; the whole city, Mount
Gibeon, the plain of Rephaim, the valley of Gihon, the hill of Olivet,
were all studded with tense, and crowded with busy people hastening to
finish their preparations before the shofa should sound at sunset, and
the Sabbath begin, when no man could work. In the temple, the priests,
the doctors, the money-changers, the bakers of shew-bread, were all at
work, and the last panorama in the life of Christ commenced.

On the first day in Holy Week, now known as Palm _Sunday_, Jesus
entered Jerusalem on an ass's colt, a prominent figure in the
festivities, for the crowds rushed up see him, with their palms, and
marched with him singing psalms; they had come out from Jerusalem to
meet him, and they escorted him into the city. At night he returned to
Bethany.

On the _Monday_ and _Tuesday_ he went early to the temple, mixing
among the people, restoring sight to the blind, and preaching to the
poor. As his life began with a series of temptations, so it was the
will of his Father that he should be persecuted with them at its
close--a lesson we may all do well to dwell upon. Up to the last days
of his life Jesus was subjected to temptations. On the Tuesday some
emissaries of the Sanhedrim came to the court where he was preaching
to question him, and gather evidence against him. They found him
amongst a crowd of Baptists, and demanded his authority for teaching.
Christ retorted by putting them to the dilemma of stating whether
John's baptism was of heaven or not; they were too much afraid of the
people to say it was of men, and if they said of heaven, Jesus would
have reproached them for their want of faith; they confessed their
ignorance. Then each party tried to entrap him.

The _Pharisees_ brought him a woman taken in adultery. By the Mosaic
law this offence would have been punished with death. But the Roman
government would have executed any Jew who would venture to carry out
such a law, and therefore the question seemed to compel Jesus to speak
either against Moses or the Romans. He quietly turned to the
witnesses, and told the man who was {512} innocent among them to cast
the first stone at her.

The _Herodians_ tempted him on a point of tribute. They had two taxes,
one to God and one to Caesar, both were disputed, and they consulted
him in order to involve him with God or Caesar; but he foiled them by
confirming both:

  "Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God the
  things that are God's."

They began to be astonished.

The _Sadducees_ tempted him with their dogma of the non-resurrection.
They told him sneeringly of a woman who had married seven husbands,
and they wanted to know whose she would be in the life to come. Jesus
replied calmly:

  "In the resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage,
  but are as the angels in heaven."

And the Sadducees with their philosophy, their learning, and their
unbelief, retired in confusion.

On the _Wednesday_ he remained in Bethany in seclusion, while Judas
was arranging for his safe betrayal to Annas and the nobles.

_Thursday_ Jesus sent Peter and John into Jerusalem to prepare the
Passover, and at sunset that day he and the twelve sat down to the
last supper; Judas left to see Annas, and after singing a hymn, the
other disciples rose from the table, passed through the sheep-gate
into the Cedron valley, and came to Gethsemane. Here Jesus withdrew,
and while his disciples were sleeping, he watched and prayed until the
betrayers came, and the kiss of Judas revealed him to them. The
Sanhedrim was summoned in the dead of the night, and when the members
arrived they found Annas examining witnesses, but with no avail, they
could not substantiate any charge against him that the Roman
government would allow them to punish with death. Annas told him to
speak for himself, but he would not. The high priest then said, "Art
thou the Christ?" he said, "I am."  Then Annas asked him who were his
disciples, and Jesus replied: "I spake openly to the world, I taught
in the synagogue and in the temple, whither the Jews resort, in secret
I have said nothing; ask them which heard me, they know what I have
said." The officer of the temple smote him, and Annas ordered him to
be bound with cords, and when it was day they went in a body to the
palace of Caiaphas. Here Jesus was questioned again, and answered that
he was the Christ, the high priest rent his clothes, in sign that it
was blasphemy and worthy of death. The Sanhedrim pronounced him
guilty, and the officers carried him to the Praetorian gates and
delivered him a prisoner into the hands of Pilate's guards. The
vacillation of Pilate and the last scene in our Lord's career are
known to all. Mr. Dixon leaves them with the observation, "They form a
divine episode in the history of man, and must be left to the writers
who could not err."

A good book is its own best eulogy, and we may safely leave this of
Mr. Dixon's to itself; but we cannot refrain from testifying our
appreciation of such a valuable addition to the records of eastern
travel. It is superfluous to say that it is excellently written, as it
emanates from the 10, not of a tyro, but of a master-craftsman, whose
style is too well known to need eulogy, a style graphic, pointed, and
impressive, the result of clear vision and accurate delineation,
strengthened by a sort of Frith-like power of grouping as witness the
description of the street life of Jaffa, which, as an exquisite piece
of word-painting, is perfect.

The reader is led through the sacred scenes of the Holy Land by an
artist as well as a scholar, who as he journeys on revives the life of
the past; we see the patriarchal life, the tents, the flocks grazing
on the hills, the ready-writer with his and lingering and the city
gate. We here David's minstrelsy and the tramp of Maccabaean
soldierly; we peer into the depths of {513} one of those ancient wells
build by the patriarchs, and listen to the conversation of the
Samaritan woman with that wonderful stranger; we linger at the wayside
Khan, and see how natural is the tale of the gospel. As we near
Jerusalem the grander figures of the panorama pass over the scene, the
Herods in their luxury and pride, in their humiliation and their sins,
the grim towers of Macherus and the dark deed behind its walls when
the head of the messenger of God fell to please a wanton woman, and
terror was struck into the heart of the tyrant; the splendid
ceremonial service of the temple, with its altars, its sacrifices, and
its robed priests; the Sadducees luxuriating in their palaces, with
servants, carriages, gardens, living their voluptuous, godless lives;
the Pharisees with their demure aspect, broad and multiplied
phylacteries; the elements of Roman soldiery, the imperial eagles
hovering over the scene as the Jews past by scowling at the pagan
rulers of the holy city; and then that marvellous god-like figure
wandering about the streets followed by crowds of people, now entering
the temple courts to preach to them, and now stopping on his way to
heal some lame man or leper; his wanderings' along the wearying roads
of Galilee; his mingling with the people in the synagogues, the
popular gathering-place; his taking part in the service and reading
the Scriptures; his final coming up to the holy city, the betrayal,
this scenes of his trial, the frantic eagerness of the Jews, the
vacillation of Pilate, the terrible suspense and the ultimate triumph
of his foes, all these and many more incidents of biblical and gospel
history are revived and enacted, as it were, amid the very scenes and
in the very places where they once took place. We repeat again, that
this work is an excellent commentary and illustration of the gospel
narrative; and though pen of its author has been nobly wielded in the
controversial defence of that gospel, yet perhaps even greater good
may be done by this exhibition and illustration of the life and work
of Christ. To hold him up to the eyes of men is the best antidote to
scepticism; and whatever tends to do that, to plant the image of
Christ in the hearts of men, is a good work; the illustration of his
individuality, standing out as he did in his times, and as he does in
every time, distinct from all men and things. We take up the great
work of any age, its characteristic achievement, and we find the
impress of the age stamped indelibly upon it; it smacks of the time
and the scenes. Homer is pervaded with the valor of a mythic heroism,
bloodshed and victory. Dante is the very best reflection of
mediaevalism--its deep, superstitious piety, its weird dreams, and its
peculiar theology. Shakespeare, though he has written with spotless
purity, yet bears traces of the tolerated licentiousness of the
Elizabethan age. But Christ and his gospel stand out distinct, totally
distinct from the times and the life when they appeared. That gospel
could not have been produced by the age, for it was an antagonism to
it; the age was a degenerate one, a mixture of formal ceremony, and
licentious unbelief; paganism was waning; Rome becoming debased; the
ancient traditions of the Jews were lost in human inventions and
Rabbinical fantasies, when, rising up in the midst of all this
debasement, this corruption, these anomalies, came Christ and his
gospel, pure among rottenness, gentle in the midst of violence, holy
among flagrant infidelity and wanton vice, the Preacher and the
preaching both sent from somewhere, but manifestly not from the world,
not from oriental barbarism, not from western paganism, not from
Jewish corruption; it could then have come from no other place than
heaven, and had no other author than God. And when we reflect upon
what was compressed in that three years' labor, and compare it with
systems which have occupied men's lives to sketch out merely, and
taken {514} ages to perfect; when we see that this greatest system,
which has spread over the whole civilized world by the force of its
own truth, was in three short years laid down and consolidated, every
principle defined, every rule established, every law delineated, and
an impetus given to it by its great Master, which has always kept it
advancing in the world against every opposing force, and in spite of
every disadvantageous circumstance, all doubt about its individuality,
its superhuman character, and its divine origin, must vanish from the
mind. Therefore we think, in conclusion. that the best thing for
Christians still to do in this world is, to lift up Christ before the
eyes of men, no matter how, so that he be listed up boldly and
faithfully, be it by the voice, the pencil, or the pen (as in this
instance before us), or, better still by the more impressive
exhibition of Christ in a Christian life. If we wish to save men, let
us display him always and everywhere in the confidence that he will
fulfil his own divine promise--"I, if I be lifted up from the earth,
will draw all men unto me."

--------

ORIGINAL.

ON THE APPARITION OF OUR LORD TO THE DISCIPLES AT EMMAUS.


  "Whilst he was at table with them,
  he took bread, and blessed, and brake, and gave to them.
  And their eyes were opened, and they knew him."


DISCIPLE.

  "Lord! grant to thy servant this singular grace,
  To gaze but for once on thy beautiful face."

JESUS.

  "Most easily may'st thou this blessing secure:
    Who gives unto mine, unto me gives instead.
  Of thy loaf give a part to my suffering poor,
    And thy Lord thou shalt see at the breaking of bread."

--------

{515}

ORIGINAL.


LITTLE SUNBEAM'S CHRISTMAS STORY.


God bless you, kind gentlemen, for your merry Christmas, and thank you
kindly for these nice things; but you must not be angry if I say I'm
almost sorry it is Christmas day, for you see it makes me think about
last Christmas and the Christmas before.

I am Mr. Willsup's little girl--Mr. Willsup that is dead, you know. I
suppose you think I ought to wear black; and so I would, but mother
says we are too poor, and we must only mourn in our hearts. I do mourn
in my heart, oh! so much, I can't tell you. I don't like to
acknowledge it, and it gives me an ugly pain and a dreadful sinking
about my heart when I think of it, but it was on a Christmas night
that we lost poor father, and I'm afraid he wasn't right, you
understand, at the time.

There was a time when father was such a nice, good man, and when we
weren't poor, as we are now. We didn't always live up in this cold,
bare garret. We used to live in a fine, large house, all to ourselves;
and we had a nice garden in front, full of pretty flowers, and a long
back porch with a buying running over it; and we had a beautiful
parlor where we talked to the visitors only--not to sleep in and cook
in as we do here, when we have any fire; and I had the cosiest little
bedroom you ever saw, with a little altar in the corner, and on it a
statue of the Blessed Virgin, white as snow; and Chip, that's a
canary-bird, hung in his cage in the window when it was fine weather,
and cat sugar like a good fellow; and then we had silver forks and
spoons; and Zephyr, that's the horse, and Dash, our dog, and Pussy,
and oh! so many nice things, I never could tell you all in a long
time. But we haven't got any of them now, for we are poor, and
father's dead, and we must only mourn in our hearts.

I hardly know how to tell you all about it, for though I am little
I've seen a good deal; so much bad and trouble that my mind goes quite
round and round sometimes thinking over it. If you ever saw poor
father after we got to be poor, that wouldn't tell you how he looked
as I recollect him. Oh! he was so much changed! I used to be so proud
of him, and delighted to go out to walk with him in the street or
across the fields; and I used to love him so much--not that I didn't
always love him just as much as ever, only I didn't get so much chance
to love him, you understand, when he got to stay away from home and
be--oh! my heart, how it aches!

Father was a handsome-looking man once, and so smart. Everybody bowed
to him in the street. But he got rough and careless, I know, and it
made me feel sorry to see him go out without brushing his hat, or
asking me to do it for him, as he used to do. And then his face turned
to such a different look from old times. It got puffed up and red, and
his eyes that I remember were so bright and so deep, for I used to
climb up on his knee often, and look 'way down into them, and then he
would laugh and ask me if I could see his thoughts, and I almost
fancied I could sometimes, and give me a sweet kiss, and call me his
darling Susy; but when he changed, you know, his eyes seemed to be,
how shall I say it? so flat and soft, and he never seemed to be
looking anywhere in particular half the time.

{516}

You see it was business and appointments that changed him. When I
wished him to stay home and we would all enjoy ourselves--for we had
the pleasantest times together, father, mother, and me, and baby,
that's dead; and perhaps Dash and Pussy too sometimes, you know--then
he would be obliged to excuse himself on account of business and
appointments, which I fear were not always with the best of people,
for when he said he was going out mother would sigh _so_ deep and _so_
long; and then when he came home late at night I often woke up and
heard mother coaxing him and soothing him, and I am sure frequently
crying and sobbing, and that would make me cry too, all alone by
myself; and so the time went on, till father began to take less and
less notice of either mother or of me. As for dear little baby, even
when she sickened and died, I don't think he seemed to understand it,
and he stood by the grave and looked at the little coffin being let
down as if he were dreaming.

It was not long before father left off doing almost any business in
the daytime, and only went out at night. I noticed then that we began
to sell some of our nice furniture, and our silver forks and spoons. I
suppose, as we scarcely ever had any visitors now, we did not need
them; but the house began to look bare and desolate and strange, as if
it wasn't our house; and the servant quarrelled with mother and left
us, and we didn't get another, but mother did the work herself, and it
made her sick, for she wasn't used to it. Sam, our man, went away,
because after the horse and carriage was sold he had nothing to do. I
recollect hearing him say to mother:

"I'd stand by you and Susy, miss, as I've always stood by you, and
it's not wages, but times is changed, and I know you ain't able to
have me." And then he pulled his hat down over his eyes so far that he
had to lift it up again before he could see his way out of the front
door; and then ran across the garden and down the street, as if he
were running away from somebody. I cried a good deal when mother told
me he was not going to come back, for I loved Sam very much, and I'm
not I ashamed of if either, though Pinkey Silver said I ought to be,
for he was just like a brother to me, and a better brother than Pinkey
Silver's brother ever was.

Once, on a Christmas eve, I was going to hang up my stocking, as I had
always done, for good Santa Claus to put something in it, when mother
burst out into such a violent fit of crying that I was afraid she
would die. When she could speak to me she wanted me to let Santa Claus
go to some other children this year; but I determined to give him a
chance to leave me, say, a doll, if he happened to have one left over,
and so I slipped down-stairs in my night-gown, after mother had gone
to her room, and hung my stocking up in the old place. Just as I had
done it, father came staggering in. He was very bad, and fell over
several things. The noise brought mother down-stairs, and father
looking at me said so savagely that it sent all the blood to my heart:

"What devilish nonsense is the girl about?"

"Oh! don't blame the child," said mother, turning pale and getting
between him and me. "You know it is Christmas eve, John."

Then he swore many awful oaths, and said he didn't care for Christmas,
and that he was not going to be taunted with his poverty by his own
children, and went stamping around the room in a furious passion.
Mother went up to him to coax him, and put her arms around his neck;
but he threw her off and knocked her down and, though you mayn't
believe it, he actually lifted up his foot and stamped upon her face.
That is why mother looks so bad now, with those great scars, but she
was very beautiful before that, as everybody knows. When mother fell,
Dash sprang up from the hearth where he lay curled up, and barked at
father.

{517}

"They've all turned against me," said he, "even the dog. But I'll
brain _you_", says he to Dash.

When I saw mother trying to get up, with the blood all streaming down
her dress from her face and mouth, I got faint, and don't recollect
any more until I woke up, it must have been noon next day, with a
dreadful headache. I crept out of bed and went into the hall, and
there I heard people talking down in the parlor. It was mother, Mrs.
Thrifty, our next-door neighbor, and the doctor. The doctor and Mrs.
Thrifty were trying to persuade mother to do something, but she kept
saying, "Never! I couldn't--poor John!" and words like that.

Such terrible things had taken place and put my mind so astray that I
quite forgot I shouldn't listen; but I soon remembered it, and went
away. I wondered where father was, and thought I would look in his
room to see if he was there. In the old times, before father changed,
I used to be let come in, bright and early, to his room, and climb up
on a chair and kiss him before he got up; and he used to call me his
"Little Sunbeam" that came creeping in to say it was day. There he was
now, lying on the bed without taking off his clothes or muddy boots,
in a deep, heavy sleep. I did so want to love him, but I was afraid to
wake him up to tell him so, he looked so frightful, gnashing his teeth
in his dreams. But I thought I might be "Little Sunbeam" once more,
even if he didn't know it, and I got a chair and climbed up and
reached my arm over round his neck and gave him a kiss. It did not
seem like father's face, but I suppose I had forgotten, it was so long
since I kissed him before. Poor father! I began to mourn in my heart
for him then, as mother says we must do now. I was afraid to stay
there, but before I went away I knelt down beside the bed and prayed
the Blessed Virgin to ask God to make him a good man again, and make
him give up drinking, and make mother well, and let me be his "Little
Sunbeam" as before. Then I slipped back to my room and dressed myself,
and mother came up-stairs with her face all bandaged up, and she told
me not to say anything to anybody about the last night.

That Christmas day wasn't like any Christmas day I can ever recollect.
I didn't find any toys from Santa Claus in my stocking. We didn't go
to mass, nor to see the little Jesus in the Crib, nor to hear the
children sing around it. Nor we didn't have any plum pudding; and when
I went out on the back porch--oh! dear, how my heart does ache--there
lay poor old Dash, with his head split open, and quite dead.

You see I had so many things happen that I don't recollect how things
turned out, except that mother and I left our house one day, because
we got poor, mother said, and then we came here, and she says we are
never to go back because our house is sold to strangers, to whom
father was in debt. Pinkey Silver told me that the man who keeps the
grog-shop where poor father was stabbed owns it now. And I must tell
you about that.

It was the next Christmas day after the last one I told you about. We
had nothing to eat all day. Toward evening mother told me to go to
Mrs. Thrifty's and ask her to please lend us a loaf of bread. Mrs.
Thrifty was gone to a party, and so I had to wait until near nine
o'clock, when George Thrifty, that's Mrs. Thrifty's son, came in
laughing and singing:

  "Hie for merry Christmas!
  Ho for merry Christmas!
  Hurrah! for Christmas day!"

As soon as I told him what I wanted he ran and got a loaf of bread and
a pie and some cakes, and gave it all to me; and then he put his hand
in his pocket and turned it inside out, but there wasn't anything in
it, and says he:

  "Oh! little one, I'm as sorry as if I'd lost my grandmother; but I
  wish I hadn't spent all my Christmas, for I'd like to give you some
  money."

{518}

I thanked him very much and came away. As I was coming home I passed
the grog-shop I spoke to you about. I heard loud, angry quarrelling
and scuffling going on, and father's voice was among the rest. I was
afraid to go away, for I did not like to leave father there to get
hurt, and thought I had better go in and persuade him to come home
with me. I had no sooner put my head in the door than the then who
keeps the store told me to "be off, that he didn't want any beggars
around his place."

"I don't want to beg," said I, "I want father," and just as I said
that I saw a knife flash in the gaslight, and then--O my poor,
mourning heart!--poor father staggered and reeled toward me, and as
he saw me he cried out:

"Why, is it you, Little Sunbeam! O my God!" and then he fell down
across the sill of the door, at my feet, dead.

You see, dear, good gentlemen, you must not be angry if I'm almost
sorry it is Christmas. I know everybody ought to be happy when
Christmas comes; and I saw a good many little boys and girls to-day as
happy as I used to be, for I've been watching them through a little
peep hole I scratched on the frosty window-pane, and it didn't seem
real that they should be down there so happy, wishing each other
"Merry Christmas," and I up here all alone, mourning in my heart. But
you see what has done it all.

Do you think, dear, good gentlemen, that there are any other "Little
Sunbeams" like me? Do you think there are any fathers that are
changing like mine? Oh! please do run and tell them quick to stop and
change back again, or they will get poor like mother and me, and have
to live up in a cold, bare garret, and Santa Claus won't come down the
chimney on Christmas eve, because their children won't have any
stockings to hang up, and they will feel so hungry and so cold in the
night. Oh! I could tell them, and mother could tell them, as she tells
me, that drink brings a black curse on a family, and that God is angry
when he hears the drunkard's children crying for bread. I don't like
to cry when I think of that, but I couldn't help it this morning
because it is Christmas day.

It's all over now, I do so wish that mother was here to say thank ye
for all those nice things, but she won't be home till night, for she's
gone over to Mrs. Nabob's to work, where they are to have a great
party. But when she comes back I'll tell her all about it, and when we
say our prayers to-night we'll ask God to bless the good, kind
gentleman who thought about coming here to wish us a Merry Christmas.

--------

ORIGINAL.


CHRISTIAN CHARITY.

"As long as ye did it unto the least of these my brethren, ye did it
unto Me."


  There is a secret chamber in my breast
    Of which my Jesus hath sole custody
  But if my neighbor willeth there to rest,
    Then Jesus kindly lendeth him the key.

------

{519}

ORIGINAL.

PROBLEMS OF THE AGE.



XI.

THE ORIGINAL STATE OF THE FIRST PARENTS OF MANKIND--THE RELATION OF
ADAM TO HIS POSTERITY--THE FALL OF MAN--ORIGINAL SIN.


The grand theatre of probation is this earth, and its chief subject
the human race. The probation of the angels was completed almost
instantaneously, and their transit to an immutable state followed
almost immediately on their creation. The probation of the human race
is long and complicated, diversified and extensive; and by it the most
magnificent exhibition is made of the principle of merit. It has also
this peculiarity that mankind were created, not merely as individuals,
each with his distinct probation, but also as a race; and that the
whole race had a probation at its origin, in the person of its
progenitor. It is our present task to unfold the Catholic doctrine
concerning the nature and results of this original probation of the
collective human race in the first epoch of its creation.

The Catholic doctrine teaches, in the first place, that the entire
human race, at present inhabiting the globe, is one; not merely in
being conformed to one archetype, but also in being descended by
generation from one common progenitor, that is, from Adam.

That this is distinctly affirmed in the book of Genesis, which the
Catholic Church receives as a portion of the inspired Scripture,
according to the obvious and literal sense of the words, is not
questioned by any one. It is only necessary, therefore, to show that
this obvious and literal sense is proposed by the authority of the
Catholic Church as the true sense. That is, that it is an essential
portion of Catholic doctrine, that God created at first one pair of
human beings, Adam and Eve, from whom all mankind are descended.

It seems evident enough that the archaic records, in which the history
of the creation of man is contained, were understood in this sense by
those who transmitted them from the beginning of human history, and
who first committed them to writing; and by Moses, who incorporated
them into the book of Genesis. This was the traditional sense
universally received among the Jews, as is manifest from all the
monuments of tradition. It is also the sense which is reaffirmed in
the other sacred and canonical books which follow those of Moses,
wherever they allude to the subject. For instance: "Who knoweth if the
spirit of the _children of Adam_ ascend upward."  [Footnote 154] "Seth
and Sem obtained glory among men: _and above every soul, Adam in the
beginning_,"  [Footnote 155]

  [Footnote 154: Eccles. iii. 21.]

  [Footnote 155: Eccles. xlix. 19.]

The similar traditions of heathen nations are well known. The Sacred
writers of the New Testament use the same explicit language. The
genealogy of Jesus in St. Luke's gospel closes thus: "Who was of
Henos, who was of Seth, _who was of Adam, who was of God_." St. Paul
affirms repeatedly and emphatically: "By _one man_ sin entered into
this world, and by sin death:" "by _the offence of one_ many have
died:" "the judgment indeed was _by one_ unto condemnation:" "by _one
man's offence_ death reigned through one:" "by the offence of _one_,
unto _all men_ to condemnation:" "for as _by the disobedience of one
man, many were made sinners;_ {520} so also, by the obedience of one,
many shall be made just."  [Footnote 156] These passages are plainly
dogmatic, and teach the relation of all men to Adam, as an essential
portion of the dogma of original sin. The whole force of the parallel
between Adam and Christ depends, also, on the individual personality
of the former, and his relation to all mankind without exception, as
their head and representative. The same parallel reappears in another
epistle: "For by a man came death, and by a man the resurrection of
the dead. And as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all shall be made
alive." "_The first man Adam_ was made a living soul; the last Adam a
quickening spirit. But not first that which is spiritual, but that
which is animal; afterward that which is spiritual. The first man was
of the earth, earthly; the second man from heaven, heavenly. Such as
is the earthly, such also are the earthly; and such as is the
heavenly, such also are they that are heavenly. Therefore as we have
borne the image of the earthly, let us bear also the image of the
heavenly."  [Footnote 157]

  [Footnote 156: St. Luke iii, 38.  Rom. v. 12-19.]

  [Footnote 157: I Cor. xv. 21, 22, 35-49.]

These passages all present the fact of the original creation of
mankind in one pair from whom all men are descended in an intimate and
essential relation with Christian doctrine, especially with the dogma
of original sin. It is, therefore, necessary to regard it as a
dogmatic fact, or a fact pertaining to the essence of the revealed
truth, which the sacred writers taught with infallibility under the
influence of divine inspiration. So it has been always regarded in the
church, and is now held by the unanimous consent of theologians. It is
also incorporated into the solemn definitions of faith.

The canons of the second council of Milevis, and of the plenary
council of Carthage, A.D. 418, against the Pelagians, contain the
following definitions:

_Can_. 1. Placuit, ut quicunqae dicit, _Adam primum hominem_ mortalem
factum, ita, ut sive peccaret, sive non peccaret, moreretur in
corpore, hoc est de corpore exiret, non peccati merito, sed
necessitate naturae, anathema sit.

_Can_. 2. Item placuit, ut quicumque parvulos recentes ab uteris
matrum baptizandos negat, aut dicit in remissionem quidem peccatorum
eos baptizari, sed nihil ex Adam trahere originalis peccati, quod
regenerationis lavacro expietur, unde sit consequens, ut in eis forma
baptismatis in remissionem peccatorum non vera, sed falsa
intelligatur, anathema sit: quoniam non aliter intelligendum est quod
ait Apostolus: Per unum hominem peccatum intravit in mundum, et per
peccatum mors, et ita in omnes homines pertransiit, in quo omnes
peccaverunt: nisi quemadmodum ecclesia catholica ubique diffusa semper
intellexit.

"_Can_. 1. It was decreed, that whoever says that _Adam, the first
man_, was made mortal, so that, whether he sinned or did not sin, he
should die in the body, that is, depart from the body, not by the
merit of sin, but by the necessity of nature, should be under the ban.

"_Can_. 2. It was also decreed, that whosoever denies that new-born
infants are to be baptized, or says that they are to be indeed
baptized for the remission of since, but derive no original sin _from
Adam_, which can be expiated in the laver of regeneration whence it
follows that in them the form of baptism is understood to be not true,
but false, should be under the ban; since that is not otherwise to be
understood which the apostle says: 'By one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, and so it passed upon all men, in whom all
have sinned;' _except as the Catholic Church everywhere diffused has
always understood it_."

These canons, although not in active by ecumenical councils, were
nevertheless approved by Popes Innocent I. and Zosimus, by them
promulgated to the universal church and ratified by {521} the consent
of the whole body of bishops; so that they are justly included among
the final and irreversible decisions of the Catholic Church. The
second of these canons was also reenacted by the Council of Trent,
which defined in the clearest terms the dogma of original sin as
derived from the sin of Adam, the head of the human race.

1. Si quis non confitetur, _primum hominem Adam_, mandatum Dei in
paradiso fuisset transgressus, statim sanctitatem, etc., amisisse: A.
S.

2. Si quis Adae prevaricationem sibi soli, non ejus propagini, asserit
nocuisse . . . . aut inquinatum illum per inobedientiae peccatum,
mortem et poenas corporis tantum in omne genus humanum transfudisse,
non autem et peccatum, quod est mors animae: A. S. cum contradicit
Apostolo dicenti: Per unum hominem peccatum intravit in mundum, etc.

3. Si quis _hoc Adae peccatum, quod origine unum est_, et
propagatione, non imitatione, _transfusum omnibus_, inest cuique
proprium . . . . per aliud remedium asserit tolli, etc.: A. S.

"1. If any one does not confess that _the first man Adam_, when he had
transgressed the commandment of God in Paradise, immediately lost
sanctity, etc., let him be under the ban.

"2. If any one asserts that the prevarication of Adam injured himself
alone, and not his posterity . . . . or that he, being defiled by the
sin of disobedience, transmitted death and the pains of the body only
to the whole human race, but not also sin, which is the death of the
soul, let him be under the ban: since he contradicts the apostle, who
says: By one man sin entered into the world, etc.

"3. If any one asserts that this sin of Adam, which in origin is one,
and being transferred into all by propagation, not by imitation,
exists in each one as his own . . . . is taken away by any other
remedy, etc, let him be under the ban."

All these decrees affirm positively that the whole human race without
exception are involved in one common original sin, springing from one
transgression committed by the first man Adam, and transmitted from
him by generation. The dogma of original sin rests, therefore, on the
fact that all mankind are descended from one first man Adam, and is
subverted, if this fact is denied. An allegorical interpretation of
the sacred history of Genesis, according to which Adam and Eve are
taken to symbolize the progenitors of several distinct human species,
cannot be admitted as tenable, in accordance with the Catholic faith.
For, in this hypothesis, the different human races had each a distinct
probation, a separate destiny, a separate fall, and are therefore not
involved in one common original sin, but each one in the sin of its
own progenitor. This doctrine of original sin, namely, that a number
of Adams sinned, and that each one transmitted his sin to his own
progeny, so that every man is born in an original sin derived from
some one of the various primeval men, is essentially different from
the Catholic doctrine as clearly taught by Scripture and tradition,
and defined by the authority of the church. Moreover, the unity and
individuality of Adam, as the sole progenitor of the human race, is
distinctly affirmed in the decrees just cited, and in all the
subsequent decrees concerning the primitive state of man which have
emanated from the Holy See, and are received by the universal church.
We must consider, therefore, the doctrine of the unity of the human
race as pertaining to the faith. Perrone affirms this, in these words:
"Prop. II. Universum humanum genus ab Adam omnium protoparente
propagatium est. Haec propositio spectat ad fidem; huic enim innititur
dogma de propagatione peccati originalis." "The entire human race has
been propagated from Adam the first parent of all. This proposition
pertains to faith; for upon it rests the dogma of the propagation of
original sin."  [Footnote 158]

  [Footnote 158: Perrone, Prael. Theil. De Him. Creat.]

{522}

Bishop Lynch, of Charleston, who is not only one of the most learned
of our theologians, but a man profoundly versed in the physical
sciences, in a very able and interesting lecture recently delivered in
New York, thus speaks on this matter:

"Some nowadays, disregarding all that Holy Scripture teaches us
concerning the origin of man, or treating it as a myth and fable,
referring at most only to the Caucasian race, pretend that America had
her own special Adam and Eve, or, as they think more probable, quite a
number of them contemporaneously or successively in different
localities.

"I shall not here undertake to discuss this last opinion, _ventured
certainly against the teachings of divine revelation_, and, as I
conceive, no less against the soundest principles of philosophy, of
comparative anatomy, of philology, and of natural history. I will
assume it as an established and accepted truth, that God made all
nations of one blood."   [Footnote 159]

  [Footnote 159: Lecture by the Rt. Rev. P. N. Lynch, D.D., on America
  before Columbus. Reported in the New York Tablet.]

The only point we have been endeavoring to make, that the doctrine of
the unity of the race pertains to essential Catholic doctrine, is, we
think, fairly made. The scientific refutation of the contrary
hypothesis is a work most desirable, in our opinion, but one requiring
a degree of scientific knowledge which the author does not possess. It
is a work, also, which could be accomplished only by an extensive
treatise. The judgment of the distinguished author just cited may be
taken, however, as a summing up of the verdict of a great body of
scientific men, given on scientific grounds, in favor of the doctrine
of the unity of the race. The contrary doctrine is mere hypothesis,
which no man can possibly pretend to demonstrate. It cannot,
therefore, be brought out to oppose the revealed Catholic doctrine.
Hypothesis even when supported by a certain amount of scientific
probability, is not science. Real science is indubitably certain.
There cannot, therefore, ever arise a real contradiction between
science and revelation. Science will never contradict revelation, and
revelation does not contradict any part of science which is already
known or ever will become known. We are not, however, to hold our
belief in revealed truths in abeyance, until their perfect agreement
with scientific truths is demonstrated. Nor are we to tolerate mere
hypotheses and probable opinions in science when they are contrary to
truths known by revelation, because they cannot be demonstrated to be
false on purely scientific grounds.

There are only two real difficulties to be encountered in the solution
of the scientific problem. One is, the difficulty of accounting for
the variations In type, language, etc., between different families of
the human race within the commonly received historic period. The other
is the difficulty of explaining certain discoveries in the historical
monuments of Egypt, and certain geological discoveries of the remains
of man or human works, in accordance with the same period. Yet has
been justly and acutely remarked by a recent British writer on this
subject, that the objections made under this second head, if they are
sufficient to establish the necessity of admitting a longer
chronology, destroy the objections under the first head. Given a
longer time for these changes, and the difficulty of supposing them to
be real variations from a unique type vanishes. The chronological
difficulties under the second head are of two classes. One class
relates to the history of well-known post-diluvian nations, whose
historical records have been discovered, indicating a longer period
than the one commonly reckoned between the age of Noah and that of
Moses. The other relates to tribes or individuals about whom nothing
is known historically, but to whom geological evidence assigns a
higher antiquity than that commonly allowed {523} to the epoch of the
creation of man. Now, these difficulties in no way tend to impugn the
doctrine of the unity of the race, but merely the chronology of the
history of the race from the ethics of the creation of the first man,
which has been commonly supposed to be established by the authority of
Scripture. If this last supposition may be classed among theological
opinions not pertaining to essential Catholic doctrine, and we may be
permitted, _salvâ fide et auctoritate Ecclesiae_, to admit a
chronology long enough to satisfy these claims of a higher antiquity
for man, all difficulty vanishes. One thing is certain, that if the
inspired books of Moses did originally contain an exact chronology of
human history from Adam to the Exodus of Israel, we cannot now
ascertain within fifteen hundred years what it was, since there is
that amount of variation between the Hebrew and Greek copies. The
weight of probability is decidedly in favor of the Septuagint, which
gives the longer chronology. Yet, it is impossible to explain how the
variation between the Septuagint and the Hebrew, and the variation of
the Samaritan version from both, arose. The great essential facts
pertaining to religious doctrine have been handed down by Scripture
and tradition in their unimpaired integrity. We are bound to believe
that the providence of God watched over their transmission, and
protected them from any designed or accidental alteration. Some
general principles and data of chronology are included in this
essential history, which is guaranteed by inspiration and the
authority of the church. Nevertheless, these chronological data are
manifestly so incomplete and imperfect, that a precise and accurate
chronological system cannot be deduced from them. So far as it is
possible to form a chronological system at all, it must be done by the
help of all the collateral evidence we can find, This evidence, so far
as we are aware, does not tend to establish, with a high degree of
probability, an epoch of creation more than a few thousand years
earlier than the common one of 4,000 years before Christ. This is
certainly true of the historical records of Egypt, the principal
source of new light on the ancient historical epochs. We are warranted
by the Septuagint in adding fifteen hundred years to the common
period. It is only, however, on critical and historical grounds that
the Septuagint has greater authority on this point than the Hebrew,
and not as having a higher sanction. For the Hebrew is the original
and authentic Scripture, and the authorized Latin Version follows it,
and not the Greek. If we can admit, then, a chronology longer by
fifteen hundred years than the one contained in the received text, on
historical grounds, why not one still longer, if sound historical
evidence demands it? Supposing that the Scripture originally did
contain a complete and infallible system of chronology, it is evident
that the key to it was lost many ages ago; and we can just as easily
suppose that the discrepancy between the Mosaic chronology as it now
stands and the chronology of the Egyptian records has arisen by the
same causes which produced the discrepancy of the Hebrew and Greek
texts, as we can assign causes why so great a discrepancy should arise
at all, and reconcile this with the reverence due to the sacred books.
[Footnote 160] This is a matter which needs to be more thoroughly
discussed than it has been, by theologians who are fully acquainted
with the subject, before we can lay down positively a principle upon
which to solve the difficulty. We reject, however, as unprovable and
untenable, all theories which throw the antiquity of man back to an
epoch of vast remoteness, and assign hundreds or {524} thousands of
centuries to a prehistoric period, of which no records remain. It is
on geological discoveries solely that this hypothesis is based. At
present it is only a conjecture, founded on the fact that human
remains have been found of a greater antiquity than those formerly
known, whence it is concluded that they may hereafter be discovered of
a greater antiquity still. We may safely wait for geology itself to
clear up the obscurity at present existing in regard to this matter,
and to set right, as science invariably does, the early and hasty
conjectures of its own votaries. Whichever way the matter may be
settled, the fossil remains of human skeletons or human works will be
assignable either to a period not too remote to be included in the
historic period, or to one so remote that it must be excluded from it.
In the first case, there is no difficulty. In the second, nothing is
established from which the falsity of our thesis can be demonstrated.
Our thesis is, that the present human race now inhabiting the earth is
descended from one man, Adam. When there is any very probable evidence
presented that another and distinct species, having a physical
organization like that of the human race, once existed on the earth,
from which it has become extinct, it will be time to examine that
theory. For the present we are concerned with Adam only and his race;
to which both our readers and ourselves have but too conclusive
evidence that we all belong.  [Footnote 161]

  [Footnote 160: Archbishop Manning says: "No system of chronology is
  laid down in the sacred books. There are at least three
  chronologies, probable and admissible, apparently given by Holy
  Scripture. It cannot be said, therefore, that there are
  chronological faults in Holy Scripture, forasmuch as no ascertained
  chronology is there declared."--Temporal Mission of the Holy Ghost,
  p. 171, American edition.]

  [Footnote 161: The Gentle Skeptic, by Rev. C.A. Walworth, now pastor
  of St. Mary's Church Albany, treats of several topics, here noticed
  in a cursory manner. This work is the result of several years close
  and accurate study in theology and science. It has, therefore, the
  solidity and elaborate finish of a work executed with care and
  diligence by one who is both a strong thinker and a sound scholar.
  In style it is a model of classic elegance and purity, and in every
  respect it deserves a place among the best works of English Catholic
  literature. The author has broke ground in a field of investigation
  which it is imperative on Catholic scientific men to work up
  thoroughly. The entire change which has taken place in the attitude
  of science toward revealed religion within a few years, and the
  doctrines of science themselves, makes the old works written on the
  connection between religion and science to a great degree useless.
  The subject needs to be taken up afresh, and handled in a manner
  adequate to the present intellectual wants of the age.]

We have now to consider what Catholic doctrine teaches of that state
in which the first parents of the human race were constituted at their
creation. Briefly, it is this: that this was a supernatural state of
sanctity and justice, in which were contained, or with which were
connected, the gift of integrity, or immunity from concupiscence, the
gift of science, and the gift of corporeal immortality.

That man was created in sanctity and justice is affirmed as _de fide_
by the decree of the Council of Trent, a part of which is cited above,
in which Adam is declared "to have lost immediately the _sanctity and
justice in which he had been constituted:_" "statim sanctitatem et
justitiam in quo constitutus fuerat amisisse." That he possessed
integrity is proved by the same decree, which declares that by the
fall he was "changed _as to his body and soul into something worse_:"
"secundum corpus et animam in deterius commutatum fuisse." That he
possessed science is proved by the declaration of the book of
Ecclesiasticus: "Disciplinâ intellectus replevit illos. Creavit illis
scientiam spiritus:" "He filled them with the knowledge of
understanding. He created in them the science of the spirit."
[Footnote 162] This is explained and corroborated by the traditional
teachings of all the fathers and great theologians of the church. His
immunity from death is proved by the decrees above cited and others
familiar to all.

  [Footnote 162: Ecclus. xvii. 5, 6.]

It is shown to be the Catholic doctrine that these gifts were
supernatural, by the condemnation of the contrary doctrine by the Holy
See. The following theses of Baius, one of the precursors of
Jansenism, were condemned by Pius V. and Gregory XIII.:

"21. Humanae naturae sublimatio et exaltatio in consortium divinae
naturae, debita fuit integritati primae conditionis, et non
supernaturalis; 26. Integritas primae creationis non fuit indebita
humanae naturae exaltatio, sed {525} naturalis ejus conditio; 55. Deus
non potuisset ab initio talem creare hominem qualis nunc nascitur; 78.
Immortalitas primi hominis non erat gratiae beneficium, sed naturalis
conditio; 79. Falsa est doctorum sententia primum hominem potuisse a
Deo creari et institui sine justitiâ natarali." Clement XI., in the
Bull _Unigenitus_, also condemned the following proposition, the 33rd
of Quesnel: "Gratia Adami est sequela creationis et erat debita
naturae sanae et integrae."

"21. The elevation and exaltation of human an nature into the
fellowship of the divine nature was due to the integrity of its first
condition, and is therefore to be called natural and not supernatural;
26. The integrity of the primal creation was not an exaltation of
human nature which was not due to it, but its natural condition; 55.
God could not have created man from the beginning such as he is now
born; 78. The immortality of the first man was not a benefit of grace,
but his natural condition; 79. The opinion of doctors is false, that
the first man could have been created and instituted by God without
natural justice (righteousness.") 33d of Quesnel: "The grace of Adam
is a sequel of creation, and was due to sound and integral nature."

It is plain from the decisions which have been quoted, and from the
consentient doctrine of all Catholic doctors, that the Catholic
doctrine is: that the state of original sanctity and integrity did not
flow from the intrinsic, essential principles of human nature, and was
not due to it, but was a free gift of grace superadded to nature, that
is, supernatural. We do not, however, censure the opinion held by some
sound Catholic writers, that congruity, order, or the fitness of
things, exacts that supernatural grace be always given to rational
nature. It is our own opinion, already clearly enough insinuated,
that, although the completion and perfection of the universe does
exact that a supernatural order should be constituted, it does not
exact the elevation of all rational species or individuals to this
order. This opinion appears to be more in accordance with the obvious
sense of the decrees just cited. It is also the opinion of St. Thomas,
and, after him, of the more prevalent school of theology. St. Thomas
thus expresses himself upon this point: "Poterat Deus, a principio
quando hominem condidit, etiam alium hominem ex limo terrae formare,
quem in conditione suae naturae relinqueret, ut scilicet mortalis et
passibilis esset et pugnam concupiscentiae ad rationem sentiens, in
quo nihil humanae naturae derogaretur, quia hoc ex principiis naturae
consequitur; non tamen iste defectus in eo rationem culpae et poenae
habuisset, quia non per voluntatem iste defectus causatus esset." "God
could have formed, from the beginning when he created man, also
another man from the dust of the earth, whom he might have left in the
condition of his own nature, that is, so that he would have been
mortal and passible, and would have felt the conflict of concupiscence
against reason, in which there would have been nothing derogatory to
human nature, because this follows from the principles of nature;
nevertheless this defect in him would not have had the quality of sin
and punishment, because this defect would not have been caused by the
will."  [Footnote 163]

  [Footnote 163: 2 Sentent., Dist. 31, qu. 1, ant. 2 ad 8. ]

The sanctifying grace conferred upon Adam is very clearly shown,
according to this view, to have been a pure and perfectly gratuitous
boon from God, to which human nature, as such, could have no claim
whatever, even of congruity.

The nature of the probation of the father of mankind is now easily
explained. He received a gratuitous gift on conditions, and these
conditions were the matter of his probation. Our scope and limits do
not admit of a minute discussion of the particular circumstances of
the trial and fall of Adam in Paradise. The point to be considered is
the relation in which {526} Adam stood to all mankind his posterity in
his trial, transgession, and condemnation. The Catholic dogma of faith
on this head is clearly defined and unmistakable. The whole human race
was tried, fell, and was condemned, in the trial, fall, and
condemnation of Adam. It is needless to cite again the passages of
Holy Scripture and the decisions of the church which establish this
fundamental doctrine of Christianity. The only question to be
discussed is, What is the real sense and meaning of the doctrine? How
did all mankind sin in Adam, and by his transgression incur the
condemnation of death? What is the nature of that original sin in
which we are born?

One theory is that the sin of Adam is arbitrarily imputed to his
posterity. As a punishment for this imputed sin, they are born
depraved, with an irresistible propensity to sin, and under the doom
of eternal misery. The statement of this theory is its best
refutation. Very few hold it now, and we may safely leave to
Protestant writers the task of demonstrating its absurdity.

Another theory is, that all human wills were included in the will of
Adam, so that they all concurred with his will in the original
transgression.  [Footnote 164]

  [Footnote 164: We refer the reader to the argument of Candace in
  Mrs. Stowe's Minister's Wooing, for a humorous but unanswerable
  reputation of the ancient Calvinistic doctrine of original sin.]

We find some difficulty in comprehending this statement. Did we all
have a distinct existence, and enjoy a deliberative and decisive vote
when the important question of human destiny was decided? If so, the
unanimity of the judgment, and the total oblivion which has fallen
upon us all, respecting our share in it and our whole subsequent
existence, until a very recent period, are very remarkable phenomena
which we have never seen adequately accounted for. The only other
alternative is that of indistinct existence or virtual existence. That
is, that the power of generating souls was in Adam, and that all human
souls are actually derived from his soul by generation. Suppose they
are. A father who has lost an organ or a limb does not necessarily
transmit this defect to his posterity. Even if he does transmit some
defect which he has contracted by his own fault to his son, that son
is not to blame for it. If the principle of all souls was in Adam,
virtually, their personality, which is the principle of imputability,
commences only with there are distinct existence. Personality is
incommunicable. An individual soul cannot communicate with another in
the principle of identity, from which all imputability of acts, all
accountability, all possibility of moral relations, proceeds. This
notion of the derivation of souls, one from another, or from a common
soul-reservoir, is, however, one perfectly inconceivable, and contrary
to the plainest principles of philosophy. Substance is simple and
indivisible. Spirit, which is the most perfect substance, contains,
therefore, in its essence the most manifest contradiction to all
notion of composition, resolution, division, or separation of parts.
The substance of Adam's soul was completely in his own individual
intelligence and will. The notion of any other souls deriving their
substance from his soul is therefore wholly without out meeting. There
is no conceivable way in which spirit can produce spirit, except by
creation, and act to which created spirit is incompetent.

There remains, therefore only the doctrine, which is that of Catholic
theology, that the human species is corporeally propagated by means of
generation, and was therefore, in this respect only, virtually in
Adam; but that each individual soul is immediately created by God, and
comes into the generic and specific relations of humanity through its
union in one integral personality with the body. How, then, can each
individual soul become involved in a original sin? Does God create it
sinful?  This cannot be; and if it could it would not be the sin of
Adam, or the sin of the race, but its own personal sin. The soul as it
comes from the hand of God cannot be sinful in act. {527} The only
possible supposition remaining is, that the soul contracts sin from
contact or union with the body. Here the Calvinist, the Jensenist, or
any other who maintains that original sin consists in positive
deprivation of the soul's essence, or in habitual moral perversity, or
determination of the will to sin, is in a position where he cannot
move a step forward. How can _soul_ be corrupted by body? How has the
innocent soul deserved to be thrust into a body by which it must be
polluted? These questions will never receive an answer. Nor will any
credible or rational method of vindicating the doctrine that all men
are born totally and positively depraved, or with a nature in any
respect essentially evil, on account of Adam's sin, ever be
discovered. The doctrine is utterly incredible and unthinkable, and
will no doubt ere long have a place only in the history of past
errors.

The way is now clear for the exposition of the Catholic doctrine
respecting the mutual relations of Adam and his posterity in the
original probation, trial, and fall of the human race immediately
after its creation. That probation of Adam, in which the human race
was included, must not be understood as including the entire personal
probation either of himself or of his descendants. His own probation
lasted during his lifetime, and so does that of each individual man.
Had he been faithful in that particular trial which is related in the
first chapter of Genesis, it is probable that, although the special
privileges whose perpetuation depended on it would certainly have then
secured to the race, he himself would have had a longer personal
trial. So also, if the progeny of Adam had been confirmed in the
perpetual possession of the privileges of the primeval state, each
individual of the human race would have had a probation of his own,
affecting his own personal destiny alone. Although each one of us
would have been conceived and born in the state of original grace and
integrity, as the Blessed Virgin was by a special privilege, as soon
as the actual exercise of reason became completely developed, a period
of probation would have commenced, in which we should have been liable
to fail, as we are now after receiving grace through baptism.

The probation of the human race in Adam was, therefore, a special
probation, on which the possession in perpetuity of certain
supernatural privileges, freely and gratuitously conceded to the race,
was alone dependent. The merely personal consequences of the sin of
Adam and Eve affected themselves alone individually. That is, the
guilt of an actual transgression with the necessary personal
consequences following from it attached to them alone, and we have
nothing to do with it, any more than with any other sins committed by
our intermediate progenitors. The father of the human race did not
act, however, in a merely individual capacity in this transaction. He
was the federal head and representative of the race. A trust was
committed to him in behalf of all mankind, and this trust was the
great gift of original sanctity and justice, the high dignity of
supernatural affiliation to God, the glorious title to the kingdom of
heaven. By his sin he forfeited this gift in trust, both for himself
as an individual, and also for his descendants who were to have
inherited it from him. There is no ground for asking the question, why
it followed that Adam, having fallen, should transmit a fallen nature
by generation to his posterity. This question is only asked on the
supposition that fallen nature is a nature essentially changed and
depraved, whereas it is really a nature which has fallen from a
supernatural height back to its own proper condition. With all due
respect to the eminent writers who have attempted to answer this
question, we must be allowed to say that we cannot attach any definite
meaning to their answer. {528} Adam, they say, having a fallen nature,
could only transmit the nature which he had. All humanity was in him
when he sinned, and therefore humanity as generic having fallen into
sin, each individual who participates by conception in generic
humanity participates in its sin, or is conceived in original sin.
This language may be used and understood in a true sense; but in its
literal sense, and as it is very generally understood, it has no
meaning. It is derived from the extravagant and unintelligible realism
of William of Champeaux, and some other schoolmen, according to which
humanity as a genus has a real and positive entity, like the great
animal _in se_ of Plato, from whom all particular animals receive
their entity. These notions have long since become obsolete, and it is
useless to refute them. The The human genus or species was completely
in Adam, but it was not distinct from his individuality; rather it was
completely in his individuality constituting it in its own generic or
specific grade of existence, as the individuality of a man. Humanity
is also completely in every other human individual. This humanity,
constituting the specific essence of Adam, as a man, was identical
with his existence, for existence is only metaphysical essence reduced
to act. It could not be essentially changed without destroying his
human existence. Whatever is contained in _humanitas_ must have
remained in him after the fall, otherwise he would no longer have
remained a man, or indeed have continued to exist at all. It is only
this _humanitas_ or specific essence of human nature, that Adam had
any natural power to reproduce by generation. He could not have lost
the power of transmitting it by the fall, except by losing altogether
the power of reproducing his species. The immediate, physical effect
of generation is merely the production of the life-germ, from which
the body is developed under the formative action of a soul, created
immediately by God. The only depravation or corruption of nature,
therefore, which is physically possible, or which can be supposed to
follow by a necessary law from the corruption of nature in Adam, is a
corruption or degeneracy in in this life-germ, through which a
defective or degenerate body is produced. This opinion has then long
ago condemned by the church. It is, moreover, contrary to science. The
human animal is perfect as an animal, and although there is accidental
degeneracy in individuals, there is no generic or specific degeneracy
of the race from it's essential type. But supposing that a defective
body were the necessary consequence of Adam's sin, a defective soul
could not be. The parent does not concur to the creation of the soul
of his offspring, except as an  cause. God creates the soul, and he
cannot create a human soul without creating it in conformity to the
metaphysical archetype of soul in his own idea, and therefore having
the essence on soul completely in itself. How, then, can the infusion
of this soul into a body which is physically degenerate make it
unworthy of that degree of the love of God and of that felicity, which
it is worthy of intrinsically, and apart from its union with the body?

There is no law in nature by virtue of which Adam must or could
transmit anything essentially more than human nature before the fall,
or essentially less after the fall. The law by which he was entitled
to transmit privileges or gifts additional to nature on condition of
is fulfilling the terms of God's covenant with him was therefore a
positive law; why those human laws which enable man to transmit with
their blood property, titles of nobility, or the hereditary right to a
crown. These privileges may be forfeited, by the crime of an
individual in whom they are vested, for himself and for his posterity.
They may be forfeited for posterity, because they are not natural
rights. In the same manner, the supernatural gifts conferred on Adam
were forfeited for the human race by his sin, because they were {529}
not natural rights, or _debita naturae_, but gratuitous gifts to which
Adam's posterity had do hereditary right, except that derived from the
sovereign concession of God, and conceded only in a conditional
manner. This conditional right could only be perfected by the
obedience of Adam to the precept of the Almighty forbidding him to eat
of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. As he failed
to obey this precept, his posterity never acquired a perfect right to
the gifts of supernatural grace through him. By virtue, therefore, of
our descent from him, we possess nothing but human nature and those
things which naturally belong to it; we are born in the state in which
Adam would have been placed at the beginning if God had created him in
the state of pure nature.

We do not stand, therefore, before God, by virtue of our conception
and birth from the first parents of mankind, in the attitude of
personal offenders or voluntary transgressors of his law. Our
essential relation to God as rational creatures is not broken. Our
nature is essentially good, and capable of attaining all the good
which can be evolved from its intrinsic principles; that is, all
natural knowledge, virtue, and felicity. That which is immediately
created by God must be essentially good. A spirit is essentially
intelligence and will, and therefore good in respect to both, or
capable of thinking the truth and willing the good. Moreover, it is a
certain philosophical truth that when God creates a spirit he must
create it in act, or that the activity of the spirit is coeval with
its existence. The first act or state of a spirit, as it precedes all
reflection, deliberation, or choice, and flows necessarily from the
creative act of God himself, is determined by him, and must therefore
be good. The acts which follow, either follow necessarily from the
first, or are the product of free deliberation. In the first case,
they are necessarily good; and in the second they may be good,
otherwise they would be necessarily evil, which is contrary to the
supposition that they are free. The human soul being in its essence
spirit, and incapable of being corrupted by the body, must therefore
be essentially good at the moment when it attains the full exercise of
reason and of the faculty of free choice. If so, it is capable of
apprehending by its intelligence and choosing by its will that which
is good, and cannot, therefore, come into the state of actual sin or
become a personal transgressor except by a free and deliberate purpose
to violate the eternal law, with full power to the contrary. It may
exercise this power to the contrary by a correct judgment, a right
volition, and thus attains the felicity which is the necessary
consequence of acting rationally and conscientiously. So far as this
is possible to mere unassisted nature, it may continue to put forth a
series of acts of this kind during the whole period of its earthly
existence. That is to say, it is capable of attaining all the good
which can be evolved from its intrinsic principles, or all natural
knowledge, virtue, and felicity. This is equivalent to saying, that it
can have a natural knowledge and love of God, as is affirmed by the
best theologians with the sanction of the church. For Pius V. has
condemned the following proposition, the 34th of Baius: "Distinctio
illa duplicis amoris, naturalis videlicet quo Deus amatur ut auctor
naturae, et gratuiti quo Deus amatur ut beatificator, vana est et
commentitia et ad illudendum sacris litteris et plurimis veterum
testimoniis excogitata." "The distinction of a twofold love, namely,
natural, by which God is loved as the author of nature, and
gratuitous, by which God is loved as the beatifier, is vain and
futile, and invented for the purpose of evading that which is taught
by the Holy Scriptures and by many testimonies of the ancient
writers."  [Footnote 165] It would be easy to multiply proofs that the
doctrine of man's capability of moral virtue, from the intrinsic {530}
principles of here's nature, is the genuine Catholic doctrine.
[Footnote 166] This is not necessary, however, at present.

  [Footnote 165: Denziger's Enchirid., p. 305.]

  [Footnote 166: See Aspirations of Nature by Rev. I. T. Hecker,
  passim.]

We proceed to another point, namely, How it is that mankind can be
said to be born in original sin, when they are innocent of all
personal and actual sin at the time of birth? The state in which
Adam's posterity are born, and which is denominated the state of
original sin, considered subjectively, is a state of privation of
supernatural grace and integrity. If man had been created for a
natural destiny, this state of inhability to the supernatural would
not have been a state of sin. If he had been created in the state in
which he is now born, as a preparatory state to the state of grace, to
be endowed at a subsequent period with supernatural gifts, it would
not have been a state of sin. Entitively it would have been the same
state as that in which he is now born. It would not have been a state
of sin, because the state of sin receives its denomination from a
voluntary transgression which produces it. The particular notion of
sin is an aversion from God as the supreme good produced by the
voluntary election of an inferior good in his place. The posterity of
Adam are born in a state of habitual aversion from God as the supreme
good in the supernatural order, which is the consequence of the
original sin of Adam. Since they virtually possessed a right to be
born in the state of grace and integrity, which was forfeited by his
sin, the state of privation in which they are born, relatively to
their original ideal condition and to the transgression by which they
were degraded from it, is properly denominated a state of sin. This is
incurred by each individual soul through its connection with the body
which descends from our first parents by generation, because it is
this infusion into a human body which constitutes it a member of the
human race. As a member of the human race, and by virtue of his
descent from Adam, each individual man participates in all the generic
relations of the race. If Adam had not sinned, he would have received
by inheritance from from him a high dignity and great possessions,
transmitted to him through the blood; as the case is, he is born
disinherited. There is no injustice or unkindness in this; because the
rights which have been forfeited were not rights involved in the
concession of rational existence itself, but rights gratuitously
conceded on certain conditions, and because no personal blame is
imputed where none exists. The illustration so often employed by
theologians of a nobleman who has suffered attainder is perfectly apt
to the case. His posterity are born under an attainder, which in human
law corresponds to original sin under the divine law, and are thus
placed in a state of privation; relatively to that condition of
nobility which was formerly hereditary in the family; but which in
itself is an honest condition. In the eye of the law, their father's
crime makes them incapable of the privileges of nobility, but it does
not deprive them of the common rights of private subjects.

So the children of Adam, on account of his sin, inherit a disability
to possess the nobility of the state of grace and to inherit the
kingdom of heaven. This disability is inherent in the person son of
each one, and therefore "_inest euique proprium_." It is a separation
from God incurred by the transgression of Adam, who represented the
human race in his trial, and therefore is truly and properly sin. It
is a privation of grace which is the supernatural life of the soul,
and is therefore properly called death, or "_mors animae_." The
"_reatus culpae_" is the obligation of being born in a state of
relative degradation, and the "_reatus poenae_" the obligation of
undergoing the conflicts, sufferings, and death which belong to the
state of despoiled nature, as well as submitting to the sentence of
exclusion from the kingdom of God. By it, human nature has been
changed into something worse as to soul and body, {531} "_in deterius
mulatur quoad corpus et animam_," because it is now deprived of
integrity, immortality, and sanctifying grace. Nevertheless this state
is essentially the same with that which would have been the state of
man if he had been created in the state of pure nature. Man in the
state of lapsed nature differs from man in the state of pure nature,
as Perrone says, only as _nudatus_ from _nudo_, one denuded from one
always nude. This is original sin, which consists formally, as St.
Thomas teaches, in the privation of sanctifying grace and the other
gratuitous gifts perfecting nature which depended on it. Mankind,
therefore, by the sin of Adam, have simply fallen back on the state of
pure nature, and are born with those attributes and qualities only
which are contained in human nature by virtue of its intrinsic
principles. To understand, therefore, the condition, capabilities, and
ultimate destiny of man, apart from the grace which comes through the
Redeemer, we have simply to inquire into the essence of these
intrinsic principles, and ascertain what man is, simply as man, where
he can do, and what is the end he can attain by his earthly life.

Man, as to his rational nature, is in the lowest grade of rational
creatures. Except under very favorable circumstances, his intelligence
is very imperfectly developed, and so far as it is developed it is
chiefly employed in perfecting his merely exterior and social life.
Under the most favorable circumstances his progress is slow, his
capacity of contemplating purely intellectual and spiritual objects
weak and limited. As to his body, he is also frail and delicate, and
naturally liable to death. Moreover, there is in his constitution, as
a being composed of soul and body, a certain contrariety of natural
impulses, one set of impulses inclining him to rational good, the
other to sensible or animal good. Like the inferior animals, he is
capable of an improvement of his species up to a certain point which
cannot be fixed, and also liable to a degeneracy which brings, him
down to a state little above that of the brutes, and even to idiocy.
There are indications enough in his soul of a latent capacity for a
much higher and more exalted state, to make it certain that his
present condition is one of merely inchoate existence, and that he is
destined to a future life in which these latent capacities will be
developed in a more perfect corporeal organization. The great
difficulty of forming an ideal conception of the state in which he
would have been constituted, had he been left to his merely natural
development, consists in the fact that we have no human subject to
study except man as he actually is, that is, under a supernatural
providence from the beginning. The actual development of human nature
has taken place under the influence of supernatural grace, and we
cannot discriminate in human history the operation of natural causes
from those which are supernatural. There are three principal
hypotheses respecting the possible development of pure nature which
may be sustained with more or less plausibility. The first is, that
the human race, beginning in its perfection of type as a species, but
without any revelation of language, or any instruction in natural
theology, morals, or science, would have remained always in the same
state in which it was created, without any intellectual or moral
progress. According to this view, the present state of man on earth
would have been a mere stage of existence, which could have no
ulterior end, except the production of a species destined to begin its
higher life in a future state. The second hypothesis is, that the
human race, beginning from the same point of departure, might have
progressed slowly, through very long periods of time, to a high limit
of civilization, knowledge, virtue, and natural religion. The third
is, that a kind of natural revelation, including a positive system of
religion, morals, and science, would have been requisite; in a word,
that human society must have been placed {532} at first, by the
immediate intervention of the Creator, in the state of civilization,
and conducted in its course by a continuance of the same intervention.
We have little room, however, for anything beyond conjecture in this
matter. The only point we are anxious to establish is, that the state
in which we are now born is not one intrinsically evil; that it is not
one derogatory to human nature as such; that it is not one in which
God might not create man in consistency with his sanctity and
goodness.

This point is established on sound theological and philosophical
principles; and from these principles it follows that all the
phenomena of man which are referrible to his original fall are the
natural consequence of his human constitution, and not evidences of a
positive, innate depravity. He is a weak, frail, inconstant creature,
easily led away by the senses and passions, liable to fall into many
errors and sins, but he is not an object of loathing and abhorrence to
his Creator, or an outcast from his love. He has in him all the
primary elements of natural virtue, the germ from which a noble
creature can be developed. Nevertheless, although his natural
condition is one which is not derogatory to himself or his Creator, it
seems to cry out for the supernatural. Its actual weakness and
imperfection, coupled with its latent capacities for a high
development, mark it as being, what it is, the most fitting subject
for the grace of God; and indicate that it was created chiefly to
exemplify in the most signal manner the supernatural love and bounty
of the Creator. It is only in the idea of the supernatural order that
we can find the adequate explication and solution of all the problems
relating to the destiny of man. For that order he was created by an
absolute, not a conditional decree of God. The fulfilment of that
decree was not risked on the issue of Adam's probation. According to
our view, the creation of man was only the inchoation of the
incarnation of the Eternal Word in human nature; and the decree of the
incarnation being absolute, the elevation of human nature was
necessary and must be efficaciously secured. The fall of man from
original grace could not therefore hinder it. After the sin of Adam,
the human race had still a supernatural destiny, and was under the
supernatural order of Providence. The divine decree to confer grace on
man was not abrogated, but only the form and mode under which the
grace was to be conferred were changed. Moreover, by this change, the
human race was, on the whole, a gainer, and came into a better and
more favorable position for attaining its destiny. There was a reason
both for the original constitution of man in the grace of Adam, and
also for the change of that constitution which followed upon Adam's
sin. By the original grant of grace, God showed to mankind his
magnificent liberality and good-will. He gave them also an ideal which
has remained imperishably in their memory of the state of perfection,
and left a sweet odor of paradise to cheer them along their rugged
road of labor and trial. By the withdrawal of that grace he brought
them under a dispensation of mercy, in which their condition is more
humble and painful, but safer and more advantageous for gaining the
highest merit.

St. Francis de Sales says: "L'état de la redemption vaut cent fois
plus que l'état de la justice originalle." "The state of redemption is
a hundred times preferable to the state of original justice."
[Footnote 167] The church herself, in her sublime hymn _Exultet_,
breaks out into the exclamation: "O certé necessarium Adae peccatum; O
felix culpa! quae tantum et talem habere meruit Redemptorem!" "O
certainly necessary sin of Adam; O happy fault! which merited to know
such and so great a redeemer!" We reason to lament our lost paradise,
or to mourn over the fall of our first parents. Our new birth in
Christ is far better than that ancient inheritance forfeited in Eden.
The consideration of the mystery of redemption must be postponed,
however for a future number.

  [Footnote 167: This thought has been beautifully developed by Mr.
  Simpson in some Essays on Original Sin, published in The Rambler]

----------

{533}

Original.

MY CHRISTMAS TREE.



  The Christmas logs were blazing bright, the house was all aglow,
  Five little stockings brimming full were hanging in a row;
  The balls of golden, silver, red, upon the Christmas tree,
  Like fire-flies glancing through the green, were shining merrily,
  And gifts for May and Josey, and for Maggie, Kate, and Will,
  From bending top to sturdy root, the swaying branches fill;
  And I, my labors all complete, sat watching through the night,
  For well I knew that busy feet, before the morning-light,
  Would patter, patter down the stairs in merry Christmas glee,
  And warm and bright as love could make, must their first welcome be.
  The while I mused upon their joy, with eyes fixed on the door.
  The fairest form I ere had seen glided the threshold o'er--
  A sweet and gentle maiden "waxen little past the child,"
  And close upon her steps a man of visage grave and mild.
  As the fair maiden nearer drew, I saw her small hands prest
  The loveliest new-born baby that e'er slept on mortal breast--
  Albeit, five fair little buds had blossomed on mine own,
  Such winning grace of perfectness mine heart had never known.
  Adown, in sudden rapture caught, I fell on bended knee.
  For Jesus and Saint Mary and Saint Joseph were with me!
  The Maiden Mother gently bent, and in my trembling hands
  Laid little baby-Jesus, wrapt up in his swaddling bands.
  "Give rest and food and shelter unto him who for your sake
  Hath reft himself of all things," thus the Maiden Mother spake;
  "Each Christmas eve we, journeying, as once in Bethlehem,
  At every Christian door-step ask for shelter, as of them
  Who in my mother's maiden home had room for all save him
  Before whose throne of living light bow down the seraphim.
  And oft times now, as on that night, rejected, we depart.
  As though they were Judean inns, from many a Christian heart.
  With warmth and light and merry feasts ye hail his natal-day,
  But who have place for Jesus Christ who in the manger lay?
  Mosttimes the doors are closely barred, the fire-light is grown dim,
  And few who watch as now you watch, keep watch or ward for _him_."

  Her tones were tender, sweet, and low, but through the crust of years
  They found the blessed, blessed fount of humble, contrite tears;
  And as they overflowed mine eyes, and plashed upon his head,
  The baby woke to life and warmth, who seemed so cold and dead;
  And pointing where a little gift for "Christ's poor" lowly lay
  Beneath the tree so richly bowed, he smiled, and passed away.
  Ah! me, how little seemed the share that I had laid aside
  To give to him who for our sake was born and crucified!
  _He_ held back naught, the last red drop flowed out for you and me:
  Oh! surely he should have the best on every Christmas tree.

       Genevieve Sales.

----------

{534}


Translated from the German.


THE LITTLE BIRDS ON CHRISTMAS DAY.



On holy Christmas morning there was a grand assemblage of little birds
behind the elder-tree yonder which stands between the court-yard and
the garden, flanked on one side by the barn and on the other by heaps
of grain that had found no shelter in the granary--so rich had been
the blessings of the Lord!

The sparrow with his house and generation was very fully represented
in the meeting; and all who belonged to his family puffed out their
feathers and sat looking as if something vexatious had befallen them.

The lark, sitting between the furrows in the field hard by, raised
himself up a little way now and again, warbling a short kyrie or
gloria as his thoughts came and went.

Finches and goldhammers were there in great spirits, as usual; and the
blackbird perched now inside the court-wall, now on the outside; then
he flew down to the brook, ducked down and up again, flew up into the
tree with the other birds, and praised the cold-water-cure, which
makes one feel right fresh and joyful as nothing else can.

Ravens and crows and the rest of the grab-alls, who are for ever
finding what no one has lost, crowded close together on the
grain-stacks in deep and loud discussion.

But the sparrow began to bewail his fate thus: "I have been sadly
disturbed in my night's rest, for before daybreak all the bells in the
steeples began to ring as if for fire. I flew out into the darkness;
and all around the houses looked bright, as if they were on fire
within. Many tiny candles were lighted, and the trees on which they
burned were covered with all kinds of fruit, such as I never have seen
together on one tree. But we enjoy nothing of all this. Our trees are
bare enough, and have not even leaves to screen us from this winter's
cold. We shall starve to death or freeze, when once food becomes
scarcer and the cold more piercing."

But the lark in the field scratched up a few worms which a mole had
tossed out with the earth; and the blackbird helped her to choose some
little worms, and that was their breakfast.

The shepherd drove his flocks through the narrow path, while
thorn-bushes on each side, and the blackberry briers and wild-rose
bushes, who had heard the birds' complaint, stretched their branches
across the way, so that the little sheep left locks of wool upon them,
some more, some less, but never enough to do them any harm. But the
birds were behind them, and gathered up the wool and carried it to
their homes, in the knot-holes of trees or crevices of walls or
hollows of the earth, and there they grew warmer warmer. Then, as they
picked at the wool, red hips, which the cold had made sweet and soft,
peeped out, and they ate them with joyful hearts.

Again rang out the bells from tower and steeple; the houses-door
opened, and the family came fourth; maid-servants first, then sons and
daughters, and, to close up the procession, the housewife and the
farmer.

"Father," said the eldest son, "it will fare ill with our corn-stacks
in the field if, before going to church, we do not shoot in among the
feathered gentry yonder, who have torn the outer coverings already,
and will soon make their way in among the unthreshed grain. The
magpies willingly read where they have not sown. They cluster here
from the whole neighborhood. Gladly would I give them a few leaden
peas for food, and silence their chattering for ever."

{535}

"By no means," replied the farmer. "No shot shall be fired during this
blessed Christmas season--on the gracious birthday of him who
overthrew indeed the tables of the money-changers, and made a scourge
of cords to drive out both buyer and seller from his temple, but only
said to those who sold doves, 'Take them hence.' He did not blame the
poor little doves; and never, on this day, when dumb beasts gave up to
him their manger for the cradle because men found no room for him in
the inn, never shall any creature find death in my fields for the sake
of a few blades of grass or kernels of grain."

But the farmer's wife had already turned back, and one of the lads
was, at her command, strewing a whole sheaf of grain before the
house-front. So generously did he scatter the food to the doves and
poultry, that there was enough and to spare for their neighbors on the
elder-tree, and magpie and raven had a fair share without being envied
by hens or disturbed by men. Thus in the court-yard was there also a
little of that "peace on earth" of which angels sang one Christmas
night upon the plains of Bethlehem. Nor did the farmer lack anything
in hay-loft or granary because the little birds of heaven had been fed
from his table that blessed Christmas morning.

Remember this: on Christmas feed the poor birds before thy door, and
if thou seest neither lark nor blackbird, nor yet finches,
gold-hammers, nor tomtits, then think of those who have no feathers,
of poor human creatures. Forget not that the angel of the Lord said to
the shepherds: "You will find the child wrapped in swaddling-clothes,
and lying in a manger." Seek out the swaddling-clothes of poverty, and
if thou walkest by that light which rose over Bethlehem, then shalt
thou find in those swaddling-clothes and in works of mercy the little
child Jesus!

Mark this: if thou wouldst be happy, then must thou make others happy!

Remember: because Jesus came to the poor, therefore shouldst thou go
to the poor.

----------

Original.

BARABBAS AND I.


  BABABBAS.

  "Strange that the Jews should set me free,
   And let this Jesus die for me!
   I have their brethren robbed and slain:
   He brought their dead to life again."


  I.

  "Strange, surely, that the ungrateful Jews
   Should thee in place of Jesus choose:
   Yet stranger far it is that he
   Should choose to die to set _me_ free."

------

{536}


From the Popular Science Review.

AËROLITES.


BY TOWNSHEND M. HALL, F.G.S.


Meteoric stones, or aërolites, as they are generally called (from two
Greek words, _aer_ and _lithos_, signifying "air-stones"), may be
defined as solid masses consisting principally of pure iron, nickel,
and several other metals, sometimes containing also an admixture of
augite, olivine, and hornblende, which, from time to time, at
irregular intervals, have fallen upon the surface of the earth from
above.

Other designations, such as "fire-balls and thunder-bolts," have been
popularly applied to these celestial masses, the former denoting their
usual fiery appearance, whilst the latter has reference to the extreme
suddenness of their descent.

Shooting stars also, although they are not accompanied by the fall of
any solid matter upon the earth, are generally placed in the same
category, since they are supposed to be aërolites which pass
(comparatively speaking) very near our earth, and are visible from it
by night; at the same time their distance from us, varying as it does
from four to two hundred and forty miles and upward, is in most
instances too great to allow of their being drawn down by the
attractive power possessed by the earth. Like comets and eclipses,
these celestial phenomena in former times were universally regarded
with feelings of the greatest awe and superstition; and in Eastern
countries especially, where the fall of a meteoric stone was supposed
to be the immediate precursor of some important public event, or
national calamity, the precise date of each descent was carefully
recorded. In China, for example, such reports reach back to the year
644 before our era; and M. Biot has found in the astronomical section
of some of the most ancient annals of that empire sixteen falls of
aërolites recorded as having taken place between the years 644 B.C.
and 333 after Christ, whilst the Greek and Roman authors mention only
four such occurrences during the same period. Even now, in this age of
science and universal knowledge, aërolites can scarcely be regarded
without a certain degree of dread. Indeed, four or five cases have
occurred in which persons have been killed by them; in another
instance, several villages in India were set on fire by the fall of a
meteoric stone; and it was by no means a pleasant subject for
reflection that such a catastrophe might happen anywhere and at any
moment, especially when we remember that these stones, although not
quite incandescent, are always, more or less, in a heated state; and
sometimes so hot that even after the lapse of six hours they could not
be touched with impunity.

The first fall of meteoric stones on record appears to have taken
place about the year 654: B.C., when, according to a passage in Livy,
a shower of stones fell on the Alban Hill, not far distant from Rome.
The next in chronological order is mentioned by several writers, such
as Diogenes of Apollonia, Plutarch, and Pliny, and described by them
as a great stone, the size of two millstones, and equal in weight to a
full wagon-load. It fell about the year 467 B.C., at AEgos Potamos, on
the Hellespont, and even up to the days of Pliny, four centuries after
its fall, it continued to be an object of curiosity and speculation.
{537} After the close of the first century we fail to obtain any
account or notice of this stone; but although it has been lost sight
of for upward of eighteen hundred years, the eminent Humboldt says, in
one of his works, that notwithstanding all previous failures to
rediscover it, he does not wholly relinquish the hope that even after
such a considerable lapse of time, this Thracian meteoric mass, which
it would be so difficult to destroy, may be found again, especially
since the region in which it fell has now become so easy to access to
European travellers.

The next descent of any particular importance took place at Ensisheim
in Alsace, where an aërolite fell on November 7th, 1492, just at the
time when the Emperor Maximilian, then king of the Romans, happened to
be on the point of engaging with the French army. It was preserved as
a relic in the cathedral at Ensisheim, until the beginning of the
French revolution, when it was conveyed to the Public Library of
Colmar, and it is still preserved there among the treasures.

In later years the shower of aërolites which fell in April, 1803, at
L'Aigle, in Normandy, may well rank as the most extraordinary descent
upon record. A large fire-ball had been observed a few moments
previously, in the neighborhood of Caen and Alençon, where the sky was
perfectly clear and cloudless. At L'Aigle no appearance of light was
visible, and the fire-ball assumed instead the form of a small black
cloud, consisting of vapor, which suddenly broke up with a violent
explosion, followed several times by a peculiar rattling noise. The
stones at the time of their descent were hot, but not red, and smoked
visibly. The number which were afterward collected within an
elliptical area measuring from six to seven miles in length by three
in breadth, has been variously estimated at from two to three
thousand. They ranged in weight from two drachms up to seventeen and
half pounds. The French government immediately deputed M. Biot, the
celebrated naturalist and philosopher, to proceed to the spot, for the
express purpose of collecting the authentic facts concerning a
phenomenon which, until that time, had almost universally been treated
as an instance of popular superstition and credulity. His conclusive
report was the means of putting an end to all scepticism on the
subject, and since that date the reality--not merely the
possibility--of such occurrences has no longer been contested.

Leaving out, for the present, innumerable foreign instances which
might be quoted, we must now glance rapidly at a few of the most
noticeable examples of the fall of meteoric stones which have taken
place in England. The earliest which appears on record descended in
Devonshire, near Sir George Chudleigh's house at Stretchleigh, in the
parish of Ermington, about twelve miles from Plymouth. The
circumstance is thus related by Westcote, one of the quaint old
Devonshire historians:

  "In some part of this manor (Stretchleigh), there fell from above--I
  cannot say from heaven--a stone of twenty-three pounds weight, with
  a great and fearful noise in falling; first it was heard like unto
  thunder, or rather to be thought the report of some great ordnance,
  cannon, or culverin; and as it descended, so did the noise lessen,
  at last when it came to the earth to the height of the report of a
  peternel, or pistol. It was for matter like unto a stone singed, or
  half-burned for lime, but being larger described by a richer wit, I
  will forbear to enlarge on it."

The "richer wit" here alluded to was in all probability the author of
a pamphlet published at the time, which further describes this
aërolite as having fallen on January 10th, 1623, in an orchard, near
some men who were planting trees. It was buried in the ground three
feet deep, and its dimensions were three and a half feet long, two and
a half wide, and one and a half thick. The pamphlet also states that
pieces broken from off it were in the possession of many of the
neighboring gentry. {538} We may here remark that no specimen of this
stone is at present known to be in existence, and that although living
in the county where it fell, we have hitherto failed in tracing any of
the fragments here referred to. A few years later, in August, 1628,
several meteoric stones, weighing from one to twenty-four pounds, fell
at Hatford, in Berkshire; and in the month of May, 1680, several are
said to have fallen in the neighborhood of London.

The total number of aërolitic descents which up to this present time
have been observed to take place in Great Britain and Ireland is
twenty, of which four occurred in Scotland, and four in Ireland. The
largest and most noticeable of all these fell on December 13th, 1795,
near Wold Cottage, in the parish of Thwing, East Riding of Yorkshire.
Its descent was witnessed by two persons; and when the stone was dug
up, it was found to have penetrated through no less than eighteen
inches of soil and hard chalk. It originally weighed about fifty-six
pounds, but that portion of it preserved in the British Museum is
stated in the official catalogue to weigh forty-seven pounds nine
ounces and fifty-three grains--just double the weight of the
Devonshire aërolite.

When we come to inquire into the various opinions which have been held
in different ages respecting the origin of aërolites, and the power
which causes their descent, we must go back to the times of the
ancient Greeks, and we find that those of their philosophers who had
directed their attention to the subject had four theories to account
for this singular phenomenon. Some thought that meteoric stones had a
telluric origin, and resulted from exhalations ascending from the
earth becoming condensed to such a degree as to render them solid.
This theory was in after years revived by Kepler the astronomer, who
excluded fire-balls and shooting stars from the domain of astronomy;
because, according to his views, they were simply "meteors arising
from the exhalations of the earth, and blending with the higher
ether." Others, like Aristotle, considered that they were masses of
metal raised either by hurricanes, or projected by some volcano beyond
the limits of the earth's attraction, so becoming inflamed and
converted, for a time, into starlike bodies. Thirdly, a solar origin;
this, however, was freely derided by Pliny and several others, among
whom we may mention Diogenes of Apollonia, already alluded to as one
of the chroniclers of the aërolite of AEgos Potamos. He thus argues:
"Stars that are invisible, and consequently have no name, move in
space together with those that are visible. . . .  These invisible
stars frequently fall to the earth and are extinguished, as the stony
star which fell burning at AEgos Potamos." This last opinion, it will
be seen, coincides, as far as it goes, almost exactly with the most
modern views on the subject.

As some of the Greeks derived the origin of meteorites from the sun
(probably from the fact of their sometimes falling during bright
sunshine), so we find, at the end of the seventeenth century, it was
believed by a great many that they fell from the moon. This conjecture
appears to have been first hazarded by an Italian philosopher, meeting
Paolo Maria Terzago, whose attention was specially directed to this
subject on the occasion of a meteoric stone falling at Milan in 1660,
and killing a Franciscan monk. Olbers,  however, was the first to
treat this theory in a scientific manner, and soon after about fall of
an aërolite at Siena, in the year 1794, he began to examine the
question by the aid of the most abstruse mathematics, and after
several years' labor he succeeded in showing that, in order to reach
our earth, a stone would require to start from the moon at an initial
velocity 8,292 feet per second; then proceeding downward with
increasing speed, it would arrive on the earth with a {539} of 35,000
feet per second. But frequent measurements have shown that the
_actual_ rate of aërolites averages 114,000 feet, or about twenty-one
miles and a half per second, they were approved by these curious and
most elaborate calculations to have come from a fire greater distance
than that of our satellite. It is but fair to add that the question of
initial velocity, on which the whole value value of this so-called
"ballistic problem" depends, was investigative by three other eminent
geometricians, Biot, Laplace, and Poisson, who during ten or twelve
years were independently engaged is calculation. Biot's estimate was
8,282 feet in the second; Laplace, 7,862; and Poisson, 7,585--results
all approximating very closely with those stated by Olbers.

We have already observed, at the beginning of this paper, that
meteoric stones may fall at any moment, but observations, extending
over many years, have sometimes been brought forward to show that, as
far as locality is concerned, all countries are not equally liable to
these visitations. In other words, the large number of aërolites which
have been known to fall within a certain limited area has been
contrasted with the apparent rarity of such occurrences beyond these
limits. If it could be proved that the earth possessed more attractive
power in some places than in others, this circumstance might be
satisfactorily explained, but in default of any such evidence, the
advocates of this theory must rely solely upon statistics, which from
their very nature require to be taken with a certain amount of
reserve. Professor Shepard, in Silliman's American Journal, has
remarked that "fall of aërolites is confined principally to two zones;
the one belonging to America is bounded by 33° and 44° north latitude,
and is about 25° in length. Its direction is more or less from
north-east to south-west, following the general line of the Atlantic
Coast. Of all known occurrences of this phenomenon during the last
fifty years, 92.8 per cent, have taken place within these limits, and
mostly in the neighborhood of the sea. The zone of the eastern
continent--with the exception that it extends ten degrees more to the
north--lies between the same degrees of latitude, and follows a
similar north-east direction, but is more than twice the length of the
American zone. Of all the observed falls of aërolites, 90.9 per cent,
have taken place within this area, and were also concentrated in that
half of the zone which extends along the Atlantic."

On reference to a map, it will be seen that in the western continent
the so-called zone is simply confined to the United States--the most
densely inhabited portion of America. In like manner the eastern zone
leaves out the whole of desert Africa, Lapland, Finland, the chief
part of Russia, with an average of thirty-two inhabitants to each
square mile; Sweden and Norway, with only seventeen per mile; whilst
it embraces all the well-peopled districts of central Europe, most of
which, like England, are able to count between three and four hundred
persons to every mile of their territory. In fact, Professor Shepard's
statement may almost be resolved into a plain question of population,
for were an aërolite to fall in the midst of a desert, or in a thinly
peopled district, it is needless to point out how few the chances are
of its descent being ever noticed or recorded. That innumerable
aërolites do fall without attracting any attention, is clearly proved
by the number of discoveries continually taking place of metallic
masses which, from their locality and peculiar chemical composition,
could only be derived from some extra-terrestrial source. The great
size also of many of these masses entirely precludes the possibility
of their having been placed by human agency in the positions they have
been found to occupy--sometimes on the surface of the earth, but just
as frequently buried a few feet in the ground.

{540}

Thus the traveller Pallas found, in 1749, at Abakansk, in Siberia, the
mass of meteoric iron, weighing 1,680 lb., now in the Imperial Museum
at St. Petersburg. Another, lying on the plain of Tucuman, near
Otumpa, in South America, has been estimated, by measurement, to weigh
no less than 33,600 lb., or about fifteen tons; and one added last
year to the splendid collection of meteorites in the British Museum
weighs rather more than three and a half tons. It was found at
Cranboume, near Melbourne, and was purchased by a Mr. Bruce, with a
view to his presenting it to the British Museum, when, through some
misunderstanding, it was discovered that one half of it had been
already promised to the museum at Melbourne. In order, therefore, to
save it from any such mutilation, the trustees of our national museum
acquired and transferred to the authorities of the Melbourne
collection a smaller mass which had been sent in 1862 to the
International Exhibition. It weighed about 3,000 lb., and had been
found near Melbourne, in the immediate vicinity of the great
meteorite. The latter was then forwarded entire to London. In the
British Museum may also be seen a small fragment of an aërolite,
originally weighing 191 lb., which from time immemorial had been lying
at Elbogen, near Carlsbad, in Bohemia, and had always borne the
legendary appellation of "_der verwünschte Burggraf_," or the
enchanted Burgrave. The remainder of this mass is preserved in the
Imperial collection at Vienna. In Great Britain only two meteoric
masses (not seen to fall) have hitherto been discovered; one was found
about forty years ago near Leadhills, in Scotland; the other in 1861,
at Newstead, in Roxburghshire.

Several instances have at different times occurred in which stones
like aërolites have been found, and prized accordingly, until their
real nature was demonstrated by the aid of chemical analysis. One
valuable specimen, found a few years ago, was shown to have derived
its origin amongst the _scoriae_ of an iron foundry; another, picked
up in the Isle of Wight, turned out to be a nodule of iron pyrites,
similar in every respect to those which abound in the neighboring
chalk cliffs; and lastly, some aërolites of a peculiarly glassy
appearance were found shortly after, of which it may, perhaps, suffice
to say that the scene of this discovery was--Birmingham.

When we come to examine the composition of meteoric stones, we find in
various specimens a great diversity in their chemical structure. Iron
is the metal most invariably present, usually accompanied by a
consider percentage of nickel and cobalt; also five other metals,
chromium, copper, molybdenum, manganese, and tin; but of all these
iron is that which largely preponderates, forming sometimes as much as
ninety-six parts in the hundred. Rare instances have, however, been
recorded where the proportion of iron has sunk so low as to form only
two percent, and the deficiency thus caused has been made up by a
larger admixture of some earthy mineral, such as augite, hornblende,
or olivine. Other ingredients, like carbon, sulphur, alumina, etc.,
are also found to enter, in different proportions, into the
composition of aërolites; the total number all chemical elements
observed in them up to this present date the nineteen or twenty. It
has been well remarked by an able writer, that no _new_ substance has
hitherto come to us from without; and thus we find that all these
nineteen or twenty elements are precisely similar to those which are
distributed throughout the rocks and minerals of our earth; the
essential difference between the two classes of compounds--celestial
and terrestrial--being seen most clearly in the respective methods in
which the component parts are admixed.

In the outward appearance aërolites there is one characteristic so
constant that, out of the many hundred examples that have been
recorded, one only (as far as we can ascertain) has {541} been wanting
in it. We refer to the black fused crust or rind with which the
surface of meteoric stones is covered. It usually extends not more
than a few tenths of an inch into the substance of the stone, and is
supposed to result from the extreme rapidity with which they descend
into the oxygen of our atmosphere, causing them to undergo a slight
and partial combustion, which, however, from the short time
necessarily occupied in their descent, has not sufficient time to
penetrate beyond the surface. On cutting and polishing the stones, if
the smooth face is treated with nitric acid, it will in many cases be
found to exhibit lines and angular markings, commonly known by the
name of "widmannsted figures." These are tracings of imperfect
crystals, while the broad intermediate spaces, preserving their
polish, point out those portions of the stone which contain a larger
proportion of nickel than the rest of the mass. We may here add that
the noise said at times to accompany the fall of aërolites, does not
appear to be a constant characteristic, nor does the cause or exact
nature of it seem able to be definitely specified.

In conclusion, we cannot do better than advise those of our readers
who desire further information on this subject to take the earliest
opportunity--if they have not done so already--of paying a visit to
the magnificent collection of meteoric stones, contained in several
glass cases at the end of the mineral gallery at the British Museum.
The catalogue for the year 1856 gave a list of between 70 and 80
specimens; in 1863 this number had increased to 216, mainly through
the energy of the curator, Mr. Maskelyne; and since that date there
have been several further additions. Chief among continental museums
may be mentioned the Imperial collection at Vienna, as possessing a
series of specimens remarkable alike for their size and importance.

--------

From Good Words.


DELIVERANCE.


  As some poor captive bird, too weak to fly,
  Still lingers in its open cage, so I
            My slavery own.
  For evil makes a prison-house within;
  The gloom of sin, and sorrow born of sin.
            Doth weigh me down.
  Ah! Christ, and wilt not thou regard my sighs,
  Long wakeful hours, and lonely miseries,
            And hopes forlorn?
  Let not my fainting soul be thus subdued.
  Nor leave thy child in darkened solitude.
            All night to mourn!

  He hears my prayer! the dreary night is done,
  I feel the soft air and the blessed sun.
            With heavenly beams.
  He comes, my Lord! in raiment glistening white.
  From pastures golden in the morning light
            And crystal streams.
  O let me come to thee!--from this dark place--
  And see my gentle Shepherd face to face,
            And hear his voice.
  So shall these bitter tears no longer flow,
  And thou shalt teach my secret heart to know
            Thy sacred joys!

--------

{542}


ORIGINAL.


WHAT CAME OF A LAUGH ON A CHRISTMAS EVE.


"Beg your pardon, sir," said I, as soon as I could compose myself
sufficiently to speak; "I couldn't help it."

"Glad to hear it. Just what I want. I was debating with myself whether
it was sure for a laugh. I am looking for things that will make one
laugh; in short, buying up causes for laughter on a Christmas day.
There can be no doubt, you think, about this being funny?"

"Not a bit of it," said I.

"Well, I'll have one for every basket, then," said the old gentleman,
his eyes twinkling with delight, as he danced the toy up and down. It
was one of those jointed wooden monkeys that by means of a slide
performs the most comical evolutions around the top of a pole.

"You see," continued he, "I cannot always trust my own judgment.
There's no credit in my laughing, bless your heart. I'd be a monster,
yes, a monster, my dear sir, if I didn't. I'm just like this monkey as
you see him now in this position, ready to go over the other side with
the slightest provocation. I have everything that heart can wish, sir,
to laugh at and be happy; but they, poor dears, they are so far on the
minus side of merriment, as well they may be, that it takes a little
something extra, you see, to get a good hearty squeal out of them."

I became at once intensely interested in the "poor dears" alluded to.
The sight of the old gentleman was enough to make one do unheard-of
feats of heroism in favor of any person or thing of which he might
take the least notice. I ventured to suppose that they had lost
something or somebody lately, with the intention of offering my hand
or purse as the case might be.

"Can't say that they have," he replied, rubbing his shiny bald head.
"Being generally on the minus side of everything, including laughter,
they haven't anything to lose which you or I might think worth
keeping, except their lives, and somehow I think they've got used to
losing even them pretty comfortably."

I was perplexed, and muttered, "Curious sort of people, those."

"But interesting, you'll allow?" said he.

I replied that I had no doubt of it; and I meant it, for so charming
and open-hearted was this old gentlemen, that I was ready to subscribe
unhesitatingly to any asseveration he might be pleased to make;
"but--" I added, about to express my ignorance of the individuals in
question, when he interrupted me.

"Why--but? My Minnie, the Darling of the World and the Sunshine of my
life" (expressing the titles of that person in the largest capitals),
"and I held an ante-Christmas council this morning, and it was
proposed by the president, that is myself, and seconded by the said
Darling of the World and Sunshine of my life, and carried by an
overwhelming majority, including Bob, who said he went in for anything
good, that buts were unparliamentary when Christmas was concerned; and
so we called the roll, twenty in all, and there being no buts, they
all stood unchallenged, making twenty baskets, and now as many monkeys
to go in them. What do you think of it! Capital, wasn't it?"

I was certain it was, and was prepared to go any odds in its favor.

"What's more," he added, "they are going privately."

{543}

Being committed beyond all explanation, I said I was glad to hear that
too, "if Miss Minnie approves." This last supposition I made with a
deprecating cough, not being quite sure of the relation which the old
gentleman bore to the Darling of the World and the Sunshine of his
life.

"It was her own proposal," was his rejoinder, "and you can't imagine
what an immense relief it was to me too. It is more than I can stand
to get through with the "thank ye sir's," and the "much obliged's" and
the "long life to your honor's." I'm a baby, sir, in their presence,
and by the time the distribution is made I'm a spectacle of
unmitigated woe, as if I'd been to as many funerals as there are
baskets. I remember that as I was coming out from a widow and five
children, last Christmas, that rascal Bob saw me wiping my eyes, and
says he, 'Most of 'em dead, sir?' 'No, Bob,' says I, 'it's the smoke,
I suppose; they've a precious smoky chimney.' But when we got to the
next place--let me see--oh! yes, a man with a broken leg, the
scoundrel says to me, as he handed out the basket, 'Now, let us bury
another one, sir.' Not bad for, was it? I had such a good laugh on
each pair of stairs beforehand that I got through that one pretty
comfortably But it was a glorious proposal of my Minnie's, was it not,
that these should go privately? for we'll sit at home, and check them
off as they go in, for I've arranged that the messenger shall deliver
them by the watch, sir, and we'll imagine their surprise and their
happy faces, and the bringing out of the monkeys, and then we'll have
a roar and be jolly, and get rid of the thank ye's and all the rest of
it that chokes up a man's throat and turns him into a born baby." And
here the good-hearted old gentleman, in the fulness of his delight,
caused the monkey in his hand to perform a series of rapid gymnastics
over the top of his pole, beyond the powers of any monkey that ever
lived. He presented such a comical appearance in doing this that I
burst into another hearty laugh in which he as heartily joined.

"It is irresistibly amusing," said I, meaning the monkey.

"I knew it would be," he returned, his mind running upon the happy
scheme by which he might prevent his left hand knowing the deeds of
the right; "we will have twenty merry Christmas laughs all rolled into
one. There I'll be, as it were, on this side," here he took a position
on the floor opposite me, "and my Darling over there, as it were you,"
a distinction I acknowledged by a profound bow, "and Bob standing
behind her chair, as that rocking-horse stands behind you; and then,
watch in hand, we'll check them off: Number One, Widow Bums, two small
children; Number Two, Susy Bell, orphan girl, works in a carpet
factory and supports her two orphan sisters; Number Three, old Granny
Mullen, with consumptive son and three grand-children, and so on; and
there we'll have them all right before us, and they knowing nothing
about it (there's the beauty of it, all due to that blessed Darling of
the World and Sunshine of my life), and out will come the joint of
meat, ready cooked, and the mince-pie, and the plum-pudding with a
dozen of silver quarter dollars in each one, and the shoes and the
stockings, and I don't know what else besides, packed away by my
Darling's own sweet little hands, and last of all the monkey with a
label around his neck, with an inscription, say, for instance, 'From
Nobody in particular, with best wishes for a Merry Christmas.' There
you have it," added he, waving the monkey triumphantly in the air,
"and won't it be grand?"

"I'd give the world to see it," I exclaimed, quite carried away by the
old gentleman's enthusiastic manner. Just then the keeper of the
toy-shop handed me a package of marbles, tops, jewsharps, a pocket
spy-glass, and a few other things of a like nature calculated to make
glad the heart of {544} boys, which I had purchased for my little
nephew, Willie, in the country.

"This for you, Mr. Holiday; but if you wish, I'll send it around to
the doctor's," said the toy-vender.

"Lord bless my heart and soul!" exclaimed the old gentleman, seizing
me suddenly by both hands. "Not Alfred Holiday is it?"

"That is my name," said I.

"Nephew of Dr. Ben?"

"Nephew of Dr. Ben," I repeated.

"And how long have you been in the city?"

"About a week," said I. "I came up to spend Christmas with Uncle Ben
and Aunt Mary."

"And to take a look in at the Owl's Retreat, No. 9 Harmony place, of
course?"

I intimated my ignorance of the Retreat in question, and of my not
having the pleasure, etc.

"My house, man, my house," said he, shaking my hands up and down. "Dr.
Ben and I are old acquaintances; in fact, ever since my Minnie was--I
beg your pardon," added he, suddenly recollecting himself, and
producing a card from his vest pocket. "Name of Acres, Thomas Acres,
who, with the compliments of his daughter Minnie to the same effect,
_will_ be--_most_ happy--_to_ see--Mr. Alfred--_Holiday_--on
to-morrow _morning_--to _join_ in--_the_ grand--checking off--_of_
the--twenty baskets--_and_ their--contents--including--monkeys--and
of course stay to dinner."

If the old gentleman's cordial manner had any weight in deciding my
acceptance of the invitation, it must be confessed that the curiosity
to see the "Darling of the World and the Sunshine of his life" added
not a little to it. Promising to be on hand at No. 9 before eleven
o'clock, at which hour the checking off was to begin, I bade my
new-found friend good-morning and went home.

But it was very provoking not to know more of the "Darling and
Sunshine" This is him him him him question. Standing in such a light
to such a father, she was, of course, a peerless being. Age--say,
twenty. Height--medium, I am five feet ten.  10 Blonde or
brunette--difficult to determine. Sunshine would seem to indicate
blonde, yet darling might be either. Good, amiable, witty,
accomplished--not a doubt of it. Beautiful name too, said I, as I
scribbled it in every style of the caligraphic art, thereby destroying
no small amount of my uncle's property in fine gilt-edged note paper.
Has she suitor already. Hoity-toity, Mr. Alfred Holiday, you are
castle-building on a small amount of material, it seems to me; and if
she have,  what affair is that of yours? a question which that
imaginative young gentlemen finding himself unable to solve fell into
a fit of despondency, and went to bed in a despairing state of mind.

Punctual to the appointed hour I walked into Harmony place, a quiet
unpretentious street, and open the gate of No. 9. There had been both
a rain and heavy frost in the night, and the trees and shrubs, clothed
in a complete armor of ice, sparkled and glittered in the bright
sunshine. Unfortunately, the ground shared in this universal covering,
and being under the impression that someone was looking from behind
the curtains, who might possibly be the Darling of the World and the
Sunshine of the life of Mr. Thomas Acres, I insanely endeavored to
walk upon the glassy pavement with careless ease, as if it were the
most ordinary ground in the world. I now advise my bitterest enemy to
try it. In an unguarded moment my feet slipped, and I came down in the
most unpleasant manner into a sitting posture upon the ground. I
thought I heard the sound of a clear ringing laugh following
immediately upon my ignominious fall. I hoped it was from No. 10 or
No. 8; yet my heart misgave me as Mr. Acres, with a half dozen
superfluous bows, divided between his daughter and myself, introduced
me, and a pair of dark, deep eyes, in which I thought I detected a
merry twinkle, quietly but warmly acknowledged my presence.

{545}

"Mr. Alfred Holiday, my child, our old friend, Doctor Holiday's
nephew; Mr. Holiday, my daughter Minnie, the Darling of the World and
the Sunshine of my life, as I have already told you, and the Dove of
this Owl's Retreat."

I was "most happy," of course, and wished them both, with a bow to
Miss Minnie, a Merry Christmas.

"We were getting afraid, Mr. Holiday, lest we should be obliged to
begin without you," said that bright-eyed and altogether beautiful
young lady, in a tone of voice which I afterward characterized in a
violently worded poem, written just before midnight, as 'rippling
diamonds' and 'dropping pearls.'

"Afraid!--without _me_?" I exclaimed, placing a most unjustifiable
emphasis upon the personal pronoun. "I am highly flattered."

"Not at all; my father tells me he feels deeply indebted to you in
assisting him in the choice of some toys designed for the children."

"For--for--laughing," stammered I. "Do you think, Miss Acres, that one
might be indebted to another for a laugh?" I was thinking of my stupid
fall on the ice, and began to regret my having accredited to No. 8 or
10 those sounds of merriment which reached my ears.

"If one gives good cause," she replied, with the quietest and most
provoking of smiles. The deep, dark eyes twinkled again, and Nos. 8
and 10 stood acquitted.

"Come, Mr. Holiday," said Mr. Acres, "let us take an inspection of the
forces. Wagon is loaded, strange man hired, with a watch in his
pocket, off he goes; whence he comes or whither he goes, nobody knows.
Ha! ha! Minnie, my dear, put me down one, your ancient Owl has struck
a poetic vein; no time to register it, however. Come along; while I am
immortalizing myself, twenty hungry families are waiting for a
Christmas dinner they don't expect to get, and their mouths watering
for plum-puddings and mince pies that they have not the most distant
expectation of"--and the good old soul led the way into the hall, and
thence into the court yard, at the entrance of which stood a large
covered furniture-cart, filled to over-flowing with the wonderful
twenty baskets destined to distribute happiness among as many poor and
suffering families, and make their hearts merry on Christmas day. Each
basket was labelled with its direction, number, and time of delivery.

"Now, John," said Mr. Acres to the driver as he mounted to his place
on the cart, "remember, you are born deaf and dumb, can't hear a word
nor even say 'Merry Christmas,' until you come back here and report."

"Lave me alone, sir," replied John with a broad grin, "the fun shan't
be spiled for me."

"He enters into it, he enters into it, you see," said Mr. Acres,
addressing Minnie and myself. "What's the time, John, by yours?"

"Near eleven, sir."

"Time's up, then.

  "One, two, three, and off you go.
   Twenty baskets piled in a row:
   Ask me no questions, for I don't know.

Positively, my darling, there's something inspiring in the air this
morning."

John cracked his whip, and the cart moved out of the yard, turned down
the street, and was soon out of sight. Mr. Acres was a perfect picture
of happiness as he stood gazing at the departing vehicle, rubbing his
hands with delight, and his full, round face beaming with intense
satisfaction. As I glanced at Minnie I saw her eyes filled with tears
of love and pride as she watched the movements of her father. Turning
about suddenly he noticed her emotion, upon which he went up to her,
and placing a hand on her either cheek said with mock gravity:

{546}

"Miss Minnie Acres, the Darling of the World and the Sunshine of my
life, is hereby invited to attend the funeral of twenty baskets
without further notice. Ha! ha! you recollect Bob, you know; and no
time to lose either," he added, taking Minnie's hand in his right and
mine in his left, and turning toward the parlor; "so let us get at it,
my dears; excuse the liberty, Mr. Holiday, I'm in a glorious humor,
and it's Christmas day, and here we are, and here's  the list, so sit
ye down; and Bob, Bob! you rascal, where are you?"

The rascal thus vociferously called for responded immediately by
presenting at the door a form about four feet in height, of the rarest
obesity, clothed in a dark-gray suit, evidently denned for the first
time, and holding with both hands the stiffest and hardest of hats.
There was no motion of his lips visible, but a sound was heard as if
it proceeded from the inside of a cotton-bale, which was understood to
mean--

"Here I am, sir; respects, gentlemen and ladies, and a Merry
Christmas."

"Pretty time of day for that" said Mr. Acres, "as if a body were just
out of bed, and hadn't heard Mass yet. Oh! I see," he continued,
glancing at Bob's new clothes, which I have no doubt were the delivery
of an order from T. Acres, Esq., made that very morning by Tibbits &
Son, fashionable tailors. "Well, Merry Christmas, Bob; but don't stand
bowing there all day"--which feat that individual seemed to be vainly
attempting to execute, but could not get through with to his entire
satisfaction--"come in, and stand there by Miss Minnie, and listen to
the checking off, and we'll see if it's all right as a trivet, as it
should be. Lord! I'd eat no dinner if there was one left out."

The "checking off" commenced immediately, the time being up for the
delivery of the first basket. Nothing could exceed the delight of the
old gentleman as Minnie read from the list the names of the parties
who at that moment received the basket, their places of residence, and
a detailed account of the articles sent. Each basket contained a
sufficient supply for a hearty Christmas dinner for the family,
jellies, wines, and other delicacies for the sick, some articles of
clothing, and last of all the toy monkey.

"They've all got one," said Mr. Acres, chuckling with glee as monkey
Number One was mentioned; "but we must do it regular and put them all
down, or I should be afraid we overlooked one, which isn't likely,
however, for they are all down at the bottom of each basket, and I
with them there myself."

One by one the baskets were checked off, Mr. Acres with watch in hand
calling "time," and Minnie reading thereupon the names of the parties
and contents of the basket allotted to them. We very soon realized the
old gentleman's promise that we would have a roar, for as the
distribution went on the merriment increased, as all considered it
their bounden duty to laugh louder and longer at the mention of the
monkey of the basket then checked off than they did at the last one.
Even Bob, whose risible powers seemed to be rather limited, and which
were evidently under still greater restraint by reason of the
additional dignity which became the new outfit, succeeded in
increasing the hilarity of the occasion by the comical manner he
performed his appointed duty in the checking off, which consisted in
answering "right" when the number and names were announced, and
submitting any information obtained of the parties in question through
the intervention of a certain Mrs. McQuirey, whose "absence at the
present delightful reunion," explained Mr. Acres, "was owing to the
numerous duties with which that excellent lady had burdened herself."
These duties, I afterward learned, consistent in making a daily
morning visit to a number of sick poor people who Mr. Acres had taken
under his fostering care. Bob's information was remarkable for its
brevity of expression as well as for its peculiarly ventriloquistic
character, due to the extraordinary amount of adipose matter which
enveloped his organs of speech. {547} Of basket Number Five, for
instance, he said, "Bad--husband goes it every Saturday
night--children thin as broom handles." Or Number eight he reported:
"Measles--shanty--rags scare--allers hungry." Of Number Ten,
"Wus--man broken leg--wife no work--ain't fit neither if there was
millions." Of Number Twenty, the last, having by this time exhausted
his stock of adjectives, he summed up his report thus: "Extremely wust
o' the hall lot--widder--nine mortal bags o' hungry bones--and what
will you do with 'em?"

"Do with them!" exclaimed Mr. Acres, "we'll have Mrs. McQuirey look
them up, Bob, eh? Minnie, dear, take a note of Number Twenty, that
basket is only a bite."

The baskets being all checked off, Bob was ordered to produce
forthwith a bottle of wine and glasses. "Now that we've got through
with it comfortably," said Mr. Acres, "we'll drink all their healths,
and wish 'em a Merry Christmas," which was done, all standing.
"Hoping," continued that Prince of Charity, glass in hand, and
following toward the four points of the compass, as if the whole
twenty families were arranged about him in a circle, "that you may all
have many happy returns of the season, and never know a Christmas that
is not a merry one."

Never was a toast drunk with purer enthusiasm or a heartier good-will.
Believing it to be the part of some one to cheer the sentiment, and
not seeing any of the parties present who might with great propriety
perform that duty, Bob took it upon himself to act their proxy, which
he accordingly did by waving his new hat in a circle and giving three
muffled "Hoo-rays" from the cotton bale.

In a few minutes John the messenger returned. He was at once
introduced to the parlor, where he gave a glowing account of his
errand.

"The shammin' deaf an' dumb was thryin' to me sowl above all. It wint
aginst me not to be able to say the top o' the mornin' to ye, or aven
God save all here on a Christmas dhay to the crathers, an' the Lord
forgive me for peepin' an' a listenin' whin they thought I was deaf as
a post, but it was in a good cause. It tuk the tears out o' me two
eyes, so it did, to hear thim wondherin and prayin 'and a blessin'
yez, and a cryin' for joy, and to see the childer dancin' the monkeys
like mad. Och! but it's a glory to be a rich man like yer honor. Me
mouth wathers whin I think o' the threasures ye're a hapin' up above."

"Bob," interrupted Mr. Acres, shifting uneasily in his seat, "you had
better get out the crape hat-bands, for I see a funeral coming round
the corner."

"A funeral is it?" said John. "May it be a thousand years afore it
shtops forninst yer honor's doors."

"Thank ye, John; thank ye," said Mr. Acres, suddenly rising and going
to the window, where he stood apparently deeply interested in the view
of a blank wall and some smoky chimney-pots before him.

"Whin _his_ day comes," continued John, loud enough to be overheard by
Mr. Acres, "what a croonin' and a philaluin' thim poor crathers will
be makin'. Sure, their tears will be droopin' like diamonds into his
grave."

This was too much for Mr. Acres, who turned around, presenting a
picture of inconsolable grief. It was only after two or three violent
efforts to clear his throat of some unusually large obstacle which
appeared to have stuck there that he succeeded in saying:

"Merry Christmas, John! Merry Christmas! You will find a plum-pudding,
John, waiting down-stairs," and immediately began another survey of
the blank wall and chimney-pots, making at the same time several
abortive attempts to whistle.

{548}

John took the hint, and bowed himself out of the room. A dead silence
ensued upon his departure, which no one appeared to find sufficient
reason to break. In vain did I rack my brains to find an appropriate
remark, but the words would not arrange themselves into a grammatical
sentence. As I chanced to lift my eyes to the full-orbed face of Bob,
standing bolt upright behind Minnie's chair, I became convinced at
once of the fact that I had been intently and impudently staring at
that Darling of the World for some time, whose beautiful downcast
face, half shaded by a profuse cluster of raven curls I thought might
engage the attention of any individual, say for an unlimited term of
years. Embarrassed by this discovery, I took up the basket list and
became at once deeply absorbed in its perusal. Unfortunately, the
paper appeared to be possessed of some diabolical fascination which
prevented my looking away from it or opening my mouth. How long this
state of things might have continued is difficult to say, had not Bob
broken the silence by a question, addressed, as it seemed, rather to
mankind in general then to any particular individual within hearing:

"This ain't Christmas is it?"

"Yes, it is, you rascal," replied Mr. Acres; who, being either
satisfied with his inspection of the blank wall and the chimney-pots,
or had concluded to defer their more minute examination to another
time, at that moment came forward to the table. "Go and order up lunch
directly, Minnie, my darling; Mr. Holiday will give us the pleasure of
his company, and also to dinner. Meanwhile, Mr. Holiday will be glad
to hear you sing, my dear, and I will go and have Number Twenty looked
after; that basket was only a bite, only a bite."

Mr. Alfred Holiday immediately led Miss Minnie Acres to the piano,
where he listened with rapt attention to that young lady's singing of
Miss Hemans's "O lovely voices of the sky;" upon which Mr. Alfred
Holiday made the stupid remark that he had never heard any one of
those "voices of the sky" before that day. Afterward Miss Minnie Acres
and Mr. Alfred Holiday looked over a portfolio of prints together,
when that young gentleman discovered that all his fingers were thumbs,
and besought Miss Minnie Acres to hold one of the prints for him,
when, looking at her and at the same time pretending to examine the
picture with a critical eye, he declared he never saw anything so
beautiful in his life, which irrelevant observation caused Miss Minnie
Acres to say to Mr. Alfred Holiday, "Why! you're not looking at it!"
whereupon that gentlemen became speechless and blushed from the roots
of his hair to the depths of his best necktie. Of the events of the
rest of the day Mr. Alfred Holiday distinctly remembers the following
facts. Lunch being announced, Mr. Alfred Holiday took Miss Minnie
Acres to the table, acted in the most insane manner while there, and
lead Miss Minnie Acres back to the parlor; that he played backgammon
with Miss Minnie Acres, and doubtless left an impression on the mind
of that young lady that he was utterly ignorant of the game; that he
accompanied Miss Minnie Acres to Vespers, and returned with her; that
he took Miss Minnie Acres to dinner, during which a gentleman, who to
the best of his belief was Mr. Thomas Acres, told him several times
that he, Mr. Alfred Holiday, ate nothing, a fact of which that
gentleman was not aware; that after the cloth was removed Mr. Alfred
Holiday sat staring at an empty chair opposite him, for the possession
of which he could cheerfully have impoverished himself and gone upon
the wide, wide world; that certain musical sounds proceeded from the
direction of the parlor, Mr. Alfred Holiday asseverated in the
strongest terms to be "divine;" that upon his return to the parlor he
was only restrained by the presence of a third person from throwing
himself upon his knees and explaining: "Thou art the Darling of the
World and the Sunshine of my life," but which he nevertheless repeated
{549} in his mind an innumerable number of times; in a word, that Mr.
Alfred Holiday fell head over ears in love with Miss Minnie Acres, and
made of all, which up to the present writing he has religiously, that
if she would accept his hand and heart, which she did a few weeks
after, he would send her twenty baskets of provisions to as many poor
families every Christmas Eve, as a thank-offering, and a grateful
remembrance of the hour when he laughed, and thereby one the most
beautiful and most faithful wife that a man ever have.

----------


From The London Society.

A CHRISTMAS DREAM.


  A Pilgrim to the West returned, whose palm-branch, drenched in dew,
  Shook off bright drops like childhood's tears when childhood's heart is new,
  Stole up the hills at eventide, like mist in wintry weather,
  Where locked in dream-like trance I lay, at rest among the heather.

  The red ferns, answering to his tread; sent up a savor sweet;
  The yellow gorse, like Magian gold, glowed bright about his feet:
  The waving brooms, the winter blooms, each happy voice in air,
  Grew great with life and melody, as if a Christ stood there.

  Unlike to mortal man was he. His brow rose broad and high:
  The peace of heaven was on his lip, the God-light in his eye;
  And rayed with richer glory streamed, through night and darkness shed,
  To crown that holy Pilgrim's brow, the one star overhead.

  Long gazing on that staff he bore, beholding how it grew
  With sprouts of green, with buds between, and young leaves ever new.
  The marvels of the Eastern land I bade him all unfold.
  And thus to my impassioned ears the wondrous tale he told:

  "Each growth upon that sacred soil where one died not in vain,
  Though crushed and shed, though seeming dead, in beauty lives again:
  The branching bough the knife may cleave, the root the axe may sever,
  But on the ground his presence lighted, nothing dies for ever.

  "Where once amid the lowly stalls fell soft the Virgin's tear,
  The littered straw 'neath children's feet turns to green wheat in ear.
  The corn he pluck'd on Sabbath days, though ne'er it feels the sun,
  Though millions since have trod the field, bears fruit for every one.

  "The palms that on his way were strewn wave ever in the air;
  From clouded earth to sun-bright heaven they form a leafy stair.
  In Cana's bowers the love of man is touched by the divine;
  And snows that fall on Galilee have still the taste of wine.

  "Where thy lost locks, poor Magdalen! around his feet were rolled,
  Still springs in woman's worship-ways the gracious Mary-gold:
  Men know when o'er that bowed down head they hear the angels weeping,
  The purer spirit is not dead--not dead, but only sleeping.

{550}

  "Aloft on blackened Calvary no more the shadows lower:
  Where fell the piercing crown of thorns, there blooms a thorn in flower.
  Bright on the prickled holy-tree and mistletoe' appear,
  Reflecting rays of heavenly shine, the blod-drop and the tear.

  "The sounding rocks that knew his tread wake up each dead abyss,
  Where echoes caught from higher worlds ring gloriously in this;
  And, leaning where his voice once filled the temple where he taught,
  The listener's eyes grew spirit-full--full with a heavenly thought."

  The Pilgrim ceased. My heart beat fast. I marked a change of hue;
  As if those more than mortal eyes a soul from God looked through.
  Then rising slow as angels rise, and soaring faint and far,
  He passed my bound of vision, robed in glory, as a star.

  Strange herald voices filled the air: glad anthems swelled around:
  The wakened winds rose eager-voiced, and lapsed in dreamy sound.
  It seemed all birds that wintered far, drawn home by some blessed power,
  Made music in the Christmas woods, mistaking of the hour.

  A new glad spirit raptured me! I woke to breathe the morn
  With heart fresh-strung to charity--as though a Christ were born.
  Then knew I how each earth-born thought, though tombed in clay it seem,
  It bursts the sod, it soars to God, transfigured in a dream.

                                                ELEANORA L. HERVEY

--------

From the Month.

VICTIMS OF DOUBT.


It is not the fashion at present to scoff at Christianity, or to make
an open profession of infidelity. Ponderous treatises to prove that
revealed religion is an impossibility, and coarse blasphemies against
holy things, are equally out of date. Yet to men of earnest
convictions, whether holding the whole or only some portions of
revealed truth, the moral atmosphere is not reassuring. The pious
Catholic, the Bible-loving Protestant, and the hybrid of the last
phase of Tractarianism, are alike distrustful of the smooth aspect of
controversy and the calm surface of the irreligious element. There is
something worse than bigotry or mischief, and that is skepticism. And,
if we may judge from what we hear and read, it is this to which most
schools of thought outside the Catholic Church are rapidly drifting,
if they have not already reached it, and into which restless and
disloyal Catholics are in danger of being precipitated. An answer made
to an old Oxford friend by one who was once with him in the van of the
Tractarian movement, but did not accompany him into the fold, "I agree
with you, that if there is a divine revelation, the Roman Catholic
Church is the ordained depository of it; but this is an uncertainty
which I cannot solve," would probably express the habitual state of
mind of a fearfully {551} large number of the more thoughtful of our
countrymen, and the occasional reflection of many more who do not
often give themselves time to think. And to the multitudes who are
plunging or gliding into doubts the Catholic system, which there
unhappy training has made it one of their first principles to despise
for detest, has not even presented itself as an alternative.

The current literature of the day, which is mostly framed to suit the
taste of the market, and reacts again in developing that taste further
in the same direction, is pre-eminently, not blasphemous, or
anti-Catholic, or polemical, but sceptical. The following description
of the periodical press by the Abbé Louis Baunard, in his recent
publication,  [Footnote 168] might seem to have been written for
London instead of Paris:

  [Footnote 168: Le Doute ses Victimes dans le Siècle présent, par M.
  l'Abbé Louis Baunard. Paris.]

"With some rare exceptions, you will not find any rude scoffing,
violent expressions, unfashionable cynicism, harsh systems, or
exclusive intolerance. Yet is not controversy that is the business of
these writers, but criticism. They deal in expositions and
suppositions, but almost always without deciding anything. It is a
principle with them that there are only shades of difference between
the most contradictory propositions; and the reader becomes accustomed
to see these shades in such questions as those which relate to the
personality of God, the divinity of Jesus Christ, and the supernatural
generally. This does not hinder these men from calling themselves
Christians, in the vague sense of a loose Christianity, which allows
the names of ancient beliefs to remain, while it destroys their
substance. They do not assault the old religion in front, but silently
undermine the foundations on which it rests, and carry on ingenious
parallels by the side of revealed truth, till some conclusion emerges
which utterly subverts it, without having appeared to be intentionally
directed against it. There is one review, the most widely circulated
of all, in the same number of which an article dearly atheistical will
be found by the side of another article breathing the most correct
orthodoxy, and very much surprised to see itself in such company. Such
concessions to truth, which are made only now and then, serve to give
the publication that makes them a certain appearance of impartiality,
and thus to accredit error, and to lay one more snare for the reader."

We may be inclined, on a cursory perusal of such periodicals as The
Saturday Review, to indulge gleefully in the laughter excited by the
ludicrous aspect in which some pompous prelate or fussy evangelical
preacher is presented; or to admire the acute and seemingly candid
dissection, at one time, of a Protestant scheme of evidences, at
another, of an infidel philosophy; or to rejoice in the substitution
of decorous calmness for rancor and raving in handling Catholic truth.
But when we study a series of such publications, and notice how
systematically all earnest convictions are made to show a weak or
ridiculous side, and all proofs of Christianity to appear defective,
and how, under a smooth surface of large-minded impartiality, there
beats a steady tide of attack upon all supernatural virtue and all
supernatural truth, our hearts must needs ache to think of the effects
of such teaching on multitudes of imperfectly grounded minds. In the
words of the author to whom we have referred: "Right and wrong, true
and false, yes and no, meet and jostle each other, and are mistaken
for each other in minds bewildered and off their guard, and mostly
incapable of discrimination: till at length, lost in these
cross-roads, tired of systems and of contradictions, and not knowing
in what direction to find light, all but the most energetic sit down
and rest in doubt, as in the best wisdom and the safest position." But
to sit down in doubt is either to abdicate the highest powers of a
reasonable being, or to admit an enemy that will use them as
instruments of torture. Except for {552} souls of little intellectual
activity, or wholly steeped in sense, this sitting down in doubt is
like sitting down in a train that is moving out of the station with
the steam up and no engine-driver, or in a boat that is drifting out
of harbor into a stormy sea.

The Abbé Baunard has collected the experiences of some of these
reckless and storm-tossed wanderers into a painfully interesting
volume. He has selected from the chief sceptical philosophers and
poets of the present century those who, in private journals or
autobiographical sketches, have made the fullest disclosures of the
working of their own minds, and has let them speak for themselves. He
calls them "victims of doubt," and bids us listen with compassion to
their bitter lamentations over the wreck of the past, and their gloomy
anticipations of the future, and to the cries of pain and shame which
seem forced out of them, even amidst their proudest boasts of
independence and most resolute rejections of revealed truth. But,
although an expression here or there may be unguarded, he
distinguishes very clearly between pitying and excusing these victims.
He reminds us that compassion for the sufferings entailed by doubt
cannot absolve from the guilt of doubt. He protests against the claim
made by sceptics to be regarded as warriors in conflicts in which only
the noble engage, and as scarred with honorable wounds; and against
the notion that to have suffered much in a wrong cause is a guarantee
of sincerity and a title to salvation. He quotes with reprobation the
plea of M. Octave Feuillet: "Ah! despise as much as you choose what is
despicable. But when unbelief suffers, implores, and is respectful, do
you respect it. There are blasphemies, be assured, which are as good
as prayers, and unbelievers who are martyrs. Yes, I firmly believe
that the sufferings of doubt are holy, and that to think of God and to
be always thinking of him, even with despair, is to honor him and to
be pleasing to him." He would not admit the same plea in the more
plausible form and more touching language in which it is urged by Mr.
Froude: "You who look with cold eye on such a one, and lift them up to
heaven, and thank God you are not such as he, and call him hard names,
and think of him as of one who is forsaking a cross, and pursuing
unlawful indulgence, and deserving all good men's reproach! Ah! could
you see down below his heart's surface, could you count the tears
streaming down his cheek, as out through some church-door into the
street come pealing the old familiar notes, and the old psalms which
he cannot sing, the chanted creed which is no longer his creed, and
yet to part with which was worse agony than to lose his dearest
friend; ah! you would deal him lighter measure. What! is not his cup
bitter enough, but that all the good, whose kindness at least, whose
sympathy and sorrow, whose prayers he might have hoped for, that these
must turn away from him as from an offence, as from a thing for bid?
--that he must tread the wine-press alone, calling to God-fearing man
his friend; and this, too, with the sure knowledge that of coldness
least of all he is deserving, for God knows it is no pleasant task
which has been laid on him." The fallacies which are dextrously
interwoven in this passage, that sympathy precludes condemnation, that
intense suffering of any kind sanctities the sufferer, and that the
state of doubt is imposed as a burden and not wilfully incurred and
retained, are refuted out of the mouth of those who resort to them. We
see, indeed, in the records of these victims of doubt, various
circumstances leading to their fall; such as the heathenish state of
the colleges where some of them lost their faith, the antichristian
theories of science and philosophy magisterially propounded to them,
the personal influence of friends who were already committed to
skepticism, poisonous literature thrown in the way, and the excitement
of political revolutions; and, of course, in the case of {553} those
who had not received a Catholic education, the far greater palliation
of the absence of a coherent system of belief. But, at the same time,
we see no less plainly the working of wilful negligence and
presumption in their descent into the abyss, and of wilful pride and
obstinacy in refusing to seek the means of extrication from it. They
are victims of doubt as others are victims of a habit of opium-eating
or gambling; and if we sympathize with them more deeply than with
these latter, it is rather because their anguish is more intense and
more refined than because it is less the harvest of their own sowing.
By the side of those who fell, there were others of the same
sensibility of mind, placed in the same circumstances, exposed to the
same assaults, who stood firm by prayer and humility, and who found in
their faith a provision for all their mental wants, and a fountain of
peace under the heaviest trials. And by the side of those who, having
once made shipwreck of their faith, plunged more and more deeply into
despair of knowing anything with certainty, till they flung away the
life that their own doubts had made an intolerable burden, there were
others equally astray and equally burdened, who worked their way back
to life and peace by the same path of earnest and humble prayer. Some
of these contrasts are very effectively presented by our author, and
others will suggest themselves to his readers.

The victims whose wanderings and sufferings are portrayed in this
volume are Théodore Jouffroy, Maine de Biran, Santa Rosa, Georges,
Farcy, and Edmund Schérer from among the philosophers of the century;
and Lord Byron, Friedrich Schiller, Heinrich von Kleist, and Leopardi
from among the poets; followed by a less detailed account of a group
of French sceptical poets, Alfred de Musset, Henri Heine, Murger,
Gérard de Nerval, and Hégésippe Moreau, whose writings are mostly too
gross for quotation, although enough is given to show that their
experience of the effects of doubt resembled that of the rest. All,
with the exception of M. Schérer, who is the editor of the French
paper Le Temps, have passed into a world where doubt is no longer
possible--two of them by their own hand, and two more by violent
deaths which they had gone to meet rather from weariness of life than
from enthusiasm for the cause for which they fought.

There is only one of the whole number, Maine de Biran, whose death was
thoroughly satisfactory; and he, though certainly to be reckoned among
the victims of doubt, which clouded the best years of his life, and
from which he only very slowly worked his way to freedom, is
introduced rather in the way of contrast to the other philosophers and
especially to Jouffroy. The great difference in his case lay in two
things, that he paid more attention to the moral nature of man, and
did not so wholly subordinate the desire of the good to the search
after the true, and that he was on his guard against that pride of
intellect which we see so rampant in his fellow-philosophers. While
all the most celebrated men of Paris were paying court to him, and
although, even before he had published anything beyond some short
metaphysical treatises, M. Royer Collard cried, "He is the master of
us all," and M. Cousin pronounced him to be the greatest French
metaphysician since Malebranche, his own private reflection was:
"Pride will be the ruin of my life, as long as I do not seek from on
high a spirit to direct mine, or to take its place." Yet it was not
till his fifty-second year, after many years' vain pursuit of truth in
different systems of sensualistic and rationalistic philosophy, and of
happiness first in pleasure and then in study and retirement, that he
set himself resolutely to try surer means. "Not finding," he wrote in
May, 1818, "anything satisfactory either in myself or out of myself,
in the world of my ideas or in that of objects, I have been for some
{554} time past more determined to look for that fixed resting-place
which has become the need of my mind and of my heart, in the notion of
the Absolute, Infinite, and Unchangeable Being. The religious and
moral beliefs which reason does not create, but which are its
necessary basis and support, now present themselves to me as my only
refuge, and I can find no true knowledge anywhere than just there,
where before, with the philosophers, I found only dreams and chimeras.
My point of view has altered with my disposition and moral character."
From this time the progress upward was steady. We find notices in his
journal of earnest prayer, of daily meditation, of study of the
gospels and the Imitation of Christ. Four years of physical suffering
and outward trials deepened the work of conversion, and were passed
with Christian resignation. The last words that he wrote were words of
certainty and peace: "The Christian walks in the presence of God and
with God, by the Mediator whom he has taken as his guide for this life
and the next." The Ami de la Religion of July 24th, 1824, contained
the notice: "Maine de Biran fulfilled his Christian duties in an
edifying manner, and received the sacraments at the hands of his
pastor, the curé of St. Thomas d'Aqnin."

Théodore de Jouffroy, if his life had not been suddenly cut short,
would probably have had the same happiness. After having devoted his
immense powers of mind to the study and dissemination of sceptical
philosophy from 1814 to 1839, when bad health forced him to resign the
professor's chair, he had begun to soften his tone, to speak
respectfully of revealed religion, and to look wistfully and hopefully
to it for the solution of the great problems which it had been the
business and the torture of his life to investigate by the unaided
light of his own intellect. He had conversed with Monseigneur Cart,
the bishop of Nîmes, and had said to him, "I am not now one of those
who think that modern societies can do without Christianity; I would
not write in this sense to-day. You have a grand mission to fulfil,
monseigneur. Ah! continue to teach the gospel well." He took pleasure
in seeing his daughter preparing herself for her first communion; and
speaking about a work of Lamennais to the clergyman who was
instructing her, he said with a deep sigh, "Alas! M. le Curé, all
these systems lead to nothing; better--a thousand times better--one
good act of Christian faith." The curé left his room with good hopes
of his conversion, and in the belief that the faith of his childhood
had come to life again in his part. But before he could see him again,
and put these hopes to the test, Jouffroy expired suddenly and without
previous warning on the 1st of March, 1842.

Two or three of the French poets had time to ask for a priest, or to
admit one when, in the hospitals to which their excesses had brought
them, a Sister of Charity proposed it. Leopardi, outwardly at least
sceptical and gloomy to the last, received a doubtful absolution from
a priest, who came when the dying man was insensible.  [Footnote 169]
To all the rest even as much as this was wanting.

  [Footnote 169: We have used this expression, also aware of the
  letter of Father Scarpa published first in the journal Scienza e
  Fede, and afterward in the eighth addition of Father Curci's Fatti
  ed Argomenti in risposta alle molte parole di V. Gioberti, in which
  he gives an account of Leopardi's recourse to his ministry and
  reconciliation by his means to the church in 1836; not, of course
  because we agree with Gioberti that this simple and modest letter is
  "a tissue of lies and deliberate inventions and a sheer romance from
  beginning to end;" but because Leopardi's letters in the beginning
  of 1837 and his continuance in the composition of his last poem the
  Paralipomeni, the conclusion of which was dictated a few days before
  his death, seems to suggest the melancholy alternative either of a
  feigned conversion or of a relapse into skepticism. He told Father
  Scarpa when he offered himself to be prepared for confession that he
  had been banished from his Father's house; and that he was now
  penitent, and was about to publish papers which would show his
  alterated sentiments. It is amusing to notice that to the staid and
  decorus Quarterly Review, as well as to Gioberti, this was to great
  an opportunity to be lost of reviling the Jesuits. Accordingly, on
  no other ground than  that Father Scarpa repeated _as told him by
  Leopardi_ what his letters contradict, and that he was not quite
  correct in guessing at his age and described his appearance ten
  years after his interview with him, the reviewer indorses Gioberti's
  description, and calls the letter "an instance of audacity beyond
  all common efforts in that kind." The habitual mendacity in
  Leopardi's letters, and his offer, while an unbeliever, to be
  ordained in order to hold a benefice which he intended _after saying
  a few Masses_ to have served by another, make it unfortunately not
  improbable that his conversion was only pretended.]

{555}

We have not space to go into the details of these melancholy
histories; but we must give a few extracts in illustration of the keen
regret with which these victims of doubt look back to the religious
convictions of their youth from the cheerlessness and misery of the
state to which they have reduced themselves, and of the involuntary
homage which, even while refusing to submit to the teaching of the
church, they are forced to pay to it. Here is Jouffroy's reminiscence
of the happy days of faith: "Born of pious parents and in a country
where the Catholic faith was still full of life at the beginning of
this century, I had been early wont to consider man's future and the
care of my own soul the chief business of life, and all my subsequent
education tended to confirm these serious dispositions. For a long
time, the beliefs of Christianity had fully answered to all the wants
and all the anxieties which such dispositions introduce into the soul.
To these questions, which to me were the only questions that ought to
occupy man, the religion of my fathers gave answers, and those answers
I believed, and, thanks to my belief, my present life was clear, and
beyond it I saw the future that was to follow it spread itself out
without a cloud. At ease as to the path that I had to pursue in this
world, at ease as to the goal to which it was to conduct me in the
other, understanding the phases of life and death in which they are
blended, understanding myself, understanding the designs of God for
me, and loving him for the goodness of his designs, I was happy with
the happiness that springs from a firm and ardent faith in a doctrine
which solves all the great questions that can interest man." His
faith, the liveliness of which had been somewhat shaken by an
indiscriminate perusal of modern literature during the latter part of
his classical studies at Dijon, gave way entirely before the lectures
of M. Cousin in the Ecole Normale at Paris, to which he was
transferred in 1814, and the combined influences of flattery and
ridicule with which his sceptical fellow-students there assailed him.
He describes the terrible struggle between "the eager curiosity which
could not withdraw itself from the consideration of objections which
were scattered like dust throughout the atmosphere that he breathed,"
and on the other hand the influences "of his childhood with its poetic
impressions, his youth with its pious recollections, the majesty,
antiquity, and authority of the faith which he had been taught, and
the rising in revolt of the whole memory and imagination against the
incursion of unbelief which wounded them so deeply." His faith was
gone before he realized the loss: some time afterward he thus painted
the horrors of the discovery: "Never shall I forget that evening in
December when the veil that hid my unbelief from myself was rent. I
still hear my footsteps in the bare narrow apartment, in which I
continued walking long after the hour for sleep. I still see that moon
half-veiled by clouds which at intervals lit up the cold window-panes.
The hours of night glided by, and I took no note of them. I was
anxiously following my train of thought, which descended from one
stratum to another toward the depth of my consciousness, and
scattering, one after another, all the illusions which had hitherto
concealed it from me, made its outline every moment more visible. In
vain did I try to cling to these residues of belief as a shipwrecked
sailor to the fragments of his ship; in vain, alarmed at the unknown
void in which I was about to be suspended, I threw myself back for the
last time toward my childhood, my family, my country, all that was
dear and sacred to me: the irresistible current of my thought was too
strong. Parents, family, recollections, beliefs--it forced me to quit
all. The analysis was continued with more obstinacy and more severity
in proportion as it approached its term, {556} and it did not pause
till it had reached it. Then I was aware that in my inmost self there
was no longer anything left standing. It was an appalling moment, and
when, toward morning, I threw myself exhausted on my bed, I seemed to
see my former life, so smiling and so full, effaced, and another
gloomy and desolate life opening behind me in which I was henceforth
to live alone--alone with my fatal thought which had just banished me
thither, and which I was tempted to curse."

A few years after this crisis in Jouffroy's life, the same sort of
catastrophe was experienced in a distant country by another highly
gifted soul, and wonderfully similar is the victim's description of
it. Leopardi, the rival, in the opinion of many of his countrymen, of
Tasso in poetry and of Galileo in philosophy, in whom a prodigious
industry was united in rare combination to a subtle intellect and a
refined imagination, who was reading Greek by himself at eight years
old, and  before he was nineteen was versed in several oriental
languages, was engaged in literary correspondence with Niebuhr,
Boissonado, and Bunsen, and was the author of numerous translations
from the Classics, a valuable translation of Porphyry on Plotinus, and
an erudite historical essay in which there are citations from four
hundred ancient authors--had, like Jouffroy, prepared the way for his
fall by an overweening confidence in his own great intellectual
powers, and by a recklessly excessive devotion to study. To this was
added the chafing of disappointed ambition, and irritation against his
father for refusing to give him the means of leaving home. His ruin
was completed by the conversation of Pietro Giordani, an apostate
Benedictine monk, who soothed and condoled with him, flattered his
vanity by telling him that "if Dante was the morning star of Italy's
sky, Leopardi was the evening star," and succeeded in inoculating him
with his own scepticism, which in himself was mere shallow impiety,
but in the deeper mind of his pupil, led, if his writings can be
trusted, to as hopelessly complete a disbelief of God, the soul, and
immortality, as is possible for a human being to bring himself to
endure. In a letter of March 6th, 1820, to his friend and seducer, he
says: "My window being open one of these evenings, while I was gazing
on a pure sky and a beautiful moonlight, and listening to the distant
barking of dogs, I seemed to see images of former times before me, and
I felt a shock in my heart. I cried out, like a convict, baking pardon
of nature, whose voice I seemed to hear. At that instant, as I cast a
glance back on my former state, I stood, frozen with terror, unable to
imagine how it would be possible to support port life without fancies
and without affections, without imagination and without enthusiasm--in
a word, without anything of all that, a year ago, filled up my
existence and made me still happy, notwithstanding my trials. Now I am
withered up like to reed; no emotion finds an entrance any longer into
my poor soul, and even the eternal and supreme power of love is
annihilated in me at my present age." He was but twenty-two then; and
through the seventeen years that is shattered constitution lasted, he
was ever speaking of life as an agony and a burden, sometimes proudly
declaring that he would not bend under its weight, sometimes
passionately asking for sympathy and love, but always recurring to
this sad refrain: "The life of mortals, when youth has past, is never
tinged with any dawn. It is widowed to the end, and the grade is the
only end to our night." "I comprehend, I know only one thing. Let
others draw some profit from these vicissitudes and passing
existences; it may be so, but for me life is an evil."

We have seen the account given by the French philosopher Jouffroy and
the Italian poet Leopardi of their feelings on waking up to the
knowledge that the faith of their childhood had passed away; let us
compare one more such experience that of the German {557} Von Kleist.
"For some time, my dear friend," he writes to the lady to whom he was
affianced, "I have been employed in studying the philosophy of Kant,
and I am bound to communicate to you a conclusion which I am sure will
not affect you as deeply and as painfully as it has myself. It is
this: we cannot be certain whether what we call truth is really the
truth or only an appearance. In this last case, the truth that we
sought after here below would be nothing at all after death; and it
would be useless to try to acquire a treasure which it would be
impossible to carry to the tomb. If this conclusion does not pierce
your heart, do not laugh at a wretch whom it has deeply wounded in all
that is most sacred to him. _My noble, my only aim has vanished, and I
have none_. Since this conviction entered my mind, I have not touched
my books. I have traversed my chamber, I have placed myself by an open
window, I have run along the street. My interior disturbance has let
me to visit smoking-rooms and cafés to get relief. I have been to the
theatre and the concert to dissipate my mind. I have even played the
fool. But in spite of all, in the midst of all this agitation, the one
thought that occupied my whole soul and filled it with anguish was
this: your aim, your noble and only aim has vanished." A few years of
the repetition of this sorrowful wailing, and then, after writing to
his sister, "You have done everything to save me that the power of a
sister could do, everything that the power of man could do; the fact
is, that nothing can help me here on earth," he escaped from doubt to
pass before the Judgment-seat by his own hand.

We must give one more of the many recurring expressions of regret with
which the volume abounds. We are inclined to regard Santa Rosa with
even more profound compassion than the other victims, on account of
the warm and tender piety of his earlier youth, and the absence in him
of the arrogance and scorn that overflows in the others in the midst
of their sufferings. All who knew him agreed that it was hardly
possible to know him without loving him. Unfortunately, his struggles
in the cause of Italy threw him into close association with many who
had mistaken infidelity for liberty. Still more unfortunately, he
contracted a close intimacy with M. Cousin, and soon began to love him
more than truth and than God, and under the blighting influence of his
teaching his own faith disappeared. M. Cousin has published his
letters with frequent and large omissions, but there remains abundant
evidence that he was always regretting the past. The following passage
occurs after something omitted: "O my friend, how unfortunate we are
in being only poor philosophers, for whom the continuance of existence
after death is only a hope, an ardent desire, a fervent prayer! Would
that I had the virtues and the faith of my mother! To reason is to
doubt; to doubt is to suffer. Faith is a sort of miracle. When it is
strong and genuine, what happiness it gives! How often in my study I
raise my eyes to heaven, and beg God to reveal me to myself, but above
all, to grant me immortality!" Twice in his life--when in prison in
Paris with the expectation of being given up to the Piedmontese
police, which would have been to be sent to the scaffold, and again
when beginning a serious philosophical work--he returned to a better
mind. Whether time and grace to return once more were given him,
behind the Greek battery in the isle of Sphacteria, where he fell
fighting bravely, we cannot tell.

Besides the implicit homage to the faith involved in such regrets of
the past as we have been witnessing, the writings of most of these
philosophers and poets contain many testimonies to their involuntary
acknowledgment of the claims of the revealed system which they had
abandoned. We will cite only one, from a discourse of Jouffroy on his
usual subject, the {558} problem of the destiny of man: "There is a
little book which children are made to learn, and on which they are
questioned in church. Read this little book, which is called the
Catechism; you will find in it an answer to all the questions that I
hare proposed--all without exception. Ask the Christian whence the
human race comes, he knows; whither it is going, he knows. Ask this
poor child, who has never in his life dreamed of it, to what end he
exists here below, and what he will become after death; he will give
you a sublime answer, which he will not comprehend, but which is not
the less admirable. Ask him how the world was produced, and for what
end; why God placed animals and plants in it; how the earth was
peopled, whether by one family or several; why men speak different
languages; why they suffer; why they contend; what will be the end of
it all--he knows. The origin of the world, the origin of the human
race, the question of races, the destiny of man in this life and in
the other, the relation of man to God, the duties of man to his
fellows, the rights of man over creation--he is acquainted with all;
and when he is grown up, he will be equally free from hesitation about
natural rights, political rights, and the right of nations; for all
this is the outcome and clear and spontaneous product of Christian
doctrine. This is what I call a great religion; I recognize it by this
sign of its not leaving unanswered any of the questions which interest
humanity."

Edmond Schérer and Friedrich Schiller, as well as Lord Byron, differ
from the other instances in never having known the true faith; but
they show that the loss of a firm hold of those fragments of
Christianity that are retained outside of the fold leads to something
of the same result as the loss of the faith. The sketch of M.
Schérer's life is very interesting, for it shows the inevitable result
of Protestantism in a highly logical and reflective mind which refuses
the alternative of submission to the Catholic Church. His installation
in the chair of theology in the Evangelical Seminary of Geneva in 1844
was hailed as a triumph by all the devout adherents to the reformed
religion, who looked to him as the invincible champion against the
socinianism prevailing all around. He set himself to the work of
proving the inspiration of Scripture without having recourse to the
authority of the Catholic Church, and the result, after passing
through various phases of sentimentalism and eclecticism, was to land
him in such conclusions as that "the Bible has so little of a monopoly
of inspiration, that there are writings not canonical the inspiration
of which is much more evident than in some of the biblical writings;"
and finally, that Protestantism and Catholicism, Christianity and
Judaism, are only conceptions more or less exact of a common object
and phases in a great movement of progressive spiritualization; that
morality itself is only relative; and that absolute certainty of any
kind is a dream. He may well say, as he has lately said: "Alas! blind
prisoners as we are, laboring at the overthrow the past, we are
engaged in a work which we do not understand. We yield to a power of
which it seems at times that we are the victims as well as the
instruments. The terrible logic whose formulas we wield crushes us
while we are crushing others with it."

The moral of these and other such histories--the moral of Froude and
Francis Newman and Clough--is that as God never made his children for
perplexity and anguish, he never made them for doubt, and must have
provided a secure asylum from it, not in ignorance or thoughtlessness,
but in a system of divinely guaranteed authority. The lesson from the
Nemesis of doubt is the conclusion of Augustine Thierry: "I have need
of an infallible authority, I have need of rest for my soul. I open my
eyes, and I see one only authority, that of the Catholic Church. I
believe what the Catholic Church teaches; I receive her Credo."

----------

{559}

Translated from the German


WHAT MOST REJOICES THE HEART OF MAN?


It was two days before the holy Christmas of the old year, and a very
hard season when Martin (a farmer, to whom heaven had granted a rich
harvest, to reward him for the faithful tillage of his land) entered
the house. He had taken his grain to the market-town, and, thanks to
the brisk demand, had parted with it at an unusually high price. And
now, returning home with a full purse, he called his wife, and pouring
out the money before her on the table, said laughingly: "Look, Agnes,
that will give us a rare treat! what thinkest thou, mother? What most
rejoices the heart of man? I want something that shall make me right
joyful."

"O Martin!" replied the wife, "it must be found, then. But this whole
day has my heart been very heavy; and even if I made something very
nice indeed, I don't think it would go to the right spot;" and when
Martin asked why, she continued: "Thou hadst not been gone long
yesterday morning when in came our neighbor's Clara, weeping and
mourning, and said her father was like to die, and would I for God's
sake come to their assistance and give him something nourishing. I
could understand, then, how matters still it, and taking with me just
whatever there was in the house, I ran down to the hut. O dear God!
what misery was there! The man lay on a little straw, so white and
feeble; the poor wife knelt beside him, crying and sobbing; and their
children hung round them, half naked, and living pictures of hunger,
and not a bit of bread in the whole house. And indeed, Martin, that is
not the only home where such want is! I don't know, but it seems as if
I ought not to enjoy one cheerful hour while so much wretchedness
surrounds us."

While Martin let his wife speak out her thoughts, his eyes were
musingly bent before him. Then he rose, and grasping Agnes's hand,
exclaimed: "Now I know what to do, mother! A joyful heart will I have,
for doing good to others gladdens the heart more than wine and good
cheer. Let us see, then, what the dear God has given us." And now he
counted out from the money first the rent due to his landlord, then
enough to pay all that he owed, and lastily all that must go toward
preparing for the next year s crop. Still there remained a pretty
little sum, so he said: "Now, mother, count up the poor of our
village, and heat the oven, and bake for every grown person two big
loaves, and for every child a smaller one; and then send the bread
round, adding to each loaf a jug of wine and two florins. Then when
the people have a Merry Christmas, and can say grace without tears,
our hearts will be light, I am thinking, even if we set nothing on the
table besides our usual fare."

Now when Agnes heard her husband speak thus, her heart grew very
happy, and she said yes to everything, and shook flour into the
bread-trough, and baked all day and all night. So on that day when the
church sings "Gloria in excelsis Deo!" there was not one in that whole
parish who had not enough to eat; and many a one who for a long time
had not tasted wine refreshed himself on that day, thanking with heart
and lips the farmer and his wife. These two had merely their usual
homely fare upon the table, but within their breasts were joyful
hearts and the consciousness of a good deed.

{560}

So far, so good; but something else happened afterward; for as,
according to the proverb, a pleasure never comes alone, so have good
works an especial power of multiplying themselves. And of that we are
now going to hear something.

When it came to the landlord's ears that his farmer, who was no
capitalist, had made a Merry Christmas for himself in the love of the
holy Christ-child, he was well pleased, and thought to himself that he
too might try something of the same sort. Therefore he appointed a day
(the octave of the blessed Christmas, New-Year's day) when all the
poor in his parish should be invited to the castle. In the hall was a
long table covered with a fine white cloth for the poor people, and a
smaller one for himself and his family. At this small table he placed
Farmer Martin and his wife Agnes, and near the head too, which has no
small significance among knights and noblemen. But he said that he
honored such excellent people as his own friends and relations,
believing that the heart makes better nobility than a long pedigree.

When now the table was filled with the sons and daughters of poverty,
grace was said by the chaplain, while all remained standing and joined
devotedly in his prayer. Then were bread-cakes set on the board, and
huge pieces if roast beef, and for each person a bumper of good old
wine; but if any one was ill and could not come to the feast, then was
his share despatched to his home, with a beautiful gold piece and a
friendly greeting from his gracious lord. So all the parish poor had a
second time plenty to eat and drink, and more than one enjoyed himself
better on that day than ever before in his life.

When the people had had a good dinner, they thought the feast was at
an end, and wished to express their thanks courteously to the host,
but he begged them to wait a little quarter of an hour longer, for
something else was coming. Then four lottery vases were placed on the
table, one for the men, another for the women, a third for boys, and a
fourth for girls; and when all the guests had been arranged ranged
according to age and family, one after another put his hand into a
vase and drew forth a number, one fifteen, another twenty-one, a third
two, and so on until each person had a number. Then they looked at
their numbers and thought, What does this all mean? and they waited
full of expectation.

Suddenly a side door opened, and the servants brought in a wooden
frame, on the four sides of which hung all sorts of garments, one side
for men, another for women, and then for boys and girls, as at a fair;
and everything was new and neat and strong, such as peasant-folks like
to wear, and a number was fastened on each piece. Some one called out,
"Now look for the numbers that you have in your hands." The men looked
shyly at each each other, as if to say, "Can he really mean it?" but
the women were more clever, and had soon found white and colored
skirts, aprons, stockings, neckerchiefs, and handkerchiefs to match
their numbers, and were helping their husbands and children in their
search. Before long not one single thread hung on the frame, and every
one possessed his appointed prize, and was rejoicing over it, for it
really seemed as if to each person had fallen the very thing he most
needed. Of course many were there who were in need of everything.

When now the time for leave-taking came, and the happy people thanked
their gracious lord in their best manner, he shook hands with each one
like a good old friend or father, at the same moment slipping into the
palm of every man a thaler. Then were there fresh rejoicings and
renewed thanks, and the worthy folk would not soon have made an end of
it, if their benefactor had not quickly broken {561} a path through
the crowd who blessed him, and so eluded their acknowledgments.

But then their hearts being full to overflowing, they longed to have
some outlet to their gratitude; so they seated farmer and his wife in
two chairs, placed them in a pretty wagon, to which they harnessed
themselves; and the worthy couple, in spite of expostulation, were
borne home in triumph. Such rejoicings had not been seen for many a
long day, and even now do the people of B---- talk of brave Martin and
his excellent wife Agnes; of the feast and the lottery and the dollars
of their kind and gracious lord in the castle yonder.

--------

From The Reader.


THE REPUBLIC OF ANDORRA.


The Val d'Andorra lies on the southern side of the central Pyrenees,
between two of the highest mountains, the Maladetta and the Moncal. It
is bounded on the north by the department of Ariège; on the south by
the district of Barrida, the territory of Urgel, and part of the
viscounty of Castelbo; on the east by the valley of Carol and part of
the Cerdana; on the west at by the viscounty of Castelbo, the valleys
of San Juan and Terrem, the Conca de Buch, and the communes of Os and
Tor. The principal mountain-passes into France are those of Valira,
Soldeu, Fontargente, Siguer, Anzat, Arbella, and Rat; those
communicating with Spain are Port Negre, Perefita, and Portella. Some
of these are only passable during part of the year. The greatest
length of the territory is about forty miles; the greatest breadth
about twenty-four miles. The country is mountainous, but includes some
excellent pasturage. The highest summits visible are Las Mineras,
Casamanya, Saturria, Montclar, San Julian, and Juglár. The principle
rivers are the Valira, the Ordino, and the Os, none of which are
navigable. At the greatest elevation the snow remains upward of six
months. In summer the rains are very frequent. The purity of both air
and water renders the climate very healthy, and the inhabitants are
remarkable for their longevity, many living to the age of one hundred.
Devonian beds lie unconformably on upper silurian, which latter forms
a valley of depression, having the town of Andorra in its synclinal
axis. There are many mines producing iron of the best quality; one of
lead, several of alum, quartz, slate, some quarries of jaspers, and
several kinds of marble. Besides the trees common to Europe, the flora
includes the cacao or chocolate. There are, likewise, many medicinal
roots and plants. Wheat, barley, rye, and hemp are cultivated; and
grapes, figs, dates, and olives are also seen. In the low parts of the
south tobacco is much grown. Indian corn is only occasionally to be
met with. The fauna include the bear, wild boar, wolf, boquetin
(_Capra Pyrenaica?_), chamois, mule, fox, blackcock, or _gallina de
monte_, squirrel, hare, partridge, pheasant, and several species of
eagles; there are also a great many blackbirds and nightingales. The
population of the whole republic has been estimated as low as 5,000,
and even higher than 15,000, but it probably does not exceed 10,000;
that of the capital has been reckoned as high as 2,800, but this
probably refers to the whole parish, {562} and is, even then, greatly
over-estimated. The name Andorra has been derived from the Arabic, but
it is, without doubt, considerably older than the time of the Moors.
It is probably from the Gaelic _an-dobhar, an-dour_, which will
variously translate, "the water," "the territory," "the border of a
country." In the Roman period the Val d'Andorra formed part of the
country of the Ceretani, who gave their name to the Cerdana; and, at
the time of the Goths, of the district called Marea de Espana. It was
the last tract of country of which Moors obtained possession in
Catalonia, and the first which they abandoned. There are traditions of
the republic even prior to the time of Charlemagne. Catalonia, being
invaded by the Moors, the Andorrans, in 778, asked aid of the emperor,
who thereupon crossed the Pyrenees, and having united his forces with
those of Catalonia, which consisted principally of the mountaineers of
Andorra, after a brilliant campaign drove the Moors to the left bank
of the Ebro. Having established a military organization for the
defence of the territory, Charlemagne recognized certain rights in
favor of the Andorrans; but, at the same time, gave to the see of
Urgel the tithes of the six parishes into which the valley of Andorra
was divided. The Moors having again invaded the territory, the emperor
despatched his son, Louis le Debonnaire, who drove out the Moors, and
ceded the sovereignty of the valley to Sisebertus, first bishop of
Urgel. The charter bears the date of 803, and the signature of
Ludovicus Pius, the name by which Louis has always been known to the
republic. Charles the Bold having illegally granted to the Counts of
Urgel the sovereignty over the lands of the republic, another dispute
arose between the bishop and the counts, and the independence of the
valley was again disturbed. Upon this the bishop asked assistance of
Raymond of Foix, and an alliance was entered into by which the
independence of the valley wad vested jointly in the house of Foix and
the see of Urgel, and Raymond forthwith expelled the Counts of Urgel
from Andorra. This took place in the twelfth century. The bishop
failing to surrender the moiety of the republican lands, Bernard of
Foix, in 1241, laid siege to the city of Urgel, and the Bishop was not
only compelled to yield to the demands of the count, but also, within
a certain time, to procurers of papal ratification of the investiture
of the house of Foix in the joint sovereignty of the republic. The
convention having been again violated by the see of Urgel, it was
finally settled, in 1278, that the right of suzerainté should be
possessed jointly by the Bishop of Urgel and the Counts of Foix. This
tree is the act of independence Of the republic, and is known to the
people of Andorra by the name of "Parialge." It stipulated that the
republic should pay annually a tribute of 960 francs to the Counts of
Foix, and half that amount to the see of Urgel, and that each should
have the privilege of nominating one of the two officers called
viguiers. The house of Foix being united, first with that of Béarn,
and then to that of Moncada and Castellvel Rosanes, was finally
absorbed in the house of Bourbon, and the joint protectorate became at
the end of the sixteenth century, merged in the government of France,
and the see of Urgel. On 25th March following a treaty was concluded
by which the republic should pay the annual tribute to the
receiver-general of the department of Ariège, in return for which it
was to receive some commercial privileges as to the free export of
certain goods. It was further stipulated that one of the viguiers of
the republic should be chosen from the department of Ariège, and that
three deputies of the Valley should nearly take an oath to the prefect
of the same department. Napoleon is said to have affixed his name to
the original charter of Charlemagne. {563} The privileges of the
Andorrans have been several times acknowledged by France and Spain.
Even the war with Spain did not injure the neutrality of the republic.
In 1794, a French column having penetrated into the centre of Andorra,
for the purpose of laying siege to the city of Urgel, the Andorrans
sent a deputation to assert the neutrality and independence of the
valley, and General Charlet gave immediate orders to withdraw. The
Andorrans have never taken part in the wars of their neighbors. The
rich pasturages between Hospitalet, in France, and Soldeu, in Andorra,
in former times attracted the cupidity of the people of Hospitalet,
who have several times endeavored to take forcible possession of them:
the Andorrans having appealed to the law, judgment was given in their
favor in 1835 by the Court Royal of Toulouse. There is no form of
sovereignty in Europe exactly similar to that of Andorra. The republic
is governed by a syndic, a council of twenty-four, together with two
viguiers or magistrates, and two judges. The French government and the
see or Urgel possess a co-ordinate right of confirmation over the
appointment of the syndic. The twenty-four members of the council
consist of the twelve consuls who represent the six parishes or
communes, and the twelve consuls who held office during the preceding
year. These latter are called councillors. One of the viguiers is
appointed by the French government, the other Bishop of Urgel. The
former is chosen for life, and is generally a magistrate of the
department of Ariège; the latter holds office for three years only,
and is chosen from among the subjects of the republic. He is not
required to be an educated man. The viguiers alone exercise the
criminal authority. Civil justice is rendered by two other judges, one
of whom is appointed by each viguier from a list of six members, drawn
up and presented by the syndic. In both criminal and civil cases the
judges are guided by equity, common sense, and custom only, and yet no
complaints are heard of. Parties to suits, both criminal and civil,
have the right of appearing by counsel, who is styled _rahonador_, or
speaker. The decision of the criminal courts is communicated to the
council, who reassemble to receive it. The sentence of the court, once
proclaimed by the council, is irrevocable, and is put in execution
within twenty-four hours. The criminal court is rarely convoked. There
are few crimes committed in the republic. One man was executed for
murder about six years since. The expenses of justice are paid partly
by the delinquents, partly by the council. The armed forces consist of
six companies, one for each parish, and scarcely amount to 600, but in
case of need all the inhabitants are soldiers. There is no enlistment;
one individual between the age of sixteen and sixty is chosen from
each family. There is no national flag, and no drums are used. The
service is unpaid. Public instruction is in the worst state. The
priest of each parish is obliged to provide a school in his own house,
but no one is compelled to send his children. Those who desire a
better education for their children send them either to France or
Catalonia. The only form of religion is the Roman Catholic. Political
refugees from Spain and France are always hospitably received.
Foreigners resident in the republic pay yearly five Catalan sous, and
enjoy all the privileges of the natives, except that of holding any
public office. If a foreigner marries an heiress, he is accounted a
citizen, but he must first obtain an authorization from the
council-general. The Andorrans are somewhat above the ordinary size of
Spaniards. In stature they are thin and wiry. In character they are
active, proud, industrious, independent, religious, faithful to their
ancient customs, and very jealous of their liberties. They are
inquisitive, great talkers, but suddenly dumb and ignorant when they
imagine their interest at stake. Those engaged in public affairs are
generally {564} hospitable, but most of the people are rather
suspicious of strangers. They speak the Catalan dialect, which is a
compound of Castilian and the ancient languages of the south of
France. They also use many modern French words, which they pronounce
after their own fashion. The people are poor, and glory in their
poverty, as they thereby preserve their independence. Should they grow
rich, they would be sure to be absorbed either by France or Spain. A
large portion of the wealth of the republic consists in its flocks of
sheep. Each landowner is possessed of a considerable flock. The price
of a sheep ranges from twelve to twenty francs. The fleeces suffice to
clothe the whole of the male population. The exports into Spain
consist of iron, in large quantities, sheep, mules, and other cattle;
cloths, blankets, cheese, butter, and excellent hams. Those into
France include untanned skins, sheep, mules, calves and wool. The
number of sheep and mules sent annually into Spain and France amounts
to 1,000. Considering the size of the republic, the imports from Spain
are considerable: they include some of the necessaries of life, as
corn and salt. The only imports from France are fish and compound
liquors. There is a good deal of contraband between the republic and
Spain and France. It consists principally in wines, vinegar, salt, and
a small quantity of silk. The contrabandistas between the valley and
Spain are generally Spaniards. There are no land conveyances, and the
transport of goods and merchandise is carried on with horses and
mules. There are no restrictions on commerce, and no stamps; and no
passports are required. The republic contains six parishes or
communes, namely, Andorra la Vieja, San Juliá de Loria, Canillo,
Ordino, En Camp, and La Massana. There are also thirty-four villages
and hamlets, the chief of which are Escaldas, Santa Caloma, and
Soldeu. There are but few ancient remains in the republic. The
capital, Andorra la Vieja, or "The Old" is so called to distinguish it
from Andorra in Spain, Province Teruel. There is a good weekly market,
and considerable business is transacted in imported corn. It is a
miserable place, with houses built of the _débris_ of schist and
granite, and generally without stucco. During the civil wars it
suffered greatly from hostile attacks, and the suspension of commerce.
The palace, called Casa del Valle, is an ancient building, constructed
of rough pieces of granite. The _façade_ is heavy and massive, and has
only three windows, of unequal dimensions, with some louvers;  in its
left angle is a turret pierced with loopholes, and surmounted with a
cross. Above the portal, which resembles a _porte cochère_, is  the
inscription _Domus_ consilii, _sedes justitiae_, under which is and
escutcheon of white marble, with the arms of the republic. The
interior of the palace is in a state of complete ruin. On the ground
floor is the national prison and the stables, where the members of the
council have the privilege of putting up their horses during the
sessions. The kitchen is on a grand scale, with immense hearts and
cauldrons. A staircase, which savors of antiquity, leads to the
chamber on the first floor, where the council meets. It is a vast hall
of an imposing aspect. At one end is a chair for the syndic, who sits
as president of the assembly; along either wall are benches of oak for
the twenty-four councillors; and between the corridors is a picture of
Jesus Christ. In another part of the hall are preserved in the
archives of the government, which include the grant of Charlemagne and
his son. They are kept in an armory or cupboard in the wall, closed by
two wooden shutters, where they have remained intact since the
expulsion of the Moors. The cabinet has six different locks and keys,
which are kept by the executive officers of the six communes whose
documents have been separately deposited. This cabinet has no outer
door, and can only be opened in the presence of the six heads of the
departments, who are bound to be present at the deliberations {565} of
the council. There are five sessions of the council annually, but when
necessary, extraordinary sessions are also held. When the general
council is unable to assemble, the syndic general, or, in his absence,
the sub-syndic, represent it, and act in its name; sometimes, also, a
junta general is convoked, at which assist a consul, or a consul and a
councillor, for each parish. In the juntas, matters of minor interest
are discussed, and the consuls and councillors who take part in them
are entrusted with the powers of their colleagues. To the general
council pertains everything relating to police, and all disputes in
commercial matters. The chapel is dedicated to San Heremengol,
formerly Bishop of Urgel and Prince of Andorra, and will repay a
visit.

--------

ORIGINAL.


CATHOLIC CHRISTMAS.


The evening of the last day of the church's advent arrives. She
gathers her ministers around her, and, singing hymns of glad
expectation, they remain in her temples, even until midnight. Let us
listen to the grand harmony!

Divided into two vast bodies, they peal forth the verses of the royal
prophet in alternate chorus; and who could tire hearkening? Well does
Durendus say, that "the two choirs typify the angels and the spirits
of just men, while they cheerfully and mutually excite each other in
this holy exercise." We fancy ourselves among the choirs of heaven, as
St. Ignatius once was in spirit, when he learned the method of
alternate chanting.

Oh! whose heart does not yearn toward the church in these her days of
longing! She has laid away from her all that is dazzling and joyous;
yet is she most charming. Anxious love, like a sun, burns over her,
altering her color; yet is she all beauty--bright and rich and
warm--her aspect teeming with purity and love and inspiration. "I am
black, but beautiful." (Cant. i. 4)

It is midnight. Long since men ceased from their labors. The din of
traffic has been hushed for hours. Yet there is a sound through all
the world. From every city and town and village, from spire-crowned
hill and from holy valley, from numberless sweet nooks and by-ways, it
swells forth, the sound of a grand harmony, the voices of myriads
chanting. Now the tones speak of longing; now they tremble with
expectation; then there is a burst of rapture following the mellow
warbling of desire. It is the voice of the church longing for her
Beloved! She shall be gratified, for even now there is a knocking at
her temple gates. The chant is hushed, and a voice, gentle as the
lisping of a child, breathes the sweet entreaty, "Open to me, my
sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled; for my head is full of dew and
my locks of the drops of the night." (Cant. v. 2.) Yes, lovely Babe,
gladly will the temple-doors open to thee; for many a long and weary
mile did thy mother journey with thee beneath her heart!

Winter ruled the earth. Chill blew the breezes, and coldness was over
all nature. Shivering had the aged saint and Mary asked for shelter,
but the inns were filled, and none in Bethlehem would trouble to
receive them. Riches were not theirs, and all saw that the {566}
unknown mother's time was near; hence, fearing they might have to look
to the child, they shut her from their dwellings. The only place of
refuge her holy spouse could find for his charge was a cheerless
stable, hollowed from a rough, cold rock. The ox and the ass were
their only earthly companions; hay and straw formed the rude couch
upon which the mother brought forth her child at midnight. Jesus!
Saviour! she wraps thee scantily in swaddling-clothes, and lays thee
shivering in a manger. Well then may the dew and the drops of the
night hang heavy upon thy locks!

But, though in Bethlehem these unknown travellers were outcasts, God
did not desert them. The glimmerings of adoring angels' wings fell
upon the mother's eyes to comfort her heart, for there were angels
near in numbers. They hovered over and within the hut, making it ring
with the most blessed hymn that mortal or angelic ears had ever heard:
"Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men of good-will."

Instantly upon this knocking the church rises to open to her Beloved,
and now begins her joy. Now she will celebrate his birthday, and her
heart leaps high in bidding him welcome. Her torches, her sanctuary
lamps, the countless candles on her altars, all are lighted with the
speed of love; their shining shows her spouse that she was so full of
expectation, so confident of his coming, that she has already cast
away her weeds of mourning and desire, and has arrayed her charms in
her most precious robes. Evergreens and tapestry are twining and
glowing all about her--in her niches, upon her piers, her arcades, her
parapets, her cloister-galleries, her massive stalls, her carved and
fretted ceilings. Her altars and her sanctuaries have festoons and
garlands, and crowns of sweetest design, and veils and hangings of
choicest embroidery. She peals her bells and sweeps her fingers over
her organ-keys, and tunes her many instruments, to fill her temples
with the rapturous canticle of the day, "Gloria in excelsis Deo."

But let us circumscribe our views. As we may behold the joy of the
universal church in even her smallest division, let us see how, in the
good old Catholic times, the simplest villagers celebrated the first
day of the Incarnate Eternal!

The few rich men among them have sent stores of flowers and fruits
from their conservatories to deck the green branches gathered in the
forest. Pious ladies have brought in the various ornaments, which they
have been preparing for weeks, as an offering for their new-born
Saviour. The happy pastor and many of his spiritual flock have been
busy in the church four days, disposing the decorations with untiring
ingenuity and taste.

Now it is almost midnight. The skies are clear and studded with
twinkling stars. Ice is over all the streams, snow is over all the
streets and fields, and weighs down the trees. Stillness is upon the
the village, yet not the stillness of slumber. You can see that
something is transpiring which takes not place at other midnights; for
lights are glimmer through the cottage-windows, and, now and then,
cheerful forms are seen passing to and fro. They are all expecting,
and they shall not be delayed; for hark! suddenly a merry peal of
bells bursts over them; joyously it rings forth--now in soft, sweet
cadence, and now in swelling harmony. It pours along the streets and
fills the village dwellings. It echoes through the cloudless vault,
over the snowy fields and the glassy streams, reaching even the
scattered hamlets in the distance. Suddenly and joyously the music
bursts upon all:

  "Adeste fideles, laeti, triumphantes
  Venite, venite in Bethlehem."

And the cottage-doors are thrown open, and groups of merry children
sally forth gladly shouting, "Christmas, Christmas!"

{567}

Then the tapers are extinguished, and the villagers all hasten forth
with holy eagerness to see their Jesus cradled in the manger; and, as
they direct their steps toward the old church, they awaken the
midnight echoes with that sweet old carol:

  "Now the circling year have given
   The joyful season, when from heaven
   Life descended to the earth
   In the Babe who took his birth
        From our sweet Lady!

  "Behold him in the manger laid,
   Owned by the cattle of the shed,
   Who know their God meanest bands
   Enswathed by the tender hands
        Of our sweet Lady!

  "Now he smiles on Joseph blessed;
   Now he seeks his mother's breast;
   Now he sobs, and now he cries,
   All beneath the guardian eyes
        Of our sweet Lady!

  "Run, run, ye shepherds, haste and bring
   Your simple homage to our King!
   Ye heaven-called watchers, taste and see
   Our God, meek-seated on the knee
       Of our sweet Lady!"

Thus they stream along from every cottage, along every pathway toward
the church, men, women, and little children, singing and chatting
happily. Far off in the moonlit distance you see small parties
hastening over the white plains from their scattered homes to mingle
in the festival. How beautifully do they remind us of those happy
shepherds who left their flocks near the "Tower of Ader," and went
over to Bethlehem, to see the word that had come to pass!

The bells continue pealing out their music to the midnight, and the
church continues filling. Listen to the half-suppressed ejaculation of
joyous surprise as each new group enters the holy place and beholds
its charming decorations! Over every window's curve, and hanging down
by its sides, is a mighty wreath of evergreens. In front of every
hallowed niche lights are burning, and wreaths of foliage hang over
it. The pillars are all twined round and round, up to the very
ceiling, with ivy, holly, laurel, intermingled with those berries that
grow red in winter. But who shall describe the glories of the
sanctuary! The arch that rises over it flows with the fullest folds of
tapestry, white as snow, save where they are here and there
interwrought with flowers of rose-hued silk and thread of gold, and
intertwined with holly and laurel, and boughs of the orange-tree with
its golden clusters. On the altar-steps are vases filled with
evergreens, slender strings of ivy twisting around tall branches and
bending gracefully between them down even to the floor. The altar is
crowded with lighted candles, and along the intervals of the
candlesticks flow festoons of slender branches, leaves, and flowers. A
stole of flowers decorates the very crucifix; the tabernacle sparkles
in its richest veil.

Oh! in olden times even a village church was grand beyond description;
for then men took a pride in their religion. They loved to see God's
Bride in bridal splendor; they loved to see the Queen in regal
vesture; they loved to see the Sister of the Church in heaven with
something like heavenly glory around her. The rich man gave of his
abundance, the poor man gave of his labor, ladies wrought
embroidery--all in holy unison strained every nerve to make her
temples beautiful.

Now the church has filled with kneeling forms. The rich and the poor,
the lady and the servant, the laborers and they for whom they labor,
here kneel side by side, they are all equal here, for they are all
alike, are God's own children, the brethren of the Babe of Bethlehem.

The steeple-bells have ceased to peal, for not a single thought must
now wander outside. Eyes and ears and heart and soul and every feeling
are intent upon the grand occurrences within.

Presently blue clouds of sweet incense are seen floating toward the
sanctuary, and modestly there comes a youth swinging a silver censer;
a long procession of little acolytes, clad in snow-white surplices and
bearing lighted tapers, follow him slowly; a saintly looking priest,
in precious vestments, closes the holy array. His {568} youthful
attendants are chosen boys of blameless life and pleading aspect: and,
indeed, they look pure and innocent and cherub-like, as they dispose
themselves around the holy place, and kneel toward the altar.

Then amid half-suppressed, repentant cries for "mercy on us," swelling
forth from the choir, the psalm is said--the psalm of preparation, of
praise, of hope, of humble confidence: the confession is made; prayers
for pardon, lights and gracious hearing are repeated. Then the priest
ascends "unto the altar of God," and whispers prayers, speaking
rapturously of the "Child that is born to us, the Son that is given to
us." But look at hie countenance as he returns slowly to the middle of
the altar; you can see that he is full of some grand event--his soul,
his heart, his feelings, all hold jubilee. One more entreaty for mercy
repeated again and again with passionate earnestness, and he raises
his eyes and his arms as though about to ascend in ecstasy, and, like
one inspired, he breaks forth in the angelic hymn, "Gloria in excelsis
Deo." It is the signal of jubilee. Suddenly there is a burst of many
little bells, shaken by the hands of the surpliced children, ringing
out their silver music until the hymn is ended by the priest; the
organ's richest and fullest chords are struck, swelling forth in
harmony like that which the rivers made in Paradise when they sang
their first hymn of praise to him who set them flowing, and the full
choir of trained voices burst forth: "Et in terra pax hominibus."

Truly you think yourself at Bethlehem. It seems as though the Child
were just born--as though you heard the heavenly hosts singing their
grand anthem--saw the shepherds wondering and adoring--beheld the
Infant lying in the manger, a fair, radiant, smiling little Babe, with
an old saint beside it, leaning on his staff, and a comely virgin, in
a trance of motherly affection, kissing its bright forehead. So these
villagers seem to feel it all. A start of joy runs through the whole
assembly, a radiance lights up every feature; friends kiss each other,
fathers kiss their children, mothers kiss their little ones; a whisper
runs from soul to soul through all the church--"Pax hominibus."

Then follow collect, the epistle, the gradual, a gospel, all full of
the grand event. And then the choir's jubilee begins again, as the
anointed one at the altar intones "Credo in unum Deum." Who shall tell
the stirless reverence of each prostrate form, as all bow yet lower at
the words that still the mystery of the night! Softly the organ
warbles in its mellowest keys; from the richest voice in all the choir
sweetly flow the words "Et Homo factus est." Every mind reflects, and
every heart is melted.

Then comes the offertory; and all present, according to their various
means, make their offerings for those "who serve the altar," and for
the poor. While the priest raises in offering the paten with the Post
and the chalice with wine, the villagers also, kneeling, make an
offering of their homage to their new-born Redeemer; and mothers lift
their little ones to heaven in spirit, praying that they may advance
"in wisdom and age and grace with God and men," as did the Child of
Mary. Then follows the washing of the heads, with its appropriate
prayers; then, the secretas, the preface, the whispered prayers for
God's church, for friends and benefactors, for all the living
faithful.

The moment of consecration draws nigh. Books are laid aside, hands are
clasped upon the breast, every head is bent. The sweet voices in the
choir have been hushed; the organ's silvery tones, murmuring more and
more softly, have at length died away, awe-stricken by the silence
that fills God's house. Yes! silence fills it, for silence now seems a
something--a breathless, pulseless, but mighty spirit feeling all
this temple, as the cloud of God's glory once filled the tabernacle.
You think you could almost {569} most hear a spirit move, you feel as
though you were among the angels when they waited breathless to behold
the effect of the sublime utterance, "Let there be light." Bending low
in reverend humility, the priest in a whisper of awe speaks the
almighty words, "This is my body," "This is the chalice of my blood;"
the light breathing of that whisper is heard even in the bosom of the
Eternal Father, the golden gates of Paradise are thrown open, and God
"bows the heavens and comes down." He is here, this church is now the
hut of Bethlehem, this altar is the manger; for the Child is born upon
it as really as the Virgin-mother there brought him forth.

As when of old light was made, there was a music of the spheres, of
the sun and moon and all the stars and planets, singing their morning
hymn of gratitude, so is the stillness now also broken, so does the
choir, warbling in swelling glee, burst forth in grand climax,
"Hosanna in excelsis." And in the mean time priest and people united
utter to their new-born Saviour many rich and beautiful prayers for
the living, for the faithful departed, for themselves.

The villagers are absorbed in prayer; it seems as though their fervor
kept redoubling, as though the flames of holy love burned higher and
higher every instant. Well they may, for the moment is approaching in
which each heart will be a manger in which Jesus will be laid, each
breast a tabernacle in which love itself shall dwell. Already there is
a move among them; with modest gait, with clasped hands and downcast
eyes, they advance to the sanctuary, the mystic bread is given to them
line after line, and, bearing their God with them, they all return in
reverence to give thanks, to petition for good things. Serenity is in
their eyes and on their features, joy is in their hearts, rapture in
their souls, peace among their feelings, and Jesus within their bosoms
harmonizing all. O truly happy Christmas! O the bliss that now is
theirs, the comfort of this moment! Well may the chanters hymn: "O
Jesus, God! Great God! Good Pastor! Sweet Lamb! O Jesus, _my_ Jesus! O
Bread! O Manna! O Power! what dost thou not grant to man!"

Then praises and thanks are sung joyously by the priest, and his hand
is stretched in blessing from the altar. The Mass is over, and the
procession moves from the sanctuary, while the choir chants aloud,
"Praise the Lord all ye nations, praise him all ye people. Because his
mercy is confirmed upon us, and the truth of the Lord remaineth for
ever." (Ps. cxvi.)

The chant dies away, and for awhile not a sound is heard through all
the sacred building. No one stirs as yet; all remain some time to
return thanks, to allow the impression of the festival to sink deep
into their souls. At length they rise, and bowing lowly toward the
altar, they go forth. At the church-door hands are shaken, kisses
given, warm embraces are exchanged, and joy and happiness and all the
blessings of the Child's nativity are wished and wished again.

But follow them home from their midnight celebration. For a long time
the village slumbers not; lights glimmer through the cottage-windows,
and within groups are kneeling around a little home-made oratory, with
a little crib in the middle, and candles around it. This is of greater
importance than the gathering around the yule-fire or the decked tree.
Moreover, all did not go home when Mass was over. Go back to the
church, and behold those silent figures praying in every posture that
feeling can suggest. There, before that tabernacle, a mother prays the
divine Child for her own babe; a virgin prays for purity like to that
of the Virgin-mother; the child of misery seeks consolation from him
who was born in a stable; many repeat over and over again the canticle
of the angels, and all beg the blessings of him over whom the angels
sang it. At length these also are gone; the lights {570} are quenched
about the altar, all, save the silver lamp which is never
extinguished; all is still as was the stable when the shepherds had
adored and gone back to their flocks.

But the festival of our Saviour's birth is not over yet. "As the day
comes round in music and in light;" you again see the villagers
wending their way to the church; and a third time, when the sun is in
the mid-arch of heaven. Each time is witnessed the same sublime
celebration that we beheld at midnight; for three births of Christ are
celebrated. His birth from the Father before lime began; his birth
from the immaculate Virgin as a wailing babe at Bethlehem; his mystic
birth, by faith and by the sacrament of love, in the heart of each
humble adorer.

Such was Christmas in the happy olden times. Alas! that a blight
should ever have come upon it. Truly they have not done well to
despoil that village church of all its charming features. Well may the
church exclaim, weeping: "The keepers that go about the city found me;
they struck me, and wounded me: the keepers of the walls took my vail
from me." (Cant, v. 7.) Fondly do we trust she will soon again be
clothed in splendor. The pope that reigned when England fell away
grieved sadly for her fall. In his distress he put away the triple
crown; and even now his statue sits uncrowned, with downcast eyes, as
though his grief had hardened him to stone. But soon, we trust, he
will again lift up his eyes. Soon, we trust, will his successors
rejoiced to find the crown replaced, not by mortal, but by angel
hands. Shall we not hope and pray that our own dear land, also, will
form not the least brilliant jewel in that crown? One day this church
will again deck herself with the flowers she once wore, but which
rebellious hands toward to pieces, scattering the leaves around her.
Then shall we once again celebrate the good old Catholic Christmas
times, and celebrate them with the increased joy which is born of the
wanderer's returned. God granted it speedily!

------


MISCELLANY


_Spots on the Sun.--Science Review_.--We would draw the attention of
our scientific readers to a remarkable opinion and theory of Sir John
Herschel's with regard to the nature of those curious objects
discovered by Mr. Nasmyth on the surface of the sun, and generally
called, from their peculiar shape, "willow leaves." We believe Sir
John first propounded this theory in an article on the sun, published
in Good Words, but it does not seem to have been noticed by many
astronomers. However wild the hypothesis may appear, it has just
received a further sanction from its eminent author, by its
republication in his new book of Familiar Lectures, which we notice
elsewhere. Sir John says: "Nothing remains but to consider them (the
so-called willow leaves) as separate and independent sheets, flakes,
or scales, having some sort of solidity. And these flakes, be they
what they may, and whatever may be said about the dashing of meteoric
stones into the sun's atmosphere, etc., are evidently the immediate
sources of the solar light and heat by whatever mechanism for whatever
processes they may be enabled to develop, and, as it were, elaborate
these elements from the bosom of the non-luminous fluid in which they
appear to float. Looked at in this point of view, we cannot refuse to
regard them as organisms of some peculiar and amazing kind; and though
it would be too daring to speak of such organization as partaking of
the nature of life, yet we do know that vital action is competent to
develop both heat, light, and electricity." Strange and startling as
is such an explanation, yet scientific men will remember that when we
{571} knew as little about the cause of the black lines seen in the
spectrum of the sun as we now know about these appearances on the sun
itself, Sir John Herschel suggested, in 1833, that very explanation
which was the foundation of the memorable law announced by the German
philosopher, Kirchhoff, in 1859--a law now universally accepted as
affording a perfect solution to the long-standing puzzle of
Fraunhofer's lines.



_Simple Net for the Capture of Oceanic Animals,--Science Review_.--In
a paper read before the Microscopical Society of London on the fauna
of mid-ocean, Major S. R. Owen gives the following directions for the
preparation of a simple form of net for the above purpose, and which
maybe rigged out at a few hours' notice. A grommet should be made for
the mouth, to which three cords may be attached to connect it with the
towing-line; that line should be a good stout piece of stuff and
capable of bearing a great strain. To the grommet should be attached,
first, a bag, the upper part of which may be made of a thin canvas,
the lower part of strong jean, ending in a piece of close calico or
linen; the bottom must be left open, and tied round with a tape when
used; this will be found convenient for taking out the contents, and
by leaving it open and towing it so for a short time it can be
thoroughly washed. Over the whole an outer covering of the strongest
sail-cloth should be put, the upper part, in like manner, attached to
the grommet, the lower part left open, and a portion for a foot or
eighteen inches of the seam left to be coarsely laced up with a piece
of cord, the same being done for the bottom itself. If necessary, a
third covering may be put between these of any strong but rather
porous material; but this in its turn should be left open at the
bottom, and only tied when required for use. Its length should be so
adjusted when tied that the inner lining of calico may rest against
it, and be relieved from the strain. The outer sail-cloth should, in
like manner, be laced up to receive and support the whole.



_A New Magnesium Lamp_.--An ingenious form of magnesium lamp, the
invention of Mr. H. Larkin, and which was first exhibited at the Royal
Institution a couple of months since, was shown at the _soirées_ of
the British Association at Nottingham. Instead of the ordinary ribbon
or wire of the commoner forms of magnesium lamps, magnesium powder is
employed. Hence all machinery is dispensed with, the magnesium being
contained in a reservoir, from a hole in the bottom of which it falls
like sand from an hour-glass. The powder is allowed to fall upon the
flame of a small gas-jet, and by this it is inflamed, giving all its
usual illumination. In order that a sufficient quantity of powder may
be employed, and that the hole in the reservoir may be large enough to
allow of a regular flow, without waste of magnesium, the latter is
mixed with fine sand. The size of the aperture is regulated by a
stopcock. When it is desired to light the lamp, the gas is first
turned on, just sufficiently to produce a small jet at the mouth of
the tube, which small jet, being once kindled, may be allowed to burn
any convenient time, until the moment the magnesium light is required.
All that is then needed is to turn on the metallic powder, which
instantly descends and becomes ignited as it passes through the
burning gas. This action of turning on and off the metallic powder may
be repeated without putting out the gas, as often and as quickly as
desired; so that, in addition to the ordinary purpose to which lamps
are applied, an instant or an intermittent light of great brilliancy,
suitable for signals or for light-houses, may be very simply produced
with certainty of effect and without the smallest waste of metal. The
first evening an objection was made that the blue tone of the light
created a cold and somewhat ghastly effect. On the second occasion Mr.
Larkin remedied this by mixing with the magnesium a certain quantity
of nitrate of strontia.--_Journal of the Society of Arts_.



_An Artificial Eye for restoring Sight_.--An apparatus of this kind,
whose efficiency we much doubt, has been described by M. Blanchet, in
a paper in which he details the operation for its insertion under the
title of Helio-prothesis. The operation consists in puncturing the eye
in the direction of the antero-posterior axis with a narrow bistoury,
and introducing a piece of apparatus to which M. Blanchet gives the
name of "phosphore." The operation in most instances produces little
pain, and when the globe of the eye has undergone degeneration there
is no pain at all, and the "phosphore" apparatus is {572} introduced
without difficulty. The description of this contrivance is this: "It
consists of a shell of enamel, and of a tube closed at both its ends
by glasses, whose form varies according to circumstances." M. Blanchet
thus describes the operation: "The patient's head being supported by
an assistant, the upper eyelid is raised by an elevator, and the lower
one is depressed. The operator then punctures the eye with a narrow
bistoury, adapting the width of his incision to the diameter of the
'phosphore' tube which he intends to insert. The translucent humor
having escaped, the 'phosphore' apparatus is applied, and almost
immediately, or after a short time, the patient is partially restored
to sight!" Before introducing the apparatus it is necessary to
calculate the antero-posterior diameter of the eye, and if the lens
has cataract it must be removed. Inasmuch as the range of vision
depends on the quantity of the humor left behind, M. Blanchet
recommends the employment of spectacles of various kinds.--_Popular
Science Review._



_Action of Different Colored Lights on the Retina_.--It is known to
physiologists that when a ray of light falls upon the retina, the
impression it produces remains for a definite period, according to
calculation about the _third of a second_. It is this fact which is
used to explain why a burning brand, when twirled rapidly round, gives
the appearance of a ring of light. But till quite recently it had not
been shown whether the different colors of light had the same degree
of persistence upon the retina. The subject has quite lately been
taken up by the Abbé Laborde, who shows that, just as the prism
separates the colors at different angles, so the retina absorbs the
callers, or the impressions produced thereby, in different times. In
conducting his experiment to prove this, the abbé receives the
sunlight through an aperture in a shutter into a darkened chamber. The
aperture is about three millimetres wide by six high. In the course of
the beam and in the middle the chamber there is placed a disk of
metal, the circumference of which is pierced by apertures
corresponding to the aperture in the shutter. This disk is caused to
revolve by clockwork. Behind the disc is placed a plate of ground
glass to receive this spot of light. The disk being then caused to
revolve rapidly, the spot appears at first white, but as the
revolution become more rapid the borders of the spot and the colors
which successively appear are in their order of succession as follows:
blue, green, red, white, green, blue.--_Comptes Rendus_.



_The Origin of Diamonds._--a curious, and it seems to us very
improbable, theory of the origin of diamonds was put foreword by M.
Chancourtios in an essay published in the _Comptes Rendus_ for June
25th. The author tries to show in this that diamonds have been
produced by and incomplete oxidation of the carbides of hydrogen, in
pretty much the same fashion as the sulphur in the _Solfatara,_
described by Professor Ansted in one of our late numbers, results from
an incomplete oxidation of sulphuretted hydrogen, all of whose
hydrogen is converted into water, while only a part of the sulphur is
changed into sulfurous acid. It is by a similar process that petroleum
has given rise to bitumen, and this again two graphite. "If, then"
says the author, "a mixture of hydrocarbon gases and vapor of water be
submitted to slow oxidation, diamonds may possibly be obtained." It is
even possible, he observes, that the tubes which convey common
coal-gas along the streets of Paris may contain such artificial
diamonds in abundance.--_Popular Science Review_.

------

NEW PUBLICATIONS.


Ballads, Lyrics, and Hymns. By Alice Carey, 8vo., pp. 333. New York:
Hurd Houghton. 1866.

Literature knows no sex, but critics do, and in courtesy we must say
to Miss Carey, we think better of her than of her book; and while
judging what is before us purely on its aesthetic merits, we incline
to believe that the selections here compiled do not show her at her
best. This book might just possibly {573} have been good, only it is
not. It appears to consist of gatherings from the grist of a
respectable and old-established mill, whose brand is familiarly known
wherever mild magazines and sensation periodicals have penetrated. The
most prominent quality it demonstrates is the tireless industry--or
the well-oiled machinery--of the fair miller. The style throughout is
just of the kind to be the first in a "Poet's Corner;" best
characterized, perhaps, by the word "unexceptionable," as used by the
domestic critic, if one there be, of Frank Leslie or the Ledger.
Generally, there is nothing whenever to quarrel with--grammatically,
socially, theologically, or practically. We should not be in the least
surprised if Miss Carey's manuscripts even came in accurately
punctuated. The whole book is like the perfection of a gentleman's
toilet; every constituent part is so correctly "got up," that once out
of sight, we cannot recall a single thing beyond the impression of the
_tout ensemble_.

There is considerable thinking, without any notable novelties in
thought. The fact is, no one who has not tried can appreciate the
difficulty of finding something salient to fasten an opinion on. The
main impression of the serious and heavy parts of the volume on our
mind was that the authoress loved God, meant to be religious and
tender-hearted, and thought the world cold and the sectarians
narrow-minded: laudable conclusions all, which we rather agree with on
the whole, but which do not show cause why they should exist in such
splendid binding.

If this were all;  if the book consisted utterly, as it does mainly,
of versified unremarkableness, all were well enough. It would sell all
the same, and descend in its due course to the limbo of respectable
mediocrity, which cannot be damned because it never had a chance to be
saved. But there are gleams amid the commonplace that make it, to our
mind, one of the saddest books we ever opened--said with the
unfulfilled promise of a busy yet wasted life. While there is not, we
believe, a single true poem in her book, we do think Miss Carey might
once have written poetry. There are traces of talent, like the
abrasions on the high Alpine ridges where avalanches or glaciers went
by them that are long since melted into the valley below, and gone to
join the sea. We do not think Miss Carey ever had a very great supply
of poetic power--never so much as Phoebe Carey, who has enough poetry
in her to equip any ten of the other lady contributors whose versicles
pay as well as hers; but what there was has been sapped and drained
off as fast as it accumulated, in a thousand paltry rillets of verse
that at most can only be silver threads in the passing sunshine. Had
she ever been suffered to let her thoughts and fancies gather and
mingle, perhaps she could have written well. She has not only
considerable command of language, but some character: there has always
been something respectable about Miss Carey that set her apart,
somehow, from the other newspaper writers of miscellaneous verses, and
to it she probably owes the present distinction of being the only one
whose productions are thought worth making a book from. But the woman
has never had a chance. As fast as an idea budded, it was contracted
for in advance and plucked long before ripeness, for the greedy
children that will have their green fruit. If a fancy strayed into her
brain, it was not hers to do with as she liked. It must be carved and
served up in as many different styles as possible; made into a long
poem for one paper and a short poem for another, and dashed into a
third as a flavoring ingredient for a string of hired rhymes. Now, is
there not a strange pathos in the idea of making a life-long business
of doing that ill which one might do well, and which is only worth
existence when well done; of dribbling and frittering away every finer
impulse; of chipping the heart's crystals up into glaziers' diamonds;
of subsisting on oneself, Prometheus and vulture in one? And how
infinitely sadder with the consciousness all the while that if one
could but get a respite, this same work, wrought in freedom, might win
all that hope asks?

Consciously or unconsciously, this, we believe, is the discipline
through which Miss Carey has passed. We think so from the manner, and
from the places, in which we come upon the fragments of promise that
shine here and there. They are often repeated in other
lines--sometimes verbatim; they are not the substance but always the
sauce of the poem; they are never sustained or developed. Everything
goes to show that she has reached that fatal state of enervation when
the mind, from long desuetude, {574} and from never having a fair
chance to think out anything, he comes next to incapable of any
continued political thought at all. The exertion of developing a happy
idea into its best form is too much for the unused and enfeebled
imagination.

So much for the conjectural inside view of these verses, the actual
outside view remains. Whether it be a sad fact or simply a fact, there
is nothing to read twice in the book. It is not poetry, but it is a
piece of very good judgment on the part of the publisher--just what
they want. And if we understand their motives, we shall earn their
good will by saying that this is a safe, trustworthy, and entirely
harmless work, innocuous to families and schools, superbly bound,
finished, and printed, and fit, beyond almost any work we know of, for
a present from very affectionate young men to very amiable young
ladies.



BEETHOVEN'S LETTERS. (1790-1836.) From the collection of Dr. Ludwig
Nohl; also his Letters to the Archduke Rudolph, Cardinal-Archbishop of
Olmutz, from the collection of Dr. Ludwig Ritter von Kochel.
Translated by Lady Wallace; with a portrait and facsimile. 2 vols.,
12mo. Hurd & Houghton.

These letters of the illustrious _maestro_ are arranged under three
heads: Life's Joy a and Sorrows, Life's Mission, Life's Troubles and
Close. They are of quite a miscellaneous character, and refer to every
conceivable event of life, displaying much good humor and not a little
ill humor in their short, quick, impatient sentences. As a
letter-writer he is far inferior to Mozart, with whom the reader comes
at once into sympathy, and of whose letters very few indeed are
wanting in sentiments of universal interest. On the contrary, a very
large number of these letters of Beethoven will be read simply because
Beethoven wrote them, and will not bear a reperusal Yet they will, no
doubt, find a welcome place beside those of his great brother artist
on the table of every admirer of the grand music or these two grand
geniuses. His enthusiastic, and we may add, somewhat imaginative
editor and compiler, Dr. Nohl, is perhaps better qualified to form a
judgment upon the general tenor and worth of these letters than we
are, and we therefore quote the following from his preface to the
present work: "If not fettered by petty feelings, the reader will
quickly surmount the casual obstacles and stumbling-blocks which the
first perusal of these letters may seem to present, and quickly feel
himself transported at a single stride into a stream where a strange
roaring and rushing is heard, but above which loftier tones resound
with magic and exciting power. For a acute year life breathes in these
lines; and under-current runs through their apparently unconnected
import, uniting them as with and electric chain, and with firmer links
than any mere coherence of subjects could have effected. I experienced
this myself to the most remarkable degree when I first made the
attempt to arrange, in accordance with their period and substance, the
hundreds of individual pages bearing neither date nor address, and I
was soon convinced that a connected text (such as Mozart's letters
have, and ought to have) would be here entirely superfluous, as even
the best biographical commentary would be very dry work, interrupting
the electric current of the whole, and thus destroying its peculiar
effect."

The volumes are published in scholarly style, and present a very
readable and attractive page.


LONDON POEMS. By Robert Buchanan 12 mo, pp. 272. Alexander Strahan,
London and New-York.

The elegant dress of this volume, so characteristic of Mr. Strahan's
publications, is calculated to make one shy of saying anything
derogatory to its character; but we are held to say that we decidedly
object to Mr. Buchanan's poetry in any dress. The greater part of
these poems are to us positively repulsive. They are but little more
than rudely hand sketches of certain phases of low life in London,
immoral and irreligious in tone, and utterly wanting in that spiritual
expression which invests the true poet with the mantle of inspiration.
The poet may describe vice if he will, but let him not dare to excuse
it or throw a charm about it if he would not raised a storm of
indignation in the bosoms of the virtuous and the truthful. Poetry is
a divine art; the poet must discharge at once the high office of
teacher as well as psalmist, and every {575} line should bear the
impress of divine truth nobility, and purity. That which is false,
base, boorish, and obscene is none the less detestable for being put
in rhythm.



FREDERICK THE GREAT AND HIS COURT. An historical novel. By L.
Mühlbach. Translated from the German by Mrs. Chapman Coleman and
daughters. 12mo. New-York: D. Appleton & Co. 1866.

The rapidity with which the novels of Miss Mühlbach have risen into
popularity in this country is a pretty good indication of their merit.
They are free from the false sensationalism which furnishes the spice
of the lower school of modern fiction; and they treat of historical
subjects and characters with an honest intention to exhibit historical
truth, and not as a mere framework for the display of a trashy story.
Many of the scenes are drawn with a fidelity and an effectiveness
which show at the same time a close familiarity with the times and
persons with which the novel is concerned and a very considerable
literary skill; but the dialogues are not always well managed, the
diction being sometimes too trivial and sometimes too stilted. Despite
this minor defect, the book is full enough of interest: and our wonder
is, considering the great and long-established popularity of Miss
Mühlbach in Germany, that her writings were not translated into our
language long ago. It is a singular fact that the present work, and
some other historical novels from the same pen which D. Appleton & Co.
have now in press, were translated and first printed in the
Confederate States during the late rebellion.



THE HIGHER EDUCATION OF WOMEN.
By Emily Davies. 16mo, pp. 191. London
and New-York: Alexander Strahan. 1866.

This is a well-written plea for reform in the present system of female
education; not for a reform which would ignore the difference in the
character and duties of the two sexes, but one which would open to
women various callings for which nature has specially fitted them, but
which they are now shut out either by defective training or by the
prejudices of society. Miss Davies's little treatise is an appropriate
companion work for a volume of similar essays by Miss Parkes which we
noticed two or three months ago; and though both of them are more
applicable to the state of things in England than to the better
condition of women in our own country there is much in both which
deserves our serious consideration.



A GENERAL HISTORY OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH,
from the commencement of the Christian Era until the present time. By
M. l'abbé J. E. Darras. Vol. IV. New-York: P. O'Shea. 1866.

The fourth volume of this highly esteemed work completes the
publication of the original history of M. Darras. It comprises the
last, and to us for many reasons the most interesting period of the
history of the church; that which begins with the rise of
Protestantism down to the pontificate of Gregory XVI. To this volume
is added as an appendix a very concise and valuable historical sketch
of the origin and progress of the Church in the United States by the
Rev. Dr. C. I. White, of Washington City. We have already warmly
commended this work to our readers. It will take its place, of course,
in all our colleges and literary societies, and become as familiar to
our American as it is already to all French students; but we wish for
it also a wide distribution in the family circle. There is no reason
why such useful and entertaining works as this should not be kept at
hand and under the eye of our youth at home. A good knowledge of the
church's life, labors, trials, and victories is necessary to every
Catholic in our day, both for an intelligent appreciation of his faith
as well as to be able to combat the attacks that faith receives
through misrepresentation of the facts of history, and the unblushing
falsehoods concerning the Papacy, which are so foul a blot upon the
pages of history and controversy written by Protestant and infidel
enemies of the church. The present work is the best history of the
church we possess in the English language. It is such a one as we have
needed a long time, and we again thank the enterprising publisher for
the boon he has thus conferred upon the Catholic public.

{576}


THE SUFFERINGS OF JESUS.
by Father Thomas of Jesus. Reprinted from the last London Edition. New
York: P O'Shea, 27 Barclay st. 1866.


This is a work composed by a great saint, and justly deserving of the
great reputation it has always enjoyed as one of the best of spiritual
books. It contains an inexhaustible mine of meditation, sufficient to
last a person during his whole life, and just as new and fresh after
the hundreds perusal as during the first. It is as a book for
meditation that it should be used, and for this purpose it cannot be
too highly recommended to religious communities or to devout persons
in the world who desire and need a guide and model for the practice of
meditation.


THE LIFE AND LIGHT OF MEN.
An essay. by John Young LL.D. Edin. Strahan.


Dr. Young was formerly a Presbyterian minister, but resigned his
position on account of his inability to believe the Presbyterian
doctrines, especially that of the vicarious atonement and imputed
righteousness of Christ. The present work is leveled against this
doctrine. The author has tolerably clear views of the Incarnation, and
some other Catholic doctrines. His learning appears to be
considerable, the tone of his mind very just and moderate, and his
intellectual and literary ability of no mean order. He is one instance
among a thousand others, of a noble, religious mind striving to rise
above the common Protestant orthodoxy without floating away into
rationalism. We recommend his book to our Calvinistic friends. What
the excellent author is yearning after is Catholic theology. This, and
this alone, would satisfy him, for it alone can satisfy any mind that
wishes to believe in the Christian revelation and at the same time the
rational.



THE LIFE OF ST. VINCENT DEPAUL, AND ITS LESSONS.
A lecture. By Rev. T. S. Preston, R. Coddington.

The publication of this lecture will gratify many who were not  able
to be present at its delivery. The orator gives a short account of the
life and great labors of the apostle of charity, and then shows the
difference between charity as a Christian virtue and simple, natural
philanthropy, both in principle and their means and plans of action.
In works of benevolence, that which the Christian saint is careless
about and avoids to the utmost of his power, is considered by the
world as of vital necessity to secure success, the approval and
applause of men. This truth is well brought out in the lecture, and is
one which it is necessary to keep before our minds in this puffing
age. The proceeds of the sale of the lecture is accredited to the
benefit of the conference of St. Vincent de Paul, attached to St.
Ann's Church in the city.




ALTE UND NEUR WELT. Benziger Bros. New York.

This is a Catholic monthly magazine in the German language, enriched
with copious illustrations. The type and paper are of very superior
quality, and the contents very various and, we should think,
well-chosen. The illustrations are by far the best which can be found
in any periodical published in America, and many of them equal to
those of the best European magazines. The work as a whole reflects the
greatest credit on its conductors, and deserves the most extensive
patronage from our numerous and intelligent German Catholic
population. We recommend it also to those who are studying the German
language, or interested in German literature. The illustrations alone
are worth the price of subscription, which is $4.00 a year.


BOOKS RECEIVED.

From D. & J. Sadlier & Co. New York. The denouncement; or, the Last
Baron of Crana, and The Boyne Water. By the Brothers Banim. 2 vols.
12mo, pp. 448 and 559; Parts 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 and 36 of
D'Artaud's Lives of the Popes.


From Ticknor & Fields, Boston. How New York is Governed. By James
Parton, reprinted from the North American Review. Pamphlet.


From P. O'Shea, New York. The Purgatorian Manual; or, a Selection of
Prayers and Devotions with appropriate reflections for the use of the
members of the Purgatorian Society in the Diocese of New York, and
adapted for general use. By Rev. Thomas S. Preston, pastor of St.
Ann's and Chancellor of the Diocese. Approved by the most Rev. John
McCloskey, D.D., archbishop of New York, pp. 452; The Imitation of
Christ in Two Books, translated by Richard Challoner, D.D. 48mo, pp.
308; Instructions on the Commandments of God, and Holy Sacraments. By
St. Alphonsus Liguori. 48mo, pp. 288. The Spiritual Combat; or, the
Christian Defended against the Enemy of his Salvation. 48mo, pp. 256;
Little Office of the Blessed Virgin, in Latin and English. 12mo, pp.
178.



We have received an Oration delivered before the members of St. Mary's
Orphan Association of Nashville, Tenn., July 4th, 1866, by Rev. A. J.
Ryan, author of The Concord Banner, etc.

------------

{577}

THE CATHOLIC WORLD


VOL. IV., NO. 23--FEBRUARY, 1867.



THE POPE AND THE REVOLUTION


BY JOHN HENRY NEWMAN, D.D.


  [This sermon is given to the world in consequence of its having been
  made the subject in the public prints of various reports and
  comments, which, though both friendly and fair to the author, as far
  as he has seen them, nevertheless, from the necessity of the case,
  have proceeded from information inexact in points of detail.

  It is now published from the copy written beforehand, and does not
  differ from the copy, as delivered, except in such corrections of a
  critical nature as are imperative when a composition, written
  _currente calamo_, has to be prepared for the press. There is one
  passage, however, which it has been found necessary to enlarge, with
  a view of expressing more exactly the sentiment which it contained,
  namely, the comparison made between Italian and English Catholics.

  The author submits the whole, as he does all his publications, to
  the judgment of Holy Church.]
  October 13, 1866.


  The church shone brightly in her youthful days,
    Ere the world on her smiled
  So now, an outcast, she would pour her rays
    Keen, free, and undefiled;
  Yet would I not that arm of force were mine,
  To thrust her from her awful ancient shrine.

  'Twas duty bound each convert-king to rear
    His mother from the dust;
  And pious was it to enrich, nor fear
    Christ for the rest to trust:
  And who shall dare make common or unclean
    What once has on the holy altar been?

  Dear Brothers! hence, while ye for ill prepare,
    Triumph Is still your own;
  Blest is a pilgrim church! yet shrink to share
    The curse of throwing down.
  So will we toll in our old place to stand,
  Watching, not dreading, the despoiler's hand.

        _Vid_. Lyra Apostolica.



SERMON.

This day, the feast of the Holy Rosary of the Blessed Virgin Mary, has
been specially devoted by our ecclesiastical superiors to be a day of
prayer for the sovereign pontiff, our holy father, Pope Pius the
Ninth.

His lordship, our bishop, has addressed a pastoral letter to his
clergy upon the subject, and at the end of it he says: "Than that
festival none can be more appropriate, as it is especially devoted to
celebrating the triumphs of the Holy See obtained by prayer. We
therefore propose and direct that on the festival of the Rosary, the
chief mass in each church and chapel of our diocese be celebrated with
as much solemnity as circumstances will allow of. And that after the
mass the psalm {578} _Miserere_ and the Litany of the Saints be sung
or recited. That the faithful be invited to offer one communion for
the Pope's intention. And that, where it can be done, one part at
least of the rosary be publicly said at some convenient time in the
church, for the same intention."

Then he adds: "In the sermon at the mass of the festival, it is our
wish that the preacher should instruct the faithful on their
obligations to the Holy See, and on the duty especially incumbent on
us at this time of praying for the Pope."

I. "Our obligations to the Holy See." What Catholic can doubt of our
obligations to the Holy See? especially what Catholic under the shadow
and teaching of St. Philip Neri can doubt those obligations, in both
senses of the word "obligation," the tie of duty and the tie of
gratitude?

1. For first as to duty. Our duty to the Holy See, to the chair of St.
Peter, is to be measured by what the church teaches us concerning that
Holy See and of him who sits in it. Now St. Peter, who first occupied
it, was the Vicar of Christ. You know well, my brethren, our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, who suffered on the cross for us, thereby bought
for us the kingdom of heaven. "When thou hadst overcome the sting of
death," says the hymn, "thou didst open the kingdom of heaven to those
who believe." He opens, and he shuts; he gives grace, he withdraws it;
he judges, he pardons, he condemns. Accordingly, he speaks of himself
in the Apocalypse as "him who is the holy and the true, him that hath
the key of David (the key, that is, of the chosen king of the chosen
people), him that openeth and no man shutteth, that shutteth and no
man openeth." And what our Lord, the supreme judge, is in heaven, that
was St. Peter on earth; he had the keys of the kingdom, according to
the text, "Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give to
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind
upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt
loose on earth, be loosed also in heaven."

Next, let it be considered, the kingdom which our Lord set up with St.
Peter at its head was decreed in the counsels of God to last to the
and of all things, according to the words I have just quoted, "The
gates of hell show not prevail against it." And again, "Behold I am
with you all days, even to the consummation of the world." And in the
words of the prophet Isaias, speaking of that divinely established
church, then in the future, "This is my covenant with them, My spirit
that is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy month, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of
the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for
ever." And the prophet Daniel says, "The God of heaven will set up a
kingdom that shall never be destroyed . . . and it shall break in
pieces and shall consume all those kingdoms (of the earth, which went
before it), and itself shall stand for ever."

That kingdom our Lord set up when he came on earth, and especially
after his resurrection; for we are told by St. Luke that this was his
gracious employment, when he visited the apostles from time to time,
during the forty days which intervened between Easter day and the day
of his ascension. "He showed himself alive to the apostles," says the
evangelist, "after his passion by many proofs, for forty days
appearing to them and speaking of the kingdom of God." And
accordingly, when at length he had ascended on high, and had sent down
"the promise of his Father," the Holy Ghost, upon his apostles, they
forthwith entered upon their high duties, and brought that kingdom or
church into shape, and supplied it with members, and enlarged it, and
carried it into all lands. As to St. Peter, he acted as the head of
the church,  according to the previous {579} words of Christ; and,
still according to his Lord's supreme will, he at length placed
himself in the see of Rome, where he was martyred. And what was then
done, in its substance cannot be undone. "God is not as a man that he
should lie, nor as the son of man, that he should change. Hath he said
then, and shall he not do? Hath he said then, and will he not fulfil?"
And, as St. Paul says, "The gifts and the calling of God are without
repentance."  His church, then, in all necessary matters, is as
unchangeable as he. Its framework, its polity, its ranks, its offices,
its creed, its privileges, the promises made to it, its fortunes in
the world, are ever what they have been.

Therefore, as it was in the world, but not _of_ the world, in the
apostles' times, so it is now; as it was "in honor and dishonor, in
evil report and good report, as chastised but not killed, as having
nothing and possessing all things," in the apostles' times, so it is
now; as then it taught the truth, so it does now; and as then it had
the sacraments of grace, so has it now; as then it had a hierarchy or
holy government of bishops, priests, and deacons, so has it now; and
as it had a head then, so must it have a head now. Who is that visible
head? who is the vicar of Christ? who has now the keys of the kingdom
of heaven, as St. Peter had then? Who is it who binds and looses on
earth, that our Lord may bind and loose in heaven? Who, I say, is the
successor to St. Peter, since a successor there must be, in his
sovereign authority over the church? It is he who sits in St. Peter's
chair; it is the Bishop of Rome. We all know _this_; it is part of our
_faith_; I am not proving it to you, my brethren. The visible headship
of the church, which was with St. Peter while he lived, has been
lodged ever since in his chair; the successors in his headship are the
successors in his chair, the continuous line of Bishops of Rome, or
Popes, as they are called, one after another, as years have rolled on,
one dying and another coming, down to this day, when we see Pius the
Ninth sustaining the weight of the glorious apostolate, and that for
twenty years past--a tremendous weight, a ministry involving momentous
duties, innumerable anxieties, and immense responsibilities, as it
ever has done.

And now, though I might say much more about the prerogatives of the
Holy Father, the visible head of the church, I have said more than
enough for the purpose which has led to my speaking about him at all.
I have said that, like St. Peter, he is the vicar of his Lord. He can
judge, and he can acquit; he can pardon, and he can condemn; he can
command, and he can permit; he can forbid, and he can punish. He has a
supreme jurisdiction over the people of God. He can stop the ordinary
course of sacramental mercies; he can excommunicate from the ordinary
grace of redemption; and he can remove again the ban which he has
inflicted. It is the rule of Christ's providence, that what his vicar
does in severity or in mercy upon earth, he himself confirms in
heaven. And in saying all this I have said enough for my purpose,
because that purpose is to define our obligations to him. That is the
point on which our bishop has fixed our attention; "our obligations to
the Holy See;" and what need I say more to measure our own duty to it
and to him who sits in it, than to say that, in his administration of
Christ's kingdom, in his religious acts, we must never oppose his
will, or dispute his word, or criticise his policy, or shrink from his
side? There are kings of the earth who have despotic authority, which
their subjects obey indeed and disown in their hearts; but we must
never murmur at that absolute rule which the sovereign pontiff has
over us, because it is given to him by Christ, and, in obeying him, we
are obeying his Lord. We must never suffer ourselves to doubt, that,
in his government of the church, he is guided by an intelligence more
than human. His yoke is the yoke of Christ, _he_ has the
responsibility {580} of his own acts, not we; and to his Lord must he
render account, not to us. Even in secular matters it is ever safe to
be on his side, dangerous to be on the side of his enemies. Our duty
is, not indeed to mix up Christ's vicar with this or that party of
men, because he in his high station is above all parties, but to look
at his acts, and to follow him whither he goeth, and never to desert
him, however we may be tried, but to defend him at all hazards, and
against all comers, as a son would a father, and us a wife a husband,
knowing that his cause is the cause of God. And so, as regards his
successors, if we live to see them; it is our duty to give _them_ in
like manner our dutiful allegiance and our unfeigned service, and to
follow them also whithersoever they go, having that same confidence
that each in his turn and in his own day will do God's work and will,
which we felt in their predecessors, now taken away to their eternal
reward.

2. And now let us consider our obligations to the sovereign pontiff in
the second sense, which is contained under the word "obligation." "In
the sermon in the mass," says the bishop, "it is our wish that the
preacher should instruct the faithful on their obligations to the Holy
See;" and certainly those obligations, that is, the claims of the Holy
See upon our gratitude, are very great. We in this country owe our
highest blessings to the see of St. Peter--to the succession of
bishops who have filled his apostolic chair. For first it was a Pope
who sent missionaries to this island in the beginning of the church,
when the island was yet in pagan darkness. Then again, when our
barbarous ancestors, the Saxons, crossed over from the continent and
overran the country, who but a Pope, St. Gregory the First, sent over
St. Augustine and his companions to convert them to Christianity? and
by God's grace they and their successors did the great work in the
course of a hundred years. From that time, twelve hundred years ago
our nation has ever been Christian. And then in the lawless times each
followed, and the break-up of the old world all over Europe, and the
formation of the new, it was the  Popes, humanly speaking, who saved
the religion of Christ from being utterly lost and coming to an and,
and not in England only, but on the continent; that is, our Lord made
use of that succession of his vicars to fulfil his gracious promise,
that his religion should never fail. The Pope and the bishops of the
church, acting together in that miserable time, rescued from
destruction all that makes up our present happiness, spiritual and
temporal. Without them the world would have relapsed into
barbarism--but God willed otherwise; and especially the Roman
pontiffs, the successors of St. Peter, the centre of Catholic unity,
the vicars of Christ, which primarily related to the Almighty Redeemer
himself: "I have a lead help upon one that is mighty, and I have
exalted one chosen quote of the people. I have found David my servant,
with my holy oil have I anointed him. For my hand shall help him, and
my arm shall strengthen him. The enemy shall have no advantage over
him, nor the son of iniquity have power to hurt him. I will put to
flight his enemies before his face, and them that hate him I will put
to flight. And my truth and my mercy shall be with him, and in my name
shall his horn be exalted. He shall cry out to me, Thou art my Father,
my God, and the support of my salvation. And I will make him my
first-born, high above the kings of the earth. I will keep my mercy
for him for ever, and my coveted shall be faithful to him."

And the Almighty did this in pity toward his people, and for the sake
of his religion, and by virtue of his promise, and for the merits of
the most precious blood of his own dearly beloved Son, Whom the Popes
represented. As Moses and Aaron, as Josue,  as {581} Samuel, as David,
were the leaders of the Lord's host in the old time, and carried on
the chosen people of Israel from age to age, in spite of their enemies
round about, so have the Popes from the beginning of the gospel, and
especially in those middle ages when anarchy prevailed, been faithful
servants of their Lord, watching and fighting against sin and
injustice and unbelief and ignorance, and spreading abroad far and
wide the knowledge of Christian truth.

Such they have been in every age, and such are the obligations which
mankind owes to them; and, if I am to pass on to speak of the present
pontiff, and of our own obligations to him, then I would have you
recollect, my brethren, that it is he who has taken the Catholics of
England out of their unformed state and made them a church. He it is
who has redressed a misfortune of nearly three hundred years'
standing. Twenty years ago we were a mere collection of individuals;
but Pope Pius has brought us together, has given us bishops, and
created out of us a body politic, which, please God, as time goes on,
will play an important part in Christendom, with a character, an
intellect, and a power of its own, with schools of its own, with a
definite influence in the counsels of the Holy Church Catholic, as
England had of old time.

This has been his great act toward our country; and then specially, as
to his great act toward us here, toward me. One of his first acts
after he was Pope was, in his great condescension,  to call me to
Rome; then, when I got there, he bade me send for my friends to be
with me; and he formed us into and oratory. And thus it came to pass
that, on my return to England, I was able to associate myself with
others who had not gone to Rome, till we were so many in number that
not only did we establish our own oratory here, whither the Pope had
specially sent us, but we found we could throw off from's a colony of
zealous and able priests into the metropolis, and establish there,
with the powers with which the Pope had furnished me, and the sanction
of the late cardinal, that oratory which has done and still does so
much good among the Catholics of London.

Such is the Pope now happily reigning in the chair of St. Peter; such
are our personal obligations to him; such has he been toward England,
such toward us, toward you, my brethren. Such he is in his benefits,
and, great as are the claims of those benefits upon us, great equally
are the claims on us of his personal character and of his many
virtues. He is one whom to see is to love; one who overcomes even
strangers, even enemies, by his very look and voice; whose presence
subdues, whose memory haunts, even the sturdy resolute mind of the
English Protestant. Such is the Holy Father of Christendom, the worthy
successor of a long and glorious line. Such is he; and great as he is
in office, and in his beneficent acts and virtuous life, as great is
he in the severity of his trials, in the complication of his duties,
and in the gravity of his perils--perils which are at this moment
closing him in on every side; and therefore it is, on account of the
crisis of the long-protracted troubles of his pontificate which seems
near at hand, that our bishop has set apart this day for special
solemnities, the feast of the Holy Rosary, and has directed us to
"instruct the faithful on their _obligations_ to the Holy See," and
not only so, but also "on the duty especially incumbent on us at this
time of _praying_ for the Pope."


II. This, then, is the second point to which I have to direct your
attention, my brethren--the duty of praying for the Holy Father; but,
before doing so, I must tell you what the Pope's long-protracted
troubles are about, and what the crisis is which seems approaching, I
will do it in as few words as I can.

More than a thousand years ago, nay, near upon fifteen hundred, began
that great struggle, which I spoke of {582} just now, between the old
and the new inhabitants of this part of the world. Whole populations
of barbarians overrun the whole face of the country, that is, of
England, France, Germany, Spain, Italy, and the re«t of Europe. They
were heathens, and they got the better of the Christians; and religion
seemed likely to fail together with that old Christian stock. But, as
I have said, the Pope and the bishops of the church took heart, and
set about converting the new-comers, as in a former age they had
converted those who now had come to misfortune; and, through God's
mercy, they succeeded. The Saxon English--Anglo-Saxons, as they are
called--are among those whom the Pope converted, as I said just now.
The new convert people, as you may suppose, were very grateful to the
Pope and bishops, and they showed their gratitude by giving them large
possessions, which were of great use, in the bad times that followed,
in maintaining the influence of Christianity in the world. Thus the
Catholic Church became rich and powerful. The bishops became princes,
and the Pope became a sovereign ruler, with a large extent of country
all his own. This state of things lasted for many hundred years; and
the Pope and bishops became richer and richer, more and more powerful,
until at length the Protestant revolt took place, three hundred years
ago, and ever since that time, in a temporal point of view, they have
become of less and less importance, and less and less prosperous.
Generation after generation the enemies of the church, on the other
hand, have become bolder and bolder, more powerful, and more
successful in their measures against the Catholic faith. By this time
the church has well-nigh lost all its wealth and all its power; its
bishops have been degraded from their high places in the world, and in
many countries have scarcely more, or not more, of weight or of
privilege than the ministers of the sects which have split off from
it. However, though the bishops lost, as time went on, their temporal
rank, the Pope did lose his; he has been an exception to the rule;
according to the providence of God, he has retained Rome, and the
territories around about Rome, far and wide, as his own possession
without let or hindrance. But now at length, by the operation of the
same causes which have destroyed the power of the bishops, the Holy
Father is in danger of losing his temporal possessions. For the last
hundred years he has had from time to time serious reverses, but he
recovered his ground. Six years ago he lost the greater part of his
dominions--, all but Rome and the country immediately about it,--and
now the worst of difficulties has occurred as regards the territories
which remain to him. His enemies have succeeded, as it would seem, in
persuading at least a large portion of his subjects to side with them.
This is a real and very trying difficulty. While his subjects are for
him, no one can have a word to say against his temporal rule; but who
can force a sovereign on people which deliberately rejects him? You
may attempt it for awhile, but at length the people, if they persist,
will get their way.

They give out then, that the Pope's government is behind the age--that
once indeed it was as good as other governments, but that now other
governments have got better, and his has not--that he can either keep
order within his territory, nor defend it from attacks from
without--that his police and his finances are in a bad state--that
his people are discontented within--that he does not show them how to
become rich--that he keeps them from improving their minds--that he
treats them as children--that he opens no career for young and
energetic minds, but condemns them to inactivity and sloth--that he is
an old man--that he is an ecclesiastic--that, considering his great
spiritual duties, he has no time left him for temporal concerns--and
that a bad rebellious government is a scandal to religion.

{583}

I have stated their arguments as fairly as I can, but you must not for
an instant suppose, my brethren, that I admit either their principles
or their facts. It is a simple paradox to say that ecclesiastical and
temporal power cannot lawfully, religiously, and usefully be joined
together. Look at what are called the middle ages--that is, the period
which intervenes between the old Roman empire and the modern world; as
I have said, the Pope and the bishops saved religion and civil order
from destruction in those tempestuous times--and they did so _by
means_ of the secular power which they possessed. And next, going on
to the principles which the Pope's enemies lay down as so very
certain, who will grant to them, who has any pretension to be a
religious man, that progress in temporal possessions is the greatest
of goods, and that everything else, however sacred, must give way
before it? On the contrary, health, long life, security, liberty,
knowledge, are certainly great goods, but the possession of heaven is
a far greater good than all of them together. With all the progress in
worldly happiness which we possibly could make, we could not make
ourselves immortal--death must come; that will be a time when riches
and worldly knowledge will avail us nothing, and true faith and divine
love and a past life of obedience will be all in all to us. If we were
driven to choose between the two, it would be a hundred times better
to be Lazarus in this world than to be Dives in the next.

However, the best answer to their arguments is contained in sacred
history, which supplies us with a very apposite and instructive lesson
on the subject, and to it I am now going to refer.

Now observe, in the first place, no Catholic maintains that that rule
of the Pope as a king, in Rome and its provinces, which men are now
hoping to take from him, is, strictly speaking, what is called a
theocracy, that is, a divine government. His government, indeed, in
spiritual matters, in the Catholic Church throughout the world, might
be called a theocracy, because he is the vicar of Christ, and has the
assistance of the Holy Ghost; but not such is his kingly rule in his
own dominions. On the other hand, the rule exercised over the chosen
people, the Israelites, by Moses, Josue, Gideon, Eli, and Samuel, was
a theocracy: God was the king of the Israelites, not Moses and the
rest--_they_ were but vicars or vicegerents of the Eternal Lord who
brought the nation out of Egypt. Now, when men object that the Pope's
government of his own states is not what it should be, and that
therefore he ought to lose them, because, forsooth, a religious rule
should be perfect or not at all, I take them at their word, if they
are Christians, and refer them to the state of things among the
Israelites after the time of Moses, during the very centuries when
they had God for their king. Was that a period of peace, prosperity,
and contentment? Is it an argument against the divine perfections,
that it was not such a period? Why is it, then, to be the condemnation
of the Popes, who are but men, that their rule is but parallel in its
characteristics to that of the King of Israel, who was God? He indeed
has his own all-wise purposes for what he does; he knows the end from
the beginning; he could have made his government as perfect and as
prosperous as might have been expected from the words of Moses
concerning it, as perfect and prosperous as, from the words of the
prophets, our anticipations might have been about the earthly reign of
the Messias. But this he did not do, because from the first he made
that perfection and that prosperity dependent upon the free will, upon
the cooperation of his people. Their loyal obedience to him was the
condition, expressly declared by him, of his fulfilling his promises.
He proposed to work out his purposes through them, and, when they
refused their share {584} in the work, everything went wrong. Now they
did refuse from the first; so that from the very first, he says of
them emphatically, they were a "stiff-necked people."  This was at the
beginning of their history; and close upon the end of it, St. Stephen,
inspired by the Holy Ghost, repeats the divine account of them: "You
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resist
the Holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do you also." In consequence
of this obstinate disobedience, I say, God's promises were not
fulfilled to them. That long lapse of five or six hundred years,
during which God was their king, was in good part a time, not of
well-being, but of calamity.

Now, turning to the history of the papal monarchy for the last
thousand years, the Roman people have not certainly the guilt of the
Israelites, because they were not opposing the direct rule of' God;
and I would not attribute to them now a liability to the same dreadful
crimes which stain the annals of their an ancestors; but still, after
all they have been a singularly stiff-necked people in time past,  and
in consequence, there has been extreme confusion, I may say anarchy,
under the reign of the Popes; and the restless impatience of his rule
which exists in the Roman territory now is only what has shown itself
age after age in times past. The Roman people not seldom offered
bodily violence to their Popes, killed some Popes, wounded others,
drove others from the city. On one occasion they assaulted the Pope at
the very altar in St. Peter's, and he was obliged to take to flight in
his pontifical vestments. Another time they insulted the clergy of
Rome; at another, they attacked and robbed the pilgrims who brought
offerings from a distance to the shrine of St. Peter. Sometimes they
sided with the German emperors against the Pope; sometimes with other
enemies of his in Italy itself. As many as thirty-six Popes endured
this dreadful contest with their own subjects, till at last, in anger
and disgust with Rome and Italy, they took refuge in France, where
they remained for seventy years, during the reigns of eight of their
number.   [Footnote 170]

  [Footnote 170: I take these facts as I find them in Gibbon's
  History, the work which I have immediately at hand; but it would not
  be difficult to collect a multitude of such instances from the
  original historians of those times.]

That I may not be supposed to rest what I have said on insufficient
authorities, I will quote the words of that great saint, St. Bernard,
about the roman people, seven hundred years ago.

Writing to Pope Eugenius during the troubles of the day, he says:
"What shall I say of the people? why, that it _is_ the Roman people. I
could not more concisely or fully express what I think of your
subjects. What has been so notorious for ages as the wantonness and
haughtiness of the Romans? a race unaccustomed to peace, accustomed to
tumult; a race cruel and unmanageable up to this day, which knows not
to submit, unless when it is unable to make fight. . . . I know the
hardened heart of this people, but God is powerful even of these
stones to raise up children to Abraham. . . . When will you find for
me out of the whole of that populous city, who received you as Pope
without bribe or hope of bribe? And then especially are they wishing
to be masters, when they have professed to be servants. They promise
to be trustworthy, that they may have the opportunity of injuring
those who trust them. . . . They are wise for evil, but they are
ignorant for good. Odious to earth and heaven, they have assailed both
the one and the other; impious towards God, reckless toward things
sacred, factious among themselves, envious of their neighbors, inhuman
toward foreigners, . . . . they love none, and by none are loved. Too
impatient for submission, too helpless for rule; . . . importunate to
gain an end, restless till they gain it, ungrateful when they have
gained it. They have taught {585} their tongue to speak big words,
while their performances are scanty indeed." [Footnote 171]

    [Footnote 171:  St. Bernard is led to say this to the Pope in
    consequence of the troubles created in Rome by Arnald of Bresela.
    "Ab obitu Caelestini hoc anno invalescere coepit istiusmodi
    rebellio Romanorum adversus Pontficem, eodemque haeresis dicta
    Politicorum, sive Arnaldistarum. Ea erant tempora infelicissime,
    cùm Romani ipsi, quorum fides in universo orbe jam à tempore
    Apostolorum annunciata semper fuit, resilientes modo à Pontifice,
    dominandi cupidine, ex filiis Petri et discipulis Christi, fiunt
    soboles et alumni pestilentissimi Arnaldi de Brixiâ. Verùm, cùm tu
    Romanos audis, ne putes omnes eâdem insaniâ percitos, nam
    complures ex nobilium Romanorum familiis, iis relictis, pro
    Pontifice rem ageoant, etc." Baron. Annal. in ann. 1144. 4.--_De
    Consid_. iv. 2.]


Thus I begin, and now let us continue I parallel between the
Israelites and the Romans.

I have said that, while the Israelites had God for their king, they
had a succession of great national disasters, arising indeed really
from their falling off from him; but this they would have been slow to
acknowledge. They fell into idolatry; then, in consequence, they fell
into the power of their enemies; then God in his mercy visited them,
and raised up for them a deliverer and ruler--a judge, as he was
called--who brought them to repentance, and then brought them out of
their troubles; however, when the judge died, they fell back into
idolatry, and then they fell under the power of their enemies again.
Thus for eight years they were in subjection to the king of
Mesopotamia; for eight years to the king of Moab; for twenty years to
the king of Canaan; for seven years to the Madianites; for eighteen
years to the Ammomites; and for forty years to the Philistines.
Afterward Eli, the high priest, became their judge, and then disorders
of another kind commenced. His sons, who were priests also, committed
grievous acts of impurity in the holy place, and in other ways caused
great scandal. In consequence a heavy judgment came upon the people;
they were beaten in battle by the Philistines, and the ark of God was
taken. Then Samuel was raised up, a holy prophet and a judge, and in
the time of his vigor all went well; but he became old, and then he
appointed his sons to take his place. They, however, were not like
him, and everything went wrong again. "His sons walked not in his
ways," says the sacred record, "but they turned aside after lucre, and
took bribes, and perverted judgment." This reduced the Israelites to
despair; they thought they never should have a good government while
things were as they were; and they came to the conclusion that they
had better not be governed by such men as Samuel, however holy he
might be, that public affairs ought to be put on an intelligible
footing, and be carried on upon system, which had never yet been done.
So they came to the conclusion that they had better have a king, like
the nations around them. They deliberately preferred the rule of man
to the rule of God. They did not like to repent and give up their
sins, as the true means of being prosperous; they thought it an easier
way to temporal prosperity to have a king like the nations than to
pray and live virtuously. And not only the common people, but even the
grave and venerable seniors of the nation took up this view of what
was expedient for them. "All the ancients of Israel, being assembled,
came to Samuel, . . . and they said to him . . . Make us a king to
judge us, as all nations have." Observe, my brethren, this is just
what the Roman people are saying now. They wish to throw off the
authority of the Pope, on the plea of the disorders which they
attribute to his government, and to join themselves to the rest of
Italy, and to have the King of Italy for their king. Some of them,
indeed, wish to be without any king at all; but, whether they wish to
have a king or no, at least they wish to get free from the Pope.

Now let us continue the parallel. When the prophet Samuel heard this
request urged from such a quarter, and supported by the people
generally, he was much moved. "The word was displeasing in the eyes of
Samuel," says the inspired writer, "that they should say, Give us a
king. And Samuel prayed to the Lord." {586} Almighty God answered him
by saying, "They have not rejected thee, but me;" and he bade the
prophet warn the people, what the king they sought after would be to
them when at length they had him. Samuel accordingly put before them
explicitly what treatment they would receive from him. "He will take
your sons," he said, "and will put them in his chariots; and he will
make them his horseman, and his running footmen to go before his
chariots. He will take the tenth of your corn and the revenue of your
vineyards. Your flocks also he will take, and you shall be his
servants." Then the narrative proceeds, "But the people would not hear
the voice of Samuel, and they said, Nay, but there shall be a king
over us. And we also will be like all nations, and our king shall
judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles for us."

Now here the parallel I am drawing is very exact. It is happier, I
think, for the bulk of a people to belong to a small state which makes
little noise in the world than to a large one. At least in this day we
find small states, such an Holland, Belgium, and Switzerland, have
special and singular temporal advantages. And the Roman people, too,
under the sway of the Popes, at least have had a very easy time of it;
but, alas that people is not sensible of this, or does not allow
itself to keep it in mind. The Romans have not had those civil
inconveniences which fall so heavy on the members of a first-class
power. The pontifical government has been very gentle with them; but,
if once they were joined to the kingdom of Italy, they would at length
find what it is to attain temporal greatness. The words of Samuel to
the Israelites would be fulfilled in them to the letter. Heavy taxes
would be laid on them; their children would be torn from them for the
army; and they would incur the other penalties of an ambition which
prefers to have a share in a political adventure to being at the head
of Catholic citizenship. We cannot have all things to our wish in this
world; we must take our choice between this advantage and that;
perhaps the Roman people would like both to secure this world and the
next, if they could; perhaps, in seeking both, they may lose both; and
perhaps, when they have lost more than they have gained, they may wish
their old sovereign back again, as they have done in other centuries
before this, and may regret that they have caused such grievous
disturbance for what at length they find out is little worth it.

In truth, after all, the question which they have to determine is, as
i have intimated, not one of worldly prosperity and adversity, of
greatness or insignificance, of despotism or liberty, of position in
the world or in the church; but a question of spiritual life or death.
The sin of the Israelites was not that they desired good government,
but that they rejected God as their king. Their choosing to have "a
king like the nations" around them was, in matter of fact, the first
step in a series of acts which at length lead them to their rejection
of the Almighty as their God. When in spite of Samuel's remonstrances
they were obstinate, God let them have their way, and then in time
they became dissatisfied with their king for the very reasons which
the old prophet had set before them in vain. On Solomon's death, about
a hundred and twenty years after, the greater part of the nation broke
off from his son on the very plea of Solomon's tyranny, and chose a
new king, who at once established idolatry all through their country.

Now, I grant, to reject the Holy Father of course is not the sin of
the Israelites, for they rejected Almighty God himself: yet I wish I
was not forced to believe that a hatred of the Catholic religion is in
fact at the bottom of that revolutionary spirit which at present seems
so powerful in Rome. Progress, in the mouth of some people--of a great
many people--means apostasy. Not that I wouldn't deny that {587} there
are sincere Catholics so dissatisfied with things as they were in
Italy, as they are in Rome, that they are brought to think that no
social change can be for the worse. Nor as if I pretended to be able
to answer all the objections of those who take a political and secular
view of the subject. But here I have nothing to do with secular
politics. In a sacred place I have only to view the matter
religiously. It would ill become me, in my station in the church and
my imperfect knowledge of the facts of the case, to speak four or
against statesmen and governments, lines of policy or public acts, as
if I were invested with any particular mission to give my judgment, or
had any access to sources of special information. I have not here to
determine what may be politically more wise, or what may be socially
more advantageous, or what in a civil point of view would work more
happily, or what in an intellectual would tell better; my duty is to
lead you, my brethren, to look at what is happening, as the sacred
writers would now view it and describe it were they on earth now to do
so, and to attempt this by means of the light thrown upon present
occurrences by what they actually have written, whether in the Old
Testament or the New.

We must remove, I say, the veil off the face of events, as Scripture
enables us to do, and try to speak of them as Scripture interprets
them for us. Speaking then in the sanctuary, I say that theories and
schemes about government and administration, be a better or worse, and
the aims of mere statesmen and politicians, be they honest or be they
deceitful, these are not the determining causes of that series of
misfortunes under which the Holy See has so long been suffering. There
is something deeper at work than anything human. It is not any refusal
of the Pope to put his administration on a new footing, it is not any
craft or force of men high in public affairs, it is not any cowardice
or frenzy of the people, which is the sufficient explanation of the
present confusion. What it is our duty here to bear in mind is the
constant restless agency over the earth of that bad angel who was a
liar from the beginning, of whom Scripture speaks so much. The real
motive cause of the world's troubles is the abiding presence in it of
the apostate spirit, "The prince of the power of this air," as St.
Paul calls him, "The spirit that now worketh on the children of
unbelief."

Things would go on well enough but for him. He it is who perverts to
evil what is in itself good and right, sowing cockle amid the wheat.
Advance in knowledge, in science, in education, in the arts of life,
in domestic economy, in municipal administration, in the conduct of
public affairs, is all good and from God, and might be conducted in a
religious way; but the evil spirit, jealous of good, makes use of it
for a bad end. And much more able is he to turn to his account the
designs and measures of worldly politicians. He it is who spreads
suspicions and dislikes between class and class, between sovereigns
and subjects, who makes men confuse together things good and bad, who
inspires bigotry, party spirit, obstinacy, resentment, arrogance, and
self-will, and hinders things from righting themselves, finding their
level, and running smooth. His one purpose is so to match and arrange
and combine and direct the opinions and the measures of Catholics and
unbelievers, of Romans and foreigners, of sovereigns and popular
leaders--all that is good, all that is bad, all that is violent or
lukewarm in the good, all that is morally great and intellectually
persuasive in the bad--as to inflict the widest possible damage, and
utter ruin, if that were possible, on the church of God.

Doubtless in St. Paul's time, in the age of heathen persecution, the
persecutors had various good political arguments in behalf of their
cruelty. Mobs indeed, or local magistrates, might be purposely cruel
toward the Christians; but the great Roman government {588} at a
distance, the great rulers and wise lawyers of the day, acted from
views of large policy; they had reasons of state, as the Kings of the
earth have now; still our Lord and his apostles do not hesitate to
pass these by, and declare plainly that the persecution which they
sanctioned or commanded was the word, not of man, but of Satan. And
now in like manner we are not engaged in a mere conflict between
progress and reaction, modern ideas and new, philosophy and theology,
but in one scene of the never-ending conflict between the anointed
Mediator and the devil, the church and the world; and, in St. Paul's
words, "we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities and powers, against the world-rulers of this darkness,
against the spirits of wickedness in the high places."

Such is the apostle's judgment; and how, after giving it, does he
proceed? "Therefore," he says, "take unto you the armor of God, that
you may be able to resist in the evil day and to stand in all things
perfect. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and
having on the breast-plate of justice, and your feet shod with the
preparation of the gospel of peace; in all things taking the shield of
faith, whereby you may be able to quench all the fiery darts of the
wicked. And take unto you the helmet of salvation and the sword of the
Spirit, which is the word of God." And then he concludes his
exhortation with words which most appositely bear upon the point
toward which all that I have been saying is directed--"praying at all
times with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching
therein with all instance and supplication for all the saints, and for
me," that is, for the apostle himself, "that speech may be given me,
that I may open my mouth with confidence to make known the mystery of
the gospel."

Here, then, we are brought at length to the consideration of the duty
of prayer for our living apostle and bishop of bishops, the Pope. I
shall attempt to state distinctly what is to be the _object_ of our
prayers for him, and secondly, what the _spirit_ in which we should
pray, and so I shall bring my remarks on this great subject to and
end.

1. In order to ascertain the exact _object_ of our prayers at this
time, we must ascertain what is the _occasion_ of them. You know, my
brethren, and I have already observed, that the Holy Father has been
attacked in his temporal possessions again and again in these last
years, and we have all along been saying prayers daily in the mass in
his behalf. About six years ago the northern portion of his states
threw off his authority. Shortly after, a large foreign force,
uninvited, as it would scene, by his people at-large--robbers I will
call them--(this is not a political sentiment, but a historical
statement, for I never heard any one, whatever his politics, who
defendant their act in itself, but only on the plea of its supreme
expedience, of some state necessity, or some theory of patriotism)--a
force of sacrilegious robbers--broke into provinces nearer to Rome by
a sudden movement, and, without any right except that of the stronger,
got possession of them, and keeps them to this day.   [Footnote 172]
{589} Past outrages, such as these, are never to be forgotten; but
still they are not the occasion, nor do they give the matter, of our
present prayers. What that occasion, what that subject is, we seem to
learn from his lordship's letter to his clergy, in which our prayers
are required. After speaking of the Pope's being "stripped of part of
his dominions," and "deprive of all the rest, with the exception of
the marshes and deserts that surround the Roman capital," he fastens
our attention on the fact, that "now at last is the Pope to be left
standing alone, and standing face to face with those unscrupulous
adversaries, whose boast and whose vow to all the world is not to
leave to him one single foot of Italian ground except beneath their
sovereign sway." I understand, then, that the exact object of our
prayers is, that the territory still is should not be violently taken
him, as have been as larger portions of his dominions of which I have
already spoken.

  [Footnote 172: The following telegram in The Times of September
  13th, 1860, containing Victor Emmanuel's formal justification for
  his invasion and occupation of Umbria and the Marches in a time of
  peace, is a document for after-times:

  TURIN, Sept. 11, evening.

  The king received to-day a deputation from the inhabitants of Umbria
  and the Marches.

  His majesty granted the protection which the deputation solicited,
  and orders to have been given to the Sardinian troops to enter those
  provinces by the following proclamation:

  "Soldiers! You are about to enter the Marches and Umbria, in order
  to establish civil order in the towns now desolated by this rule,
  and to give to the people a liberty of expressing their own wishes.
  You will not fight against the armies of any of the powers, but will
  free those unhappy Italian provinces from the bands of foreign
  adventurers which infest them. You do not go to revenge injuries
  done to me and Italy, but to prevent the popular hatred from
  unloosing itself against the oppressors of the country.

  "By your example you will teach the people forgiveness of offenses,
  and Christian tolerance to the man compared the love of the Italian
  fatherland to Islamism.

  "At peace with all the great powers, and holding myself aloof from
  any provocation, I intend to read Central Italy of one continual
  cause of trouble and discord. I intend to respect the seat of the
  chief of the church, to whom I am ever ready to give, in accordance
  with the allied and friendly powers, all the guarantees of
  independence and security which his misguided advisors have made
  hope to obtain for him from the fanaticism of the wicked sect which
  conspires against my authority and against the liberties of the
  nation.

  "Soldiers! I am accused of ambition. Yes; i have one ambition, and
  it is to re-establish the principles of moral order in Italy, and
  preserve Europe from the continual dangers of revolution and war."

  The next day The Times, in a leading article, thus commented on the
  above:

  "Victor Emmanuel has in Garibaldi a most formidable competitor. . . .
  [Piedmont] must therefore, at whatever cost or risk, make herself
  once more mistress of the revolution. She must lead that she may not
  be forced to follow. She must revolutionize the Papal States, in
  order that she may put herself in a position to arrest dangerous
  revolutionary movement against Venetia. . . . These motives are
  amply sufficient to account for the decisive movement of Victor
  Emmanuel. He lives in revolutionary times, when self-preservation
  has superseded all other considerations, and it would be childish to
  apply to his situation the maxims of international law which are
  applicable to periods of tranquility.

  "These being the motives which have held Piedmont to draw the sword,
  we have next to see what are the grounds on which she justifies the
  step. These grounds are two--the extraordinary misrule and
  oppression of the Papal government, and the presence of large bands
  of foreign mercenaries, by which the country is oppressed and
  terrorized. The object is said to be to give the people an
  opportunity of expressing their own wishes and the re-establishment
  of civil order. The king promises to respect the seat of the chief
  of the church--Rome, we suppose, and it's immediate environs; but,
  while holding out this assurance, the manifesto speaks of the Pope
  and his advisers in terms of bitterness and acrimony unusual in the
  present age, even in a declaration of war. He will teach the people
  forgiveness of offenses, and Christian tolerance to the Pope and his
  general. He denounces the misguided advisors of the pontiff, and the
  fanaticism of the wicked sect which conspires against his authority
  and the liberties of the nation. This is harsh language, and is not
  inconsistently seconded by the advance into the States of the Church
  of an army of 50,000 men."

  It was the old fable of the Wolf and the Lamb.]

 [End footnote 172]

This too, I conceive, is what is meant by praying for the Holy See.
"The duty of every true child of Holy Church," says the bishop, "is to
offer continuous and humble prayer for the Father of Christendom, and
for the protection of the Holy See." By the Holy See we may understand
Rome, considered as the seat of pontifical government. We are to pray
for Rome, the see, or seat, or metropolis of St. Peter and his
successors. Further, we are to pray for Rome as the seat, not only of
his spiritual government, but of his temporal. We are to pray that he
may continue king of Rome; that his subjects may come to a better
mind; that instead of threatening and assailing him, or being too
cowardly to withstand those who do, they may defend and obey him;
that, instead of being the heartless tormentors of an old and
venerable man, they may pay a willing homage to the apostle of God;
that instead of needing to be kept down year after year by troops from
afar, as has been the case for so long a time, they may, "with a great
heart and a willing mind," form themselves into the glorious bodyguard
of a glorious master; that they may obliterate and expiate what is so
great a scandal to the world, so great an indignity to themselves, so
great a grief to their father and king, that foreigners are kinder to
him than his own flesh and blood; that now at least, though in the end
of days, they may reverse the past, and, after the ingratitude of
centuries, may unlearn the pattern of that rebellious people, who
began by rejecting their God and ended by crucifying their Redeemer.

2. So much for the _object_ of our prayers; secondly, as to the
_spirit_ in which we should pray. As we ever say in prayer, "Thy will
be done," so {590} we must say now. We do not absolutely know God's
will in this matter; we know indeed it is his will that we should ask;
we are not absolutely sure that it is his will that he should grant.
The very fact of our praying shows that we are uncertain about the
event. We pray when we are uncertain, not when we are certain. If we
were quite sure what God intended to do, whether to continue the
temporal power of the Pope or to end it, we should not pray. It is
quite true indeed that the event may _depend upon our prayer_, but by
such prayer is meant perseverance in prayer and union of prayers; and
we never can be certain that this condition of numbers and of fervor
has been sufficiently secured. We shall indeed gain our prayer if we
pray enough; but, since it is ever uncertain what is enough, it is
ever uncertain what will be the event. There are Eastern
superstitions, in which it is taught that, by means of a certain
number of religious acts, by sacrifices, prayers, penances, a man of
necessity extorts from God what he wishes to gain, so that he may rise
to supernatural greatness even against the will of God. Far be from us
such blasphemous thoughts! We pray to God, we address the Blessed
Virgin and the holy apostles, and the other guardians of Rome, to
defend the holy city; but we know the event lies absolutely in the
hands of the All wise, whose ways are not as our ways, whose thoughts
are not as our thoughts, and, unless we had been furnished with a
special revelation on the matter, to be simply confident or to predict
would be presumption. Such is Christian prayer; it implies hope and
fear. We are not certain we shall gain our petition, we are not
certain we shall not gain it. Were we certain that we should not, we
should give ourselves to resignation, not to prayer; were we certain
we should, we should employ ourselves, not in prayer, but in praise
and thanksgiving. While we pray, then, in behalf of the Pope's
temporal power, we contemplate both sides of the alternative his
retaining it and his losing it; and we prepare ourselves both for
thanksgiving and resignation as the event may B. I conclude by
considering each of these issues of his present difficulty.

(I.) First, as to the event of his retaining his temporal power. I
think this side of the alternative (humanly speaking) to be highly
probable. I should be very much surprised if in the event he did not
keep it. I think the Romans will not be able to do without him; it is
only a minority even now which is against him; the majority of his
subjects are not wicked, so much as cowardly and incapable. Even if
they renounced him now for awhile, they will change their minds and
wish for him again. They will find out that he is their real
greatness. Their city is a place of ruins, except so far as it is a
place shrines. It is the tomb and charnel-house of pagan impiety,
except so far as it is sanctified and quickened by the blood of
martyrs and the relics of saints. To inhabit it would be a penance,
were it not for the presence of religion. Babylon is gone, Memphis is
gone, Persepolis is gone; Rome would go, if the Pope went. Its very
life is the light of the sanctuary. It never could be a suitable
capital of a modern kingdom without a sweeping away of all that makes
it beautiful and venerable to the world at large. And then, when its
new rulers had made of it a trim and brilliant city, they would find
themselves on an healthy soil and a defenceless plain. But, in truth,
the tradition of ages and inveteracy of associations make such a vast
change in Rome impossible. All mankind are parties to the inviolable
union of the Pope and his city. His autonomy is a first principle in
European politics, whether among Catholics or Protestants; and where
can it be secured so well as in that city which has so long been the
seat of its exercise? Moreover, the desolateness of Rome is as
befitting to a kingdom which is not of this world as it is {591}
incompatible with a creation of modern political theories. It is the
religious centre of millions all over the earth, who care nothing for
the Romans who happen to live there, and much for the martyred
apostles who so long have lain buried there; and its claim to have an
integral place in the very idea of Catholicity is recognized not only
by Catholics, but by the whole world.

It is cheering to begin our prayers with these signs of God's
providence in our favor. He expressly encourages us to pray, for
before we have begun our petition, he has begun to fulfil it. And at
the same time, by beginning the work of mercy without us, he seems to
remind us of that usual course of his providence, namely, that he
means to finish it with us. Let us fear to be the cause of a triumph
being lost to the church, because we would not pray for it.

(2.) And now, lastly, to take the other side of the alternative. Let
us suppose that the Pope loses his temporal power, and returns to the
conation of St. Sylvester, St. Julius, St. Innocent, and other great
Popes of early times. Are we, therefore, to suppose that he and the
church will come to naught? God forbid! To say that the church can
fail, or the see of St. Peter can fail, is to deny the faithfulness of
Almighty God to his word. "Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I
build my church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it."
To say that the church cannot live except in a particular way, is to
make it "subject to elements of the earth." The church is not the
creature of times and places, of temporal politics or popular caprice.
Our Lord maintains her by means of this world, but these means are
necessary to her only while he gives them; when he takes them away,
they are no longer necessary. He works by means, but he is not bound
to means. He has a thousand ways of maintaining her; he can support
her life, not by bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of
his mouth. If he takes away one defence, he will give another instead.
We know nothing of the future: our duty is to direct our course
according to our day; not to give up of our own act the means which
God has given us to maintain his church withal, but not to lament over
their loss, when he has taken them away. Temporal power has been the
means of the church's independence for a very long period; but, as her
bishops have lost it a long while, and are not the less bishops still,
so would it be as regards her head, if he also lost his. The eternal
God is her refuge, and as he has delivered her out of so many perils
hitherto, so will he deliver her still. The glorious chapters of her
past history are but anticipations of other glorious chapters still to
come. See how it has been with her from the very beginning down to
this day. First, the heathen populations persecuted her children for
three centuries, but she did not come to an end. Then a flood of
heresies was poured out upon her, but still she did not come to an
end. Then the savage tribes of the north and east came down upon her
and overran her territory, but she did not come to an end. Next,
darkness of mind, ignorance, torpor, stupidity, reckless corruption,
fell upon the holy place, still she did not come to an end. Then the
craft and violence of her own strong and haughty children did their
worst against her, but still she did not come to an end. Then came a
time when the riches of the world flowed in upon her, and the pride of
life, and the refinements and the luxuries of human reason; and lulled
her rulers into an unfaithful security, till they thought their high
position in the world would never be lost to them, and almost fancied
that it was good to enjoy themselves here below; but still she did not
come to an end. And then came the so-called reformation, and the rise
of Protestantism, and men said that the church had disappeared and
they could not find her place. Yet, now three centuries after that
even, _has_, {592} my brethren, the Holy Church come to an end? has
Protestantism weakened her powers, terrible enemy as it seemed to be
when it arose? has Protestantism, that bitter, energetic enemy of the
Holy See, harmed the Holy See? Why, there never has been a time, since
the first age of the church when there has been such a succession of
holy Popes, as since the reformation. Protestantism had been a great
infliction on such as have succumbed to it; but it has even wrought
benefits for those whom it has failed to seduce. By the mercy of God
it has been turned into a spiritual gain to the members of Holy
Church.

Take again Italy, into which Protestantism has not entered, and
England, of which it has gained possession. Now I know well that, when
Catholics are good in Italy, they are very good; I would not deny that
they attain there to a height and a force of saintliness of which we
seem to have no specimens here. This, however, is the case of souls
whom neither the presence nor the absence of religious enemies would
affect for the better or the worse. Nor will I attempt the impossible
task of determining the amount of faith and obedience among Catholics
respectively in two countries so different from each other. But,
looking at Italian and English Catholics externally and in their
length and breadth, I may leave any Protestant to decide, in which of
the two there is at this moment a more demonstrative faith, a more
impressive religiousness, a more generous piety, a more steady
adherence to the cause of the Holy Father. The English are multiplying
religious buildings, decorating churches, endowing monasteries,
educating, preaching, and converting, and carrying off in the current
of their enthusiasm numbers even of those who are external to the
church; the Italian statesman, on the contrary, in all our bishop's
words, "imprison and exile the bishops and clergy, leave the flocks
without shepherds, confiscate the church's revenues, suppress the
monasteries and convents, incorporate ecclesiastics and religious in
the army, plunder the churches and monastic libraries, and exposed
religion herself, stripped in bleeding in every limb, the Catholic
religion in the person of her ministers, her sacraments, or most
devoted members, to be objects of profane and blasphemous ridiculed."
In so brave, intelligent, vigorous-minded a race as the Italians, and
in the nineteenth century not the sixteenth, and in the absence of any
formal protest of classes or places, the act of the rulers is the act
of the people. At the end of three centuries Protestant England
contains more Catholics who are loyal and energetic in word and deed
then Catholic Italy. So harmless has been the violence of the
reformation; it professed to eliminate from the church doctrinal
corruptions, and it has failed both in what it has done and in what it
has not done; it has bred infidels, to its confusion; and, to which
dismay, it has succeeded in purifying and strengthening catholic
communities.

It is with these thoughts then that, my brethern, with these feelings
of solemn expectation, of joyful confidence, that we now come for our
God and pray him to have mercy on his chosen servant, his own vicar,
in this hour of trial. We come to him, like the prophet Daniel, in
humiliation for our own sins and the sins of our kings, our princes,
our fathers, and our people in all parts of the church; and therefore
we say the _Miserere_ and the Litany of the Saints, as in the time of
fast. And we come before him in the right and glad spirit of soldiers
who know they are under the leading of an invincible king, and wait
with beating hearts to see what he is about to do; and therefore it is
that we adorn our sanctuary, bringing out our hangings and multiplying
our lights, as on a day of festival. We know well we are on the
winning side, and that the prayers of the poor and the weak and
despised can do more, when offered in a true spirit, then all the
wisdom and all the resources of the world. This seventh of October is
the very {593} anniversary of that day on which the prayers of St.
Pius, and the Holy Rosary said by thousands of the faithful at his
bidding, broke forever the domination of the Turks in the great battle
of Lepanto. God will give us what we ask, or he will give us something
better. In this spirit let us proceed with the holy rites which we
have begun--in the presence of innumerable witnesses, of God the judge
of all, of Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, of his mother Mary
our immaculate protectress, of all the angels of holy church, of all
the blessed saints, of apostles and evangelists, martyrs and
confessors, holy preachers, holy recluses, holy virgins, of holy
innocents taken away before actual sin, and of all other holy souls
who have been purified by suffering, and have already reached their
heavenly home.

----------

From Chambers's Journal.


THE SOURCE OF LABOR.


Science has taught us that the processes going on around us are but
changes, not annihilations and creations. With the eye of knowledge we
see the candle slowly turning into invisible gases, nor doubt for an
instant that the matter of which the candle was composed is still
existing, ready to reappear in other forms. But this fact is true not
only of matter itself, but also of all the influences that work on
matter. We wind up the spring of a clock, and, for a whole week, the
labor thus stored up is slowly expended in keeping the clock going.
Or, again, we spend five minutes of hard labor in raising the hammer
of a pile-driver, which, in its fall, exerts all that accumulated
labor in a single instant. In these instances, we easily see that we
store up labor. Now, if we pat a dozen sovereigns in a purse, and none
of them be lost, we can take a dozen sovereigns out again. So in
labor, if no labor be lost, as science asserts--for the inertia of
matter, its very deadness, so to speak, which renders it incapable of
spontaneously producing work, also prevents its destroying work when
involved in it--we should be able to obtain back without deduction
all our invested labor when we please.

Imagine a mountain stream turning an overshot wheel. It thus falls
from a higher to a lower level. A certain amount of labor would be
required to raise the water from the lower level to the higher; just
this amount of labor the water gives out in its fall, and invests, as
it were, in the wheel. If, however, when arrived at the lower level,
the water were to demand of the wheel to be pumped up again, the
slightest trial would show that it would ask more than it could
obtain, though not more than it had given. The wheel, if questioned as
to the cause of its inability, must reply as others have done, that it
has shut up part of the labor in investments which it cannot realize.
The reason, as commonly stated, is, that friction has destroyed part
of the labor. The labor is not, however, destroyed. Science has shown
that heat and labor are connected; labor may be turned into heat, and
heat into labor. The labor absorbed by friction is but turned into
heat. If, however, we try to extract labor from the heat thus diffused
through the different parts of the water-wheel, and make it available,
we find ourselves quite at a loss. The heat gradually diffuses itself
through surrounding bodies, and, so far as we {594} are concerned, the
labor is wasted, though it still exist, like Cleopatra's pearl
dissolved in the cup of vinegar.

If no labor is lost, so neither is any created. The labor we exert is
but the expenditure of labor stored up in our frames, just as the
labor invested in the wound-up spring keeps the clock going. Whence,
then, does all this labor originally come? We see the waste--how is
compensation made? The answer is simple and easy to give. All the
labor done under the sun is really done by it. The light and heat
which the sun supplies are turned into labor by the organizations
which exist upon the earth. These organizations may be roughly divided
into two classes--the collectors and the expenders of the sun's labor.
The first merely collect the sun's labor, so as to make it available
for the other class; while, just as the steam-engine is the medium by
which the steam gives motion, so this second class is the medium by
which the sun's heat is turned into actual labor.

Still, the sun does not work only through organized labor: his mere
mechanical influence is very great. With the moon--the only second
post he deigns as to fill--he produces the tides by his attraction on
the sea. But for the friction of the earth and the sea, the tides,
once set in motion, would rise and fall without any further effort;
but the work done in overcoming the friction is, though due to the sun
and moon, not extracted from them, but by them from the earth. For it
would make a vast effort to cause the earth to cease rotating. All
this effort is, as it were, stored up in the revolving earth. as the
tidal waters, then, rub along the bed of the sea, or the waters on
which they rest and the adjacent coasts, this friction tends to make
the earth move faster or slower, according to the direction in which
the tidal flow is. The general effect is, however, that the friction
of the tides makes the earth revolve more slowly; in other words, that
part of the energy of rotation of the earth, so to speak, is consumed
in rubbing against the title waters. All the work, therefore, that the
tides do in undermining our cliffs and washing away our beaches, is
extracted by the sea and moon from the work stored up in the rotation
of the earth. The diminution of rotation, indeed, is so small as
scarcely to be perceived by the most refined observation, but the
reality of it is now generally recognized; and this process, too, will
apparently go on till the earth ceases to rotate on its axis, and
presents one face constantly to the sun.

Thus we see that the destruction of the land by the sea, so
interesting in a geological point of view, is partly due to the sun's
action. Not only is he the source of the light and the heat we enjoy,
but he aids in forming the vast sedimentary beds that form so large a
part of the crust of the earth, mixing the ingredients of our fields
and moulding our globe.

By heating the air, the sun produces winds, and some of the labor
costs expended is made use of by man in turning his windmills and
carrying his wares across the sea. But there is another expedient of
the sun's heat more immediately useful to man. By evaporating the sea
and other bodies of water, he loads the air with moisture, which, then
in contact with cold mountain-peaks or cold masses of air, loses its
heat, and, being condensed, falls as rain or snow. Thus the rivers are
replenished, which for a long time supplied the greater part of the
labor employed in manufacturers, though the invention of the
steam-engine is fast reducing relatively the value of this supply of
labor.

But vast as the sun's power thus exerted is, and useful as it is to
man, is surpassed in importance by his his labor exerted through
organized beings. The above named agents have one defect; on the
whole, they are incapable of being stored up to any great degree; we
must employ them as nature gives them to us. Organized existence,
however, possesses the power of storing up labor to a very high
degree. {595} The means it adopts are not mechanical, but chemical.
The formation of chemical compounds is attended with the giving out of
heat, which, as we have said before, is equivalent to labor, and if of
sufficient intensity, can by us be made available as labor, as in the
steam-engine. Now we take iron ore, consisting of iron in combination
with other substances. By means of great heat the iron is set free in
the smelting-furnace. The iron, then, in its change of form has, as it
were, taken in all this heat. If, now, we take this iron, and keeping
it from the influence of the air, reduce it to a very fine powder, and
then suddenly expose it to the air, by the force of natural affinity
it will absorb the oxygen of the air, and in so doing give out the
heat before required to set it free from the oxygen; and if the iron
be in small enough portions, so that the process is sufficiently
rapid, we may see the iron grow red hot with the heat thus disengaged.

Now, plants and trees, by the aid of the solar light and heat, remove
various substances, carbon especially, from what seem to be their more
natural combinations, and in other combinations store them up in their
structures. Take a young oak-tree with its first tender leaves; if
deprived of the sun's light and heat, its growth would be stayed, and
its life die out. But with the aid of the sun's rays, it absorbs
carbon from the gases in the air, each particle of carbon absorbed
being absorbed by the power of the sun, through the agency of the
plant; and with each particle of carbon stored up is also, as it were,
stored up the labor of the sun by which that particle was set free
from its former fetters. The sap of the plant thus enriched returns in
its course, and by some mysterious process is curdled into cells and
hardened into would. But the work by which all this was accomplished
lies hid in the wood, and not only is it there, but it is there in a
greatly condensed state. To form a little ring of wood round the tree,
not an eighth of an inch across it, took the sunshine of a long
summer, falling on the myriad leaves of the oak.

Lemuel Gulliver, at Laputa, was astonished by seeing a philosopher
aiming at extracting sunbeams from cucumbers. Had he but rightly
considered the thing he would have wondered at any one's troubling to
make a science of it. The thing has always been done. From Adam and
Eve in the garden of Eden eating sweet fruits, through the
onion-eating builders of the pyramids, down to the flesh-eating
myriads of our land, this process has always been going on. The active
life of reasoning man, and his limitless powers of invention, need for
their full development a vast supply of labor. By means of the
vegetable kingdom, the sun's work is stored up in a number of organic
substances. Man takes these into his system, and in the vessels and
fibres of his body they resume their original combinations, and the
labor of the sun is given out as muscular action and animal heat. To
allow a larger supply of labor for man's intellect to work with,
Providence created the herbivorous races. Some of these further
condense the work of the sun involved in plants, by taking these
plants into their systems, and storing up the work in them in their
flesh and fat, which, after some preparation, are fit to be received
into the frame of man, there, as the simpler vegetable substances, to
supply heat and labor. Others, extracting work from the vegetable
kingdom, just as man does, and mostly from parts of the vegetable
kingdom that are not suited to the organs of man, are valuable to man
as sources of labor, since they have no power to invent modes of
employing this labor to their own advantage. Man might have been
gifted with a vaster frame, and so with greater power of labor in
himself, but such a plan had been destitute of elasticity; and while
the savage would have basked in the sun in a more extended idleness,
the civilized man had still lacked means to execute his plans. {596}
So that good providence which formed man devised a further means for
supplying his wants. Instead of placing him at once on a new-formed
planet, it first let the sun spend its labor for countless ages upon
our world. Age by age, much of this labor was stored up in vast
vegetable growths. Accumulated in the abysses of the sea, or sunk to a
great depth by the collapse of supporting strata, the formations of a
later age pressed and compacted this mass of organic matter. The beds
thus formed were purified by water, and even by heat, and at last
raised to within the reach of man by subterranean movements. From this
reservoir of labor man now draws rapidly, driving away the frost of
today with the sunshine of a million years ago, and thrashing this
year's harvest with the power that came to our earth before corn grew
upon it.

Such are the processes by which the sun's power is collected and
stored up by the vegetable kingdom in a form sufficiently condensed to
be available for working the machinery of the bodies of men and
beasts, and also to assist man in vaster expenditures of labor. It is
most interesting to trace such processes, and not only interesting,
but also instructive, for it shows us in what direction we are to look
for our sources of labor, and will at once expose many common
delusions. One hears, perhaps, that something will be found to
supplant steam. Galvanism may be named; yet galvanism is generated by
certain decompositions--of metal, for instance--and this metal had
first to be prepared by the agency of coal, and in its decomposition
can give out no more labor than the coal before invested in it. It is
as if one should buy a steam-engine to pump up water to keep his
mill-wheel going. The source of all labor is the sun. We cannot
immediately make much use of his rays for the purposes of work; they
are not intense enough; they must be condensed. The vegetable world
alone at present seems capable of doing this; and its past results of
coal, peat, petroleum, etc., and present results of wood and food, are
ultimately all we have to look two.

To say that man will ever be dependent upon the vegetable world for
all his work may be considered bold, but there is certainly great
reason to believe it. The sun's labor being supplied in such a diluted
form, each small quantity continually supplied must be packed in a
very small space. Now, man can only subject matter to influences in
the mass. The little particle of carbon that the plant frees each
instant is beyond his ken. The machinery he could make would not be
fine enough; it would be like trying to tie an artery with the biggest
cable on board the Great Eastern. Organized existence possesses
machinery fine enough to effect these small results, and to avail
itself of these little installments of labor. At present, this
machinery is beyond our comprehension, and possibly will ever remain
so. Nature prefers that her children should keep out of the kitchen,
and not pry into her pots and pans, but eat in thankfulness the meal
she provides.

Some interesting results follow from what has been stated above. One
is, that we are consuming not only our present allowance of the sun's
labor, but also a great deal more, unless the formation of coal in our
age equals its consumption, which is not probable. Mother earth will
certainly, so far as we can see, some day be bankrupt. Such a
consummation is pointed to, however, in other quarters. The sun's
heat, unless miraculously replenished, must gradually be dissipated
through space. There are reasons for thinking that the planets must
ultimately fall into the sun. These things, however, possess to us no
practical physical interest. Such countless ages must elapse ere they
affect man's material condition upon the earth that we hardly can
gravely consider them as impending. The chief interest they excite is
moral. Like the man's hand that appeared to the revelling king, they
write, "Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin" (weighed, measured, limited,
doomed) on our material world, and dimly point to some power that
stands, as it were, hidden from our view behind the screen of matter,
that shall make things new.

--------------

{597}


ORIGINAL.


POEM.

BY E. HOWARD.



  While wandering by the mountains
  And musing by the streams,
  I asked myself if ever thus
  My life would pass in dreams.

  I gathered the little pebbles
  The waves threw on the sand:
  The rippling waters seemed to say,
  "There is a better land!"

  And while thus my steps were straying,
  Above, in azure far,
  I saw a beacon's streaming light--
  The glorious evening star!

  My soul, enraptured, then exclaimed:
  "Hail, beauteous star of even!
  Wilt thou, while speeding into dawn,
  Bring me the will of heaven?"

  I watched it in its onward course,
  Until its golden glow
  Was lost behind the western clouds.
  And left me wrapped in woe.

  I struggled hard to free my soul
  From brooding thoughts of care.
  Till morning broke, when, with the star,
  These words fell on the air:

  "No more let earthly passion move.
  Nor wearied hopes bemoan,
  A life that has a God to love,
  A heaven to call its own!"

  The star had kindled hope
  And raised my soul in prayer;
  The clouds that rolled between
  Foretold a life of care.

  I bowed my head, and humbly knelt,
  Submissive to his will.
  Who, when the waves were troubled most,
  Said, "Peace!" and all was still.

--------

{598}

ORIGINAL.


THE GODFREY FAMILY; OR, QUESTIONS OF THE DAY.



