CHAPTER IV.

"O Paris! gulf of evils, on each of thy stones we could drop a tear,
red with blood, if the sorrows, which thy walls enclose, could appear
before us."--J.J. ROUSSEAU.


The city of innumerable wonders, of shining domes, and colossal
towers, with its enchanting gardens, palaces, and gigantic monuments,
which one sees in the distance--the first glimpse he gets of Paris
through the blue haze--now appeared to the astonished gaze of the
little mountaineer, and was like a dream of the Arabian Nights. "O
Paris! Paris!" shouted he joyously, clapping his hands, and looking
eagerly through the misty veil that still enveloped the city. And, as
he approached nearer, his emotions redoubled; for it was there that
his mother predicted he would one day be happy. Oh! sweet security,
blissful trust of childhood, why must it pass away with advancing
years? Why is it that devouring inquietude and mental restlessness
then comes to our souls, and tortures them without ceasing? It is a
sad condition of our probation here, that we must see all the bright
delusions of early life disappear one by one; and submit unmurmuringly
to the different phases of life and the different ideas and feelings
to which time leads us all. And so it may perhaps be for little
Robert, who now trusts so confidently in the future, and in his
mother's prediction being fulfilled. Have confidence, like him, dear
readers--like him hope, without trying to draw aside the veil which
hides your destiny--but follow him, step by step, in all the changing
events of his life, and perhaps we shall see him fill an enviable
position, as the fruit of his good conduct and perseverance. And since
he is now radiant with hope, let us not efface, by our indiscreet
words, this vision which sustains and comforts all.

As the travellers neared Paris, the old man's forehead wrinkled, his
brows contracted each moment, and flashes of rage burst from his eyes.
The sight of the hordes of the enemy's soldiers who had established
their bivouacs before the capital, put him in a transport of fury.

The detested uniforms of the English, Austrians, Russians, and
Prussians which he saw before him, made him think he was the victim of
some dreadful hallucination, but the insolent air of the conquerors
awakened him to the frightful reality that the emperor could no longer
expel them. In his terrible rage he beat his breast with his fists,
swore, and uttered words that sounded like distant thunder, gnashing
his teeth at the same time most {825} convulsively. Then he walked on
with a resolute and hasty step, so that Robert was obliged to run,
rather than walk, at his side to keep up with him. He was very
taciturn, but the boy at once comprehended the reason of his stubborn
silence, and he respected the holy indignation of the old warrior,
wounded, in his national pride and his deepest feelings, when he saw
all his dreams of glory vanish with the shadow of the great man who
had made the fame and splendor of all France. To the ex-soldier of the
guard there was nothing left but cruel discontent. In Paris there was
militia of all ranks and grades and countries; but there were no brave
leaders, the old soldiers thought, and most of them were young men who
had yet to see the field of battle. The white stripes had replaced the
three colors, which disappeared with the glorious exile, Napoleon. The
despair of poor Cyprien was as great as his love for his emperor, and
nothing could soften his rage, so violent was the hatred he felt for
the new order of things.

Robert was much excited by the strange and picturesque spectacles
which presented themselves to his view on every side--by the gay
costumes of' the people, and the movements of this ocean of of human
beings, but he did not address many questions to his sad companion,
for he loved him already, and saw the deep sorrow that filled his
soul, and it made him timid and reserved.

It was now time to think of getting lodgings, and Cyprien wanted to go
into the most modest quarter of the city, where he was born, and for
which naturally he had the strongest affection. But in the twenty-five
years that he had been a wanderer, vast changes had taken place, and
most of his family had gone to rest. He found himself alone, separated
for ever from his old comrades of glory; but of this he thought
little, so completely was his heart filled with the adored image of
his emperor. The most extraordinary thing was that amidst his grave
thoughts he had found a place for the little orphan, whom chance had
thrown in his way, and for whom he evinced the strongest attachment,
which grew day by day, for Cyprien did nothing by halves; and when he
could for a moment forget his emperor, it was to bestow almost
paternal care upon his young _protégé_. One day, when they had been
having a long talk, and he had said things which charmed the sensible
and loving boy, he asked him to take him to the Church of St. Germain
l'Auxerrois, for it was there that he was to find the curé to whom his
letter was addressed. "Willingly," replied Cyprien, "I will take you
there; but I cannot go in, it has been so long since I have made a
visit of that kind, that I don't care to go, but I will wait for you."
Robert presented himself alone at the door of the curé's house, and
was received by him with grace and a touching cordiality. He was a man
of fine address, with eyes that seemed to penetrate the depths of
one's soul, but his scrutiny was accomplished by a smile so
beneficent, that it drew you irresistibly toward the minister of' God.
The virtues he had practised appeared in his person, his language was
full of purity and goodness, and he appeared ever ready to pardon and
bless. Such, in general terms, was the man to whom Robert was
recommended. When he had read his friend's letter, he made the child
sit down and tell him all about his journey and the manner in which he
acquitted himself charmed the good curé, and his lively and
intelligent face set him to reflecting. The purity of his eyes showed
a generous and noble soul, and the good man knew that he was one of
those natures that always remain pure, in the midst of corruption.
These exiled angels have often sorrowful lives, before they reach the
glorious end. Deprived of pecuniary means, they see the paths to fame
closed for them, while it is open for the rich, and made wide and easy
of access.

{826}

The good curé, after making these observations mentally, recalled the
illustrious men who have illumined the earth from time to time with
the rays of their genius, and the traces of whose lives are still
visible; but the road to fame has, alas! been sown for centuries with
bitter tears, unknown sufferings, and cries of the despair of
unrecognized genius. He recalled faces radiant with sublime thoughts,
crowned with thorns, the only recompense of their work, and he said
with agony, "O God! if this child should ever be one of the victims,
if he should ever weep over lost hopes, would it not be better to
leave him as he is, simple and natural, ignorant of the delights of a
studious life; ignorant of knowledge, than to be initiated into the
cruel deceptions of hope long deferred, and which may be finally lost?
How often, like a beautiful dream, youth, glory, and mind fade away in
the awful struggle. But no," said he, fixing his eyes on the
expressive face of Robert, "his future will not be so sad. Too much
intelligence burns in his eyes, too much fire is lighted there, to be
extinguished by the wearying labors of mind, or by hunger and
frightful misery. If this diamond in the rough shows so much
brilliancy, what will it not be when it is polished? Then will all its
marvellous lustre appear, and I will have the holy joy of aiding to
perfect this work." These were his reflections, and so had it always
been with him; from the moment he was ordained to his saintly
ministry, he was always looking for the means of doing good to others;
and was a beautiful religious type of charity and goodness. It was so
great a happiness to him to make others happy, that he looked upon his
days as badly spent if he had not dried a tear, or given another joy;
and his doing good was so sweet a duty, that he passed his days and
nights in consoling the unfortunate. But for children especially was
he most tenderly solicitous, He said with one who was all love and
charity when among men, "Let little children come unto me." Like his
divine Master, he drew them to him and pressed them to his heart, his
hands rested on their young heads, and he called down upon them
celestial benedictions. But he did not stop here. He gave them not
only his prayers, but aid and protection. When his purse was
exhausted, and his personal resources no longer sufficed, he had
recourse to that of others. He was eloquent and persuasive when he
pleaded the cause of children, and happy in receiving the offerings
which were always deposited in his charitable hands. Thus he was the
father of a large family, the benefactor of many children, who,
becoming men, repaid his care by unlimited gratitude and
irreproachable conduct, and by the constant practice of the virtues of
which he had given them so noble an example. Robert found in him a
tender and devoted protector, who was interested for him, and in whose
future friendship he might trust. The day when this action was
registered in heaven, the good man felt a happiness he had never known
before in adopting before God the orphan that his friend, the curé of
the village of Bains, had recommended to him in such warm terms. The
vow which he made himself to protect him, was not like those men
usually make, and forget as soon as made.

During the interview between the child and the curé, the old soldier
was walking up and down outside, absorbed in reflections of quite an
opposite nature. Sometimes hope colored his thoughts; oftener they
were sombre and cold, like the clouds of the region to which memory
transported him, to the fatal soil of Russia, where victory had
abandoned the French flag. An hour was passed by him in recalling
these days of sorrow, but at last he grew tired of waiting, and jerked
at the bell string, which hung so modestly at the curé's door, most
violently. In an instant a servant appeared with harsh words on the
end of her tongue, but the severe face and long moustache of Cyprien
induced her to withhold from speaking them. Scarcely was the door
opened, when a voice, almost of thunder, {827} inquired for Robert.
Hearing it, the curé opened the parlor door, and advancing toward the
soldier, with an affable air, invited him in, saying, "I will be very
glad to talk with you. You were, I suppose, uneasy about your little
friend, whom I have detained a long time, I know, but it is not time
lost; we have become acquainted and are now old friends, and you have
a share of the affection I have avowed for this interesting child. You
have a noble heart, and the Lord will bless you, my friend, you may be
sure of that, for in the midst of your own sufferings you have had
compassion on those of others, and above all you have protected an
orphan!" The soldier was stunned by this benevolent speech; he, raised
his hand mechanically to his forehead, following the curé and
muttering the words "Pardon--excuse--do not pay any attention to me."
Robert had not dared to move, but when Cyprien came near him, he threw
himself into his arms. "There--that will do," said he to him--"pay
attention, the curé speaks." "Why did you not come in with Robert? You
have denied me the pleasure I should have had in talking with I a
brave soldier. Our _protégé_ has spoken of you in most affectionate
terms, but he did not tell me you were waiting for him, or I should
not have suffered you to remain outside the door." "Thank you, M.
Curé, but I cannot talk to you, I have so few words, and have not been
accustomed to much, and all I know is how to use 'Arms.'" "Each of us
has his profession, my friend," replied the curé, "and you have made
yours glorious. Nevertheless you must allow me to think you know a
great deal besides." "If that is your idea, kind father, I will not
oppose it, but, with respect to you, I must tell you I have not seen a
book since I knew, the 'Little Corporal,' and we are old
acquaintances. Twenty-five years;" said he, "impossible to forget
that"--wiping away a tear.

"Yes, my friend, you have reason to regret your emperor, and even to
weep for him, for he was a great man, and loved you all as children."

"But, oh! how was he repaid?" and then he wept again.

"The love you bear your emperor honors you. Respect and devotion to
misfortune fills noble souls, and I understand very well how your
attachment is augmented in proportion to the sufferings which weigh
down your chief; and it is not for me, a minister of peace and
charity, to make a crime of your regrets and affection, or to denounce
them. But let us leave this sad subject, until you know me better and
have more confidence in me. For today we will talk about Robert and my
plans for him. I am thankful to you for taking a father's place to
him; without you he would have been lost in this great city, or might
perhaps have met persons who would have placed him in contact with
vice and wickedness. I rejoice that a kind Providence permitted this
child to awaken an interest in you, and that he found you so
affectionate a guide. You must continue your friendship, and I hope to
gain his, by the care I will take of him."

"Oh! my dear father," said Robert, kissing respectfully the hand of
his new protector, "you are too good to me, but I will try to repay
your kindness by a full and entire submission to your least wishes."

"Well spoken, little one!" exclaimed the soldier, "this is the first
duty of a conscript."

"I will try to find the mean s of aiding him to fill a high position
some day," said the curé. "I have acquaintances and friends who will
give me of their wealth, for," said he, in a tone of regret, "I am far
from being rich. But no matter, God will help us; I have this sweet
certainty, so you may take courage, my little friend, and whatever
taste you may have for study, I promise you I will do all that I can
to advance you. You are in such good hands that I shall have no cause
for uneasiness as to how you pass your time; and I will leave you for
a while, {828} and perhaps I may bring back some good news for you."

After calling at several houses without success, he chanced to see a
wealthy widow who had but one child, a son. This boy was of a most
vicious nature, and although young in years, he had every defect of
character, without a single good quality. He made his poor mother
despair, and she often reproached herself bitterly for her weakness
toward him, but she knew no means that would reform his bad habits,
which assumed the form of fatal and violent passion. When the curé
spoke of Robert, she said: "O God! since he is possessed of so many
amiable and virtuous qualities, entrust him to me. He will be treated
as my own child, will share the studies of Gustave, and have the same
masters; and perhaps God may pity a mother's sorrows, and that this
child may have so good an influence over him, that Gustave may feel a
desire to be good also. I pray you do not refuse me," said the mother
in a supplicating tone; "I cling to this last hope, as a ship-wrecked
man would cling to the plank he hopes will save him from perishing."

After long consideration of the chances of happiness and success in
the future if Robert accepted it--of the great dissimilarity of the
two persons who would thus be thrown together, and the disagreements
and sufferings for Robert; and still worse, if the pure, rich nature
of the orphan should be corrupted in the society of the wicked child,
whom he knew only too well--he was still undecided. But an
irresistible, though secret, argument spoke in favor of the mother of
Gustave; so that at last her pressing solicitations were acceded to.
He reserved for himself the right to watch closely over the precious
trust that Providence had confided to him, and after this it was
agreed that Robert should be presented to Madame de Vernanges (this
was the name of Gustave's mother) as soon as he could be informed of
it, and if he was willing to accept it.


