XIV.

 THE FINAL DESTINATION OF ANGELS AND MEN;
 CONDITION OF THE UNREGENERATE IN THE  FUTURE LIFE;
 ETERNITY OF THE PENALTY OF SIN;
 STATE OF FINAL THE  BEATITUDE.


The closing articles of the creed are: "Expecto resurrectionem
mortuorun et vitam venturi saeculi, Amen." "I look for the
resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world of come, Amen."

{659}

Thus, the creation, which proceeds from God as first cause, is shown
to have returned to him as final cause. This is especially
accomplished in the beatification of the elect; and consequently it is
the glory and blessedness of heaven which is immediately and
explicitly affirmed in the creed. The entire creed, however, implies,
what the Catholic church in her exposition of the creed teaches
dogmatically, that only a portion of the angelic hierarchy and the
human race attain heaven. The doctrine of hell, or the place and state
of those who are excluded from heaven, is, therefore, the necessary
correlate of the doctrine of heaven. So far as the human race is
concerned, we have to consider, first, what is the condition in
eternity of those who are subject to the consequences of original sin
only.

It follows from the doctrine already laid down, namely, that the state
to which man is reduced by original sin, is entitively the same with
that in which consists the state of pure nature; that the condition of
this class of human beings in eternity is the same that it would be if
they had never been constituted in the order of the supernatural. They
are destitute of supernatural beatitude, but attain to all the
felicity of which they are capable in the natural order. They are
elevated in the due course of nature to that integrity and perfection
of soul and body which, in the case of Adam, was anticipated by a
gratuitous gift. Their felicity consists in a perfect exemption from
an liability to sin, in the complete evolution of their natural
capacities, and in the possession of the proper object of their
intelligence and will, that is, in the knowledge and fruition of the
works of God, and of God himself by abstractive contemplation. This
last expression needs some explanation in order to show its conformity
with the doctrine we have laid down at the beginning of these essays
respecting the primitive intuition of reason. We have there affirmed
that the original intuition of reason is the intuition of that idea
which is afterward demonstrated by reflection to be identical with the
being of God. Some, rejecting this doctrine of the idea, object to it
that it leads to a confusion of the act of intelligence constitutive
of rational nature with the act proper only to beatified nature, that
is, the intuitive vision of God. Others, who accept it, endeavor to
rebut this objection, and to show the distinction between the
knowledge of God derived from rational intuition and that which is
communicated by the light of glory. But in doing this they make the
first to be only the inchoation of the second, and the second the
completion or full evolution of the first. It would follow, then, that
a rational creature cannot attain to the proper object of his
intelligence and will, consequently cannot attain perfect felicity,
without the beatific vision. We cannot admit either that the objection
is a valid one or that the explanation which is made in order to do
away with it is sufficient. We venture, therefore, to suggest another.

It is real and concrete being, not possible and abstract being, which
is the intelligible object of reason. Reason, however, does not, by an
intrinsic, perceptive power, actively elicit the intuition of its
intelligible object. In other words, it is not by its virtue as
intelligence that real being, or the intelligible, becomes
intelligible to it. The intelligible has the precedence and the
superiority in the act of intelligence. The presence of the object
makes the subject intelligent in the first act, and this first act is
one in which the creative spirit is the agent and the created spirit
the terminus of the act. The original, immediate contact of the
intellect with real, concrete being, that is, with God, is, therefore,
a contact in which the soul is passive, because this contact precedes
and is the cause of its activity. It is only by reflection, or bending
backward upon itself, that the intellect can have distinct
self-consciousness and elicit thought. When it does so, it takes
always the affirmation of real, necessary being, by which {660} God
created it rational, as the first and absolute elements of its
thoughts. But this affirmation, as soon as it enters into reflection,
and becomes an element of the spontaneous activity of the soul,
becomes _abstract_. It is not a pure abstraction, or an act which
terminates on the abstract or possible as its ultimate object, but an
abstraction formed from the concrete object as apprehended by the
passive intelligence, or an abstract conception of the concrete idea.
It would require too much time to develop this statement fully. But it
is plain at a single glance that it is justified by the facts of
consciousness. All our judgments respecting necessary and universal
truth are abstract. The judgment respecting necessary cause, that
respecting the infinite and the eternal, that respecting ideal space
and time, those which respect mathematical relations, and those which
form the data of logic, are all of this kind. There is no direct,
immediate intuition of God as the infinite, concrete, personal truth,
to be found in our consciousness; as we have previously proved in our
demonstration of the being of God. The necessity of using the term
_intuition_ in reference to our apprehension of the idea is,
therefore, an unfortunate one, and gives rise to a confusion of the
act in which we conclude the existence and attributes of God by a
rational, deductive judgment, with the act in which the soul
immediately beholds him by an intellectual vision. Intuition and
vision are, strictly speaking identical. Experience teaches us that
our first distinct vision is the vision of sensible objects, and that
we refer constantly to this as the standard of clear vision, since
there is nothing which appears to us equally clear and distinct. By
the aid of our perception of the sensible, we attain to the perception
of ourselves as existing, thinking spirit, and of other spirits like
our own. But we never attain a similar intuition of God by the mere
exercise of our intellective activity. It is of the essence of a
created spirit that its active intuition or intellective vision is
limited to finite objects as its immediate terminus, commensurate to
its finite visual power. It sees God only mediately, as his being and
attributes are reflected and imaged in finite things, and therefore
its highest contemplation of God is merely abstractive. The natural
felicity of created spirits is, therefore, at its maximum, when they
attain the most perfect exercise of their faculties in this mode of
action which is connatural to them. It is the fruition of God
mediately through his creation.

We now proceed to show that the Catholic doctrine permits us to
believe that this perfect felicity which is possible without
supernatural grace is actually conceded to those who die in original
sin only. It is reasonable to believe that any felicity which those
souls can attain, consistently with their position as liable to the
eternal consequences of original sin, will be actually attained by
them. For God has created them for good; and to what end as he made
them capable of this felicity, unless it be that they may possess and
enjoy it? We shall quote from a treatise written in the seventeenth
century by F. Maria Gabrielli, in defense of the doctrine of Cardinal
Sfondrati, a very thorough summary of the opinions of the theologians
on this point: [Footnote 183]

    [Footnote 183: Dispunctio Notarum, 40 etc, Colon. 1699.]

"Joseph Maria de Requesens [Footnote 184] enumerates in his little
book on the state of infants many theologians of great name who
concede to these infants a certain kind of imperfect natural
beatitude.

  [Footnote 184: de Statu Parvui. Rom. 1684.]

He says that Richard (of St. Victor) teaches that these children will
have more goods and greater joy in their possession than sinners have
who possess created goods in this life. Lyra says, that according to
the opinion of all doctors they will enjoy a happier life than would
be naturally possible in this present world. Almost in the same way
speak Origen, Marsilius, St. Buonaventure, Cajetan, and others {661}
cited by Cornelius à Lapide, who all teach that children dying without
baptism lead a happier life than those who are living on the earth.
Lessius writes, that although they may be said to be damned because
eternally deprived of the celestial glory for which they were created,
it is nevertheless credible that their state is far happier and more
joyful than that of any mortal man in this life. Salmeron says, these
children will rise again through Christ and above this natural order,
where they will daily advance in the knowledge of the works of God and
of separate substances, _will have angelic visits_, and will be like
our rustics living in the country, so that as they are in a medium
between glory and punishment, they will also occupy an intermediate
place.  Suarez says, that children will remain in their natural good
and will be content with their lot; and, together with Marsilius as
quoted by Azor, he describes to them a _knowledge and love of God
above all things_, and the other natural virtues. Didacus Ruiz, a
theologian of extensive reading, lays down this conclusion: Great
mercy will be mingled with the punishment of infants dying in original
sin, although not a diminution of the punishment of loss, since that
is incapable of diminution; yet in the remission of death which was
the punishment directly do to original sin, and would naturally have
endured to eternity, so that in spite of this infants will be
resuscitated at the day of judgment nevermore to die, endowed with
supernatural incorruptibility and impassibility, and they will also
supernaturally receive accidental, infused sciences, and will be
liberated from all pain, sadness, sickness, temptations, and personal
sins, which are naturally wont to arise from original sin.
Consequently, they are liberated from the punishment of hell which
they might have incurred. Albert (the Great), Alexander (de Hales),
and St. Thomas agree with this doctrine. Suarez shows that these
children obtain some benefit, in a certain way, from the merits of
Christ; and says that it pertains to the glory of Christ that he
should be adored and acknowledged as prince and supreme judge on the
day of universal judgment even by infants who died without grace. He
also considers it more probable that they will understand that they
have done neither good nor evil, and therefore receive neither glory
nor pain of sense, and also that they are deprived of glory on account
of sin (that is, original). He adds the reason of this, to wit, that
they may understand the benefit which they received, first in Adam and
afterward in Christ, and on this account may worship and adore him.
Martinonus adds: when even the demons love God in a certain way even
more than themselves as the common good of all, according to St.
Thomas, why shall not these children love Christ as their benefactor
and the author of their resurrection, and of the benefits which they
receive with it through Christ, who is the destroyer of corporeal as
well as spiritual death? He cites also what Suarez says, that although
one who should speak of the bodies of infants in the same way as of
the other damned would say nothing improbable, since St. Thomas speaks
of all indifferently, nevertheless since those bodies will have a
greater perfection and some gifts or benefits which are not at all due
to nature, therefore, in regard to these gifts, Christ may be said to
be their model. The same Martinonus subjoins: although those words of
the apostle, "In Christ all shall be made alive," Suarez affirms, must
be properly and principally understood of the predestined,
nevertheless they can probably be applied to a certain extent to these
children, inasmuch as they will have in their risen bodies a certain
special conformity and relation to Christ, which will be much less and
more imperfect in the damned than in the predestined. Nicholas de Lyra
affirms that "infants dying without baptism do not endure any sensible
punishment, but have a more delightful {662} life than can be had in
this present life, _according to all the doctors_,  [Footnote 185] who
speak concerning those who die in original sin alone."

  [Footnote 185: This is true of the great majority, but not of all.]

Those who die in actual sin, and the fallen angels, although in the
same state of existence with those who die in original gin only, that
is, in the Infernum, or sphere below the supernatural sphere of the
elect angels and men, have to undergo a punishment corresponding to
their individual demerits. This truth, which is clearly revealed in
the Holy Scriptures and defined by the church,  is confirmed by the
analogies of this present life. The transgressions of law is punished
in this world in accordance with the sense of justice which is
universal among men. There is no reason, therefore, for supposing that
the same principle of retribution is not continued in the future life.
Moreover, there is positive proof from reason that it must continue.
There has never been a more absurd doctrine broached than that of the
Universalists. To suppose that all men are saved on account of the
merits of Christ without regard to their moral state or personal
merits, is most unreasonable; and subversive of the moral order as
well as destructive of the idea of a state of probation. It is equally
absurd to imagine that the mere fact of death can make any change in
the state of the soul, or that separation from the body causes the
soul to make a mechanical rebound from a state of sin to a state of
holiness. The soul can be made happy only from its own intrinsic
principles, and not by a mere arbitrary appointment of God, or a
bestowal of extrinsic means of enjoyment. Sin brings its own
punishment, and the state of sin is in itself a state of misery. Plato
and other heathen sages taught the doctrine of future punishment, Mr.
Alger, who has written the most elaborate work on the subject of the
history of the doctrine of a future life which has appeared in recent
times, has fully proved the universality of the doctrine of future
punishment. Other rationalistic writers of ability have also of late
years seen the impossibility of removing this doctrine from the
teaching of Christianity and from universal tradition. We have already
fully proved that God does not deprive any of his rational creatures
of the felicity which is proper to their nature by his own act. It
follows from this that it is the creature himself who is the author of
his own misery. Existence is in itself a good, a boon conceded from
love by the Creator. So far as this good is turned into an evil, it is
by a voluntary perversion of the gift of a benevolent sovereign by the
subject himself.  The punishment which he must undergo in eternity is,
therefore, the necessary consequence of his own acts, together with
such positive penalties as are required by the ends of justice and the
universal good. This doctrine, which is the doctrine of the Catholic
Church, based on the clear evidence of Scripture and ecclesiastical
tradition,  [Footnote 186] is also the doctrine of calm, unbiased
reason, and of the common sense of mankind. The probation of the
Angels having been finished with their first trial, and the probation
of men ending for individuals at death, and for mankind generically at
the day of judgment, the epic of grace is closed for ever with the
completion of this present cycle of providence; and consequently the
state of all angels and men is fixed for eternity. Hell is, therefore,
an eternal state out of which there is no possibility of transition
into heaven.

  [Footnote 186: It is now considered by the best authorities as fully
  proved that Origen and St. Gregory Nyssen, who have been so often
  cited by the advocates of the doctrine of universal salvation, did
  not teach anything contrary to the Catholic doctrine of eternal
  punishment.]

Heaven, or life everlasting, is the eternal state of supreme,
supernatural beatitude, to which the elect angels and men are elevated
by the grace of God, and in which they participate in the {663}
glorified and the deific state of the Incarnate Word, through and
ineffable fellowship with the three persons of the Blessed Trinity.

Man being integrally composed by the union of soul and body, and his
corporeal nature being hypostatically United with the divine nature in
the person of the Word, the resurrection of the body must necessarily
precede his complete glorification. The only difficulty which the
doctrine of the resurrection of the body presents to the understanding
relates to the principal of identity between the earthly and celestial
body. This principle of identity, or unity and continuity of life,
must be the same with that which constitutes the unity of the body in
all the stages of its natural growth; and through all the changes of
its material particles, from the instant of its conception to its
disintegration by death. It is the soul which is the form of the body,
its vivifying principle. The soul and body have an innate
correspondence with each other, not only in the generic sense, but in
the sense of an individual aptitude of each separate soul for its own
body, and each separate body for its own soul. The soul and body act
and react upon each other perpetually while the development of both is
going on, producing a specific type in each individual which is a
modification of the generic type of manhood. The determination of the
active force of the soul to the production of this type remains with
it after the separation from the body. At the resurrection, it forms
anew its own proper body in accordance with this type which is the
product of the conjoint action of the soul and body during the earthly
life. There is, therefore, the same continuity and identity between
the earthly body and the celestial body that there is between the body
of the embryo and that of the full-grown man. The celestial body is
the same that it would have been if there had been no death
intervening between the two corporeal states, but a transformation of
the earthly body into the celestial perfection and glorification of
its proper type. If this is not all which is included in the
definition of the church respecting the identity of the body in the
two states, we must believe, in addition to what has been stated
already, that there is a material monad which forms the nucleus of the
corporeal organization and is a physical principle of identity. This
physical principle must contain virtually the whole body, as the germ
does the plant; it must be preserved when the body is disintegrated;
and reunited to the soul at the resurrection, in order to become the
physical germ from which the celestial body is developed.

The natural beatitude of the glorified angels and saints, which is
only a more exalted grade of that felicity which is accorded to the
inferior intelligent creation, need not be specially noticed. It is
the essential and supreme beatitude consisting in the clear, intuitive
vision of God, which is the principal subject of the divine revelation
proposed by the creed as the object of faith.

The possibility of this divine vision will not be called in question
by any who are properly speaking theists and rationalists, and with
others we have nothing to do at present. Much less will it be
questioned by any class of believers in the divine inspiration of the
Scriptures. We have not, then, the task of laboring to show the
intrinsic reasonableness and credibility of the doctrine, but merely
of setting forth that which can be made intelligible respecting the
_relation between our present state in which we are unable to see God,
and the future state in which we may be enabled to see him_. The
examination of this relation includes that of the means and method by
which the soul is elevated to an immediate intuition of that which
constitutes the divine essence and personality. It requires a
statement which shall show what is the nexus between the act which
constitutes the soul in the power to exercise {664} intelligence, and
that which constitutes it in the power to behold God immediately. It
may be said, that the essence of the soul is transformed or enlarged
in such a way that it becomes able, _per se_, to see God as it now
perceives the creation. But this would be equivalent to the creation
of a new essence with a new personality; which would destroy the
identity of the subject who is supposed to be elevated to this new
grade of existence. Moreover, according to the doctrine we have laid
down, that supernatural grace elevates the soul _super omnem naturam
creatam atque creabilem_, the supposition is impossible. We cannot go
over again the principles already discussed, but merely endeavored to
state such a theory of the mode of the beatific vision as shall be in
harmony with these principles. We, therefore, dismiss this first
supposition without further discussion. Another supposition may be
made, that the complete evolution of the idea of God which the soul
possesses in the present state in an obvolute manner bring it to that
relation _vis-à-vis_ two God as its intelligible object, which
corresponds to the relation of the visual faculty to the visible,
material object. We cannot accept this supposition any more than the
other. It contradicts the principles we have previously laid down, and
the generally accepted maxims of Catholic theology respecting the
supernatural quality of the power conceded by God to the creature of
beholding his intimate essence, just as palpably as the first one. We
do not deny that the reason of man is to a great degree in a obvolute
condition in this life, and that it is capable of evolution in another
and higher life. In this higher life the soul may be capable of
perceiving immediately the essence of things, and spiritual
substances, after the mode of intelligence which is proper to the
angels. But the angels themselves, according to Catholic theology,
though created at the summit of the intelligent order, with the
complete exercise of intelligence in the highest possible grade, have
no natural power to see God immediately; and their natural knowledge
of him, though very perfect, is merely abstractive contemplation like
that of men. The power of seeing spiritual substances, and the perfect
evolution of the idea of God in the soul, therefore, do not give the
intuition of the essence of God which constitutes the beatific vision.
The beatific vision is supernatural, by means of immediate light
communicated by God to the intelligence, called by theologians _lumen
gloriae_, the light of glory. By means of this light the intelligence
perceives God by an active intuition, or a clear, distinct act of
reflective consciousness, as immediately present to it in the creative
act, the cause of its existence, the source of its active power, the
light of its reason, in whom it lives in moves and as it's being. God
presents himself to the intelligence immediately in his concrete
being, as the visible world is presented to the eye by the light of
the sun. This is not accomplished by the creation of any new essential
faculty in the soul or the addition of anything to its substance. The
very same intelligent, thinking principle, or subject, which in this
present state of existence of firms to itself the existence of God by
and intellectual judgment, behold him in the beatific state by an
intuitive vision. It must be, then, by a concurrence of God with the
same faculties of the mind by which we think and reason and perceive,
and our self-conscious, in our natural mode of rational activity, that
the intelligence is raised to this higher power of supernatural
intuition. That act which constitutes it rational in the natural
order, must be the basis and substratum of its supernatural tuition of
the divine essence. It has already been proved that a created spirit
cannot be constituted rational in the first instance by the beatific
vision of God; that is, cannot have an essence whose intrinsic,
necessary act is a clear intuition of the divine essence, like that
{665} act in which God has the eternal, necessary intelligence of
himself. The created spirit must first be constituted a rational,
intelligent subject, before it can be capable of a supernatural
illumination. It must be extrinsicated from God, made a distinct,
thinking substance, and constituted in its own finite, rational
activity; before there can be any subject, or really existing, active
force, with which God can concur; with which he can unite himself, and
to which he can communicate the power of looking back upon himself by
a distinct intuition. The created spirit must be, therefore, in a
certain sense, self-subsisting, or containing in itself its own
rational principle. It must have its own separate self-consciousness
as a thinking substance, containing within itself all the necessary
principles of thought. The necessary, the universal, the eternal, or,
in a word, the idea, cannot be contained in a created spirit in its
concrete being, but only in an abstract form, any image, or a created
word. This is identical with the intelligence itself; it is what
constitutes its intellective force and principle of activity. In man,
as we have already seen, this intellective activity needs the
concurrence of exterior, sensible objects, acting on it through the
senses and occasioning perceptions and reflections, before it can
attain distinct reflective consciousness of itself, and evolve its own
ideal formula. This reflective consciousness cannot go back of the
soul itself, where it finds the abstractive idea passively received
from concrete being. The contact of being, or of God who is alone
being, gives the apprehension of being to the soul by creating it. The
creative act, and the being who produces the creative act, are
unperceived by the soul, and lie back of its existence, which is the
terminus of the creative act. The soul's separate activity begins at
the terminus of God's activity, and is projected forward to its own
proper terminus. Its natural activity would never bring it face to
face with its creator, God, or enable it to contemplate him in any
other way than it is now able to do so, by the vividly apprehended
demonstration of his being from its own first principles and exterior
works of his hand. In order that the soul, in its reflexive acts, may
see God continually and clearly, it is necessary that he should unite
himself in a new and ineffable manner to its substance and its
faculties, and concur with them in such a way that they can look
beyond their natural limit of vision into the infinitude of the being
of God which surrounds the creation like an ocean on every side. The
soul, which is, so to speak, projected from God by creation, must
receive a movement of return, which does not arrest itself at the mere
fact of self-consciousness, but brings the soul to a consciousness of
God as immediately and personally producing its self-consciousness.
This act is most perfect in the human soul of Jesus Christ, the
Incarnate Word. The personality of the human and divine natures in him
being one, there is but one Ego. The human soul, therefore, terminates
its act of self-consciousness, not upon itself, as its own
_subsistentia_, but upon the divine Ego or person. It is conscious of
itself as a distinct substance, but not a substance completed and
brought to distinct subsistence in itself. Its consciousness
terminates in the divine person, and is referred to it, so that Jesus
Christ, in every human act, affirms himself by self-consciousness as
both God and man in one person. The union of glorified spirits to God
is similar to this hypostatic union, though not so perfect, and not
implying personal identity. The nature and mode of this union of the
created spirit with God, by which it is glorified, beatified, and even
deified--as the doctors of the church fear not to affirm, in
accordance with the declaration of the Holy Scripture--is impenetrable
to the human understanding. The Indian philosophers, having retained a
confused idea of it from the primitive revelation, have expressed this
idea in their sublime mysticism with all the superb imagery of their
luxuriant imaginations. With {666} them, it is an absorption of all
individual souls in the infinite fount of being. Nearly all their
language may, however, be adopted, in a good sense, as expressing the
Christian dogma, if clear, philosophical conceptions are substituted
for their obscure and unscientific notions of the creative act.
Without these clear conceptions and definitions, it is impossible to
escape money into pantheism. The language of Christian mystic writers,
even, is liable to misapprehension as expressing the pantheistic
notion of the identity of God and the creatures, unless their terms
are properly explained. In point of fact, Eckhart did give expression
to some propositions which implied pantheism and were condemned by the
Holy See. The mystic writers continually affirm that the soul is made
_una res cum Deo_, and becomes God by participation. By this, however,
they do not mean that the soul loses its distinct substance or becomes
identified with the divine nature. They intend to signify and
ineffable union between the soul and God, in which, each remaining
distinct in its own proper essence, God communicates his own
knowledge, sanctity, glory, and beatitude to the soul; and admits it
into the Fellowship of the Blessed Trinity. This is the vanishing
point of all theology, and of all sciences, beyond which even the most
illuminated eye cannot penetrate. The return of all things which
proceed from God as first cause to God as final cause, consummated in
this beatific union, solves all the problems of time; there remains
only the problem of eternity, which eternity alone can solve.

--------


ORIGINAL.


MY AUNT'S WORK-BOX.


  Sure, such a mess was never seen
  Of white and brown and black and green!
  Not Noah's Ark, Pandora's box,
     Such dire confusion e'er displayed
  Here's wool, shorn from the fleecy flocks
     That o'er Circassian Meadows strayed,
  With spools of cotton, every number;
  Buttons and studs, and other lumber;
  Needles of every size and kind,
    The blunts and sharps, the coarse and fine;
  White linen, recent wounds to bind;
    And rows of pins in order to shine.
  Lo! Thimbles, for each finger fit,
  And yarn too darn with or to knitt.
  Here's sewing-silk of every hue
  From brilliant red to modest blue;
  And floss, with which the maiden traces,
    With all the painter's art and skill,
  Flowers, landscapes, birds, and human faces,
    The verdant field or purling rill.
  Here every sort of thread is seen,
  The jolly ball and languid skein;
  And here's the ivory thing that shapes
  Small eyelet-holes in caps and capes.

{667}

  Look at that pair of rusty tweezers!
  They must blame their many years.
  Dear! what a tiny pair of scissors!
  Sure, they're the twins of those huge shears.
  Here's lots of crewel, which I mean
  To use, someday, to work the screen.
  Here are pin-cushions and emery bags,
  Small shreds of lace and other rags,
  Linen, calico, and crape,
  And hanks of twine and bits of tape.
  In short, here's every earthly thing
  That thrifty wife could wish, I ween;
  But I've not time to say or sing
  The treasures of this magazine.

--------


Original.

HOW MY AUNT PILCHER FOUND THE CATHOLIC CHURCH.


Perhaps you don't know my aunt, Patients Pilcher? Very likely not. i
know her very well, and am going to tell you something about her. She
is my  mother's sister, and was born in the town of Squankum, Vermont,
where she lived until she was over thirty years old--she says,
twenty-five, but that don't matter--when she came to New York to see
Uncle George. Well, Aunt Pilcher was mightily pleased and surprised
when she saw New York; and as she knew every house, barn, and fence,
and every lane and field in Squankum, and to whom they belonged, she
thought she must find out as much about New York. She had no sooner
taken off her bonnet and shawl when she got to our house--I say _our_,
because I live with Uncle George since mother died--than she wanted
to put them on again and go out "and see the places, and find out
where people lived, and git introduced," as she said, adding that she
would "hev to begin directly, or she would never git through."

My Aunt Pilcher is a very tall, thin woman, with a very cold face, as
I found out on the first day she came to our house, when she bent over
and kissed me. She thought I wiped off her kiss, and said "Oh, fie!"
but it wasn't that, it was the cold. As I was saying, she wanted to
see all of New York, and I believe she has, too, by this time; but she
soon got disgusted with what she called "the offishness of the
Yorkers." "You don't know anybody," said she, "and nobody 'pears to
want to know you." She never tired, however, of seeing the many
beautiful buildings in the city, and among them all the churches seem
to her to be the most attractive and the most worthy of her close
investigation.

"I'm gittin 'most ashamed of our wooden meetin'-house to Squankum,"
said she, one day, after returning from a visit to Trinity Church; "we
used to be kinder proud of it, though, when some of the folks down to
Rattlebog came over to spend Sabbath with us; 'cause ye know what a
mis'able little country skule-house of a place they've got over there.
Then, ye've got sich a lot o' churches, my! I'm 'most afeered never
see them all, or I'll forgit abeout the first ones afore I git
through."

"What sort of churches have you seen, aunty?" I asked.

{668}

"Oh! I've seen white-marbled ones and brown-stun ones, and a sort o'
speckled mixed ones like Washin'ton cake, ye know, a streak o' jelly
and a streak o' cake. Then agin, I've seen all kinds o' styles;
Grecian, Beshantem, Gothys, high-steepled style, low-steepled style,
and no-steepled style. But I haint seeing a green winder-shutter one
like ours to Squankum yit. I s'pose the taste in architectur here in
York don't run that 'a way."

But I was not thinking of the outside of the churches when I asked her
the question, but of their inside. The truth was that Uncle George and
I had been two or three times to see Mass and Vespers in the Catholic
Church, and I was so full of all I had seen and heard there that I was
nearly dying to talk with some one about it. But Uncle George had told
me that he thought Aunt Jane--that is, Uncle George's sister who keeps
house for him and me--might possibly disapprove of our going again if
I happened to mention it, and so I took care to say nothing about it.
I was very anxious to find out if Aunt Pilcher had seeing a Catholic
Church, so I asked her if she happened to see any boys in the churches
she had been to.

"Boys!" said she. "Why boys? Of course boys. Shouldn't boys go to
meetin' as well as girls?"

"But boys dressed up," said I.

"Dressed up! Laws yes, in their best Sunday-go-to-meetin', as they ort
to be."

"In long red coats, perhaps, down to their heels," I suggested, in
spite of Uncle George's frown; "with nice white lace jackets over that
again, and carrying torch-lights and censers, and going up and down
and all around?" I added, eager to describe all I had seen.

"Why! what's come to the boy?" exclaimed Aunt Pilcher, raising up her
hands in astonishment. "He ain't right," meaning in my head."'

"Oh! yes, he is!" said Uncle George, "that's the way the Catholics go
on in their churches, and I suppose that Fred must have seen it
somewhere."

"Catholics!" ejaculated Aunt Pilcher, in a tone of horror, and half
looking over her shoulder as if some ghost of one might come in at the
sound of the word. "Ye don't mean them papists and other Jesuits that
call themselves Catholics! It's enough to make a body hate the name."

"That won't do, you know, sister Pilcher," said Uncle George, "because
it is in the Apostles' Creed."

"I know it," returned Aunt Pilcher, "but I'd like to know what the
Holy Catholic Church in the Apostles' Creed has got to do with them
ignorant idolaters, the Catholics, the Roman papists, I mean?"

"It's the same name, that's all," said Uncle George, with a sly
twinkle in his eye; "and they say it's the same thing."

"Which in course is nonsense!" ejaculated my aunt.

"Oh! of course it is," rejoined Uncle George. "We are the real and
true Catholic Church, and if some one wanted to come to our true and
real Holy Catholic Church we would just tell him to ask for the
Catholic church and anybody would show him."

"Well, they ort to, that's all I got to say," said Aunt Pilcher
doubtfully.

"Certainly," continued Uncle George, "and I've no doubt now, sister
Pilcher, that if you were to go out and ask people in the street here
to point you to a Catholic church that they would show you our
Protestant churches directly."

Aunt Pilcher looked very hard at Uncle George, as if she feared he
might be making game of her; but he looked so solemn and sedate that
she didn't suspect, but I did, and I got a crick in the back of my
neck trying to keep from laughing. She seemed to think that she was
bantered by my uncle, and said:

"Well, I never sot eout to do a thing yit that I didn't do it, and I'm
going to do _that_."

"Hurrah! Aunt Pilcher," I shouted, "I would too, if I were you." And
that confirmed her in her engagement, {669} for the very next morning
she put on her bonnet and shawl, and hung her reticule on her arm,
without which she never went out of doors, and off she started. She
was gone all day and did not return until tea-time, appearing
completely fagged out and exhausted. She was not in the best of humors
either, to judge of the way she pulled off her out-door additions to
her ordinary dress, and bade me "carry them things up-stairs, for
people dead a'most and starved can't always be expected to wait on
theirselves." But not a word did she say about the object of her long
day's journey. I was all curiosity to know where, she had been and
what she had seen; and when we had nearly got through tea, that is,
Uncle George, Aunt Jane, Aunt Pilcher, I, and Bub Thompson, who had
come to play with me in the afternoon, and said he smelt short-cake,
and wondered whether Aunt Jane could make it nice, and so got invited
to try them--then I could stand it no longer, and said I, "See
anything nice to-day, Aunt Pilcher?"

"I didn't particularly _see_ anything, my dear, but I heered something
I shan't forgit, I can tell you, if hearin' a thing a hundred and
ninety-nine times over is enough to' make a body remember it."

"What did you hear, aunt?" asked everybody at once.

"Hear!" exclaimed she. "These Yorkers never knows anything if a body
asks them a perlite question abeout who lives in any house, or which
is the way to somewhere; but to-day I do think they was all possessed,
for everybody 'peared to know only one church, when, dear knows, they
ort to know their own churches, I should think, and not be a'
directin' everybody everlastin'ly to St. Peter's."

"How was that, aunt?" asked every one again.

"Well," said she, "I told you what I was goin' eout for, and I went.
Neow I always do things in order: commence at the beginnin', I say,
and then ye'll know when ye git to the eend. So I went clean deown to
the battery, and then I turns reound and comes up. Not wishin' to ask
questions of people _too_ fur off (for these Yorkers don't know where
anythin' is ef it ain't right deown under their nose), I walked on
till I got pretty near Trinity Church, belongin' to the Episcopals,
and says I to a knowledgable lookin' man, says I, 'Couldn't ye pint me
eout, neow, a Catholic church?' 'I can't precisely pint ye to it,'
says he, which I thort was queer, with a Christian church right afore
his eyes, 'but I can tell you where one is: in Barclay street, right
up Broadway, ma'am, Saint Peter's church,' and off he went like a
shot. These Yorkers air in _sich_ a hurry, they won't stop to hear a
body eout. Well, on I walks, and I saw another church, Saint Paul's in
Broadway, similarly belongin' to the Episcopals; and this time I got
straight in front of it. The folks 'peared to be in sich an orful
hurry jist here that I thort somebody must be dead; or somebody's
house had ketch't afire, and I couldn't git eout the first word afore
the person I spoke to was a whole block off, and I got kind o'
bewildered like. At last, I tried a lady--for I give the men folks
up--and says I to her:

"'Is this a meetin'-house of the Holy Catholic Church, ma'am?'

"'No, ma'am,' says she rather short, 'ef you want to go there, you had
better go deown Barclay street, next street above, St. Peter's on the
left,' and off she went. Well; I goes deown Barclay street, jist to
see this St. Peter's, and do you believe, I found eout it was one of
them papist churches.'

"That was rather strange," interrupted Uncle George.

"I thort it was a leetle so myself," said Aunt Pilcher, "and I began
to conceit people took me for a papist or a Jesuit, so I made up my
mind to say so to once; and on I walks agin till I come to Broome
street, deown which I went till I found a nice look-in' church, and
says I to a minister-lookin' gentleman, says I:

{670}

"'I'm not a Jesuit, sir.'

"'Glad to hear it, ma'am,' says he, 'there are concealed Jesuits all
over.'

"'I'm a Protestant,' says I, 'pre-haps you can show me a meetin'-house
that believes in the Holy Catholic Church; is that one there?'

"I am grieved,' says he, 'that anybody should wish to know anythin'
abeout the Catholic Church, and I hope you have no intention of goin'
to sich a place of abomination.'

"He didn't 'pear to know my mean-in', so says I, 'I mean the _real_
Catholic Church.'

"'Ma'am,' says he, 'real or unreal, it is always the same thing;
always was and always will be. That is a Baptist church, ma'am, before
you, and not a Catholic mass house. There is one of them, called St.
Peter's, in Barclay street, I believe,' and off he walked without
sayin' another word. 'Patience,' says I to myself, 'be true to your
name,' for, to tell the truth, I was gettin' a leetle bit flustrated.
I walks on, turnin' corners and reound and reound, and at last I got
into a street called Bedford street. There I saw a meetin'-house with
a sign over the door tellin' it was a Methodist. Says I to a man that
was jist then sweepin reound the door--thinkin' to begin right this
time--says 'I:

"'My Christian friend, the apostles believed in the Holy Catholic
Church.'

'"Not a bit of it,' says he.

"'Oh! yes,' says I, 'they did; it is in the Apostles' Creed.'

"'Is it?' says he.

"'Yes, it is, and what's more, you ort to know it,' says I, gettin'
bothered with sich ignorance.

"'None o' yer impudence,' says he.

"'Why, good lands!' says I, almost swearin', 'they believe in the Holy
Catholic Church in this meetin'-house, don't they?'

"'No, they don't, and don't want to,' says he, and slammed the door in
my face. Then I wanders reound and seen lots of churches, but I didn't
see anybody, to speak to till I got ever so fur off in the Fifth
avenue, where I saw a handsome brick church with a tall steeple, and
there I saw some people goin' in. I asked what was goin' on, and they
said it was a prayer--meetin". I should liked to have jined in a York
prayer-meetin', but I wasn't in a fit state jist then--in sich a
twitter as I was--so I ups and speaks to a young lady who looked like
a Sabbath school teacher, and says I:

"'The real Catholic Church in the Apostles' Creed is where the gospil
is preached.' She kinder opened her eyes at me, and says she:

"'The gospil is preached here, ma'am; but this is not a Catholic
church; this is a Presbyterian church.'

"'But,' says I agin,' where the gospil is preached is the true
Catholic Church.'

"'I guess not,' says she, 'the gospil is not preached in the Catholic
Church.'

"'Well, ma'am,' says I, feelin' considerably riled, 'I guess I larnt
my catechism, not afore you was born, but abeout the same time, I
should say; and I'm jist lookin' for somebody else that knows it, and
if anybody in York knows what and where the Holy Catholic Church is;'
and do you believe she actually turned 'reound to another gal and said
I was crazy, and had run away from a 'sylum. I went away disgusted and
tried agin, one plase and another. I even tried the Washin'ton cake
church in the Fourth avenue, but not a soul would own up to what they
ort to believe. You wouldn't get papists sendin' you to their St.
Peter's, I'll be bound, if you asked them for a Protestant church."

"Of course not," said Uncle George, "and what conclusion have you come
to, sister Pilcher?"

"I've come to the conclusion," said Aunt Pilcher, "that these Yorkers
don't know the Apostles' Creed."

"I should say," said Bub Thompson, "that those folks you 'saw didn't
believe it."

{671}

"Boy!" exclaimed Aunt Pilcher, with an awful expression of
countenance, "speak when you air spoken to."

"How is it when you're spoken about?" asked Bub; "'cause I'm a
Catholic, a papist as you say, and you've been speaking about my
church."

"My! I never!" ejaculated Aunt Pilcher, looking first at one and then
at another for explanation.

"Sister Pilcher," said Uncle George, "the truth is, it is no use for
us Protestants to call ourselves Catholics, for we are not. You see
how everybody denied it. Of course you could never get a Protestant to
own to the name of  'Catholic,' either here in New York or anywhere
else, any more than you could persuade any one to give us the name;
and it seems to me that where the name is, and always has been, the
reality is likely to be. As for your experiment to-day, it is just
what would have happened thirteen hundred years ago; for I read in a
book that Bub Thompson's father lent me, that St. Augustine said,
speaking about the sects that tried to call themselves 'Catholics' in
his time: 'The very name of _Catholic_ detains me in the Catholic
Church, which that church has alone, and not without cause, obtained
among so many heretics, in such a way as that while all heretics wish
to be called Catholics, nevertheless not one of them will dare to
point out his basilica or house to a stranger inquiring for a place of
Catholic worship."  [Footnote 187]

  [Footnote 187: Epist. contra Manich. I. 5, 6.]

"Well! sakes alive! live and larn," exclaimed Aunt Pilcher, "but it's
enough to make a body think they never knowed anythin' when they find
oat some things!"

----------


Translated from Le Contemporain.

A PORTRAIT OF FRA ANGELICO.

BY EDMOND LAFONDE.


At dawn of a summer's day in the year of grace 1453, a Dominican monk
set out from his convent of Santa Maria sopra Minerva, at Rome. He was
an old man, but the brightness of youth still shown in his aged
countenance, attributable, perhaps, to the shadowless sanctity of his
life, and the purity of a soul which had never known wrinkles. He
walked slowly in his dress of white woolen covered with a black
scapular, his shaven head bared to the sun, his eyes cast down, and
his hands employed in rolling the beads of the Rosary of St. Dominic.
He traversed the square of the Pantheon, and was going to cross the
bridge of St. Angelo, when, in passing the prison of the Tor di Nona,
he saw coming out of it a funeral cortége; a condemned person, led to
death in the usual place of execution, the piazza della Bocca Verità.
A man nearly forty years of age, of noble and proud figure, but
seemingly worn out by vice or grief; his costume curious, and wholly
oriental; clothed in red silk, with a turban ornamented with gold and
ermine. A Franciscan accompanied him, but endeavored in vain to direct
his thoughts to heaven, and make him kiss the crucifix, from which he
turned away his lips in discussed. The crowd that followed, becoming
infuriated, exhorted him to penitence, crying out, "Amico, pensa a
salvar l'anima." "My friend, think of saving thy soul."

{672}

As soon as the Franciscans saw a brother priest, he called to him,
saying: "Ah! Fra Giovanni, in the name of the holy friendship which
united our two glorious patriarchs, St. Dominic and St. Francis, come
to my aid. You see this unhappy man. He is one of the Greeks just come
from Italy, since the taking of Constantinople. His name is
Argyropoulos. He has murdered a Roman woman; is doomed to die, and
will not reconcile himself with God. He is not merely schismatical,
but pagan. Try if you can be more successful than I." At a sign from
the chief of the guard the _cortége_ stopped--for in Rome, since the
earliest age, pontifical justice does not wish to kill the soul, and
makes every effort to save it while sacrificing the guilty body. Fra
Giovanni tried to speak to the Greek, but was met with repulse and
blasphemy. With tears rolling down his cheeks he whispered a few words
to the Franciscan, who, elevating his voice, thus addressed the chief
of the guard: "This son of St. Dominic," he said, "is Fra Giovanni of
Fiesole, the favorite painter of his holiness. He is going to the
Vatican, and will ask the Holy Father a delay of one day, in order to
try once more to induce the sinner to repent." The people applauded,
and the captain of the guard declared himself willing to assume the
responsibility of suspending the execution while awaiting a new order
from the sovereign pontiff. The condemned man, who remained apparently
immovable during this debate, was re-conducted into the prison of Tor
di Nona, where still later were to be enclosed the guilty family of
Cenci, and the Franciscan entered with him. The crowd remained a long
time before the door, losing none of its interest or curiosity. Fra
Giovanni again pursued his way to the Vatican, his soul, so calm
ordinarily, deeply agitated and troubled by the unfortunate event.
Arrived at the square of St. Peter, he kneeled by the obelisk which
contains a piece of the true cross; then passing the guards, who were
daily accustomed to see him, entered without difficulty into the
pontifical palace. He repaired immediately to the new chapel, which
Pope Nicholas V. had just finished, and charged him to decorate; for
it is time to say that Fra Giovanni was the painter-monk of Fiesole,
whose purity of genius and sanctity of life had surnamed him Beato
(blessed) or Fra Angelico (the angelical brother), under which latter
name he is most generally known, and which is equally appropriate to
his beauty of soul and to his works. The great Pope Nicholas V., who
had known him at Florence, and watched the budding of these marvellous
products of his pencil in the convent of St. Mark, had just called him
to Rome, where Eugene IV. had already bid him come, to enthrone in his
own person Christian art in the Vatican. Nicholas V. had built in his
palace a small chapel, in which he desired the painter-monk to retrace
for him the story of St. Lawrence and St. Stephen, reuniting them in
the same poetical commemoration; as had been the custom of the
faithful to invoke them, since their bones had lain united outside the
walls in the ancient basilica of St. Lawrence. This chapel being very
small is lighted by a single arched window; happily it has been
preserved, and is one of the sanctuaries where the friends of
Christian art love to make a pilgrimage. Below the window is now
placed the altar which formerly faced it. On the three other sides Fra
Angelico has painted two series of compositions, one above the other;
in the arches of the upper part is represented, in six compartments,
the history of St. Stephen, and in the lower that of St. Lawrence. On
entering the chapel Fra Angelico fell on his knees to pray God to
guide his pencil, then commenced to paint the scene where St. Stephen
was led to martyrdom. He there represented an enraged Jew, who
conducts the saint outside of Jerusalem, while others pushed and
pursued him with stones in their hands. While painting the violence of
the Jews Fra Angelico {673} thought deeply of the Greek whose
execution he had arrested, and awaited with pious impatience the
arrival of the Pope, who never failed daily to visit the works of his
favorite painter. The Dominican interrupted his work now and then to
rest, reposing his mind with prayer and singing occasionally a stanza
of Dante, who was then for mystical painters an unfailing source of
religious inspiration. He recited the exquisite passage where Dante
paints the glorious martyrdom of St. Stephen:

  "Poi vidi genti accese in fuoco d'ira
  Con pietre un giovinetto ancider, forte
  Gridando a se pur; Martira, martira, ect."

"Then I saw an excited and angry crowd, stoning and forcing onward a
young man, with loud cries of 'Kill him, kill him!' And him I saw bent
to the earth by the weight of death, but with eyes uplifted and turned
to heaven; in the midst of the terrible struggle praying the sovereign
God to forgive his enemies, with an expression so beautiful as to
command pity and respect."

At last the door of the chapel opened and the Pope entered. Nicholas
V. was old, but more bent by sorrow than age. In his youth he was
called the poor student of Sarzana, and had passed his life in the
society of saints and literary men. Become sovereign pontiff, he
encouraged piety, science, art, and letters; laid the foundation of
St. Peter's, embellished Rome, and merited truly to give his name to
the fifteenth century as Leo X., gave his to the sixteenth. During the
Council of Florence he had known Fra Angelico, and soon perceived that
the soul of the Dominican artist was worth far more than his pencil.
Pope Eugene IV. had thus judged him when he wished to name this holy
religious Archbishop of Florence. Fra Angelico, seized with fear on
learning the intentions of the pontiff, besought to be spared so great
a weight. His vocation, he said, was not to govern, but stated at the
same time he could recommend a brother of his order far more worthy
than he of such a dignity. Eugene IV. listened to his suggestion and
named for archbishop the monk who was afterward to be St. Antonine.
When Nicholas V. entered the chapel he appeared so unhappy that Fra
Angelico, in kneeling to implore his blessing, could not forbear
asking the cause of his sadness; if some recent misfortune had not
befallen him. "O my son," replied the Pope, "the misfortune which has
happened me is the catastrophe long since foretold, but not the less
bitter to all Christian hearts, the taking of Constantinople by the
Turks! My dreams, even, are troubled, for since I have been Pope the
principal aim of my pontificate has been the pacification of
Christianity, so as to unite and direct all our forces in a crusade
against the Turks. But the unfortunate Greeks have upset all my
projects in their hatred of the papacy, preferring the turban to the
tiara. They have broken the peace of Florence, ill received the
assistance of the Latins, and now their capital is no longer for Jesus
Christ, but Mahomet. Ah! Fra Giovanni, can any one in the world be
more wretched than I? Were it not that I fear a failure of duty, I
would renounce the pontifical dignity, to become again Master Thomas
of Sarzana. Then, one day gave me more true happiness than I have
since enjoyed in a whole year." The Pope shed tears abundantly.
[Footnote 188]

  [Footnote 188: See this scene in Muratori, volume 25th, page 286.
  The taking of Constantinople was a mortal blow to Nicholas V. From
  that day he was never seen to smile.]

Fra Giovanni deeply commiserated him, and replied in a voice choked
with emotion: "Most Holy Father, let us resign ourselves to the will
of God. Bear your cross as did he of whom you are the vicar; I wish I
were the good Cyrenean to aid you. Let us contemplate the images of
the two martyrs I am to paint on the walls of the chapel, and, like
them, let us learn to suffer." "You are right, Fra Giovanni. Your soul
and talent are truly consolatory, and I love to come here and open my
heart, charged as it is with incurable anguish." {674} Just then
twelve o'clock struck. The Pope knelt down to recite the Angelus, and
dried the tears which since St. Peter so often had reddened the eyes
of the sovereign pontiffs. At this moment a prelate came to announce
that the dinner of his holiness was ready. "My son," said the Pope,
"do not leave me in this hour of affliction. I beg you to dine at my
table." "Holy Father," replied the humble monk, "without the
permission of the prior I dare not do so. I must dine with my
community." "But, my son, I can dispense with this obligation. Come,
come!" The Dominican dined, therefore, _tete-à-tete_ with the Pope,
but in silence, and with eyes cast down, as if he had been in his own
refectory. It was not a day of abstinence, and meat was served on the
Pope's table, but the monk refused to partake of it, "Fra Giovanni,"
said Nicholas, "you exhaust yourself with this painting, and I perhaps
urge you too closely to finish it. You have worked hard to day, and
should strengthen yourself anew by eating some meat." "Holy Father, I
can not without the permission of the prior." The Pope smiled, but
could not help admiring the innocent scruples of the pious monk. "My
son," said he, "do you not think the authority of the sovereign
pontiff greater than the permission of your prior? For to-day I
dispense with the rule of St. Dominic, and order you to eat all that
is offered you."  [Footnote 189]

  [Footnote 189: This scene, which so well portrays the virtue of Fra
  Angelico, is related by Vasari and Fra Leandro Alberti; De Viris
  Illustribus Ordinis Predicatorum, libri sex.]

The Dominican obeyed in silence, but his mind seemed preoccupied. He
thought unceasingly of the poor guilty Greek whose execution he had
suspended, but he dared not speak of him to the Pope. Nicholas V.
perceived his distraction and asked him of what he was thinking. Then
Fra Angelico related to him the story of Argyropoulos, and added:
"Holy Father, with justice your government has condemned this unhappy
man to be executed, but I know your holiness desires not the death of
his soul, and I have hoped your mercy would grant him the delay of a
day that he may still have time to repent." "My son, I thank you for
having acted thus. I accord you not only one day,  but several if
necessary." Nicholas V. then wrote an order suspending the execution,
and gave it to Beato, who full of joy, asked permission to retire
without finishing his repast. He obtained it, and in haste quitted the
Vatican. After passing the bridge of St. Angelo, he was strongly
tempted to stop at the prison of Tor di Nona; but he considered his
duty to his convent, where doubtless his absence from dinner had
occasioned surprise. When he entered the cloister of Santa Maria sopra
Minerva, the brothers had left the refectory, so the prior exacted of
the dilatory monk a penance, which consisted of eating his dinner in a
kneeling posture. The Beato, without saying a word to excuse himself,
knelt down and simply made a sign he would rather not eat. The prior
then ordered him to explain his absence. "My Father," said he, "I am
guilty; mea culpa. His Holiness wished me to dine with him, and
obliged me to eat meat without your permission." The prior admired the
simplicity and obedience of the blessed one, but said nothing to
disturb his humility. The habit of obedience was so natural to him
that all orders for his art were received through his spiritual
superior; and when any work was requested of him, his friends were
referred to the prior, as nothing could be done without his consent.
He refused to stipulate a price for his works, and distributed all
they bought him to the poor and unfortunate. "He loved the poor during
his life," said Vasari, "As tenderly as his soul now loves the heaven
where he enjoys the glory of the blessed." If he loved the poor, Fra
Angelico better loved souls; he obtained from the prior permission to
go immediately to the prison. He ran thither with the wings of
charity, and showed the order from the Pope which delayed the
execution. He gained {675} admittance to what is now called the
prisoner's cell, now that so many of our ancient abbeys are
transformed into houses of detention. Argyropoulos presented himself,
grave and sad, clothed always in his red dress and white turban, which
gave him an air of majesty quite oriental. He was seated on a straw
bed, but his attitude was King Solomon enthroned. The Dominican, with
his white robe and angelical figure, resembled one of the beautiful
lilies he so often painted in the hands of the angel of the
annunciation; one of the lilies of the field, of which the Saviour
himself has said, "Not Solomon in all his glory could be arrayed like
one of these." Fra Angelico, without saying anything at first, stopped
at the entrance, and, kneeling, prayed God to cure this ulcerated
soul. A ray of light, which shone obliquely through the only window,
illuminated his bared and shaven head, and gave him the anticipated
crown of glory of the blessed. The Greek contemplated with
astonishment this luminous apparition, and thought he dreamed again
the dream of the patriarch Jacob, who saw angels ascend and descend a
mysterious ladder. Having strengthened himself by prayer, Fra Angelico
approached the prisoner, and said in a voice truly angelical: "My
brother!" But the charm to which Argyropoulos had given himself up at
the vision of the blessed one was broken by the sound of his voice; he
saw in him only a Catholic monk, and thus a being he detested. "I am
not thy brother, we have nothing in common, and I hate the religion of
the Azymites."  [Footnote 190]

  [Footnote 190: A name that the Greeks gave the Catholics on account
  of the discussion on the _unleavened_ bread as material of the
  eucharist.]

"My brother, you and I are Christians, although fifteen years ago you
have separated the Greek and Latin churches, which the Council of
Florence so happily united."

"No! As our great Duke Notaras said, there is no peace between us. I
would rather see the turban of Mahomet at Constantinople than the
tiara of the Pope."

"O my brother, can you say so? If you are not Catholic, are you not
Christian?"

"No, I am so no longer. I do not believe in God; and besides, if there
is a God, I have committed crimes too great for him to pardon. I am
pagan and of the school of Plato; I prefer Jupiter to Jehovah, Plato
to the Scripture, and the gods of Homer to the Saints of
Christianity."

"Why, my brother, you have gone backward two thousand years, to
breathe what Dante calls the fetid air of paganism, 'Il puzzo del
paganes mo.'"

Fra Angelico tried in vain to move this heart, as hardened and
desperate as that of Judas; during three days he fasted, prayed, and
begged the prayers of his fraternity, offered himself to God as a
victim to save this soul, and employed against his own body the
instruments of penance. But God did not grant him the grace he sought.
Every morning, while painting at the Vatican, he rendered an account
to the Pope of his unsuccessful efforts, and recommended the Greek to
the pontifical prayers. The three days expired; again he solicited a
still longer delay of the execution. "Holy Father," said he, "a
residence in prison seems to exasperate this unhappy man; perhaps I
might obtain a better hearing if I could take him out and let him
breathe the fresh air." "I can refuse you nothing, Fra Giovanni. Bring
him to see this chapel, I am sure your painting will do his soul some
good." "I will bring him to-morrow, since your Holiness permits me,
and at the same time solicit your daily visit, as I am certain his
meeting the vicar of Jesus Christ will have more effect on him than my
pictures." Nicholas V. promised to do so, and wrote an order to place
the captive at liberty for one day, and at the responsibility of Fra
Giovanni. It was a touching spectacle to see the Pope and the monk so
generously united in their {676} efforts to convert this paganized
schismatic.

The next morning Fra Angelico ran to the prison, brought out the
Greek, and proposed to him to see his pictures, without mentioning the
Pope. Argyropoulos, who rather prided himself on his knowledge of art
as well as of literature, willingly accepted the invitation. The fresh
air and the glorious Roman sun softened his mood, hitherto so
ferocious, and gave him an air almost of serenity. Fra Angelico,
transported with joy, conducted his future neophyte to the Vatican,
and introduced him to the chapel, praying God to work in him the same
miracle which he had granted to St. Methodius, whose painting of the
Last Judgment, on the walls of a palace belonging to the King of
Bulgaria, had not only converted the king, but as many of his subjects
as looked upon it. The Greek was deeply affected by these admirable
pictures, and took upon himself to explain them lengthily. To show his
artistic knowledge, he criticised the executioners who stoned St.
Stephen, and thought their countenances lacked sufficient energy. The
painter monk humbly accepted the criticism, which was not wanting in
justice. A competent judge has said that the character of Fra Angelico
was so formed of a love amounting to ecstasy that he never could
familiarize himself with dramatic scenes where hateful and violent
passions had the ascendency. In the painting of the life of St.
Lawrence, the Beato begged the Greek to particularly observe the
prison window where the martyr was converting a man on his knees, who
afterward became St. Hippolytus. "In painting this scene of conversion
I thought of you, my brother," he said, in a voice so sweet and tender
it would have touched a heart of marble; but Argyropoulos turned away
his eyes, and pretended not to hear him. Fra Angelico's heart was
grieved, and he felt his only hope was in the sovereign pontiff. He
had not long to wait for him. Nicholas V. entered into the chapel,
with a dignity tempered by an ineffable tenderness. The Beato knelt
down--his forehead in the dust--to kiss the feet of His Holiness. The
sight of the Pope always caused him transports of joy, equal to those
of St. Joseph of Cupertino, who went into ecstasy whenever in the
presence of the vicar of Jesus Christ. But a contrary effect was
visible in the mind of the pagan of Constantinople. At the sight of
the pontiff he reassumed all his dignity. "On your knees, my brother,
on your knees!" in vain said Beato to him, while pulling his dress.
"Never," cried the Greek, "never will I bend the knee before the idol
of the Azymites--before a priest who wished our submission at the
Council of Florence." Angelico sighed in the dust at the obstinacy of
this pagan, but the Pope, calm and dignified, began to converse in
Greek with Argyropoulos, who, captivated instantaneously by this
graciousness, replied by a verse of Homer. "My son," said Nicholas V.,
"I also will cite you a passage from Homer. In the second book of the
Iliad, the prudent Ulysses cries out: 'All Greeks cannot reign, too
many chiefs would do harm; let us have but one sovereign, but a single
king, him to whom the prudent Saturn entrusted the sceptre and the
laws to govern us:

  [Greek text]

Thus, my son, God wished in his church but one chief, one flock, and
one shepherd." At these words the Greek grew angry and replied in
harsh terms. "My son," said the Pope to him with tenderness, "I
forgive you, I pity your blindness, and I will continue to pray God to
enlighten you."

Nicholas V. withdrew.

Argyropoulos, mortified at his own conduct, returned to Fra Angelico,
and again commenced to eulogize the pictures. "My paintings are worth
nothing," cried the monk, bursting into tears, "since they have failed
to convert you. I am unworthy the name of preacher, since all my
teaching has not succeeded, {677} and I have brought you before the
holy father, only to hear you outrage the dignity of God's
representative on earth." The remembrance of this scene completely
overcame the tender and pious soul of Fra Angelico. He became pale and
weak, sank on his white robe like a lily on its stalk, and fell on the
pavement as one dead, according to Dante:

  "E cadi, come corpo morte cade."

The Greek, seized with pity and astonishment, tried vainly to restore
him. He thought he had killed him, and this man, whose hands were
already bloodstained, imagined he had committed another murder. He
hated himself when he saw this angel extended at his feet. He knelt
before him, rubbed his hands in his own, and threw in his face the
water in the vase which was used in his painting. "Father, father,"
cried he, "come back to life, and I swear to do all you wish." The
Angelico opened his beautiful eyes, languishing and moist with tears.
"My brother," said he, "you restore me to life, but again you will
give me to death if you forget your promise. Now we must leave the
chapel; it is time, according to my duty, that I take you back to
prison." Notwithstanding his pallor and feebleness Fra Angelico
insisted on leaving the Vatican immediately, and returned home leaning
on the shoulder of Argyropoulos. He said nothing until they reached
the prison of Tor di Nona. But there again, alone with him, the
angelical monk knelt before the prisoner, and reproached him for his
conduct toward the Pope with that sweetness he never lost, and which
so greatly astonished his biographer Vasari.  [Footnote 191]

  [Footnote 191: "Never," said he, "could one surprise him in an angry
  moment. This seemed to me incredible: Il che e grandissima cosa e mi
  pare impossibile a credere."]

This touching kindness greatly affected the Greek, who had been
already so deeply moved by the fainting of Beato. He began to
comprehend the love with which this pious monk was inflamed for the
salvation of his soul. "My brother," said the Dominican to him, while
joining his hands, "you have restored me to life, but in promising to
do as I wish, and I only desire to save you. You must discharge your
conscience of its weight of sin--you must confess." "But I cannot
believe in the necessity of confession, or in its divine institution."
"O my brother, if you could contemplate your poor soul in its mirror
of truth, it would appear so shaded and sullied. Your soul is bound in
cords ruder than those that chained your body when they led you to
execution. But confession would deliver you from all." "Let me see
this with my eyes, or I can never believe it." A sudden inspiration
came to the mind of the angelical painter. "My brother, we will speak
again of this. I am hurried to finish a picture; would you be pleased
I should paint it with you by my side, that I might every morning
distract your thoughts and keep you company?" "Oh! yes, my father, I
should be most happy, for you are very good to the poor prisoner." The
Beato obtained permission from Nicholas V. to suspend for some days
his work at the Vatican, and from the next morning he installed
himself in the prison, accompanied by his pupil Benozzo Bozzoli, who
brought with him an easel, some brushes, and a box of colors. After a
fervent prayer, he placed on the easel a small panel of wood, upon
which he commenced to paint rapidly, and without retouching, according
to his custom; he never perfected his paintings, leaving them
according to his first impression, believing, as he said, so God
wished them. "His art," says M. de Moutalembert, "was so beautiful in
his eyes, and so sacred, that he respected its productions as the
fruits of an inspiration much higher than his own intention." He
commenced by painting, as a foundation for his picture, some trees,
which rose near a house of simple appearance, and a modest church,
decorated by a portico supported by four pillars in Florentine style.
In a court grown over with herbs and studded here and there with {678}
flowers, he grouped five personages. At the right our Saviour, clothed
in a blue robe and draped in a red mantle, is seen in profile; a large
nimbus of gold encircles his tender and majestic countenance, his
golden hair falls on his shoulders. The Saviour has an attitude of
command, and extends his arm and hand which holds a golden rod. He
accomplished one of the greatest acts of his mercy, he institutes the
sacrament of penance, he gives to his apostles the power to remit
sins: one can almost hear him repeat the words which he addresses to
Peter, that he may transmit them to the entire Christian priesthood:
"Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven."
[Footnote 192]

  [Footnote 192: In the convent of St. Mark at Florence, the Beato has
  painted the grand scene of Calvary, where he represents St. Benedict
  holding in his hand the rod of penitence.]

The painter monk put into action these words of Christ. He painted a
priest in Florentine costume; a red cap encircled with ermine and a
blue dalmatic, which hung in graceful folds; his figure is youthful,
and expression benignant. This priest approaches a sinner in a red
dress, and turbaned with a cap of gold and ermine. The sinner is bound
with cords which are passed several times around his body. The priest
approaches him with ineffable compassion. With what care, what
delicacy, what respect, what love, he unties the cord with his white
and pure hands! With what grace and dignity he fills his office of
priest and confessor! The seven capital sins are figured by seven
demons chased from his body by absolution, and who are making every
effort to re-enter it. Rage and impatience are depicted on the faces
of these servants of Satan, and their attitudes are as various as
strange. One of them still threatens the sinner with his iron trident.
In the second part, Fra Angelico represents a person in a green robe
and turban, who expresses, by figure and gesture, his admiration at
the sight of this miracle of divine mercy, which is called the
institution of confession. Near this man, and right against the
Saviour, is a second personage, of whom the face only is seen. His
head is bared, and his angelical features seem to recall those of the
Beato, such as they are sculptured on his tombstone at Santa Maria
sopra Minerva. The Greek had followed with curiosity and profound
interest all the details of this picture, accomplished in three days
under his own inspection. He had admired the piety of the Angelico,
who, according to his custom, had not dared to paint the head of the
Saviour but on bended knees. Contrary to his usual manner, he had only
lightly sketched the face of the sinner bound with the cord. It was on
the third day that he suddenly finished it. But how express the
surprise and emotion of Argyropoulos, when he perceived that, under
the pencil of the painter-monk, this face became his own portrait! The
blessed one had painted his gray beard, his noble profile, and
expressed in his face at the same time the grief of being restrained
by sin and the hope of a speedy deliverance. Argyropoulos, in the
midst of the picture, had truly an expression of contrition in the
intensity of his regard. "It is I," cried the Greek, "it is I indeed!"
And he burst into tears. The divine touch of grace had vanquished him
at last. "My father, my father, untie me also, deliver me from the
bonds of many sins." The Angelico seized him in his arms, and in
transports of joy pressed him to his breast, then begged him to kneel
with him and render thanks to God. He passed several days in
explaining to him Catholic truths; then he received the acknowledgment
of his faults, baptized him conditionally at St. Jean de Latran, in
the baptistry of Constantine.  [Footnote 193]

  [Footnote 193: The author has here fallen into a mistake; the
  sacraments of the Greek Church are never reiterated conditionally.
 --Ed. CATHOLIC WORLD.]

{679}

The eve of this great day he had enjoined him, as penance, to go to
the Vatican, throw himself at the feet of the Pope, and ask pardon on
his knees for the invective he had cast on the holy father in the
chapel. Nicholas V. received him kindly, and said: "My son, Jesus
Christ has pardoned you, and I could not do otherwise than he of whom
I am vicar; I absolve you, not only for what you have said against me,
but the crimes committed against society. I grant you full and entire
pardon from the punishment you have merited, in the hope that your new
life will atone for the past." The Greek prostrated himself with
gratitude, and kissed his feet; then showed the picture from which he
would never part. The Pope admired it, and said to the painter-monk:
"Your pencil has worked another miracle of conversion." The humble
artist replied that only to God must be given the glory, and recited
the verse of David: "Non nobis, Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da
gloriam." This was the device of the Templars, and we have seen it in
Venice engraved on the wall of the old palace Vendramini. "Most holy
father," said the Greek. "I know with what goodness your Holiness has
received my compatriots, Theodore Gaza, George of Trebizond,
Calchondylos, and Gemistos Plethon, who after the taking of
Constantinople took refuge on a Venetian galley, and have come to
Italy, bringing with them the precious manuscripts of the ancient
Greek authors and fathers of the Greek Church, which but for them
would have been burned by the infidels. They have been most happy to
repay your hospitality by enriching the library of the Vatican with
these literary treasures." "It is true," said Nicholas V. "Thanks to
their and other conquests, we have become able to reunite in the
Vatican nearly five thousand manuscripts; it is, we believe, the
richest collection made since the dispersion of the Alexandrian
library. But I still have one gap to fill, and I have promised a
reward of fifty thousand ducats to him who will bring me the gospel of
St. Matthew in the original language." "O holy father, how can I
express my happiness! I possess this manuscript, which I brought from
Constantinople. After having committed the crime by which I merited
death, I hid this book in a place in the Roman campagna, where I could
easily find it again. To thank your Holiness for all your goodness, I
am only too happy to offer you the gospel of St. Matthew," Nicholas V.
was delighted, he who ever thanked God for the taste given him from
his youth for literature, and the faculties necessary for its
successful cultivation. On the receipt of the manuscript the Pope paid
to the Greek the fifty thousand ducats, who, finding himself possessed
of so great a fortune, resolved to go to Venice, and engage in
commerce with one of his compatriots. He quitted Rome with regret to
leave Fra Angelico, but returned at Easter to confess to the saviour
of his soul, as he called him, and receive the communion from his
hands in the church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva. The mass said by the
Beato inspired him with great devotion, and he was happy to receive
from such pure hands the body and blood of Jesus Christ. The year that
followed 1455, the Greek appeared at the same epoch, carrying ever
with him, in a casket of cedar, the precious painting which had been
the determining cause of his conversion,   [Footnote 194] and which,
he never ceased to contemplate with love and, gratitude, repeating
what Vasari said of another picture of the Beato: "I can affirm I
never contemplate this work that it does not appear new to me, and I
am never satisfied gazing upon it."

  [Footnote 194: This picture on wood is painted _a tempera_ and
  enriched with gold. It is twenty-seven centimetres high, and
  twenty-three broad. After various vicissitudes it was carried from
  Rome to Venice, from Florence to Turin, and finally found an asylum
  in Paris, in the celebrated Pourtales gallery. To-day it is in
  possession of him who relates the story, according to a traditional
  account received by him at Rome.]

{680}

Scarcely landed at Rome, Argyropoulos hastened, according to his
custom, to the convent of Santa Maria sopra Minerva and asked for Fra
Angelico. At this name grief overshadowed the countenance of the
brother porter, who replied: "Alas! signor, the blessed one has gone
from earth and left us to sorrow. His death was as angelical as his
life." The prior, who appeared, confirmed the sad news and gave the
details to the heart-broken Greek. The holy father said he was so
impatient to enjoy his beautiful chapel that he hurried continually
our blessed brother to finish his work; and he, ever willing to be
sacrificed to duty, and believing he worked for God in serving this
vicar, would not even interrupt his work during the fever season,
which is always more pernicious at the Vatican than elsewhere. His
health was lost by it entirely, he languished, and died at last of
malaria. Argyropoulos shed tears and asked to pray by the tomb of his
friend. It is still seen at the left of the church choir, a simple
tombstone encased vertically in the wall; the painter-monk is rudely
sculptured in bas-relief in his Dominican robe, with hands joined, his
head uplifted, and mouth partly opened as in prayer, as he was in
life, as he was particularly in death. I have often contemplated this
sepulchral stone, and recalled the verse of Dante, which could so well
have described the heart of Argyropoulos:

  "Come, perche di lor memoria sia,
  Sovr' a sepoiti le tombe terragne
  Porton segnato quel ch'elli eran pria;
  Onde li molte volte siripiagne.
  Por la pun ura della rimenbranza
  Che solo a pii da della calcagne."

"As to preserve the memory of the dead, the tombs given them on earth
bear the impress of their features as they were in life, so each time
one weeps over them the pious heart is pierced with the remembrance."
"Nicholas V.," said the prior to the Greek, "was inconsolable at the
death of his painter and friend, and survived him but a few weeks. It
is this great Pope who has erected this monument to Fra Angelico, and
who composed the epitaph you can read on this stone:

  "'Hic jacet ven. Pictor.
    Fr. Jo. de Flor.  Ord. P.
    MCCCCLV.
  Non mihi sit laudi quod eram velut alter Apelles.
  Sed quod lucra tuis omnia Christe dabam
  Altera nam terris opera extant, altera caelo;
  Urbs me Joannem flos tulit Etruriae.'"

"Here lies the venerable painter.  [Footnote 195] Brother John, of
Florence, of the order of Brother Preachers; 1455. Let me not be
praised because I have painted as another Apelles, but because I have
given all I made to the poor. O Christ! I have worked for heaven at
the same time as for earth. I am called John, the town which is the
flower of Etruria was my country."

  [Footnote 195: We must remark this title of venerable given the
  Angelico immediately after his death, and which justifies the
  popular canonization which has surnamed him in Italy, Il Beato.]

Argyropoulos remained long kneeling by the tomb, then on rising said
to the prior: "Tell me exactly the day of his death; for me it will
ever be an anniversary to be celebrated with prayers and tears." "It
was the 18th of last March," replied the prior, "that the blessed one
went to heaven, there to contemplate the true models of the dear and
holy pictures which, with so much love, he painted on earth."


------

ORIGINAL.


"I  AM   THE   WAY."

  "I am the way."  I well believe thy word;
  The truth of it is plain enough to see.
  For never was there yet a man, O Lord,
  So roughly trodden under foot like thee!

--------

{681}

ORIGINAL.

CHRISTINE.   [Footnote 196]

  [Footnote 196: Christine, and other Poems. By George H. Miles
  New-York: Lawrence Kehoe.]


The writer of the present remarks made his first acquaintance with the
volume under consideration during the magic season of Indian summer,
and perused many of its pages beneath the shade of sycamores by the
side of a woodland streamlet, ever and anon lifting his eyes from the
book to scan the many-colored foliage of trees mellowed by the
distance and draped in luminous haze. He took it up a second time when
driven into the house by equinoctial storms, and a third when the
trees had doffed their painted leaves and stood as black and cold as
the iron woods we read of in the Scandinavian Edda. But whether
in-doors or out, by waterside or fireside, he always found Christine
and her sisters the same genial and charming companions.

Who does not prefer the sunny side of a landscape to the dark one? Are
not coins and medals more pleasing when viewed on the side bearing the
principal legend and inscription? Juicy fruit, whether plum, peach, or
apple--does not the eye dwell with more pleasure upon the side which
is tinted with the finest blush and which glows with the rosiest
bloom? The same may be said of a pigeon's neck, a maiden's cheek; and
why not of a volume of poems? Let us, therefore, fix our eyes upon the
bright points, the beauties; and as every human production _must_ have
its imperfections, let us, when we discover these last, pass them over
lightly and almost in silence. The poet, when he composed his book,
hoped that its perusal would add to our enjoyment, and expected to
accomplish this, not by means of its defects, but by reason of its
many excellences.

Many, many such excellences belong to Christine. Open the book,
reader, and as if by magic you will find yourself transported some
eight hundred years backward in the world's history, and will fly on
fancy's wings from the age of steam-cars and telegraphs to that of
chivalry and the crusades. You will find yourself now in the
south-east of France, now in Savoy, gazing in succession at the Rhone,
the Isère, the Alps, Pilate's Peak, and the Grande Chartreuse, and, in
short, wandering over that romantic land so dear to all true lovers of
poetry, and so renowned of old for

   "Dance, Provençal song, and sun-burnt mirth."

The story is founded on one of those old devotional legends of the
early church, many of which have afforded such fine subjects both to
the painter and poet. Were I to enumerate one-tenth part of the fine
specimens of pictorial art which have been founded on such subjects, I
should soon swell out the list to a sufficient number to constitute a
good-sized picture-gallery. I will only allude, in passing, to a few
masterpieces, most of which are familiar, even to the untravelled
reader, from engravings, copies, and written descriptions. Among the
most noted are the St. Cecilia by Raphael, the Vision of Constantine
by the same artist, the the Assumption of the Virgin by Murillo, the
Marriage of St. Catharine by the same, the Archangel Michael by Guido,
and St. Patronilla by Guercino. These two last have been copied in
mosaic to adorn the interior of St. Peter's. Of poems of this nature
might be cited as among the best, Dryden's Ode to St. Cecilia, the
Virgin Martyr by Massenger, the Golden Legend by Longfellow, and the
Eve of St. Agnes by Keats.

{682}

Christine, I think, may fairly be catalogued among the same sainted
sisterhood.

These traditions and legends of an earlier and more credulous age may
be likened to the eggs, beautifully spotted and fantastically marked,
which some delighted school-boy finds in spring-time, after hours of
climbing and nest-hunting. Such eggs, curious in themselves, and
brooded over by genius, often break forth into winged and musical
poems, which afterward soar high above the nests and the tree-tops in
which they were first cradled. Such is the case with the one now under
consideration. In a new world, in a land which was not then even
dreamed to be in existence, it arises lark-like, soaring and singing
toward "heaven's gate." Let us watch it for a few moments, reader, and
listen to its matin melody; my word for it, we shall be none the
worse, either in heart or head, for having done so.

I shall not mar the beauties of this radiant little poem by attempting
a cold and prosaic outline; this would, indeed, be to offer a dingy
silhouette in place of a picture glowing with all the colors of a
Tintoretto. Instead of this, I say, let the volume speak for itself;
procure it, read it aloud to your friend; there is music sleeping in
the book, awaken it to the sound of your own voice, and even though
you may be a Protestant of the strictest school, you will find here
nothing to offend, nothing to call forth a word of disapprobation,
with one proviso, however, and that is that you read it as the
title-page directs. Remember always that it is supposed to be "A song
by a Troubadour."

A troubadour? And what was a troubadour? And what were his mainsprings
of action? Hear an answer in the language of one of the most gifted of
their number.

  "A Dien mon ame, ma vie au roi,
  Mon coeur aux dames, l'honneur pour moi!"

This, interpreted into tamer and more prosaic language, means that his
ruling principles of action were religion, loyalty, gallantry, and
honor; in other words, his soul, his life, his heart belonged
respectively to God, to the king, to the ladies, and only his honor he
reserved to himself. Such was his creed, such was the disinterested
and noble spirit which animated him, and which breathed through all
his lays, his vire-lays, his morning songs, his serenades, his
sonnets, his idyls, his villanercas, his madrigals, and his canzonets.
In this spirit acted the enthusiastic Rudel, who became enamored of
the Countess of Tripoli from the reports which he heard of the
hospitable manner in which she treated the Crusaders, and who, without
having ever seen her, actually started of on a long voyage to visit
the object of his admiration. Who has not heard of Blondel, and of the
romantic incident by which he discovered the lion-hearted Richard
while imprisoned in the castle of Lovenstein?

But in addition to the above-mentioned motive principles, the
troubadour was influenced by another sentiment, which had a powerful
effect on all the feelings and actions of his life. This was an
intense and romantic veneration for the Virgin Mary. In fact, with
little variation the following words, which we find in another poem in
the same volume, entitled "Raphael Sanzio," might with equal propriety
be attributed to one of the troubadours.

 --"Her whose colors I have worn since first
  I dreamed of beauty in the chestnut shades
  Of Umbria--Her for whom my best of life
  Has been one labor--_Her, the Nazareth maid,
  Who gave to heaven a queen, to man a God,
  To God a mother_."

Such, then, was the troubadour. His birthplace was Provence. It was
there, in fact, that during the darkness of the Middle Ages the muse
relit her torch which had long been extinguished. Many years before
Dante's great poem rose like a sun--never again to set--the
troubadours, those morning-stars of poesy, "sang together and shouted
for joy." The troubadour preceded the Saxon bard, the Anglo-Norman
minstrel, and the German minnesinger. There were held those curious
courts of love where {683} queens and noble ladies often presided, and
there were exhibited, on green and flowery meadows, those poetical
contests, those festive jousts and tournaments, the idea of which
seems to have been caught from the neighboring Saracens of Spain. The
cross and the crescent both added something to the great result, the
one contributing the deep and earnest glow of devotion, the other the
pomp and circumstance of chivalry.

Of all these circumstances our poet has, with exquisite tact and
skill, availed himself. Christine herself, when only ten years old,
had accompanied her father to the Holy Land. This throws an oriental
richness around her whole bearing and manner of thinking:

  "Sooth thou art fair,
  O ladye dear,
    Yet one may see
  The shadow of the East in thee;
    Tinting to a riper flush
    The faint vermilion of thy blush;
    Deepening in thy dark-brown hair
    Till sunshine sleeps in starlight there."

The gray charger which plays so conspicuous a part in the action was
born under the palm-trees of Palestine, and his name, Caliph, would
seem to indicate an Arabian descent. By this subtle link the
connection between Provençal and Arabic poesy seems delicately to be
hinted at. The fact that the main poem concludes in sonnet-form, if
accidental, is curious; if brought about by design, is a happy
thought, inasmuch as the sonnet derived its birth in Provence, and
also from the fact that, from the number of its lines (twice _seven_),
and the collocation of its rhymes, it is instinct with Christian
symbolism.

The song itself, or story of Christine, is divided into five cantos or
sub-songs, which, like the five acts of some romantic melodrama,
arrest the attention from the start, and conduct the reader by five
stages of increasing interest to the jubilant conclusion.

This main picture, as it may be called, has hanging on each side of it
a smaller lateral one, one of which is a kind of _prelude_ and the
other the _finale_ to the whole performance. This reminds us of some
of those works of art by the older masters, in which a smaller
side-picture may be seen to the right and left of the main
representation. These appendages, though apparently slight and worded
with extreme conciseness, are artistically conceived and add greatly
to the general effect. They are also in fine keeping with the time and
spirit of the legend itself, reminding us of one of those
triple-arched emblazoned windows so often seen in old Gothic edifices.
But the chief advantage derived from such an arrangement is, that the
two smaller or lateral pieces serve as links to connect the more
confined interests of the story with that grandest event in history,
namely the Crusades, and thus to impart to the whole a breadth and
grandeur of design which the size of the poem scarcely led us to
expect. In the prelude we are presented with a view of the troubadour
himself, who is supposed to sing the song, and not only himself, but
his lady love, together with Richard of the Lion Heart, his queen, and
all his chivalry. These last are at the time gazing over the blue
Mediterranean, on which, in the distance, King Philip of France is
seen sailing homeward with his receding vessels. The finale exhibits
the arrival of a fleet under English banners. In both, a glimpse is
caught of the troubadour who sings the song; in the one case, before
he commences his romaunt, in the other, as he retires unnoticed and
unthanked by the English monarch.

In the midst of so many beauties and artistic excellences, it is with
reluctance that I notice two little circumstances which some might
consider as slight blemishes. Caliph, the charger above alluded to, is
spoken of as "the gallant gray." This expression sounds almost too
trite and commonplace to find a place in so original a poem. Even if
the color were preserved, I should {684} prefer some more novel and
striking form of words. But would not pure _white_ be a hue more
suitable in itself, and also form a finer contrast with the
_coal-black_ steed which is ridden by the Goblin Horseman of Pilate's
Mount? The last personage forms the evil, as Christine forms the
_good_, principle of the poem. By placing one upon a white and the
other on a black horse, the antagonism would be brought out in bolder
relief, and we should be reminded of the fine allegory in Plato's
Phaedra, where the chariot of Psyche is represented as drawn by two
steeds of opposite colors, under the guidance of Reason, who is the
charioteer.

The other--a trifle scarcely worthy of mention--is this: For the
expression "Santo sudario" I should like to see substituted
"Veronica," not so much on account of its effect upon the ear, as on
account of those subtle trains of associated ideas which either lead
us _off from_ or _on_ to poetical ground, as the case may be.

In justice to the author I must add that of these supposed blemishes I
am doubtful, whereas of the beauties above alluded to I feel perfectly
certain. It is much more easy to suggest alterations when a work is
finished than by one's own effort to finish a perfect work. As a
whole, there is a youthful fire and glow about the poem which cannot
fail to render it captivating to the young, and a devotional and
earnest tone of feeling which must be extremely acceptable to those
more advanced. Reserving the "other poems" which accompany it for a
future article, I shall conclude my remarks by a short extract taken
almost at random from the third song:

  "They are coming from this castle,
    A bevy of bright-eyed girls,
  Some with their long locks braided,
    Some with loose golden curls.
  Merrily 'mid the meadows
    They win their wilful way;
  Winding through sun and shadow,
    Rivulets at play.
  Brows with white rosebuds blowing,
    Necks with white pearl intertwined,
  Gowns whose white folds imprison
    Wafts of the wandering wind.
  The boughs of the charmed woodland
    Sing to the vision sweet,
  The daisies that couch in the clover
    Nod to their twinkling feet
  They see Christine by the river,
    And, deeming the bridegroom near.
  They wave her a dewy rose-wreath
    Fresh plucked from her dark-brown hair.
  Hand in hand tripping to meet her
    Bird-like they carol their joy,
  Wedding soft Provençal numbers
    To a dulcet old strain of Savoy."

How trippingly and buoyantly do these verses gallopade adown the
jocund page, as if one of the blithest of the old masters of the "gaya
scientia." had been thrown by Merlin into an enchanted sleep, and,
awaking from his slumber of eight centuries, was even now pouring into
verse one of the freshest of his matin visions. And that bevy of
dancing maidens! long may they continue to bound in tiptoe jollity
adown the salient page. The glad creatures are as yet ignorant of the
fact that Christine's noble lover is lying in a death-like a swoon,
and that Christine herself has just had an interview with the fearful
demon who wishes to bear her off in triumph. Each one of them seems to
be a kind of Provençal Minnehaha, and may be compared to one of those
merry waterfalls which come tumbling down the mountain-side, leaping
in joy from rock to rock, and quite heedless of the black precipices
which surround them.

But enough. As Cleopatra's barge of old went sailing down the river
Cydnus, with burnished hull and perfumed sails, and silver oars rowing
in unison with dulcet flutes, so ever and anon, at long intervals, is
launched into the world some rare poem, which moves sailing down the
river of time, to the admiration of all beholders. It behooves us,
when such an apparition heaves in sight, whether it be poem or vessel,
to be on the lookout and not to miss the pleasure of saluting it with
our heartiest cheers.

--------

{685}

ORIGINAL.

GENIUS IN A PARISIAN ATTIC  [Footnote 197]

   [Footnote 197: In a private letter received from a member of the
   Guérin family--one whose name is held in gentle reverence by all
   the readers of Eugénie's Journal--we are asked if it would be
   possible to interest devout souls in America in the reconstruction
   of the little church of Andillac. We would gladly answer this
   question in the affirmative, for the restoration of Eugénie's
   parish church would be a monument that even her humility could not
   reject.

  The smallest sums for this purpose will be gratefully received and
  forwarded to Andillac by Miss E. P. Cary, Cambridge, Mass., or
  Office of THE CATHOLIC WORLD, 145 Nassau Street, New-York.]



In a former article   [Footnote 198] we traced the course of Maurice
de Guérin's career at La Chênaie; and left him in Paris, bewildered by
the rush and whirl of such a city, one day to become so familiar to
him. We will now let his journal and letters exhibit the curious
change through which he passed in turning from the fair Utopian dreams
of Lamennais to the work-day experiences of an unsuccessful author.

  [Footnote 198: See article in THE CATHOLIC WORLD of June, 1866,
  entitled: Two Pictures of Life in France before 1848.]

To do this fully we must retrace our steps to Le Val, the asylum
thrown open to him by Hippolyte de la Morvonnais when he left
Ploërmel. Guérin's record of that peaceful sojourn in Brittany is as
distinct from our popular ideas of French life as Eugénie's sketches
of Rayssac and Le Cayla. The brother and sister have successfully
proved that all Frenchmen are not deceitful and unbelieving, nor all
Frenchwomen vain and perfidious. Surely no young man in any country
ever met with influences more sound and elevating than Maurice found
in the society of Eugénie and Mimin; of Louise de Bayne, Madame de la
Morvonnais, and Caroline de Gervain; or with friends more enduring
than Hippolyte, Paul Quemper, Marzan, Trébutien, and D'Aurevilly.

There is in France an undercurrent of domestic life as pure and fresh
as the superficial existence in her great  cities is shallow and
turbid. Indeed, the more familiar one becomes with French life and
manners, the more one appreciates the truth of the _mot_ of a certain
cardinal: "There is no purgatory for Frenchmen; they go straight to
heaven or hell." But we will no longer detain the reader, by moral
reflections, from the perusal of the selections we have made from
Guérin's writings.

LE VAL, Dec. 7th, 1833.

After a year of perfect calm, but for interior tempests for which I
must not blame the solitude that has unfolded me in such silent peace
that any soul less unquiet than mine would have slumbered deliciously
therein; after a year, I say, of absolute tranquillity, Fate, who had
let me enter the holy house to rest awhile, smote on the door to call
me forth again; for she had not gone on her way, but had sat waiting
on the threshold till I should gather strength to resume the journey.
"You have tarried long enough," she said; "Come." And she took me by
the hand and tramped on like the poor women you meet in the road,
leading a tired, lagging child. But what folly it is to complain; are
there no troubles in the world but mine to weep for? I will say
henceforth to the fountain of my tears, "Dry up," and to the Lord,
"Lord, heed not my complaints," whenever I am tempted to invoke God
and my tears in my own behalf; for suffering is good for me, who can
merit nothing in heaven by my actions, and, like all weak souls, can
earn nothing there except through the virtue of suffering. Such souls
have no wings to raise them up to heaven, and the Lord, who would fain
possess them, sends help. He lays them on a pile of thorns, and
kindles the fire of grief; the consuming {686} wood mounts up to
heaven like a white vapor, or like the doves that used to spring
upward from the dying flames of a martyr's stake. This is the soul
which has completed its sacrifice, and grown light enough in the fire
of tribulation to rise to heaven like a smoke. The wood is heavy and
immovable; set fire to it, and a part of itself will ascend to the
clouds.

8th.--Yesterday the west wind blew furiously. I watched the shaken
ocean, but to me its sublime disorder was far from equalling the
spectacle of a calm blue sea, and yet why say that one is not equal to
the other? Who can measure these two sublimities and say that the
second surpasses the first? Let us only say: "My soul delights rather
in serenity than in a storm."

Yesterday there was a great battle fought in the watery plains. On
came the bounding waves, like innumerable hordes of Tartar cavalry
galloping to and fro on the plains of Asia--on to the chain of granite
islets that bar the entrance to the bay. There we saw billows upon
billows rushing to the assault, flinging themselves wildly against the
rocky masses with hideous clamor, tearing along to leap over the black
heads of the rocks. The boldest or lightest sprang over with a great
outcry; the others dashed themselves with sluggish awkwardness against
the ledges, throwing up great showers of dazzling foam, and then drew
off growling, like dogs beaten back by a traveller's staff.

We watched the great struggle from the top of a cliff, where we could
hardly keep our feet against the whirling wind. The awful tumult of
the sea, the rushing boisterous, waves, the swift but silent passing
of the clouds, the sea-birds floating in the sky, balancing their
slender bodies on wide-arched wings; all this accumulation of wild,
resounding harmonies, converging in the souls of two beings five feet
(French) high, planted on the crest of a cliff, shaken like two leaves
by the energy of the wind, and not more apparent on this immensity
than two birds perched on a clod of earth. Oh! it was something
strange and wonderful, one of those moments of sublime agitation and
deep revery combined, when the soul and nature rear themselves in
majesty before each other.

From this height we clambered down into a gorge which opens a marine
retreat, such as the ancients could have described to peaceful waves
that rock themselves to sleep there murmuring, while their frantic
brethren lash the rocks, and wrestle among themselves. Huge blocks of
gray granite, embossed with white lichens, are thrown in disorder on
the slant of the hill which has hollowed out an inlet for this cove.
They look, so strangely are they tossed about, half tipping toward the
slope, as if a giant had amused himself with hauling them from the
height above, and they had been checked by some obstacle, some a few
feet from the point of departure, and others half way down; and yet
they seem to have paused, not stopped, in their course, or rather they
appear to be still rolling. The sound of the winds and waves pouring
into this echoing recess makes glorious harmony. We stood there a long
time, leaning on our walking-sticks, looking and listening and
wondering.

9th.--The moon was shining with a few stars when the bell called us to
mass. I especially enjoy this mass, celebrated in the early morning
between the last rays of starlight and the first beams of the rising
sun.

In the evening Hippolyte and I wandered along the coast, for we wished
to see what the ocean is like at the close of a calm, gray December
day. Mist veiled the distance, but left space enough to suggest
infinity. We stationed ourselves on a point where a tidesman's hut
stands, and leaned against the wall. To the right a wood, spreading
over the slope of the coast, stretched its thin, naked branches out
into the pale light with a faint, sighing sound. Far away to our left
the tower of Ebihens vanished into the {687} mist, and then appeared
again with a faint gleam upon its brow, as some furtive ray of
twilight succeeded in eluding the clouds. The sound of the sea was
calm and dreamy, as on the fairest days, but with a more plaintive
tone. We followed this sound as it swelled along the shore, and only
taking breath when the waves that had poured it forth gave place to
another. I believe it is from the deep, grave tone of the advancing
wave as it unfurls itself, and from the shrill, pebbly sound of the
retreating wave, gritting against the shells and sand, that the
marvellous voice of the sea is created. But why dissect such music? I
could say nothing worth hearing on the subject, for I am no adept at
analysis, so we'll go back to sentiment.

The shadows thickened around us, but we never thought of going away,
for as the earth grew still, and the night unveiled its mysteries,
grander grew the harmony of the sea. Like those statues set on
promontories by the ancients, we stood immovable, fascinated and spell
bound by the beauty of the ocean and the night, giving no sign of life
except to look up when we heard the whistling wings of the wild duck
overhead.

The thread of my wandering fortunes led me to a solitary headland in
Brittany to dream away an autumn evening, there for several hours
those interior sounds were hushed that never have been still since the
first tempest arose in my breast. There a sweet, heavenly melancholy
stole into my heart with the ocean chords, and my soul wandered in a
paradise of revery. Oh! when I shall have left Le Val and poured my
parting tears into the bosom of your friendship; when I shall be in
Paris where there is neither vale nor ocean, nor any soul like yours;
when I shall wander alone with my sadness and with an almost
despairing heart; what tears I shall shed over the memory of our
evenings; for happiness is a fine, gentle rain that sinks into the
soul, and then gushes forth in torrents of tears.

21st.--For several days the weather has done its worst. The rain falls
and the wind blows in gusts till it seems as if everything would be
torn to pieces by the storm. These three nights I have started up wide
awake as the gale swept by at midnight, besieging the house so
furiously that everything in-doors shook and trembled. I spring up in
my bed white, and listen to the hurricane, while a thousand thoughts
that swept, some on the surface, others deep down in my soul, start
into shuddering wakefulness.

All the sounds of nature; the winds, those awful breathings from an
unknown mouth, rouse up the innumerable instruments in the plains or
on the mountains, hidden in the hollow of valleys or massed among the
forests; the waters with their marvellous scale of tone, ranging from
the tinkling of a fountain through moss, to the wondrous harmonies of
the ocean; thunder, the voice of that sea that floats above us; the
rustling of dry leaves beneath a human foot or before a whirling
breeze; in short, for I must stop short in enumerating innumerable
sounds, this continual emission of tone, the floating rumor of the
elements, dilates my thoughts into strange reveries, and throws me
into unutterable amazement. The voice of nature has taken such hold
upon me that I can hardly free myself from its perpetual influence,
and in vain I try to turn a deaf ear. But to wake at midnight amid the
cries of the storm, to be assailed in the darkness by a wild,
tumultuous harmony, overthrowing night's peaceful empire, is something
incomparable among strange impressions. It is ecstasy in the midst of
terror.

CAEN, 24th January.

I have been wandering along the streets of this city by the dim light
of the street lamps. What did I see? Black phantoms of steeples and
churches, whose outline I could barely trace. The mystery of night,
which enveloped them without limiting their dimensions {688} like dear
daylight, added to their impressive influence, and filled me with an
emotion that was worth more, I believe, than forms. My thoughts soared
up to heaven with the never-ending spires, and wandered awe-struck
through naves that were mournful as sepulchres. That was all. The
streets were crowded, but what is a crowd by night, or even, by day?
At night I enjoy more the sound of the wind, and in the daytime those
grand assemblies, now silent and now rocking and roaring, called
forests. Besides, I met several of that class of men who always put me
to flight; students strutting along in gown and cap, and wearing in
every feature a nameless expression that reduces me to rout and
discomfiture. Oh! my dear journal, my gentle friend, how I felt that I
loved thee, as I worked my way out of the multitude. And here I am
with thee now, though the night is far advanced and I am half dead
with fatigue; all alone with thee, telling thee my griefs, and letting
thee peacefully into my secrets. Can I recall often enough those
memories all steeped in tears, that will ever dwell incorruptible
within my soul? Kind Hippolyte and his exquisite Marie! I bade her
farewell; she answered me in a few words of touching kindness. I
stammered out a few words more, and was running down the steps
thinking that she had not come beyond the threshold, and that all was
over; when I heard another farewell coming to me from above, and,
looking up, saw her leaning over the balustrade. I answered very
softly, for her voice had taken away the little strength I had to keep
back my tears.

  MAURICE   DE   GUÉRIN   TO
  M.  H.   DE   LA MORVONNAIS.

  PARIS, Feb. 1st, 1834

You thought you would receive news of me by the end of this week. Your
calculation has proved false, and you are feeling impatient, and
thinking that I am neglectful, and that the tumult of Paris has dulled
my ear to the sweet, lovely voice of friendship that sings unceasingly
in the depths of my soul. Imagine no such thing, my dear friend. God
knows that since I came to Paris I have listened to nothing but the
two farewells that I heard on that black Thursday evening, one from
her whom you must let me call your sweet Marie, who, as I went
down-stairs thinking that everything was at an end, leaned over the
balustrade to say good-by once more; and the other from you, on the
steps of the carriage, uttered half aloud as you clasped my hand. I
hear these two voices incessantly, and never fail to listen to them,
while all other sounds pass by as if they were not.

I did not see Quemper until two days after my arrival, Tuesday
morning, when I surprised him in bed, dreaming, between sleeping and
waking, of music, dancing, fresh garlands of young maidens, and all
the other vague and enchanting images that float through the
imagination long after the magic of a ball has passed away. Our friend
had spent the night at one of those radiant entertainments, whose
brilliancy his pen, fresh as if dipped in a dew-drop, depicts with
such sparkling charm. All of a sudden my pale and melancholy visage
appeared to put these fair dreams to flight; but though it must have
looked among them much like one of those crows that we used to see
flying among flocks of white sea-gulls, he embraced me with all the
cordiality that you remember in him. I sat down by his bedside, and
the vivacity of our first greetings having effervesced, a long and
charming conversation gradually unrolled itself, of which this is the
substance: remember that he was the speaker and that I interrupted him
very seldom, so anxious was I to gather up all his instructions.

The most difficult task to accomplish at the beginning of the career
which we have chosen _is to get published_, to bring one's name before
the public; {689} and he mentioned the names of several young men who
had been vainly knocking at the gates of journals for several years
past. We are already far advanced, since two are thrown open to us,
Catholic France and the European Review. Booksellers have no faith in
the unknown, and would refuse obstinately to have a masterpiece
printed if it were the first attempt of its author, while if they have
seen his name ever so little in reviews and journals they would prove
facile and accommodating. Therefore we must devote our whole strength
to making our names known through magazines and papers.

But in order to write acceptably for this sort of publication one must
adapt one's self to its habits, speak its language, and become all
things to all men--in matters of style merely, you understand. Let us
strive, then, to catch their ways, as the saying is, and to throw our
thoughts into the conventional mould, until we shall have attained to
such independence of pen as will leave us free to clothe our thoughts
after our own fashion. There is no use in disguising the fact that as
long as we serve under an editing committee (I dwell upon this point
because it is an important one, and Quemper insisted upon it very
strongly), we must, to a certain degree, renounce the habits of style
peculiar to ourselves, and adopt those of the journal; so that, while
preserving our individuality, we may blend and combine it with customs
foreign to our nature. It is hard for men like us, with characteristic
traits of their own, proud and independent of the fashions they have
railed at and disdained; it is hard for such men to muffle themselves
in the livery of the day, to follow instead of leading, to copy
instead of designing; but necessity with her iron nail stands before
us. Finally, the committee of the European Review refused an article
of Cazalès himself because it was in Germanic form.

As to the Review, we must share the editing of it thus: Each number
should contain a leading article purely philosophical, an article of a
high order of literary criticism, and an article, artistic or
imaginative, of a light character fitted to relax the mind after
reading the first two. You, Duquesnel, and I could share the labor and
play into each other's hands, so that each number should have as often
as possible three articles from us, conceived in the manner that I
have just indicated; only remember that you must leave the light
article for me, because I know nothing of philosophy or criticism.

. . . . .

And now let me tell what my present position is. I have hired a little
room at twenty francs a month, near my cousin. He could not take me
into his own family; my friend, Lefebvre, could not accommodate me
either; and besides, the fact is that one must be alone and quite
independent if one would work well; it is better to have a house of
one's own. I take my meals at my cousin's; in short, I am in a very
tolerable position, and one that will allow me to try my fortune for
three months to come, and I hope much longer.

Add to this a most charming perspective, from which I hope much for
the advancement of my fortunes and the maintenance of my courage. At
the end of this month Quemper is going to change his lodgings. He has
in view, still, in the rue des Petits-Augustins, an apartment
consisting of three rooms, two bed-chambers and a parlor. He proposes
that I should take one of these rooms, which would cost me twenty
francs, like the one I have at present, and that we should share the
parlor. You may imagine that I accepted the plan with both hands,
especially because it will be so delightful to live with such a
friend. We have already laid out a life of uninterrupted happiness not
to be described, a sort of Le Val for us two in the midst of Paris.
{690} Can discouragement seize upon me there? and if it comes, cannot
we put it to flight? Quemper has drawn up a rule of life for me, and
given lessons in a double economy of which I knew nothing--that of
time and money; in short, as he says, he will pilot me through life
and Paris, two paths where I lose myself completely, though I number
twenty-three years of life and eight years of Paris. I begin to
believe that in spite of myself or any evil genius, I shall accomplish
something.

If I turn to the source of all these blessings, I find you, my dear
friend, who by your exhortations and generous reproaches, sowed in my
soul the first germs of the courage that I feel stirring within me
now. You urged me to come to Paris when I was contemplating a cowardly
retreat; you bound me in that ripe sheaf of friendship with yourself,
Quemper, and Duquesnel, an endless blessing from which, perhaps, all
the success of my life will grow; to you I owe two months of beautiful
impressions and pure happiness. You let me look upon Le Val as a
second Le Cayla, love it with the affection that belongs to one's
birthplace, for it was the June of my second birth; weep for it in
momenta of sadness, and sing of its charms when I am glad.

My cousin's little girl is nine months old; she is charming, can stand
alone already, without walking of course, has an enchanting smile; in
short, would be a companion angel for Marie. When her tongue is
loosed, I will teach her all the little words that her baby sister in
Le Val can say, "_Bon jour, ma, à tantôt, le v'la lia_" and I will
swing her in a napkin; in short, I will do everything I can to make
her another Marie, her faithful and bewitching likeness.

I have not yet written to my sister. I shall do so this evening with
exhortations and entreaties. How happy it would make me to see a firm
friendship grow up between Madame de La Morvonnais and Eugénie! those
two souls so formed for mutual understanding, and to draw forth the
wealth of sweetness from each other's souls.

Offer my homage to her who will, I hope, soon call my sister friend,
and win the same title from her; as it is between you and me, my dear
friend. Countless kisses to Marie. Don't forget me, I beg, when you
write to Mordreux and St. Malo. Love to Duquesnel and François.

At the time the following idyl was written, the pernicious style of
literature which it satirizes was confined to France. To-day, when our
bookstores teem with works of the same class, we fear that the
allegory may meet with less favor among American readers than it would
have aroused thirty years ago.

  MAURICE   DE   GUÉRIN   TO
  M.   H.   DE   LA MORVONNAIS.

  PARIS, February, 1834.

I fear me much that the month of May will bring us snow-balls instead
of roses.

When I left you, dear friend, your solitude was just ready to burst
forth into flowers and verdure. The reddening fruit walls in your
garden, and the little chilly shrubs that love the sun, were trusting
their tender foliage, in all confidence, to the benign and gentle
winter, smiling upon them with the grace of spring. The wood that
stretches over your sloping shore, dipping almost into the sea, wore
that look of life and gladness that trees put on as spring-time draws
near. The sticky, oval buds of the Indian chestnut, glistened in the
sun; beech buds, sharp and slim, pricked themselves up with pert
vivacity, even the small round oak buds were beginning to gather in
bunches at the end of the branches, and yet the oak leaves out later
than other forest-trees. We saw the young shoots of undergrowth
blushing with the red tint that colors them at the awakening of
vegetation, as if blood were purling through their veins instead of
sap. The grass, pushing its way up through the bed of dead leaves and
withered vegetation, thrown over {691} it in autumn, was bordering the
paths, and spreading a velvet carpet in every glade, decked with the
enamel of a thousand Easter buds and daisies. Everything was gay in
preparation for the great feast of nature. Oh! if nightingale,
swallow, oriole, and sparrow knew all this, how they would bestir
themselves to fly _dulcesque revisere nidos_. It may be that their
European brothers have sent messengers to tell them that everything is
ready for their reception, woods, groves, hedge, and bush; that seeds
and berries will come early; that, morning and evening, the gnats are
whirling in myriads in the beams of the rising and setting sun; that
all is lovely here, and they must hurry home to enjoy the glorious
festival. I don't know that our domestic birds have paid this
attention to their travelled brethren, but at least they have given
themselves up to joy and harmony in awaiting their return. Do you
remember, Hippolyte, how the blackbirds whistle, the gay, sweet warble
of the thrush, or the twitter of some wren perched on the top of a
wall, used to beguile us from our study, tempting us forth to pleasant
rambles?

Such was your Thebaïd, as you call it, the day before I left you, full
of warmth and animation, vivid with rising sap and the labor of
vegetation. To-day I will wager that the eruption of leaves and
flowers is far advanced, that the birds are hopping about in search of
moss, twigs, stray feathers, and bits of down, and that you are
wandering in spring revery under the first shade of your chestnut
trees. But, my friend, are you slumbering serenely on these fair
promises? Does it never occur to you that this may be all a stratagem
of winter, and that the old despot may have manoeuvred, merely to draw
out verdure and blossom, and kill them with his baleful breath? Do you
never fear that thus the acme may be reached of our delusions? What if
this balmy, perfumed air turned to a north wind; if a black, sharp
cold condensed all this living sap, this fecundity now gushing through
the veins of nature; if the frost crystallized your woods and their
tender leaflets; if your little eddying brooks were to clasp in ice
the flower, stems, and stalks of herbs that grow upon their beds and
borders; if, instead of nightingales and singing-birds from southern
shores, you should see triangles of long-necked geese and swans
pouring down from the north, and files of those ducks that we used to
hear cutting the clouds with whistling wings on December evenings; if
the exterminator, winter, were to kill in one night all these
first-born of the year; in short, if your Thebaïd were to turn into a
Siberia, what would become of your dreams of plenty, fruits, and
flowers, soft siestas under the shade of a tree, songs on the
sea-shore, and of that whole existence, nourished upon sunlight,
gentle breezes, and sweet odors, that you lead in your dear
wilderness?

If you had power over nature, I should say to you: "Give your gardens
and woods and birds a lesson of wisdom. Bid those buds that I saw
gaping in the sunshine to hold back well in their envelope the leaves
entrusted to their care, scare them with the rigors that may surprise
them; the brightest sun is a deceiver. Put them on their guard against
the wiles of a fair day, teach them to be austere, and tell them the
thousand tales you know of flowers that have crumbled into dust
because they heeded the lures of a passing breeze or of a glowing
sunbeam. Tell them that, if perchance a few be saved amid the general
havoc, they will one day bear shrivelled, meagre, tasteless fruit that
no fair hand shall ever gather, and that shall wither on the branch or
fall a prey to the vile appetite of insects. Tell them that their thin
and pallid foliage shall draw disdain upon them from the panting
traveller, the young maidens, and the winged musicians that take
refuge under their shade to rest or dance or sing. Men will take them
for useless cumberers of the earth, and one day {692} perhaps the axe
will be laid at their root." As to the birds, the best advice you can
give them is, to leave their brothers in exile until the first day of
true spring shines. It is better to bear banishment a little longer
than come home to find their country the wretched slave of winter. Let
your birds beware how they recall their brethren or begin to build
their own nests. The brood would not prosper; the poor mothers would
shiver on their eggs, and the bitter cold, stealing under their wings,
would kill the chicks in the shell, despite the warmth of the maternal
bosom. Oh! if you had, power over nature, what a discourse I would
send you for your Thebaïd, to save it from the seductions of this
perfidious spring whose perils I know so well.

Do you take all this seriously, my friend? I fear not, and that you
will dismiss it with a smile, as the prattle of a child. I even fear
that you may regard my letter as very eccentric, and say to yourself:
"What nonsense is this? Talking of woods and flowers to a hermit;
wandering on into homilies addressed to birds and flowers, when he is
writing from Paris, and not one word of what is stirring in the world!
He deserves in punishment that I should send him an essay upon the
dramas and romances of last year!" My friend, restrain your wrath, and
contain yourself long enough to hear, my reasons.

Horace said: "At Rome I prate of Tiber, and at Tiber I prate of Rome."
Don't imagine that my taste is light and changeable as the wind, and
thus explain to yourself my long tirades on your solitude. When I was
in your Thebaïd, did I ever speak regretfully of the joys of Paris?
Did I not, on the contrary, say always that a city life is repugnant
to my taste, and that I care not at all for any pleasures to be
enjoyed here? Don't you remember how the little rough huts of your
tidesmen used to excite my envy, and that I used to have dreams of
hollowing out a cool, dark grotto in the heart of a rock in one of
your creeks, and letting my life glide away in the contemplation of
the vast ocean, like a sea-god? If you recall all this, you'll easily
understand why in Paris I talk of the country and forget Paris.
Indeed, you will see that it cannot be otherwise; for having said to
the fields, as you know,

  "Le corps s'en va, mals le cocur vous demeure,"  [Footnote 199]

my discourse must turn on them, and I can only live in this mad
tornado of Paris as not belonging to it.

  [Footnote 199: Froissart (manuscript note).]

If you know me well, these reasons will more than suffice to make you
understand the beginning of my letter. But will you be able to resist
the perpetual impulse that makes you look for mysteries in the
clearest things, so insatiable is your taste for divining? No; you
will look under the natural sense of my words, and think you have
surprised a sly meaning, crouching like a serpent under flowers,
beneath my sentences, which breathe only sweet images of spring. I'm
not afraid of your discovering some political allusion in them, for
you are too solitary, and hold yourself too much aloof from such
things for that idea to occur to you. But, if your eyes turn from the
arena of politics, they will settle on the noble field of literary
doctrines; and because lately the combat has grown hot, and the noise
of the mêlée is resounding far and wide, you will fancy that I am a
passionate spectator of the struggle, amusing myself with winding the
opposing party in subtle mocking allegories. Let me tell you that this
interpretation, or any similar one given to my idyl on the precocious
spring, misses its aim; that my idyl veils no satire; and that if it
seems to you the least in the world insidious or guileful, 'tis only
because you've breathed your own malice upon the innocent thing. I
repeat, it conies merely to discourse with you about nature; and what
can be more natural? Know that never has a ray of sunlight shone
directly {693} into the room where I live; I receive it only by
repercussion. Toward noon the sun strikes some garret windows opposite
that send across to me a few pale reflections, without warmth or
cheerfulness, like the rays of a lamp; and even this vague,
languishing light vanishes in a quarter of an hour. These are the
beams that gladden my eyes, accustomed to the broad overflowing
liberality of a southern sky. A narrow, sombre court-yard, where
there's not a blade of grass growing in the cracks of the pavement,
nor a flower-pot on a window-sill to smile upon me--this is the
horizon to which I am reduced; I, who so many, many times have scaled
with you your rocks and downs and sea-cliffs, whence our eyes embraced
the divine expanse of ocean, the marvellous indentures of your coast,
and the wide fields all green with wheat and flax. And now that I've
fallen from these fair heights into a hole that hardly admits the
light of day, do you suppose I shall not try to live over again these
charms in imagination, or that I shall talk to you of anything but
yourself and your solitude? And you, you cynical recluse, would
envenom these sweet, innocent recollections, and find some apologue or
another in the images of nature among which I seek recreation? But as
I have every reason to suppose that you are not attending to me, and
are still working to disentangle the metaphors, let us see if
perchance malice can make anything out of my precocious spring, and to
what allusion it can be turned.

Interested as you are in literary matters, and attentive to the
disturbances that have risen tip lately among our authors, I am sure
that it will not be long before the _facile literature_ comes to your
mind. Then you will think you have the clew, and with that thread
you'll plunge into the labyrinth of my supposed allegory, hoping to
emerge maliciously triumphant and content. I allow that, without any
extraordinary flights, imagination might pass from the buds, opening
prematurely on the faith of a brilliant winter sun, to this young
literature, which has burst into blossom before its time, and
innocently exposed itself to the returns of frost that I predict to
your woods and groves. But, my friend, will you, who rejoice so
ardently at sight of an almond-tree in flower, will you reproach
severely these trusting souls that have opened in the broad-day light
and displayed with touching faith their treasures to the graces of
heaven? Blame rather the burning sun of our day, and the atmosphere
all charged with fatal heat, which have hastened this development and
perhaps reduced the harvest of our age to a few ears.

And the trees whose blossoms are only born to die, and those that bear
bitter fruits which no one will ever pluck, or will gather only to
throw away--ah! you'll not have much trouble in seeing in them the
emblems of the many authors who have appeared once and vanished for
ever; the many authors whose books, distasteful to a few grave judges,
are welcomed by seekers after novelty and romance readers; and who,
having filled these vain souls with vain ideas, often sink into the
well of oblivion with hands relaxed by the lethargy that comes from
dull satiety.

Will you have it that the trees shunned by travellers, young maidens,
and birds figure those renowned books, worthy of their fame as works
of art, which do not contain a grain of the hidden manna, nor one of
the sweet, beneficent thoughts that nourish the soul and relax it
after fatigue?--books that maidenly hands dare not touch, and that put
to flight everything fresh and innocent--a thought to make one die of
shame and grief! Will you have it so? I yield the point with good
grace, for in truth my thoughts bear your interpretation as well as if
I had really hidden it therein, and I will follow you no further in
your suspicious investigations, feeling sure that my test will not
suffer violence from you, {694} and that you will go on to the end
without losing your way.

What conclusion do you draw from all this? First, that, resolved to
enter the lists, I am preparing in secret my lance and chariot, and
kindling my wrath. But are my peaceful inclinations unknown to you, or
the weakness of my arm and my very doubtful courage? I a combatant!
Just remember that the least tumult scares and routs me like a flying
prey, and that my strength bravely suffices to drag me out of danger;
so how could it drag me in?

In the second place, you will suppose that I am nursing an aversion
for the new school and calling out for a classical reform. M. Nisard,
of course, does not wish the new school to perish, but to amend its
ways; and it is with that belief, and, I dare to say, on that
condition, that I pray ardently for the success of the campaign he is
about to open. The Catholic faith would never allow me to sympathize
entirely with a sceptical and fatalist literature, that sets no value
upon morality. But, on the other hand, the same faith makes me feel a
certain interest in it; for is not this disorderly, frantic new school
a truant from our fold?

No, dear friend, I am not a prey to devouring anger; but I must groan
in solitude over the wanderings of this literature, which has
forgotten the home and the teaching of its father, and has so
hopelessly lost itself, until the last and most terrible romance, in
that style, would now be its own history. Amid these sighs there come
to me a few reflections upon the cause of the evil and the means to
remedy it; and that is what I meant to announce to you in this
incoherent letter, in which I beg you to see only a whimsical prelude
of my imagination, turning, as it always does, toward you.

  MAURICE   DE   GUÉRIN   TO
  M. H.  DE  LA MORVONNAIS,
  AU VAL SAINT POTAN.

  AU PARC, July 9th, 1834.

I wrote to you  on leaving Paris a short letter, of which I begged you
not to take any notice. To-day, dear Hippolyte, when I have all
possible leisure, and the untroubled peace of the country is around
me, I resume our talk with every intention of carrying my confidence
to the utmost limits; that is, to the point where I shall begin to
fear that my chattering bores you.

I announced to you a complete account of my affairs and my position
during these five months past. Now I am going to begin and you must
listen. You know what my hopes were when I left Le Val; I felt a
decided taste for literary life, the profession of a journalist smiled
upon me, and I was hugging some bright phantom or other of the future
that had sprung up in my imagination; and in spite of the distrust
that you know I mingled with my love, I had given myself up to this
dream with intense ardor. For, let me tell you, _en passant_, that I
throw myself impetuously into every new project that can modify my
existence; and whether a walk is proposed to me for the next day, or
whether I am told, "To-morrow your destiny is to be completely
altered," I feel equally excited, and rush to meet the two events with
equal impatience. A strange activity of thought possesses me, and I
shake myself and champ my bit because time prevents me from seizing at
a bound what I am already devouring with my eyes. You may imagine
that, with a soul subject to such ardent cravings, I reached Paris
full of enthusiasm and seized the journalist's pen with a quiver of
delight. But, as usual, my enthusiasm did not last long, and
difficulties, personal as well as external, made themselves felt. I
saw the entrance to the journals bolted and barred by that selfishness
which guards the gates of everyplace against the approach of poor
young fellows who come to Paris full of innocent hopes. Catholic
France alone admitted me within its circle; but this journal,
notwithstanding the good-will of its directors, could not satisfy my
needs. My articles were favorably received, {695} but the narrow frame
of the journal cut me off from frequent contributions, and in four
months I had only appeared four times.

In the mean time expenses were not behindhand, and, although I lived
in a very small way, my expenditure was large in comparison to my
resources. I was exhausting fruitlessly time and money, my own
patience and my father's. For several months I persisted in this
disposition, holding my ground against adverse fortune in order to
save appearances and not yield the field without making fight. But at
last everything went so badly that I had to decide promptly upon a
plan suggested by the extremity of the ease. If I had been alone, I
don't know what would have become of me in my utter failure of
strength and courage; but God, as if for my preservation, has placed
around my wavering soul friends who prop and sustain it, restoring me
to myself with touching solicitude. I went to Paul, and laid before
him the whole story of my painful position. I proposed to him the
terrible enigma of my destiny and asked him for a solution. Without an
effort he untied the Gordian knot with these words: "If you leave
Paris, the future will slip through your hands. Do not let go your
hold at any cost. Make your father feel that this concerns your whole
life, that our last effort may save everything, and a first refusal
may ruin everything." And thereupon we set to work to compute article
by article all the necessities to be satisfied, all the debts to be
paid, all the most threatening possibilities of the future; and the
whole account, amounting to the sum of twelve hundred francs, I sent
to my father, with a petition written by my cousin in order to give it
more weight.

At the end of a fortnight my father returned it with his approbation
and a gift of the sum I had asked. What happiness it was to go in
search of Paul that I might thank him, triumph with him, overwhelm him
with joy for my joy; for I knew his kindness too well to doubt that he
would share all my transports. I was not mistaken; his rejoicings over
my success were sweeter to me than my own, and I had the inestimable
pleasure of seeing it communicated to my other friends, François,
Elic, etc. How delightful it is to receive such proofs of pure,
heartfelt sympathy! In short, my dear Hippolyte, here I am launched
upon the waves, provisioned with money and courage, and walking with
assured step to meet the future; I feel as if a light were guiding me,
and as if I were advancing toward an unknown goal. For the present
this is what I mean to do: I shall spend the end of August and the
whole of September at the College Stanislas, where I shall have a
class during vacation: when the term begins, I shall establish myself
in the college if there is a place for me; if not, I can have quite an
advantageous situation at my cousin's, by helping him to keep his
little _pension d'elèves_. This is an abridged history of these last
five months; it gives only a superficial view, but you are well enough
acquainted with my inner life to understand the course of my thoughts
during the time. Here I am at rest, dreaming of the future, giving
myself up to the pleasures of friendship and conversation, and
drinking in the country-life and all the dear idleness that one can
never fully enjoy except in the fields. Our solitude is so profound
that we do not even know the result of the elections. Another
ignorance, harder to bear, is concerning all that is going on among
our friends and affairs in Paris. I know nothing more than when I left
them, and it is a very long time also since I heard from my sister.

Pray, present my respectful compliments to Madame Morvonnais, and my
remembrances at Mordreux and Saint-Malo. I am going to write to
Amédée. Ask Marie, who can answer me now, if she remembers M. Guérin,
who sends her a thousand kisses.


  TO M. H.  DE LA MORVONNAIS.
  PARIS, Sept. 21st, 1834.

I have just  received your manuscript, my dear friend, and the letter
{696} it enclosed; it has only this moment arrived, and I write before
reading, that my despatch may be ready for Paul, who leaves day after
to-morrow in the morning. You are to possess this inestimable treasure
of friendship, freshness of soul, and warmth of heart. He will rest
from his busy, devoted life in the fair sanctuary of peace and
friendship, of which you are the priest; he will bathe in the current
of those easy, limpid days that murmur beneath your roof. What an
interruption and vacuum in my life will be between his departure and
the day of his return with the other brothers! What will become of me
in my _ennui_. Tomorrow evening we shall have our farewell _soirée_.
Do you know what evenings we have now and then? We meet at dinner-time
and have a cosy dinner, intimate talks, long wandering walks under the
chestnut-trees of the Tuileries, through the perfume of
orange-blossoms and flower-beds in the gleams of the setting sun.
These talks come and go between Paris and Le Val, from one friend to
another, from present to future, from melancholy to the liver,
philosophy to poetry, weak sadness to firm and manly resolutions, from
one thing in life to another. To paint these conversations for you
would be like trying to render with a style the colors of twilight,
the vague nonchalance of the breezes, or, a still more difficult task,
what comes more softly shaded to our hearts. Tomorrow will be the
farewell evening, the close of these melodious evenings. How many
things come to an end under our eyes! I will not speak of my own
affairs; Paul will tell you where I stand, and how my hopes ebb and
flow, rising to the chair of rhetoric of Juilly, and falling to a
little schoolroom. He will tell you about my firm resolutions and the
manly efforts of my will to seize the empire of my soul. It would be a
long story to relate the history of my interior revolutions, changes
of government, civil wars, anarchy, despotism, gleams of liberty.
These are annals that write themselves in rude characters upon the
soul and in wrinkles on the brow. Sometimes I feel that I _can no
more_, like an old empire. O my charming hermit, my sea-swan, my
poet-philosopher, how shall I express the jumble there is in my soul
at this moment of pleasure and pain, the pell-mell of joyful and sad
tears that rush from my eyes and roll over each other down my cheeks?
I see you in my soul; I see Paul's departure and embrace him in
farewell; I see Le Val, your meeting, the charm of your life, the
isolation of mine, and my longings after my dear Brittany. My friend,
sometimes the soul wanders out of sight, and is restless and troubled
like the sea.

  MAURICE   DE   GUÉRIN
  TO   M. H. DE LA MORVONNAIS.

  PARIS, Oct. 19th, 1834.

At last, my dear friend, I can be with you, I can open my heart and
confide my soul to you; a doubtful privilege, perhaps you think, but
unluckily I cannot keep it to myself. Today, then, this gray Sunday, a
calm day, a day of decline quite suited to the fall of leaves and the
emigration of souls, my busy life, heated with action, pauses to
recover its strength, and resume its confidential intercourse so long
interrupted; to give itself up to the genius of autumn and lend its
ear to the memories whose rustling we hear so distinctly on certain
days; and, all laden with impressions, reminiscences, and autumnal
melodies, to retire into some lonely corner far from chances of
interruption, and pour itself out to you. But I have left behind me
the mystery that I wish to unveil to you: _My busy life, heated with
action_. What! I a man of action! Some potent voice must have bade me
take up my bed and walk! The day after Paul left me I was to go to
Versailles, where I had reason to hope I could have a place as teacher
in an institution. I went to Versailles, and this was what I found:
four hours of teaching {697} every day, _des salles d'études_,
recreations, walks with the pupils, and a salary of 400 francs.    The
position I had hoped for in the College Stanislas having failed me
also, there remained only my last plan, that of going to my cousin's.
But, as if to complete and crown the lesson that she was resolved to
give me, fortune decreed that my cousin should all of a sudden be
absolutely without scholars.  Thus for a time was I trampled beneath
the feet of destiny.  Then indeed I had time to write to you, I had a
superabundance of leisure. To punish me for my sins--me, so long a
rebel against the ancient condemnation to labor, God took from me the
possibility of doing anything. He turned aside and removed from my
reach all working tools at the moment when my hands were eager for
them. Leisure on every side, far stretching, never ending, condemned
to bury myself in unlimited leisure as in a doleful desert.  Why did I
not write to you when my whole life lay before me at my own disposal?
My friend, I had nothing to tell but misfortunes, and my recital would
only have grieved you.  I preferred waiting for the wind to blow away
these black days and clear my atmosphere. The tempest was short; the
sky of my little world is tinged anew in the east, and it is by the
light of its first gleams that I write to you.  The professor of the
fifth class at Stanislas asked leave of absence for a month; I have
taken his place and shall have 100 francs for the work. I am looking
for private lessons and have found several. Classes and recitations
occupy my day from half-past seven in the morning until half-past nine
in the evening; I sleep at my cousin's, the college dinner serves me
for breakfast, and in the evening I get a dinner for twenty-four sous
like a _débutant_.   Such has been my life for the last three weeks; a
sudden revolution in my existence, an abrupt transition from careless
revery to breathless action.  An urgent pressure, a little reason, a
few grains of irritating self-love, supply fresh strength to my soul,
which is exhausted at the first tug. However, I must say that in the
deepest and most hidden recesses of my being, in the sanctuary of the
will, lives a resolution, that is, I believe, firm and steady, to
sacrifice half my existence to external things, in order to insure
repose to the inner man; and therefore I have decided to prepare
myself for the _agrégation_ (corresponds to the expression, master of
arts). I have explained to you the facts, accidents, and external
circumstances; let us go deeper. Latin, Greek, and all the bustle of
laborious life, absorb a certain portion of my thoughts; but it is
that floating and least, valuable portion which, without regret, I let
flutter in the wind like the fringe of a cloak. These are the waves
that break upon he beach; the sand drinks them in, men gather their
spoils, the sea tosses them to any one who wants them. Thus, as I tell
you, my mind near its shores is occupied by the cares and duties of
active life; but far out at sea nothing touches it, nothing passes
over it, nothing is lost from its waves, except by the continual
evaporation of my intelligence drawn up by some unknown star.

It will soon be a year since from the heights of Créhen I hailed Le
Val, lying all golden on the hillside beneath the beautiful autumn
sun. Dear anniversary, full of gentle melancholy like the season that
brings it. Every morning, on the way to college, I cross the Tuileries
where the ground is covered with the heaps of autumn leaves, the wind
sighs through the branches as in a desert, and, like the ring-doves
that build their nests in ancient chestnut-trees, a few of the poems
of solitude flutter about in these city groves. Sometimes the murmur
of a breeze among the boughs recalls to me the sound of the sea, and I
pause to possess myself of the delusion, and isolate myself with it
from the whole world: these are the waves, I am walking along the
shore with you, wandering over headlands in the evening twilight; I am
sitting on La {698} _Rôche-Alain_. Then when I feel the illusion is
fading away, I resume my walk, all full of emotion, all full of you,
and cry like the _Young Bard_: "Good God, give us back the sea!"


  MAURICE   DE   GUÉRIN
  TO   M.   H.   DE   LA MORVONNAIS.

  PARIS, Dec. 5th, 1835.

Your impatience to know how I dispose of my time, and all the turnings
of the roads I am following, that you may go with me in thought,
roused in me a very delightful feeling, and one that does not easily
find expression in words. But your idea of my life is quite too
elevated; you attribute to it a dignity with which it is not invested
when you speak of my sufferings and the courage with which I bear
them. No, my dear Hippolyte, my lot is not so beautiful as you would
make it out. The difficulties of my life consist in a few material
fatigues, to which the body easily becomes hardened, even deriving a
certain strength from contending with them; and in the distaste for a
profession which is conquering my antipathy through the slow but
irresistible action of habit, which tames the wildest spirits, and
reduces them to complete submission almost without their knowledge,
everything becomes deadened, everything dissolves insensibly. The
firmest revolutions yield each day something to the progress of the
hours. All rebellions are absorbed again by degrees into the common
soul. All things lie upon a declivity which opposes itself to
continued ascent. I have chosen my course in life; I come and go in
the leading-strings of habit, keeping my mind in the middle of the
road, restraining it carefully from those thoughts that would draw it
aside, and mar the blessed monotony which lends something to the
pettiest existence. Being reduced to this state, I have no need of
courage. I required, of course, some resolution to arrive at it, but
it was not worth much and was borrowed from circumstances.

These are the principal features of my day: I set forth on foot at
seven o'clock to give a lesson in the neighborhood; then I go to the
College Stanislas; at the other end of Paris, and remain there until
six in the evening. That leaves me an hour and a half to dine and
retrace my steps again to the further extremity of Paris, where my
last lesson awaits me, which ends at half past eight. My liberty
claims possession of the night. Custom having worn away the asperities
of this life, only one defect remains, but a capital one; and that is
the difficulty of using the fragments of time that are left to me
after using the larger portions for studies that are to raise me above
my present condition. How to make the cares of self-subsistence agree
with these exacting labors seems to me an insoluble problem in Paris.
But time is so fertile in good advice, and sometimes unties knots so
easily that would have defied a sword, that I await its solution in
patience. You wish me to compose, to unveil the gifts which you think
I possess. My friend, why interrupt the course of a wise resolution
and mar a work that is so slow of formation and so costly? Let the
waters flow in their natural hidden course, following their tranquil
destinies in a narrow, nameless bed. My mind is a domestic animal, and
shuns adventure; that of the literary life is especially repugnant to
its humor, and excites its contempt, speaking without the least
self-sufficiency. I see delusion in the career, both in its essence
and in the prize we seek, charged often with the venom of a secret
ridicule. Looking at life with the naked eye, in the severe,
monotonous expanse she presents to some of us, seems to me more
conformable to the interest of the mind, and more in accordance with
the laws of wisdom, than unceasingly applying one's eyes to the prism
of art and poetry. Before I embrace art and poetry, I wish to have
them demonstrated with an eternal solemnity and certainty, like {699}
God. They are two doubtful phantoms, and wear a perfidious gravity
that conceals a mocking laugh. That laugh I will not bear.



  MAURICE
  TO MLLE. EUGÉNIE DE GUÉRIN.

  PARIS, Feb. 9th, 1836.

I saw Madame ------ (name illegible) day before yesterday. She is to
leave Paris in a fortnight, and offered very obligingly to take charge
of my commissions to Gaillae. I shall profit by her kindness to send
you what you ask, the velvet neck-ribbons, the net for your hair (but,
pray, why have you adopted this very ugly coiffure?) and the albe that
Mimi asked me to send her. I hope the little articles I send will suit
you both and fulfil your expectations exactly. But why be afraid of
being indiscreet in drawing upon my purse a little? Think, dear
friends, that I am your treasurer here, and that I wish you to
consider me as such. If you had reminded me sooner of the cloaks, you
would have had them now. I would gladly have deferred getting one for
myself until next year, and should not now be regretting the fact that
my shoulders are well covered, while I know that cold and damp air are
penetrating to yours as you go to Andillac. I am quite provoked with
myself for not having thought of it. Am I not very ungracious, never
beforehand with any idea, but waiting to be urged out of what looks
like indifference? Are you annoyed with me for this, and could you
ever judge me by mere external signs? Never, I am sure. You have too
much penetration to deceive yourselves for a moment about my
affection, when it is most hidden or most ungainly.

I am glad to know that the union which has been so long uncertain is
at last secured. I have no doubt that all the conditions of happiness
will be found in it, if only health can be added to them.

The lime of papa's journey is drawing near. From a distance it is
difficult to judge his course correctly; the moment itself must have
arrived before one can appreciate it truly.

I am trying to find out at this moment what I may count upon in the
future for the accomplishment of my dearest hopes.


The last sentences in this letter refer to Guérin's marriage with
Mlle. de Gervain, which is so fully described in Eugénie's letters
from Paris that it needs no comment here. Then followed a few months
of tranquil success, a lingering illness at Le Cayla, a happy
death-bed; and our story ends, as all true stories must end, in a
graveyard. By the gateway of that old cemetery of Andillac, where
Eugénie sunned herself one day sitting on a tombstone, while waiting
for her turn to go to confession, is a white marble obelisk surmounted
by a cross. Caroline placed it there as her last gift to her husband,
and it bears these words:

  Here rests my friend
  Who was my husband
  Only eight months. Farewell.
  Pierre George Maurice
  De Guérin du Cayla.
  Born August 4th, 1810,
  Died at Le Cayla
  July 19th, 1839.

Close by stands the little church whose chief ornament is a delicately
wrought statue of the Blessed Virgin, presented by Queen Marie Amélie
at Eugénie's petition. The belfry is crumbling to decay, and the
tottering porch under which the dove of Le Cayla passed so often
appeals pitifully to those who have a zeal for the preservation of
God's house.

--------

A record has been made of Eugénie's daily life by one who had hourly
opportunities of watching her actions, and we cannot refrain from
laying it before our readers. Nothing concerning the sister of Maurice
can be inappropriate in an article devoted to him, and it will be well
to see how holy and regular a life may be led in the world without
singularity or narrowness.

{700}

"She rose at six in the morning when she was not ill. After dressing
she made a vocal or mental prayer, and never failed when she was in a
town to hear mass at the nearest altar. At Le Cayla, after saying her
morning prayer, she went into her father's room, either to wait upon
him, or to carry his breakfast in and read to him while he took it. At
nine o'clock she went back to her room and followed mass spiritually.
If her father was well and did not need her assistance, she occupied
herself with reading and writing or with sewing, of which she was very
fond (fairy in hands as she was in soul); or in superintending the
household, which she directed with exquisite taste and intelligence.
At noon she went to her room and said the Angelus; then came dinner.
When it was over, if the weather was good, she took a walk with her
father, or sometimes made a visit in a village if there was any
invalid to see or any afflicted person to console. If she resumed
reading on her return, she took up her knitting also and knitted while
she read, not admitting even the shadow of idle hours. At three she
went to her room, where she generally read the Visit to the Blessed
Sacrament by St. Alphonsus Liguori, or the life of that day's saint.
This ended, she wrote until five o'clock if her father did not call
her to be with him. At five she said her rosary and meditated until
supper time. At seven she talked with the rest of the family, but
never left off working. After supper she went into the kitchen for
evening prayers with the servants or to teach the catechism to some
little ignorant child, as often happened during the vineyard times.
The rest of the evening passed in working, and at ten o'clock she went
to bed, after reading the subject of meditation for the next day, in
order to sleep upon some good thought. And, finally, it should be
added that every month she prepared herself for death and chose some
saint whom she loved best that she might imitate his virtues. Every
week she went to communion, and even oftener during the last years of
her life, when her failing health would allow her to go to the church,
which was at some distance from Le Cayla."

The hour of release came at last for her too, after a lingering
illness of which we possess few details. After receiving the last
sacraments, she gave a key to her sister, saying: "In that drawer you
will find some papers which you will burn; they are all vanity." She
died in 1848 on the last day of the beautiful month of Mary, which she
and Mimin had always observed with such tender devotion in the
_chambrette_.

  "All was ended now, the hope and the fear and the sorrow,
  All the aching of heart, the restless unsatisfied longing,
  All the dull, deep pain, and constant anguish of patience."

The dear old father survived "his angel, his second self and much
more," only six months. Grembert died in 1850. Three graves now
surround Maurice's, and on one of them, which is already regarded with
veneration by the country people, is a wooden cross, bearing a
circular medallion that encloses a virginal crown with these few
words:

  "Eugénie de Guérin, died May 31st, 1843."

"Soft as the opals of the east at dawn, and sad as the gleams that die
away so quickly in the twilight, she will be, for those who read her,
the Aurora of her brother's day; but an Aurora who has tears too! May
these tears fertilize the grave over which she wept, and make the
flower of glory spring up rarer than ever now for poets! The
materialism of our times has thickened the earth, so hard to break at
all times. We know there is a flower that pierces the snow, but one
that can penetrate the mind of an age devoted to matter is harder to
find." (Jules Barbey d'Aurevilly's unpublished notice of Mademoiselle
de Guérin.)

--------

{701}



From The Month.

SYRACUSE AND AETNA.


Tourists bent on the ascent of AEtna leave Catania at the end of the
long straight street which terminates in the Piazza Giorni. The ascent
begins at once. On both sides of the road luxuriant groves of orange,
citron, almond, and carouba trees alternate with vineyards and
cornfields rich in the promise of future crops. Yet all are growing on
the lava, and lava meets you at every turn: the walls, festooned with
the "Bourgainviller," the passion-flower, and beautiful yellow roses,
are still of lava; so are the pretty villas and the _riant_
farm-houses and the lodges in the vineyards--all are built of it. The
streets through the villages are paved with it. There is a sort of
allegorical beauty and poetical justice in the way in which the great
common enemy has been, as it were, conquered and subdued--at least for
a time--and forced to repair the terrible mischief it has wrought. As
the road ascends higher and higher, the vegetation diminishes, and you
come at last to a wild waste of rock sprinkled with broom and dwarf
oak. A twelve-miles' drive brought our travellers to Nicolosi, where
their first visit was paid to the kind old professor and geologist,
Dr. Gemmellaro, from whom every kind of assistance is obtained for the
ascent of the mountain, which is, as it were, both his child and his
home. He is a most good-natured and agreeable old man, whose whole
life has been devoted to this one great interest, and whose greatest
pleasure seems to be to make others share in the knowledge which he
himself possesses. His house a museum of curiosities, and contains a
carefully arranged collection of all the geological phenomena of the
mountain. Among other things, he showed the party a ptarmigan which
had been "caught sitting" by the lava stream, and had been instantly
petrified, like Lot's wife! the bird preserving its shape perfectly.
The village of Nicolosi is composed of low houses built up and down a
long straggling street, with a fine church in the centre. Horse-races
were going on the day of our travellers' arrival, and causing immense
excitement among the people, who were all in the street in holiday
attire. The horses ran, as at the carnival in the Corso, without
riders, and were excited to a pitch of madness by the shouts of their
starters and the _bandeleros_ stuck in their sides. After watching the
races for some little time, our travellers  returned to the kind
professor's, who had seen the guides required for their ascent of
AEtna, but who advised them to delay their expedition for two or three
days to allow of a greater melting, of the snow, the season being
backward, and to procure the requisite number of mules for so large a
party. It was also necessary to send some one beforehand to clear out
the snow from the Casa Inglese, the small house of refuge which the
professor had built on the  summit  of the mountain, at the base of
the principal cone, and where travellers rest while waiting for the
sunrise, or before commencing the last portion of the ascent to the
crater. He is very anxious to have this house better built and
provided with more comforts, and tried to enlist the interest of  our
travellers with the English Government in its behalf. Having arranged
everything with him, our party retraced their steps to Catania, having
decided to visit Syracuse first, and take AEtna on their return.

{702}

The following morning, consequently, at half-past three, they started
for Syracuse, so as to arrive there before the great heat of the day,
and also in time for mass. A long marshy plain occupied the whole of
the first stage; after which the road wound through limestone rocks
and rich cultivation, till they reached the picturesque village of
Lentini. The lake of Lentini is the largest in Sicily, famous for its
wild fowl, but also for its malaria. There is a beautiful view of the
little town, with its wooded cliffs and deep ravines, from the
Capuchin convent above. The scenery increases in beauty as you
approach Syracuse, the road descending into deep glens full of ilex,
myrtle, oleander, and a variety of aromatic shrubs, and rising again
over rocky hills scented with thyme and every kind of wild flower.
From hence comes the delicious Hybla honey, which rivals that of Mount
Hymettus. Over the wide downs which stretch seaward, the picturesque
town of Augusta was seen, perched on the edge of the broad sandy bay.

Our travellers had excellent horses; so that it was not more than
half-pas ten when they reached the gates of Syracuse and found
themselves in the comfortable little hotel near the port. One of the
party started off at once to find a mass; but the good people of
Syracuse are very early in their habits, and the lady wandered half
over the city before she found what she sought in the beautiful little
church of St. Philip, where there happened to be on that day the
exposition of the blessed sacrament, and in consequence masses all the
morning. On her return she found that the vicar-general had been
kindly sent by the archbishop to show her the curiosities of the
place. He first took them to the temple of Diana, now converted into a
private residence, and of which nothing remains to be seen but some
very ancient Doric columns. From thence they proceeded to the
world-famed fountain of Arethusa. The spring rises from an arch in the
rock, and is protected by a bastion, which defends it from the sea.
The papyrus grows here in great luxuriance, and the party gathered
some as a specimen, having first duly drank the anciently sacred
water. Resuming their carriages, their kind guide now conducted them
outside the town to the interesting church and crypt of San Marzian,
the first church of Sicily, built on the spot where St. Paul preached
during his three days' stay in Syracuse. It is a simple, massive
building, of the shape of a Greek cross, and contains the episcopal
chair of St. Marzian. Here also is the tomb of the saint, who was the
proto-martyr of Sicily. Near the tomb is the rude stone altar where
St. Paul said mass. A column of gray granite is shown as that to which
St. Marzian was attached for the scourging previous to his execution:
it is tinged with his blood. The crypt, however, is the most sacred
spot. Here came the apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, with the
evangelists St. Mark and St. Luke, on their successive visits to the
holy bishop, St. Marzian; where also the local tradition affirms that
St. Mark was martyred. The curious font now in the cathedral was found
in this crypt, and was probably used for the baptism of many of the
early Pagan converts. Adjoining is the place of St. Marzian's
martyrdom. The church itself is built over the site of an ancient
temple of Bacchus. Leading out of a side door is the entrance to the
catacombs, which are more extensive than even those of Naples or Rome,
and abound in Christian emblems: crosses, palm-branches, the dove, and
other Catholic symbols, are rudely carved on all the vaults and
niches, with here and there an early fresco of the Blessed Virgin and
Child, or a Greek inscription.

From the catacombs our travellers crossed the plain, thickly studded
with ancient columns, sarcophagi, and remains of Greek and Roman
buildings, till they came to the little church of St. Nicolo.
Underneath is a reservoir with an aqueduct, leading to the great
amphitheatre; the principal monument left of Roman work in Syracuse,
and {703} still in perfect preservation. Recent excavations have
cleared the space, so that the seats and arena are clearly visible.
From the amphitheatre, a five-minutes' walk leads to the Latomia del
Paradiso--a quarry containing in its further recesses the famous Ear
of Dionysius. This cavern was excavated by the tyrant for a prison,
and so constructed that the faintest whisper could be heard in the
chamber above, where he sat listening to the conversation of his
victims. It is to be supposed that the listener, according to the
proverb, rarely heard any good of himself. It is a wonderfully
picturesque spot; the sides of the quarry being lined with fruit-trees
and ferns and flowering shrubs, mingled with masses of fallen rock and
fragments of ancient masonry. Pistols were fired off by the guides to
let the party hear the full force of the echo, which is tremendous.
Round a deep spring at the further end of the cavern grew the most
beautiful maiden-hair fern. Close by is the Greek theatre, the largest
in Sicily, hollowed out of the rock, and capable of containing more
than 20,000 spectators.

Returning home to luncheon, the ladies visited on their way the
Sisters of Charity of St. Vincent de Paul, who are lodged in one of
the fine old mediaeval palaces of Syracuse, with beautifully carved
windows and doorways. But it is very much out of repair, and very
inconvenient for their large orphanage. There are only six or seven
sisters here. Their superior is a charming person, and only another
proof, if one were needed in that wonderful religious order, of the
way in which energy, zeal, and, above all, a burning charity can
triumph over the sufferings entailed by a delicate frame and sickly
constitution.

After luncheon our travellers started again to meet Monsignor B------
at the cathedral. It is built on the site of an ancient temple of
Minerva, but has been ruined by modern church-wardenship and
whitewash. There are two fine side chapels, however; one dedicated to
the Blessed Sacrament, the other to St. Lucia, in which, is exposed a
large silver figure of the saint of great antiquity. The font, of
which notice has been taken above, is of marble, supported by seven
fine bronze lions. There is a beautiful renaissance doorway leading to
the sacristy. A beautiful benediction service with litany was being
sung; after which the relics and treasures were examined, which
include a beautiful chalice of amber, cut out of one piece, and a
pastoral ring of great size and value. In the Place, or court of the
cathedral, are fourteen fine columns of Cipollino marble, supposed to
have formed part of the ancient temple of Ceres. Opposite the north
door of the cathedral is the museum, containing all the antiquities
lately discovered in Syracuse and its neighborhood. The finest is a
beautiful torso, a Venus of the best date of Greek art. There are also
some very fine cameos and medals. The day was closed by a sweetly sung
benediction at the orphanage of the Sisters of Charity.

The next morning, after a daybreak mass at the cathedral, one of the
party breakfasted with the archbishop, who afterward showed her his
palace and gardens, which are very fine. In the latter grew the
largest citrons she had ever seen, very nearly equalling the gigantic
oranges at Jaffa. Adjoining his garden-wall is a convent of
Benedictine nuns, which was likewise visited. The good-natured prefect
then insisted on taking the whole party in his carriages to the
Franciscan convent of St. Lucia outside the town. There is an
interesting Norman church attached to it, raised over the site of the
saint's martyrdom; and a granite column is shown as that to which she
was fastened on the occasion. Her tomb is cut in the rock at the back
of the altar, underneath which is a fine statue of the saint by
Bernini.

From this spot a narrow lane, traversing vineyards fenced by stone
walls, leads to the convent of Sta. Maria di Gesù, in front of which
is a fine stone {704} cross. Passing by an aqueduct in very tolerable
preservation, and by a succession of old tombs cut in the cliff, our
party arrived at the Capuchin convent--a fortified building, with
fosse and drawbridge and machicolated battlements. A little gate at
the side led them into the Latomie, or quarries, from whence the stone
was taken to build the city. Here is one of the most beautiful spots
in the neighborhood of Syracuse. It is a vast pit, about a hundred
feet in depth; and of many acres in extent, planted with oranges,
citrons, pomegranates, figs, and cypresses, with an undergrowth of
roses, arums, acanthus, ferns, and creepers of every kind, and overrun
with ivy and wild vine. The whole is walled in by lofty gray cliffs
hung with creepers; and from the midst of this wilderness of beautiful
and almost rank vegetation rise two tall insulated masses of rock,
with an ancient flight of steps cut in the side of one of them, but
now inaccessible. The cliffs are hollowed into vast halls or caverns,
in one of which the prefect told our travellers that he had given a
_fête_ to Prince Alfred on his first visit to Syracuse. The kind old
monk who had been their escort brought them fruit, bread, and wine in
this deliciously cool retreat, and sat a long time talking of the Holy
Land, where he had been, and which he was delighted to find was
equally well known and appreciated by his guests. Here and there,
embedded in the rocks, are traces of ancient sepultures; and one or
two Protestant epitaphs on the cliffs prove that the quarries have,
even in late days, been used for purposes of burial. Leaving this
beautiful spot with great regret, and acceding to the request of the
good old monk that they would first pray with him for a few minutes in
the church for a blessing on the Holy Land Mission, our travellers
visited one or two more of the antiquities in the neighborhood,
including the recently excavated baths of Diana, full of beautiful
marbles and mosaics; the sepulchral road, the perpendicular sides of
which are lined, with niches for cinerary urns; the tombs of
Archimedes and Timoleon, and other interesting remains of Greek and
Roman times; after which they returned once more to the city and to
the museum, where the collection of natural history had yet to be
seen, which contains everything most interesting of the kind in
Sicily, and also the library. The latter contains priceless treasures,
of which the most remarkable are--a rare copy of the gospel of St.
John, of the twelfth century; a Koran on paper, of 1199, brought from
Egypt by Lord Nelson, and given by him to the Cavalier Landolina, who
was the real founder of the library; a very fine block-book, a replica
of one of those in the Wilton library; and many beautifully
illuminated martyrologies and missals.

Nothing can be kinder or more hospitable than the residents of
Syracuse. The visit of our travellers was necessarily too limited in
point of time to enable them to profit by it; but every one offered
their carriage and horses, and put their palaces, not figuratively,
but actually _à leur disposition_. There are still some beautiful
medieval palaces in the town, especially the Palazzo Montalto, with
its pointed windows and dog-tooth mouldings. It bears also some
curious Gothic inscriptions, like the houses at Avila, and with the
date 1397.

A charming boating excursion was made by one or two of the party from
Syracuse to the fountain of Cyane, up the river Anapus, the only spot
in Europe where the papyrus still grows wild. Nothing remains of the
temple of Jupiter Olympus, which one visits by the way, but two broken
columns. But there is a lovely sketch a little further on of a ruined
bridge, with a date-palm overhanging the stream, and a foreground of
magnificent tangled vegetation of reeds, sugar-cane, acanthus, iris,
and every kind of aquatic plants, and which the slow progress of one's
boat through the weeds enables one fully to enjoy. The Anapus {705}
leads into the Cyane, which is a far clearer stream, but very narrow.
Here the papyrus grows luxuriantly among flags and castor-oil plants.
It was sent from Egypt by Ptolemy to King Hieron II., and has
flourished ever since. Struggling up the narrow stream and through the
choking mass of vegetation, which threatened to  close the passage
altogether, our travellers' boat at last arrived at a beautiful
circular basin, fringed with papyrus and purple iris; the water, very
deep, was clear as crystal, and swarming with fish. This was known in
old times as the famous "dark-blue spring," converted  by heathen
mythology into a nymph; and an annual festival was  held  here in
honor of Ceres. Now it is utterly deserted, save by  an  occasional
traveller  or sportsman seeking food for  his   gun from   the
multitude  of   snipes and wild fowl which resort to  its  banks and
make their nests in its undisturbed arid reedy shores.  That same
evening our travellers returned to Catania, charmed  with  their
expedition, and full of gratitude for all the kindness which had been
showered upon them.

The following morning found  one of   the party very early at the
convent of her old friends the Benedictines, where the superior
received her with his usual fatherly kindness, and presented her, as a
surprise, with the deed   of   affiliation   to   their   order, which
he had obtained for her from Monte Casino;  together with   a picture
of the saint and the miraculous medal or cross of St. Benedict, with
its mysterious letters, _C.S.S.M.L._ (Crux sacra sit mihi lux), a
medal always given by St. Vincent de Paul to his Sisters of  Charity,
as  a  defence in the many perils of their daily lives. Once more the
traveller heard that glorious music, which, beautiful at all times, is
so especially thrilling at the benediction   service.    The organ
begins with a low, sweet, wailing sound, which those beautiful and
cultivated voices respond:  and then  bursts into thunder, expressing,
as  far as mortal instrument can, the glorious majesty of God. It was
the feast of St. Monica--that saint so dear to every widowed mother's
heart; and the fact, in connection with the English stranger, had not
been forgotten by the kind abbate, who came up and whispered to her as
she knelt before mass: "My child, the prayers and communions of the
community this day will be offered up for _you_, that you may follow
in the steps of St. Monica, and finally reap her reward."

Returning at seven to the hotel, the whole  party  started  once  more
for Nicolosi, on   their way to  undertake the more formidable ascent
of AEtna. Arriving, after a four hours' drive, at the house of their
old friend Professor Gemmellaro, they found he had kindly made every
arrangement for their start; and after about an hour's delay in
settling the pack-saddles, packing up provisions for the night, and
arranging everything with the guides, they mounted their mules and
began the ascent. For some miles they passed through a tract of lava,
sprinkled here and there with broom and heather, till they reached a
cattle-shed, called Casa di Rinazzi, where they came to a picturesque
wood of dwarf oak looking like the outskirts of an English park. From
thence to Casa del Bosco the road is both easy and pleasant, and our
travellers began to think that the difficulties of the ascent (to
people who had crossed, as they had done, the Lebanon in deep snow)
would be comparatively trifling. They soon, however, discovered their
mistake. At the Casa del Bosco they stopped to rest their mules and
make some tea, while the guides advised them to put on as much
additional clothing as they could for the coming cold. The peasants
were at work round them collecting the snow in reservoirs close to the
cavern called the Grotta delle Capre--that snow so invaluable to the
dwellers in the plain, and the sole substitute for ice to the
inhabitants of Catania.

{706}

But here the real toil of the ascent begins. It is only nine miles
from hence to the summit; but those nine miles are terribly severe,
not only from their steepness, but from the nature of the ground,
composed of a black loose ash, interspersed with sharply pointed lava
rocks, on which you tread and stumble, and seem to recede two steps
for every one you take. As you ascend higher the snow conceals the
inequalities of the ground, but does not make them the less fatiguing.
The cold, too, increases every instant, and our travellers regretted
that they had not followed their guides' advice and brought both
overstockings and gloves. After toiling up in this manner for two
hours, they came to a pile of lava which marks the distance halfway
between the Casa del Bosco and the Casa Inglese. The snow here
increased in depth--the rarefaction of the air became painfully
intense; while the clouds of sulphur from the eruption, which still
continued on the opposite side of the mountain, driven in their faces
by the wind, made some of the party so sick that they could scarcely
proceed. The cold, too, became well-nigh intolerable. The mule of one
of the ladies sank in a snowdrift, rolled and fell some way down the
precipice, compelling her to continue the journey on foot; but her
feet and hands were so numbed and so nearly on the verge of being
frostbitten, that it was with the utmost difficulty she could go on.
At last the Casa Inglese was reached. It is a low stone house, built
on what is called the Piano del Lago, a small ledge of frozen water,
10,000 feet above the sea. In spite of the orders of the professor, it
was still half full of snow when they arrived; and this had to be
cleared out, and made into what the children call "snow men," before
the frozen travellers could enter and endeavor to make a fire with the
wood they had brought with them. The guides cautioned those who were
still on their mules to descend very gently, as, in the semi-frozen
state they were in, the least, jerk or slip might occasion a broken
limb. One of the party was lifted off her horse at last and laid on
some rugs by the fire, which for a long time resisted all efforts to
light; and then her limbs had to be rubbed with snow to restore some
kind of animation. When this object was attained, the overpowering
smoke--for there was no chimney or fireplace--made the remedy almost
worse than the disease. All this time they had been well-nigh deafened
by the detonations from the mountain, which, at regular intervals,
sounded like artillery practice on a large scale. Everything they had
brought with them was frozen, including the milk they had got at
Nicolosi, and of which they were obliged to break the bottle before
they could melt any for their tea. After a time, the younger portion
of the travellers lay down to rest on some straw arranged in wooden
shelves or layers round the inner room, one at the top of the other,
after the manner of pears and apples in a kitchen-garden house in
England. A French geologist and two other professors had joined their
party, and of course had no other place to go to; but the appearance
of the company, roosting in this way on the shelves, was comical in
the extreme.

At three o'clock, however, every one rose, and commenced the ascent of
the cone, so as to reach the top by sunrise. The distance is short,
but intensely steep; it is like going up the side of a house; and the
difficulty is heightened by the loose ashes in which you sink at every
step, and the hot fumes of sulphurous vapor which pour out of the
sides of the cone. Only a portion of our travellers persevered to the
top; the others being reluctantly compelled by faintness and violent
sickness to retrace their steps. On reaching the crater, they at first
saw nothing but a deep yawning chasm, full of smoke, which kept
pouring out in their faces. The eruption, which one of the party had
{707} seen in perfection two months before, was some miles off, and
had burst out of a new crater on the Taormina side of the mountain.
But with the dawning light the whole magnificent scene was revealed to
them. It has been so admirably and accurately described by Mr.
Gladstone, that any attempt at a fresh description could be but a poor
repetition of his words. Sufficient, then, is it to say that the view
at sunrise repaid all the sufferings of the ascent. AEtna, unlike
other mountains, stands alone, rising straight from the plain, with no
rivals to dispute her height, or intercept any portion of the glorious
view below. The whole of Sicily is stretched out at your feet, the
hills below looking like the raised parts of a map for the blind. Not
only is the panorama unequalled in magnificence, but there are
atmospherical phenomena in it which belong to AEtna alone. As the sun
rises over the Calabrian coast, a perfect and distinct image of the
cone is reflected--as on the sheet of a magic-lantern--on the horizon
below, gradually sinking lower and lower as the sun becomes brighter,
and finally disappearing altogether. As it was early in the season,
the snow extended over the whole of the so-called desert region, while
the wood below seemed to encircle the mountain as with a green belt,
which added to the beautiful effect of the whole. Tired and exhausted,
and yet delighted, our travellers descended the cone, and rejoined
their companions at the Casa Inglese, who had been compelled to
content themselves with seeing the sun rise from a green hillock just
below the house. They determined on their way home to diverge a little
from the straight route, in order to visit the Val del Bove, that
weird and ghost-like chasm which had struck them so much when looking
down upon it from the height of the cone. Floundering in the snow,
which was a good deal deeper on that side of the mountain, their mules
continually sinking and struggling up again, breaking their
saddle-girths in the effort, and consequently landing their riders
continually on the soft snow, the party arrived at last on the edge of
this magnificent amphitheatre. It is of vast size, enclosed by
precipices 3,000 feet in height, and filled with gigantic rocks, of
wonderfully strange and fantastic shapes, standing out separately,
like beasts--hence its name. The perfect silence of the spot reminds
one of some Egyptian city of the dead. Smoke, explosion, dripping ice,
or rushing torrents characterize the other extinct craters in this
wonderful mountain; but in this one all is still and silent as the
grave. It is stern as the curse of Kehama, and as if the lava had been
cast up in these wonderful shapes in some extraordinary convulsion of
nature, and then had been petrified as it rose. Our travellers
lingered long, looking over the edge of the precipice, vainly wishing
to be able to descend into the enchanted valley, and at last
reluctantly turned their muels' heads in the direction of Nicolosi.
The descent was intensely fatiguing, from the continual jerking and
slipping of their beasts; and they arrived more dead than alive at the
kind professor's house, after being more than eight hours in the
saddle. A few hours later found them once more in the burning sunshine
of Catania, where the thermometer in the shade, was 86°, while it had
been 27° on the mountain, a difference in one day of 59° degrees of
temperature. But no difficulties should discourage the traveller from
attempting the ascent of AEtna, which is worth coming the whole way
from England for itself alone. A few days later saw our party on the
deck of the Vatican steamer, _en route_ for Naples, carrying away with
them recollections of enjoyment and kindness such as will ever
associate piety in their minds with pleasant thoughts and grateful
memories.

------------

{708}

From The Dublin University Magazine.

THE FIRST SIEGE  OF LIMERICK.


JAMES'S FAREWELL.

The fight at the Boyne was over; the English, Dutch, Danish, and
French allies resting, or preparing to rest, as well as the ground
near the Pass of Duleek would allow, and their defeated but not
dispirited foemen marching wearily in the summer night toward Dublin.
James accompanied by Sarsfield's horse was already far in the van, and
in due time he reached the castle. We can scarcely fancy a more false
or uncomfortable position than that in which James now stood, when,
calling together his council, the lord mayor, and other notables, he
addressed them for the last time. An ill-disposed historian might have
invented this speech for him if no memory of the one really delivered
had survived. "My dear and loyal Irish subjects, I believe I ought not
to have risked the disastrous battle of yesterday against the advice
of my judicious officers. After the fighting was determined on, I
unhappily did much to discourage the undisciplined fellows who so well
exhibited their loyalty and bravery at the Boyne. We are beaten, I am
sorry to say, and I am getting away as fast as I can to place hundreds
of miles between myself and the cannons and muskets of my callous
relative. Make as good terms, my poor people, with William as he will
grant you. I. can do no more for you than leave you my blessing, to
which you are heartily welcome. Adieu!"

There is an ill-natured tradition still afloat that in his greeting to
Lady Tyrconnell he alluded to the agility of the Irish in running away
from the field, and was in return complimented by that lady for having
outstripped such very fleet runners. The anecdote bears every mark of
a lie about it. The orderly retreat at the Boyne was nothing like a
dastardly flight, and James's disposition would have been worse than
his ill-wishers have ever represented it, had he cracked that bitter
jest on his loyal supporters. We prefer the following sketch of the
final interview from the pen of a writer whose Williamite leanings,
though strong, are regulated by calm judgment and generous feelings:

  "In the cold grey of the winter's morning it were hard to imagine a
  drearier or less inviting spectacle than this group of loyalists
  presented. While they were waiting thus, James, a man of punctuality
  to the last, was employed in paying and discharging his menial
  servants, previously to his taking final leave of his Irish capital.
  At last however the door opened, and James followed by two or three
  gentlemen and officers, including Colonel Luttrell who kept garrison
  as governor of the city, entered the apartment. . . . There was that
  in the fallen condition of the king, in the very magnitude of his
  misfortunes, which lent a mournful dignity to his presence, and
  which in spite of the petulance which occasionally broke from him,
  impressed the few disappointed, and well-nigh ruined followers of
  his cause who stood before him with feelings of melancholy respect.

 "'Gentlemen,' said the king after a brief pause, 'it hath pleased the
 Almighty Disposer of events to give the victory to our enemies. . . .
 The enemy will be in possession of this city at least before many
 days are passed. . . . Matters being so, we must needs shift for
 ourselves as best we may. Above all we do command you, we do implore
 of you, gentlemen, in your several stations, and principally you,
 Colonel Luttrell, as governor of this our city, to prevent all undue
 severities, all angry reprisals, all violences .... upon the
 suspected within its walls. We do earnestly intreat of you all to
 remember that this is our city, and they our subjects; protect it and
 them as long as it shall seem wise to occupy this town for us. This
 is our last command, our parting request.'"

{709}

The poor king was overcome during his speech by the part his own
daughters were acting in the bitter drama then in progress. However,
that does not excuse the reference to the want of capacity or courage
which he was pleased to discover among his Irish supporters. For from
the beginning they appeared more interested in his success than he did
himself.


WILLIAM IN DUBLIN.

But the speech came to an end, and the king departed, and conflicting
and varying hopes and fears agitated the citizens, as the Irish troops
marched in with drums beating and colors flying, and again quitted the
city, and proceeded to Limerick, and so on till the arrival of the
Duke of Ormond and the Dutch guards on Thursday.

The king rode in from the camp at Finglass on the next Sunday,
attended divine service in St. Patrick's cathedral, and returned to
the camp in time for dinner. On the 7th of the month he issued a
proclamation from which a few extracts are here presented:

  "WILLIAM, R.

  "As it hath pleased Almighty God to bless our arms in this kingdom
  with a late victory, . . . . we hold it reasonable to think of
  mercy, and to have compassion on those whom we judge to have been
  seduced. Wherefore we do hereby declare, we shall take into our
  royal protection all poor labourers, common souldiers, country
  farmers, plough-men, and cottiers whatsoever: as also all citizens,
  trades-men, towns-men, and artificers, who either remained at home,
  or having fled from their dwellings, shall return by the first of
  August. . . We do also promise to secure them in their goods, their
  stocks of' cattel, and all their chattels personal whatever, willing
  and requiring them to come in, . . and to preserve the harvest of
  grass and corn for the supply of the winter."

Those who held from Protestant landlords were to pay their rent as
usual, but tenants of Roman Catholics should hand their money to
commissioners appointed to receive it. The term REBELS is applied in
the proclamation to all in arms for King James, a proof that privy
councillors dating from the royal camp at Finglass, 7th July, 1690,
were determined to hold the adherents of James sternly to their
constitutional position.

Devoted partisan as was our chaplain,  [Footnote 200] he was sometimes
blessed with kindly feelings toward his master's foes. He thus
continues after copying the proclamation:

  "This declaration was published in the camp two days after, and had
  it been punctually observed according to the intent of it, we had
  had fewer enemies at this day by at least 20,000. For though the
  king was punctual in his observance of it, some officers and
  soldiers were apt to neglect the king's honour, and the honour of
  our country and religion, when it stood in competition with their
  own profit and advantage."

    [Footnote 200: Rev. George Story, chaplain in King William's army.]


DOUGLAS'S SLOW JOURNEY TO ATHLONE.

On the 9th of July, William divided his forces, sending one portion
under General L. G. Douglas to force the pass at Athlone, himself
conducting the rest toward Limerick. Douglas did not tire his soldiers
with rapid marches. The first night they bivouacked at Chapel
_Issard_, which place a citizen of Dublin will reach easily on foot in
an hour. The second night they encamped at _Manouth_ (May-nooth?), but
here we must quote our historian.

  "Friday we encamped at _Glencurry_ (Clon-curry?) about five miles
  further, and we had not got this length till we begun to plunder,
  though the general gave strict orders to the contrary. Saturday the
  12th, we marched to _Glenard_ (Clonard) bridge, and here we staid
  all Sunday. The soldiers went abroad and took several things from
  the Irish, who had staid upon the king's declaration, and frequent
  complaints came already to the general'; but plundering went on
  still, especially among the northern men who are very dexterous at
  that sport. . . At _Mullingar_ several of the Irish came in for
  protections, though when they had them they were of little force to
  secure their goods or themselves.".

{710}

General Douglas and his soldiers arrived before Athlone, which our
authority locates fifty miles north of Dublin, though it happens to be
nearly due west, on the 17th, having marched out of Chapelizod on the
9th (six and a quarter miles per day). Not a whit fatigued or daunted,
they summoned stout old Colonel Grace to surrender. Story says he
fired a pistol at the herald, to show the value he set on his request.
We must pronounce the old warrior a recreant, unless the charge was
mere powder, or the muzzle pointed upward, which we opine was the
case. Colonel Grace expressed at the same time his determination to
eat his old boots rather than capitulate; hence the application of
_Boot-eater_ to stout defenders of fortresses. So besiegers and
besieged fired guns long and short, wide and small bores, at each
other till the 25th, when General Douglas, hearing that Sarsfield was
coming to the relief of the place, raised the siege, and marched
southward to meet the main army near Limerick. Mr. Story says that
about three or four hundred men were lost between Dublin and Limerick,
of which number thirty only were slain before Athlone, say three men
and three quarters of a man each day. Very indifferent gunners were
those behind the walls of Athlone if this statement be true, Our
observant author makes curious mistakes in topographical matters at
times. In this portion of' his narrative he mentions the Shannon as
falling into the sea beyond Knoc Patrick. Every child exercised on the
map of Ireland, is able to lay finger on Cnoc-Patrick in Mayo, seventy
miles or so north of the Shannon's mouth.

After laying the deaths of the three or four hundred men missing to
sickness, hard marching, six and a quarter miles per diem, surprises
by Rapparees, and sundry other disadvantages, he cracks a gentle joke
by way of cheering up his reader's spirits. "W e killed," says he,
"and took prisoners a great many thousands, but more of' these had had
four feet than two." Having brought this division of the army safe
through the "Golden Vale," let us see what the other portion under the
immediate attention of the king were about.


HOW WILLIAM ENFORCED DISCIPLINE:

On the 9th of the month, William encamped at Crumlin, and the next
night between the Ness  [Footnote 201] and Rathcoole. It was well for
the inhabitants of the line of march that the king commanded in
person.

  [Footnote 201: Naas was anciently the seat of the kings of North
  Leinster. The word means a fair or a commemoration. Rathcoole
  implies a lonely fortress.]

  "Little hapned remarkable except the king's great care to keep the
  souldiers from plundering, and every night it was given out in
  orders that on pain of death no man should go beyond the line in the
  camp, or take violently to the least value from Protestant or
  Papist. The 11th the army marched to _Kill-Kullen_, Bridge, the king
  this morning passing by the _Ness_ saw a souldier robbing a poor
  woman, which enraged his majesty so much, that he beat him with his
  cane, and gave orders that he and several others guilty of the like
  disobedience should be executed on the Monday following. People were
  so wicked as (to) put a bad construction on this action of the
  king's, but it had so good an effect upon that part of the army,
  that the country was secured from any violence done by the souldiers
  during that whole march. Two of the sufferers were _Iniskillin_
  dragoons."

Had General Douglas acted thus the worthy chaplain would not have had
to record so much cruelty and injustice inflicted upon the harmless
country people.

Story takes occasion, on Colonel Eppingar's proceeding with a party of
1,000 horse and dragoons  [Footnote 202] to Wexford, to inform his
English readers about the people in the south of the county.

    [Footnote 202: In 1660, Marshal Brissae, fancying or feigning
    dragons to be in the habit of spouting fire out of their mouths,
    get the muzzles of short muskets adorned with the effigies of
    these monsters, and therewith armed some troops of horse. The
    early dragoons discharged the duties of infantry and cavalry. The
    Scots Grays formed in 1683 were the earliest British dragoons.]

  "Hereabouts were the first English planted in Ireland. They were a
  colony of west-countrymen, and retain their old English tone and
  customs to this day. I am credibly informed that every day about one
  or two o'clock in summer, they go to bed, the whole country round;
  nay, the very hens fly up and the sheep go to fold as orderly as it
  were night."  [Footnote 203]

    [Footnote 203: The people of "the barony" are the descendants of a
    Flemish colony who had settled in Wales at the invitation of Henry
    I. Beans were the favorite crop, and dry bean-stalks furnished
    their chief fuel. If the gossip of the inhabitants of the northern
    part of the county could be credited, the barony of Forth formerly
    furnished priests for all Ireland.]

{711}

Good Mr. Story was as fond of a bit of picturesque or romantic hearsay
as Herodotus himself. The well-to-do farmers really indulged in a
siesta, but as to the degeneracy of manners among the hens and sheep
we are altogether incredulous. Some time before the _Ninety-Eight_,
household and village councils were held for a month in a townland of
the barony to decide whether a farmer, to whom a legacy had been left
in Dublin, should relinquish his right to it, or encounter the risks
of the journey to the city. At last it was decided that prayers were
to be solemnly offered up for his safety in all the neighboring
churches and chapels, and then let him in God's name brave the perils
of the way.

A good deal of irresolution prevailed at this time in William's
proceedings. Ill news came rife across the water, and at one time he
retraced his route even as far as Chapelizod with the intention of
crossing to England. There, however, he received tidings which
reassured him, and he returned to the camp at Golden Bridge, which he
reached on the 2d of August. On the 8th General Douglas arrived, and
on the 9th the united forces approached the Irish stronghold.


INTERIOR OF THE IRISH COUNCILS.

The Irish and French chiefs who had collected to Limerick after the
day at the Boyne were far from being of the same opinions or
aspirations. According to Colonel O'Kelly, Tyrconnell desired nothing
more than to give up Limerick and all the other garrisons to King
William, and Count de Lauzun was more anxious to get back to that
centre of delights, the city of Paris, than co-operate in the defence
of their present hold, which, he said, required only a smart discharge
of roasted apples to be made listen to terms.


THE PARLEY BEFORE THE FIGHT.

Limerick, now apparently devoted to destruction, consisted of an
island within two arms of the Shannon, and a smaller area outside
called the Irish-town, both portions being connected by Ball's-bridge.
King's Island was and is connected with the Clare side of the river by
'I'homond-bridge, and contains a legacy left by King John in the shape
of a castle. William's people set to work forming batteries and
trenches as well as the balls coming from the ramparts of' Irish-town
would allow them, and the moment they were ready they proceeded to
exchange iron and leaden compliments with the folk behind the
parapets.

Hostilities, however, did not really begin till some civil
communications had taken place on both sides. A herald-trumpeter,
blowing his instrument and displaying his white flag, entered the city
with a polite request to the authorities to surrender the place.
Monsieur Boiselieu, chief in command, calling the Duke of Berwick and
Major-General Sarsfield to council, indited a politely expressed
letter to Sir Robert Southwell, secretary of state, in which was
implied some wonder at the request, and a determination on his part,
and that of his officers and soldiers, to gain the good opinion of the
Prince of Orange by defending the city against his forces while
defence was feasible. On the return of the trumpeter firing began, the
king inspecting the hot business from Cromwell's fort.

Story says that a Frenchman, escaping into the city the day the enemy
sat down before it, gave accurate information to Sarsfield of the
complete economy of the English camp, and of a battering-train, tin
boats, wagons of biscuits; etc., approaching William's camp from
Dublin. {712} Part of the sequel is given in his own words:

  "Monday the 11th in the morning, came one _Manus O'Brien_ a
  substantial country gentleman to the camp, and gave notice that
  _Sarsfield_ in the night had passed the river with a body of horse,
  and designed something extraordinary. . . . . The messenger that
  brought the news was not much taken notice of at first, most people
  looking on it as a dream. A great officer however called him aside,
  and after some indifferent questions, askt him about a prey of
  cattel in such a place, which the gentleman complained of
  afterwards, saying he was sorry to see general officers mind cattel
  more than the king's honour. But after he met with some acquaintance
  he was brought to the king, who, to prevent the worst, gave orders
  that a party of five hundred horse should be made ready, and march
  to meet the guns. . . . Where the fault lay, I am no competent
  judge, but it certainly was one or two of the clock in the morning
  before the party marched, which they then did very softly till about
  an hour after they saw------"

What shall be told farther on.

SARSFIELD'S GREAT FEAT.

  "From Limerick that day bould Sarsfield dashed away,
  Until he came to Cullen where their artillery lay;
  The Lord cleared up the firmament, the moon and stars shone bright,
  And for the Battle of the Boyne be had revenge that night."

Poor John Banim inserted these stirring lines in his romance of the
Boyne Water as belonging to an old ballad; we suspect them to have
been his own composition. Whoever might have given Sarsfield
information--a rapparee was as likely as the Frenchman mentioned by
the chaplain--he crossed Thomond-bridge at the head of five hundred
horse on Sunday night as soon as it was sufficiently dark, and the
party moved up as noiselessly as they could along the western bank of
the Shannon to Killaloe, or _Killalow_, as Rev. Mr. Story spells it.
There they crossed the river and penetrated among the Tipperary
mountains, over which the Keeper and the "Mother of Mountains" towered
in pride. Among the hills they spent the rest of the night and the
whole of the next day, being kept aware of the movements of the convoy
which meantime was working its slow way along the Cashel road. Toward
evening Sarsfield and a few who were most in his confidence, lying
among the dry grass and fern of the hill-pass since called
Lacken-na-Gapple (_Lagan-na-Capal_, "Hollow of the Horses"), were
inspecting the last stage of the convoy. At that hour the train had
passed the village of Cullen, and were about taking their rest on and
about the road leading up to the grassy platform on which stood the
old fortalice of Ballyneedy. This was about five miles from the
mountain pass where the Jacobite general was on the watch. He waited
as patiently as he could till the sun had sunk some time behind the
Galteigh mountains, and the watch-fires began to glimmer from the
encampment.

The watch-word that night among the wearied men and their sentinels
was SARSFIELD, an ill-omened coincidence. How the party conspiring
their destruction found it out is not so very apparent; but when the
officers were asleep in the waste castle, and the soldiers by their
wagons, Sarsfield's men sang out the password to the sentinel placed
in advance of the village, to the sentinels in the village, and to the
sentinels immediately in advance of the unconscious groups. There the
commander thundered out "Sarsfield is the word, and Sarsfield is the
man." Deafening shouts came from the rushing horsemen, and of the
awakened slumberers some were slain gallantly resisting, a few
escaped, and a few others got quarter. The spoils consisted or eight
pieces of heavy battering-cannon, five mortars with their carriages, a
hundred and fifty-three wagons of ammunition, twelve carts loaded with
biscuit, eighteen tin boats for the passage of rivers, and all the
cart and cavalry horses.

The commander, wisely judging that troops were at the moment marching
from Limerick to interrupt his plans, had the cannons charged to the
mouth and set in the earth, muzzle downward. {713} These he surrounded
with the wagons and their contents, and skifully laid trains of powder
were not neglected. The successful party then withdrawing to a safe
distance--they needed a wide berth, taking the quantity of powder into
account--set fire at once to the lines of powder, and at one and the
same moment all the contents of the great guns and the
ammunition-carts were ignited. There was an intolerable blaze, a roar
and its reverberations; accompanied by a blowing up in the air of
pieces of metal and blazing wood, and the combined effect was sublime
and terrible beyond conception. The darkest recesses of the mountain
glens were lighted up as in the summer noon, and the shock was felt
for many miles in every direction. Sir John Lanier, who was hastening
when too late to protect the convoy, saw the blaze and heard the
terrible explosion at several miles distance, and comprehended the
terrible disaster in a moment. The concussion was perceptible even in
William's camp at a distance of about thirteen miles, and it is
probable that the general who had "_askt_" Manus O'Brien about the
prey of cartel, felt (to use a provincialism) very lewd of himself.
Sir John Lanier directed his squadron of five hundred horse to the
left to intercept the Irish party, but it was not his fortune to meet
with them, and Sarsfield recrossed the Shannon without the loss of a
man.

The Rev. Mr. Story relates that no one was made prisoner at Ballyneedy
"only a lieutenant of Colonel Earle's, who being sick in a house hard
by, was stripped and brought to Sarsfield, who used him very civilly."

While the Irish chief is snatching a short relaxation after his
successful sortie, and all within the walls are filled with a
momentary joy for the signal benefit, let us introduce a slight sketch
of the career of the brave Earl of Lucan, whose memory is still held
in love and veneration by the great mass of the Irish people, and of
whom no disrespectful word is ever pronounced by the descendants of
the brave men against whom he often waged battle.


SARSFIELD'S CAREER.

The first of the name known in Ireland was Thomas Sarsfield,
standard-bearer to King Henry II. In the reign of Charles I., Patrick,
the then representative of the family, married Anne, daughter of
Ruaighré (Roger) O'Moore, and their children were William and the
subject of our sketch Patrick, who succeeded to the estate on the
death of his brother. "He had received his education in one of the
French military colleges, and saw some early campaigns in the armies
of Louis XIV. His first commission was that of ensign in the regiment
of Monmouth in France, after which he obtained a lieutenancy in the
Royal Guards of England." He commanded for James in one of those
skirmishes which took place with William's Dutch troops on their march
from Torquay. At the commencement of the Irish campaigns his estates
produced £2,000 annual revenue, so that it did not inconvenience him
much to raise a. company of horse. We shall not here touch on his
achievements during the war in Ireland, as these have found, or will
naturally find their places in the course of our narrative. On
arriving in Paris after the treaty of Limerick, "he was received with
kindness and distinction by the ex-king of England and Louis XIV."

  "The former appointed him colonel of his body guards, and his most
  Christian majesty bestowed on him the rank of lieutenant-general in
  the French armies. He might have obtained a marshal's staff had his
  life been spared. He fought under Luxembourg at Steenkirk in 1692, .
  . . . and on the 29th of July, 1693, a little more than one year and
  a half after his voluntary banishment from his own country, he was
  killed in the command of a division at the great battle of Landen.
  It was a soldier's death on a glorious and memorable field.

{714}

  "There are few names more worthy to be inscribed in the roll of
  honour than that of Patrick Sarsfield, who may be quoted as a type
  of loyalty and patriotic devotion. In the annals of Irish history he
  stands as a parallel to Pierre du Terrail, Chevalier de Bayard in
  those of France, and may be equally accounted 'Sans peur et sans
  reproche,' the fearless and irreproachable knight; in his public
  actions firm and consistent; in his private character amiable and
  unblemished. . . . (At the end of the war) William III. would gladly
  have won his services, and offered to confirm him in his rank and
  property; but he listened to no overtures, and left his native
  country attended by thousands of that gallant body, who, under the
  title of the Irish Brigade, filled the continent of Europe with
  their renown."  [Footnote 204]

    [Footnote 204: "Patrick Sarsfield, Earl of Lucan, a Biography;"
    Dublin University Magazine for November, 1853; the writer, John
    William Cole, Esq., formerly captain in the Royal Fusiliers. Mary,
    sister of the earl, was married to Colonel Rossiter, County
    Wexford, and to a lineal descendant of theirs, the gentleman just
    mentioned, we are indebted for the only life of Sarsfield yet
    given to the world. He could find but scant materials, though it
    is supposed they might be made available if the living
    representative of an old family of the Pale would take the trouble
    of a search among the archives of his house. Mary Sarsfield's
    great granddaughter was the wife of Lieutenant (afterward colonel)
    James Cockburn, who was on the personal staff of General Wolfe on
    the memorable day at Quebec. His portrait (to the right of General
    Moncton's) was introduced by West into his picture of the "Death
    of Wolfe." He afterward commanded the Thirty-fifth in the American
    war of Independence. Colonel Cockburn's daughter, Margaret,
    married Thomas Cole, Esq., of Callan, in the county of Kilkenny,
    major in the King's Fencibles. Our authority the issue of this
    marriage could not resist the martial impulses of his race; so he
    smelled powder along with Rev. R. Gleig at Washington and New
    Orleans and elsewhere. Since he laid aside the "spurtle blade and
    dog-skin wallet," he has usefully employed his leisure hours in
    literary composition of a healthful character. We suspect the
    papers in the University Magazine on ancient military tactics
    illustrated by plans of battles to be his. Among his other
    productions are biographies of General Vallancey, Tyrone Power,
    and other Irish theatrical celebrities.]

In his Military Memoirs of the Irish Nation, Mathew O'Connor speaks
thus of his military qualifications:

  "As a partisan and for a desultory warfare, he possessed admirable
  qualifications; brave, patient, vigilant, rapid, indefatigable,
  ardent, adventurous, and enterprising; the foremost in encounter,
  the last in retreat. He harassed his enemy by sudden, unexpected,
  and generally irresistible attacks, inspiring his troops with the
  same ardour and contempt of danger with which his own soul was
  animated. . . . No general was ever more beloved by his troops."


A SIEGE INCIDENT OR TWO.

Whatever William might have felt on being made acquainted with the
loss of his cannon and ammunition, he said very little on the subject.
He was one of those whose fixed purpose is not to be set aside for
defeat or check. With his battering-train augmented by two great guns
and a mortar from Waterford, he continued to pound the walls day after
day. The trenches were relieved at midnight till the following unlucky
mistake occurred, all the particulars of which are not very
intelligible to civilians:

  "Monday 18th August at night the trenches were relieved by
  Lieut.-General Douglas, My Lord _Sydney_, and Count _Nassau_, as
  major-generals, and Brigadeer _Stuart_. We made our approaches
  towards the fort outside the wall, and Lieut.-General _Douglas's_
  and Brigadeer _Stuart's_ regiments were posted towards the right. It
  was dark when they went on, and they did not perceive the enemy to
  be so near them as they really were. [What brought the enemy outside
  their walls?] for there was at that time scarce twenty yards
  distance between them. They were ordered to lye down upon their arms
  which they did, and a great part, both of the officers and soldiers,
  fell asleep. The enemy perceived this, and attacked them, which
  presently put them into a confusion, and several of them gave
  ground, but presently recovered themselves and fired, but did not
  know at what. The _Danes_ to the left took our own men for the enemy
  sallying, and so fired upon them; they believed the Danes to be the
  Irish; and so returned the compliment. The Irish fired upon both,
  and they at one another. This confusion lasted nigh two hours, in
  which several men were killed; nor did the king or any body else
  know what to make of it. At last our men found their mistake, and
  the Irish were beat in, crying 'quarter' and 'murder' as they used
  to do. After this his majesty ordered the trenches to be relieved in
  the day, and our men marched always in and out in the very face of
  their cannon."

If truth lies in a well, it is a pity she should make choice of a
muddy one, where her contours and lineaments are so admirably
confused. Hear another version by John Banim, the novelist, from what,
if any, authority we know not:

  "While day after day the battering, at this one point continued, the
  garrison made a midnight sortie upon the besiegers. Taken by
  surprise, and thrown into such confusion as to be unable to discern
  friend from foe, they attacked each other, and the Irish {715}
  having retreated unperceived, so continued until the morning light
  showed them their mistake and the shocking havoc that resulted from
  it."

Our chaplain did not much relish that classic and severe style of
composition which critics assigned to a great historical work.
Moreover he was ever as ready as Homer to introduce a gossiping or
traditional episode, and repose his pen from the dry or terrible
details of the main course of events.

On the 19th of the month King William had another providential escape.
He was riding slowly up toward Cromwell's fort, when, as he was
entering a gap, an officer stayed him about some business. Within a
second or two after the pause of the horse's feet, a cannon-ball swept
through the spot where he and his horse would have been but for the
interruption.

All this time the people within the walls were in ill-condition, their
diet consisting of beans, or very coarse bread, and the enemy's
mortars throwing bombs and carcasses among them with little
interruption. These things disturbed them much, as Mr. Story says, for
they had not seen the like before. The round or oval iron carcasses
which flashed forth through it's holes a fierce and inextinguishable
fire for some eight or ten minutes was nearly as terrible as the bomb.
Still they doggedly held on, and made no complaint; Sarsfield's energy
and hopeful spirits kept up their courage. The chaplain relates with a
sort of remorseful feeling how his party and himself enjoyed the
burning of a part of the town one night by the bombs and red-hot
balls, "which made me reflect upon our profession of soldiery not to
be overcharged with good nature."


HOW LIMERICK AS ASSAILED AND DEFENDED.

By the 27th of the month, a twelve yards breach being made in the wall
of Irishtown, and William looking on from Cromwell's fort, the
grenadiers, supported on either side by Dutch, Danes, and
Brandenburghers, on hearing a signal of three cannon-shots, sprang out
of their trenches, and cheering loudly, dashed forward to the glacis.
[Footnote 205] They were hotly received from the covered way, whose
occupants mounting the banquette, and resting their muskets on the
edge of the glacis, poured a shower of balls among them; and the guns
on the ramparts, great and small, volleying fast and fiercely, made
wide lanes among the brave fellows. However, the guns from Cromwell's
fort, enfilading the ramparts, soon silenced the engines of death
stationed there, and the grenadiers, undaunted by the thinning of
their ranks, gained the glacis, sprang into the covered way, and after
a terrible struggle forced the defenders from that post, from their
trenches in the ditch, and over the breach into the city.

  [Footnote 205: For the behoof of young renders not conversant with
  the outworks of besieged towns, a few explanatory words are given.
  Outside the strong walls is a wide and deep, dry ditch. The sloping
  side from which the wall rises is the scarp, the opposite slope is
  the counterscarp, its upper line meeting with the platform called
  the covered way. This covered way is about thirty feet wide, its
  outward boundary being the face of the glacis or sloping plane, this
  last so situated that men marching along it to attack the fortress
  are in the direct range of the guns. The level of the glacis is
  higher than that of the covered way by seven or eight feet. The
  defenders standing on a small terrace called the banquette at the
  base of the glacis, and resting their muskets on its edge, can fire
  on the advancing foe.]

The guns on the ramparts to the right of the breach being silenced,
the firing from the Danes and Dutch on the flanks of the storming
party did considerable damage to those on the ramparts and in the
ditch, but the guns of a fort constructed in King's Island opened on
the foreigners, killed many, and afforded some relief to the
defenders. While these were mowing each other down at a distance, the
grenadiers, driving their opponents across the breach, cheered
lustily, and flung in their hand-grenades, whose bursting and
destructive iron shower were ill calculated to recall the
self-possession of the fugitives. But the pikes and bayonets of their
follows in shelter, now levelled full at their breasts, were {716} as
much to be dreaded as what they expected from behind. Over the breach
and inward dashed Lord Drogheda's grenadiers, but a battery snugly
placed in front of the yawning breach on stones, timber, earth, and
other stuff, all at once belched out a storm of grape upon them, and
after struggling for some time, a second discharge sent them back over
the ruins and into the ditch.

But no dastard feeling was to be found among the survivors.
Re-enforced by new comrades who had yet done nothing, they returned
once more to the assault, flung their grenades, and cleared the
tumbled masses of lime and stone. Undaunted by the havoc made among
them by a fresh discharge, they rushed on the battery, effectually
silenced it, and now looked on the capture of the town as certain. But
here they were met by fresh and untired foes, who being kept to that
moment in inaction by Sarsfield, now rushed on from either side, and a
dreadful struggle commenced, the badly armed defenders showering
volleys of stones where more effective weapons were not at command,
the mere townsmen and their wives and daughters mingling fiercely in
the desperate fray. Those who had pushed on the furthest were slain to
a man, neither asking nor receiving quarter, and the others, after
effecting everything in the power of energy and dauntless courage,
were for the second time driven forth from the rescued city.

  "From the walls and every place (we quote our chaplain) they so
  pestered us on the counterscarp (properly the covered way), that
  after nigh three hours resisting bullets, stones (broken bottles
  from the very women who boldly stood in the breach, and were nearer
  our men than their own), and whatever ways could be thought on to
  destroy us, our ammunition being spent, it was judged safest to
  return to our trenches. When the work was at the hottest, the
  _Brandenburgh_ regiment, who behaved themselves very well, were got
  upon the black battery, where the enemie's powder hapned to take
  fire, and blew up a great many of them, the men, faggots, stones,
  and whatnot, flying into the air with a most terrible noise."

In some Jacobite memoirs mention is made of a sortie made by Sarsfield
and his driving the wearied assaulters to their camp, and their
rescuing many of the enemy from an hospital which had taken fire. The
exploit is overlooked by the chaplain, who thus concludes his short
account of the day:

  "The king stood nigh _Cromwell's_ fort all the time, and the
  business being over, he went to his camp very much concerned, as
  indeed was the whole army, for you might have seen a mixture of
  anger and sorrow in every bodie's countenance."

William thus disappointed of bringing the Irish issue to a conclusion,
and his presence being much needed in England, drew off his forces,
and he himself made little delay till he set sail from Waterford to
make matters in London comfortable, and keep a sharp lookout on the
unfriendly proceedings of his bitter foeman, Louis XIV.

In September Count Solmes, who was left in command after William's
departure, went to England, and Ginckell succeeded to his office. A
better choice could not have been made; he established his
head-quarters at Kilkenny.


TYRCONNELL'S POLICY.

Tyrconnell, who all along was no better than a drag on his party, who
desired peace in order to secure his own estates, and who was accused
of holding secret correspondence with William, sailed to France soon
after the siege of Limerick. Previous to his departure he appointed
the young Duke of Berwick commander-in-chief; giving him twelve
councillors to aid him with their advice. Some of these were men after
Tyrconnell's own heart, such as in our own days are called
_Cawtholics_ by their own party. Sarsfield happened to be among them,
because, if he were not, Tyrconnell's arrangements would have been
little regarded by the men of heart and head among the loyalists.
Count O'Kelly declares that Tyrconnell's reasons for repairing to the
presence of Kings Louis and James were to nullify tile {717} effect
that the gallant defence of Limerick might have made upon their minds.
He would so twist and remould circumstances as to show that there was
not a shadow of hope for ultimate success. James appears to have long
entertained the notion of recovering England by losing Ireland, hence
his enduring patronage of Tyrconnell. Berwick was influenced, of
course, by what he knew were the cherished wishes of his father and
his father's favorite, and by his inaction, and want of cordial
co-operation with Sarsfield and the others, who, like him, were in
earnest, did all that in him lay to make General Ginckell's task easy.
On more than one occasion the Irish party were about deposing the
young duke, but he managed by a show of compliance to still retain his
power.

In September of this year the brave soldier but faithless adherent,
Lord Churchill, afterward Duke of Marborough, took Cork, which the
Duke of Berwick had previously advised the brave M. Elligot to burn,
and then retire to Kerry, as its defence seemed hopeless. He rather
chose to hold it out for five days. The Duke of Grafton, a natural son
of Charles II., and who bequeathed his name to the Bond street of
Dublin, commanding the navy, perished at the siege, fighting against
his uncle's supporters. Marlborough next marched against Kinsale,
which he entered without opposition, but the new fort commanded by Sir
Edmund Scott held out for twenty days.


THE RAPPAREES: UNCOMFORTABLE WINTER QUARTERS, 1690.

Those patriotic and troublesome light-armed irregulars, the rapparees,
continued during the decline and fall of the year 1690 to do the
English in Leinster and Munster much mischief by unexpectedly visiting
places supplied with provisions, either cattle or corn, and carrying
off all they could seize. So General Ginckell finding himself
straitened, conceived the idea of effecting a settlement in Kerry,
from which Limerick obtained much provender. With this object he
directed Lieutenant-General Douglas to march on Sligo, and take it if
possible, at all events to move down the west bank of the Shannon, and
co-operate with Colonel Richard Brewer, then at Mullingar, in attempts
to pass the river at Jamestown and Lanesboro' above, and Banagher
below Athlone. While the attention of King James's generals would be
drawn to these proceedings in the north and east, Major-General Tettau
would quietly proceed from Cork into Kerry, and take possession of
that ancient "kingdom," seconded in his expedition if necessary by
forces from Clonmel under the brave Ginckell himself. The advance was
really made, and skirmishes and attacks of forts ensued, and after
all, the English forces were withdrawn, leaving matters pretty much as
before, except the damage mutually inflicted. Some desultory
encounters took place on the east bank of the Shannon between portions
of the hostile forces, and the rapparees improved every opportunity of
despoiling the English foe, and collecting munitions into their boggy
or hilly retreats. There are sufficient materials for a dozen romances
in the adventures of Maccabe, Grace, O'Higgins, O'Callaghan,
O'Kavanagh, the White Sergeant, Galloping Hogan. The last-named worthy
indeed figures in the two standard romances of the Jacobite wars which
we are happy to possess. It may be supposed that the deeds of these
heroes smelt unsavorily in the nostrils of our chaplain, who thus
descanted both in sorrow and anger on their proceedings. He prefaced
his remarks with an expression of Lord Baltimore to King James I.,
namely, that "the Irish were a wicked people, and had been as wickedly
dealt withal," and conscientiously adds, "I make no application of the
expression to ourselves, the most people that have been in that
country know how to do it."

{718}

One expedition of some moment was made by Colonel Foulkes into an
island in the Bog of Allen. This was connected by two toghers or
causeways to two points on the dry land, one of them being furnished
with twelve trenches. These the brave colonel, who brought three
field-pieces along with him, was obliged to fill up one after the
other. When he arrived he found Colonel Piper, who had approached by
the other causeway. The rapparee garrison had all carefully retreated
into the woods when they became aware of their danger, leaving, as Mr.
Story says, "only some little things for the invaders."

Of course no quarter was ever extended to the poor rapparees. However,
the usual forbearance was exhibited by the regular forces on both
sides toward each other. Opposite Lanesboro, on the other side of the
Shannon, were posted three regiments of Irish, with the duty of
watching the English on the east bank, during some days in December;
and (in Mr. Story's words) "then little hapned of moment only some
small firings, and sometimes they made truces, Colonel _Clifford_ and
the other Irish officers drinking healths over to our men, and those
on the other side returning the compliment."

It never entered the mind of the warlike chaplain to throw a halo of
interest round one of his rapparee chiefs, though some were perhaps
more worthy of the name of hero than Redmond O'Hanlon or Rob Roy. They
were contemporaries of his, and were directing their chief energies to
bring his master's rule in Ireland to an end. So it was against nature
that he could see in them anything but "thieves, robbers, tories, and
bogg-trotters."

The most distinguished of the heads of these free companies was
Anthony O'Carroll, named _Fadh_ from his great height. After the first
siege of Limerick he fixed his head-quarters at Nenagh, and
_discomforted_ the English and their allies from that period to the
beginning of the second siege. Though he or any of his followers if
taken prisoners would be hung according to the laws of war, without
mercy, he observed a different demeanor to his captives. Those who had
money ransomed themselves; others were kept as prisoners. When he
found himself crowded by his foes after the day at Aughrim, he set
fire to the town, and brought his garrison of 500 men safe to Limerick
Mr. Story says that he was able to collect 2,000 men to his banner at
any moment while he ruled at Nenagh.

--------

ORIGINAL.

NEW PUBLICATIONS.

SERMONS PREACHED AT THE CHURCH OF
ST. PAUL, THE APOSTLE, NEW YORK,
during the years 1865 and 1866. 12mo,
pp. 440. New York: Lawrence Kehoe.

The new volume of Sermons by the Paulist Fathers, which Mr. Kehoe has
just issued in a very neat and tasteful shape, derives a special
interest from the fact that it contains several of the hitherto
unpublished discourses of the Rev. Francis A. Baker. In the earnest,
vigorous, affectionate sermons on Penance, on the miracle of Pardon,
on the power of the Holy Ghost as exemplified in good Christians, and
on the duty of Thankfulness, it is easy to recognize the impulses of
that beautiful soul which has now gone to its reward. We have spoken
before of the characteristics of Father Baker's preaching. Here is an
extract, taken at random from the first of the four discourses which
we have mentioned:

  "Do you know, my brethren, what it is that consoles the priest in
  his labors in the confessional? Why does he shut himself in that
  dark closet for hours? Ah! I will tell you, Like Elias in the cave
  of Horeb, he is watching for the manifestation of God; and as the
  prophet found the power of God, not in {719} the tempest or the
  earthquake, but in the still small voice, so the priest finds the
  greatest work of God, the most beautiful, that which consoles him
  for every sacrifice; not in the works of nature, not in sensible
  things, however great; but in the still small voice of the
  trembling, self-accusing soul, that has really come to shake off the
  slavery of sin, and to claim once more, through the blood of Christ,
  the glorious liberty of the children of God. Beautiful is the earth
  and sky, and glorious is the jewelled city of God; but if I may say
  what I think, I do not believe in all God's universe there is a work
  so stupendous, so grand, so beautiful, as the conversion of a
  sinner.

  "Well, then, does St. Augustine say, that to convert a sinner is a
  greater work than to create heaven and earth. Well do the saints cry
  out, Glory and empire for ever to Jesus Christ, who has loved us and
  washed us from our sins in his own blood! Well do the angels in
  heaven rejoice over one sinner that does penance. It is a thing for
  heaven and earth to wonder at. But, my brethren, it does not speak
  well for us that we think so little of it. It shows that we have
  very imperfect ideas of the evil of sin, a very inadequate
  remembrance of what Christ has done and suffered for us, a very
  insufficient conception of the conversion that is required of us. It
  seems to me that some men imagine that God pardons sin in much the
  same way that a good-natured parent overlooks the slight offences of
  a child who owns his fault. Whereas, in fact, God is a holy God, who
  tries the reins and hearts, who demands of us, as the condition of
  preserving his favor, that we love him with all our mind and
  strength and heart. When I see a man who has recently been to
  confession, and who has had grievous sins to confess; when I see him
  no more thoughtful than before, no more watchful over himself, no
  more grateful to God; when I see him forget all about it, and take
  it as a matter of course, I fear that he has come away as he went;
  that no angel has smiled on his penance, no saint rejoiced over it;
  that no droop of the precious Blood has fallen on his heart. Surely
  if he had been pardoned he would think more of it. Let it not be so
  with us, my brethren. Have we been forgiven a deadly sin, then from
  reprobates and castaways we have become children of God. How sweet
  it is to receive any grace from God! To look on the sky and earth,
  and think that he has made it, to look on ourselves and think that
  we have come from his hands, fills us with delight.

  "But to have sinned and to be pardoned, to have sinned and to be
  washed in the precious Blood, and then to belong to the family of
  God. To have tasted of the heavenly gift, and the powers of the
  world to come. To have the love of God, and the peace of God, once
  more to renew these dark and stubborn hearts. Where is our gratitude
  for favors such as those? Magdalene hath loved much because she was
  much forgiven. When is our love and our zeal proportionate to the
  pardon which we have received from God? Go, pardoned sinner--sin no
  more. Go, and ponder deeply the graces yon have received. Go, and by
  your life show what great things he has done for you. Once in
  darkness, but now light in the Lord, walk as children of light,
  living with St. Paul in the faith of the Son of God, who hath loved
  you and given himself for you."

The same fervent spirit and the same vein of practical exhortation
which we see so admirably combined in the passages which we have
cited, are conspicuous in many other pages from the anonymous hands
which have contributed to the authorship of this volume. The Paulist
Fathers have little to do in their book with controversy; and not a
great deal with dogma, except in so far as it has a direct practical
relation to the duties of every-day life. They seem, in this
collection of sermons, to care more for exhorting than expounding;
more for arousing sinners to the comprehension and performance of what
the church requires of them, than for setting forth the church's
sacred attributes. As discourses addressed to ordinary congregations,
made up of people of the common run who are burdened with the common
imperfections of average humanity, we know of few specimens of pulpit
literature which we rate higher. And they have also the great and
unfortunately rather rare merit of being very impressive and effective
when read in the retirement of the closet.

   J. R. G. H.


LYDIA, A TALE OF THE SECOND CENTURY.

Translated from the German of Hermann Geiger, of Munich. 12mo, pp.
275. Philadelphia: Eugene Cummiskey. 1867.

We are inclined to believe that the now world-renowned tales of
Fabiola and Callista have prompted the composition of this beautiful
story. The heroine is a young Christian of Smyrna, named Seraphica,
who is cast into prison and condemned to death for her faith. A
terrible earthquake, most powerfully depicted by the author, sunders
the walls of her prison, and she is liberated; but learning that her
{720} mother was carried off to Athens as a slave, she follows her
thither. The captain of the vessel in which she embarks seizes her and
makes a present of her as a slave to a wealthy Athenian lady named
Metella, who names her Lydia from the place of her birth. In the
service of this lady, who is a pious heathen, the Christian slave
passes several years, exhibiting in her life many traits of that
heroic patience, humility, love of suffering, and divine charity which
were inspired by her holy faith; and which is beautifully contrasted
with the pure, natural virtue of her heathen mistress.

Her Christian patience is rewarded at last by the conversion of
Metella and her son. Freed from slavery, she goes to Rome to seek her
mother, who she finds has in the mean time suffered martyrdom, and
returns to Metella to become her bosom friend and companion.

We could scarcely wish anything added to the plot of this charming
tale, but the impression made upon us during its perusal was that the
different descriptions, scenes, and tableaux were wanting in a proper
connecting link, being presented to us rather, as it would appear, for
their own sake, than as necessarily united with, or dependent upon,
the life and fortunes of the characters of the story. The translator
has fallen into a common fault from a desire to be too literal; the
intermingling of the historical present with the past. We have not
observed it in any instance without feeling that it detracted very
much from the force and beauty of the description. The volume does the
enterprising publisher the highest credit, its typography and binding
lacking in nothing that we could desire for elegance and taste. We
predict and wish for it a wide circulation.


HISTORY OF A MOUTHFUL OF BREAD.
By Jean Macé. Translated from the French by Mr. Alfred Gatty.
New-York: American News Company, 121 Nassau-street.

This is a very popular work on the branch of physiology which relates
to the organs and processes of nutrition. It is written in a pleasing,
lively style, and with the express purpose of being readable by
intelligent children. Excepting the absurd notion that the globules of
the blood are animalculae, and the grovelling definition of the body
as a digestive tube served by organs, we see nothing worthy of censure
in the book, which, otherwise, imparts valuable information respecting
the merely physical facts of animal life.


Goodrich's PICTORIAL HISTORIES OF
GREECE AND THE UNITED STATES,
and
CHILD'S PICTORIAL HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES.
New editions. Philadelphia: Butler & Co. 1867.

These new and improved editions of very popular and well-written
histories are very suitable for elementary instruction. We have
examined the history of Greece with some attention, and find it an
excellent epitome. The illustrations are remarkably good.


LAWRENCE KEHOE, New-York, has in press, and will soon publish, Lady
Herbert's new work, which has just appeared in London, entitled Three
Phases of Christian Love--namely, Life of St. Monica, Life of
Victorine de Galard, Life of Venerable Mere Devos.


BOOKS RECEIVED.

From AMERICAN NEWS COMPANY, New York. The New Gospel of Peace,
according to St. Benjamin. 1 vol, 12mo, pp. 343; price $2. Alderman
Rooney at the Cable Banquet. Pamphlet illustrated; price 50 cts. Olive
Logan's Christmas Story. Pamphlet; price 50 cts.

From LEE & Shepard, Boston, Mass. Oliver Optic's Magazine for Boys and
Girls. No. 1, pp. 12; price 5 cts.

From the OFFICE OF THE AVE MARIA, Notre Dame, Indiana. The Ave Maria
Almanac for 1867. Illustrated, pp. 32; price 20 cts.

From HURD & HOUGHTON New York. The Riverside Magazine for Young
People. No. 1, pp. 48; price 25 cts. Lalla Rookh, by Thomas Moore. 1
vol. 12mo, pp. 332. Illustrated; price $1.50.

From P. O'SHEA, New York. The Rosa Mystica; or, Mary of Nazareth, the
Lily of the House of David. By Marie Josephine. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 290;
price $2. Spirit of St. Francis de Sales. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 372; price
$2. The Manual of the Immaculate Conception, a collection of prayers
for general use. Compiled from authentic sources. Published with
approbation of the Most Rev. J. McCloskey, D.D., pp. 1122.

From John Murphy & Co., Baltimore. The Southern Poems of the War.
Collected and arranged by Miss Emily V. Mason. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 456;
price $1.50. Good Thoughts for Priest and People; or, Short
Meditations for every Day in the Year, etc., etc. By Rev. Theodore
Noethen, pastor of Holy Cross, Albany, N. Y. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 383;
price $2.

From KELLY & PIET, Baltimore, Md. Sermons Delivered during the Second
Plenary Council of Baltimore, October, 1866. And Pastoral Letter of
the Hierarchy of the United States, together with the Papal Rescript
and Letters of Convocation. A complete list of dignitaries and
officers of the Council; and an introductory notice, with plates. 1
vol. 12mo, pp. 244; price $3.

From BENZIGER BROTHERS, New York and Cincinnati. School Recreations;
or, The Catholic Teacher's Companion. Compiled for the use of Catholic
Schools, with approbation of Archbishop Purcell. l vol 12mo, pp. 94.

----------

{721}


THE CATHOLIC WORLD.

VOL. IV., NO. 24.--MARCH, 1867.


ORIGINAL.

THE CATHOLIC CEREMONIAL.

BY REV. M. O'CONNOR, S. J.

Outside the Catholic Church there is a general opinion that we
Catholics make all devotion to consist in the performance of a certain
routine of ceremonies, and are entire strangers to what is called
vital religion. These ceremonies to which we are supposed to attach
such excessive, or rather such superstitious value, are looked on by
those outside the church as an unnecessary and worse than useless
display, or as an empty pageant. Our love of them is set down as one
of the damning ingredients in that bug-bear which they have conjured
up, and designated by the name of "Popery." We, on the contrary, look
upon our ceremonial as one of the most beautiful things in the church,
one of those that most clearly mark the finger of God, and operate
most efficaciously in the work of true vital religion.

The point, therefore, is a most important one, and well deserving our
most serious consideration. To understand it rightly, let us consider
the principles on which ceremonial is based, and its
practical-working.

It has been admitted by all nations, that worship is due to the deity;
that worship needs an external and a public expression. Not only the
people of God under the old and new dispensations have admitted this,
but the Turk and the Pagan of every shade have admitted and acted on
it. Many have erred egregiously, and have had recourse to disgusting
and execrable· means to put it in practice; but the feeling itself is
universal, and, therefore, may be enumerated among the first
promptings of reason.

Its necessity is based on our relation to God; and on our own nature.
God, as in himself infinitely perfect, as our creator, our ruler, and
provider is entitled to our acknowledgment of his perfections and of
his dominion over us, to thanks for benefits conferred, to
supplication for their continuance. We owe him this duty not merely as
beings having souls, but as that which we are--beings, having a body
and soul--as men. The feelings of the soul, especially if earnest,
cannot be pent up in it. They need expression. When strong and earnest
they flow over into the body, they express themselves in bodily
action. Man, as such, acts with the body and the soul. Moreover, we
owe God worship not merely as individuals, {722} but as society. God
made society and all that gives it charms. He is the author of the
bonds that hold it together; he gave us those faculties that force us
into it; the wants that in it alone are satisfied; and the powers that
contribute to their satisfaction. Society, as well as the individual
man, is one of those beautiful and bountiful works that call forth our
admiration and demand our gratitude. Society can recognize and thank
its author only by external and common public worship. The internal
feeling needs something to lean on, as it were, to give itself
strength and almost to give itself an existence. The internal act, is,
of course, the soul of true worship, but, like the soul itself of man,
it needs a body in which it may become incarnate to fill the end of
its being. Without this it has neither life nor power. It needs this
to give itself intensity.

The external act becomes as it were a depository in which the soul
lays what is produced at one moment, while it is adding more and more.
As the iron receives in deposit the powers of each of the circles of
the magnetic wire that turn and turn again around it, and is ready to
discharge their combined force at any moment, so the external act
catches as it were the fire of the internal emotion, holds it until
that of another is added, and enables the soul to seize again the
power of those that have vanished and resume its work with redoubled
vigor. Thus going on from faith to faith, from worship to worship,
from virtue to virtue, all these rise higher and higher, strike their
roots deeper and deeper, until the internal feeling becomes
intensified and strong and as worthy of the great object to which it
is directed as it can be in a mere creature.

The ceremonial is nothing else but this external expression of inward
worship. It is an expression that gives it consistency and strength.
It intensifies and preserves it. It transmits it from one to another,
and to succeeding generations. In it society expresses itself. The
individual man has his own organs of expression. The organ of the
Christian body is the minister of the church. Through him she acts as
a body; she expresses herself as a unit. On this account she very
properly regulates minutely, how he shall discharge this duty. This
gives his actions a meaning and a value over and above, and to some
degree independent of, the value they possess, as expressions of his
own individual devotion.

Worship does not consist, properly speaking, in receiving instruction.
This is, of course, a good thing, but it is only a means to an end. It
is like the ladder to ascend, or the scaffolding used in the erection
of a building. To receive it with respect and other dispositions due
to the word of God, may imply faith in him, and submission to him;
but, properly speaking, in as far as it is mere instruction or
information, it is not worship. Worship is our submission to God, a
performance of the duty we owe him. As far as instruction shows us
how, and leads us to do this in a proper manner, it is good, but in
itself--as a mere expansion of the mind, or the storing of it with
knowledge, it is not worship. In paying worship, we must act, not
merely be acted upon; we must do, not merely hear. For this, the
ceremonial affords most useful aid; not, of course, as far as it is a
mechanical movement, which if it stop there would be useless, but
inasmuch as it is the instrument of the inmost soul. Light and
instruction must precede to give it significance, but when life has
thus been breathed into it, it becomes itself an action, a practice of
virtue, a discharge of the highest virtues, which are those that have
God himself for their immediate object.

This ceremonial consists of the words that are used, and the acts that
are performed. Words, said or sung, are a part of it, but only a part.
Many acts often express the feelings more effectually. These are
sometimes {723} more or less natural; at other times they may be said
to be conventional. But though arbitrary as words themselves, when
they receive a determined meaning, they become capable of effectually
and powerfully expressing the internal feelings of the individual and
of society. Kneeling or standing erect, raising up or clasping the
hands or striking the breast, an uplifted glance to heaven or a
reverent bowing of the head, will express adoration, reverence,
sorrow, or supplication as well and often better than words. When you
walk in a procession with torch in hand, accompanying the blessed
sacrament, or to honor some other mystery of religion, you are
professing your faith in it as effectually, and impressing that faith
in your soul, perhaps, more deeply than when you recite the creed,
just as the citizen expresses forcibly his political principles by
analogous acts. These, of course in particular cases, may be acts of
hypocrisy or hollow pageant, just as words may be a lie or an empty
sound, but this takes nothing from their intrinsic appropriateness.
Nay, acts of this kind would seem to draw the soul into what is
intended to accompany them and be expressed by them more powerfully
than words.

Some of the acts of this worship have, in themselves, a power and
efficacy apart from any impression they may produce on the beholder.
Such is the case in all the sacraments. The sacred rite, duly
performed may be compared to the spark, which, however powerless of
itself, when falling on the proper material, awakens a great power of
nature, that will rend mountains, and hurl into shapeless masses, the
proudest works of man. The sacred rite has been chosen by omnipotence,
as his agent and instrument, and its power has only the limits which
omnipotence has been pleased to assign. It is the same thing in the
celebration of mass. The words of Christ, pronounced by his minister,
effect a great change. For he who first took bread and said, "This is
my body," and by his infinite power made true what he said, addressing
his apostles, added. "Do this"--yes, even this, great as it is--"in
commemoration of me." And they "do" it, and by doing it, "show forth
his death until he come." The effect follows by the power of God, no
matter who is present, no matter who is instructed or edified, even
though no heart beat more in unison than did the hearts of the Jews,
who stood by while the great offering was made on Calvary. But other
parts of the ceremonial, which, though not of equal importance, occupy
more time, realize their end only when they express our feelings of
reverence, or give them strength and light. Many are directed to aid
the priest alone, in the proper performance of his high duties. Many,
while they have this object also, are likewise directed to instruct,
and become expressions of the devotion of the people. The ceremonial,
therefore, first of all makes provision for the priest. It is
important for himself and for the people that he be a worthy minister
of Christ; that he discharge the duty of offering up the holy
sacrifice with all the reverence, the humility, the fervor which so
great an act demands. The ceremonies become a means of his doing this.
In performing them properly he exercises all these virtues. The church
makes him descend to the foot of the altar, and there acknowledging
himself a sinner before God and the heavenly court, express by words
and acts his sorrow, demand pardon before venturing to ascend the
altar on which is to be laid the holy of holies. He then ascends with
trembling step, and having again silently prayed for forgiveness, he
intones the noble hymn,"_Gloria in Excelsis Deo_." Whether the voices
of the choir take up its thrilling notes and make the vault resound
with a call to give glory to God on high or he continue it in a
subdued tone, every word he utters, every motion he is called on to
make, enables him to express more and more {724} earnestly his desire
for God's honor, his homage to Christ, "alone holy, alone Lord, alone
most high."

Prepared by this introduction and having admonished the people to turn
to God, he pours out in simple but touching words his supplications
for our various wants. He then reads choice extracts from the sacred
volume conveying the most important teachings of our holy religion. I
will not stop to describe to you the ceremonies at the offertory, nor
speak of the sublime "Preface" preparatory to the most sacred part of
the sacrifice. Having prayed for all conditions of the church, having
appealed to the blessed in heaven with whom the church on earth is in
communion, he approaches the solemn act of consecration. Every word he
utters, every glance, every motion, is directed to fill him with awe,
with reverence, to express a demand, an act of homage, of gratitude or
of invocation; and when the sacred words are pronounced, and he stands
before the incarnate God truly present, though not visible to corporal
eyes, with profound inclination he expresses his adoration, while the
victim is raised up, that all present may, like him, kneel down and
adore. And so all through the holy sacrifice.

While these lessons are taught and put in practice by the priest, the
people, before whom they are performed, learn from them to cherish
similar dispositions, and to unite their spirit in the expression of
his devotion. It is the same thing with all the ceremonies, which,
like those alluded to, are expressive of the feelings we should
entertain for God. They frequently express them more forcibly than
words could. Even ordinary feelings often become too strong for
language and seek expression in some action. The fond mother would
find words too tame to express the love she bears her child. She hugs
it to her bosom, and impresses warm kisses on its face. We meet a
long-lost friend. Words would not express all we feel. We clasp him in
our arms, and press him to our heart. The model of repentance, the
prodigal, when he meets his father, forgets a part of the discourse he
had resolved to pronounce, and folded in his father's arms, expresses
his sorrow more forcibly in silent tears and heart breaking sobs, and
is forgiven. Even anger, which cannot find an adequate expression in
the most impassioned language, seeks to manifest itself in the
uplifted clenched fist, if it cannot gain its object by striking a
blow. Do not tell me, then, that all this action in the church
ceremonial is mummery. It is often a higher expression of devotion
than words would afford.

If yon wish to test this, look at a devout congregation of Catholics
kneeling before the altar. The organ that had lifted up their hearts
when singing the "Glory to God in the highest" is silent, or a few low
notes are heard that make the silence of the congregation more
sensible. No voice, scarcely a breath, is heard, when the priest,
having raised his eyes to heaven, is now inclined over the sacred
elements. Thousands are kneeling around in awe. A slight stroke of the
bell announces that the act is done. The priest prostrates himself in
silent adoration, and then elevates the consecrated host. Every head
is bowed in the presence of a God. Will anyone who has witnessed that
scene, who has tried to enter into the feelings of that congregation,
please tell me the words, or write out the speech, that would have
expressed so powerfully their reverence, their adoration, their
gratitude, and their love? Yes, ceremonies are a noble expression of
our highest feelings. They are even more; for they intensify them,
embalm them, and preserve them from evaporating. They communicate them
and spread them abroad, and transmit them from generation to
generation.

All this is a consequence of human nature, and this is so true that it
is made an objection to our system. It is said that we build too much
on human nature. But if worship be made for man it must accord with
his nature {725}--not, indeed, with that which is corrupt in it, but
with his nature as it came from God. Now, this need, this power, this
efficacy of the expression of feeling by outward ceremony, is no
effect of the fall: it is in the very nature of man. Hence we have
recourse to it in everything else. What is the shake of the hand when
we meet a friend, or the salute, or the banquet to which we invite
him, but a ceremony to express friendship or esteem? Look at our
processions and various political demonstrations. What are they but
ceremonies in which political or other feelings seek expression--an
expression which we know will strengthen them, deepen them,
communicate them to others by creating and giving force to what may be
called a contagions influence? What are our national and party airs;
our national and party festivals, but expressions of a similar
character looking forward to similar results?

In these things, as I said in the beginning, the feelings of the soul
seek an embodiment, that will give them consistency and duration.

No matter what the external manifestation be, even though it be merely
conventional, when it expresses a feeling, it becomes an instrument
for all these purposes. It becomes, as it were, a permanent part of a
structure, to which another stone is added as often as the act is
repeated, until the building grows up in solid beauty that defies the
ravages of time. This is the case with our political or social
sentiments, because it grows out of our very nature. Why then should
it not be the case, or rather is it not evidently the case, with those
also which are connected with religion? These external rites not only
express and intensify the interior feelings, but let philosophers
explain it as they may, they become as it were a depository in which
they may be laid by to be recalled almost at pleasure, nay, even to be
drawn out by others who wish to acquire them.

Look at that piece of bunting hanging from a flag-staff and flying
before the breeze. What is it? A first glance will tell you that it is
a piece of stuff purchased for a trifle a few days ago from the
merchant, on whose shelves it lay unnoticed and uncared for, except as
far as it was capable of producing some day a few dollars for its
owner. But now it has received a new destiny. It bears the national
symbols, and it is the flag of the country. And, oh! what a change has
taken place! It recalls the glories of the past, the hopes of the
future; it is the symbol of the majesty of the nation. The patriot
heart warms in beholding it; the warrior-breast is bared to do it
honor. Through a hail of fire he stands by it or bears it on, and will
see unmoved a thousand of his companions strewed o'er the battle-field
while this yet floats before the breeze. And, when victory has crowned
his efforts, he salutes it as the genius that nerved his right arm
during the contest. Though torn almost to tatters, he bedews it with
his tears of joy. It is his pride in life. He looks forward to descend
in honor into the grave wrapped in its folds.

Wherever that flag is raised, one glance leads us to behold the genius
of our country standing up before us with all her claims to our
devotion and our love. Let it receive but the slightest insult, and a
thrill vibrates throughout the land, every heart is wounded, every
hand is ready to be raised in its defence. Yet it is, after all, but a
piece of bunting, worth so many cents per yard. But by becoming a
symbol, by being the object of a rite, it has become the depositary of
the enthusiasm of the nation. It is made capable of evoking this, of
quickening and communicating it, whenever it is unfurled.

Look at our national airs: what are they? The scientific musician will
find little in them that is soul-stirring; but the feelings of our
fathers are deposited in them. They were the tunes in which we
expressed our gladness in days of triumph, by which we were aroused on
the national holiday, in which we sung our joy on all {726} important
occasions. Our love of home, of kindred, of fatherland, has been
embalmed in them; and when they fall on our ears, all these dear and
stirring feelings, as if buried in their notes, are sent forth, now
unlocked, and again take possession of our souls. They thus arouse the
warrior and the patriot, calling out all the feelings that cluster
around what is most dear.

The Swiss soldier in foreign lands was so vividly recalled to the
memories of home, by the airs to which he listened in childhood, and
the recollection of his native mountains, and the associations revived
by them, had such power, that a special disease, called
"home-sickness" was frequently the result. As this proved fatal to
many, the playing or singing of such tunes was forbidden in Swiss
regiments in foreign service. And who does not know the stirring
effect produced on certain occasions, when Yankee Doodle or Patrick's
Day has been struck up, no matter what musical professors may say of
their artistic merits.

In a similar manner our feelings of devotion are consigned to some
homely religious tune. They are first expressed in it. They cling
around it. They become identified with it. They are recalled vividly
when we hear it again. They all come back in their original freshness,
with accumulated force. They are transmitted to others, and thus we
inherit the treasure of the devotional feeling of preceding
generations.

Though _our_ being supplied with music by great artists, who are
constantly changing, if not improving their compositions, deprives us
in a great measure of the advantages that might arise from this
source, we can feel it at times, in what is allowed to retain this
traditional force. Who is there that does not feel the devotion so
often experienced in assisting at the benediction of the blessed
sacrament, or on other occasions renewed by the tones of the Tantum
Ergo or other familiar tunes, when the performers do not destroy, or
at least smother the old airs by their exquisiteness? Where the songs
of the church are in more general use, the intonation of the Miserere
or the Stabat Mater or the Pange Lingua and many other tunes is like
the opening up of a flood-gate, through which feelings of devotion
rush as it were in a torrent and take possession of a whole
congregation.

What is said of songs may be applied to other rites. The feelings of
the past are deposited in them; they express them, they arouse them,
they communicate them. This occurs, though they may be chosen
arbitrarily. What more arbitrary, generally speaking, than the meaning
attached to words? The word "home," for example, for all that is in
the sound, might as well have been adapted to signify anything else of
the most different character. Yet now having received a definite
meaning, it recalls uniformly a whole definite series of ideas and
feelings. So it is with a rite--say that of anointing with oil, that
of sprinkling with water, burning incense, the use of candles, or the
making of the sign of the cross. Many rites were established primarily
for this purpose, others had their origin in necessity or convenience
or usage; but the church, anxious to make even these things a source
of edification and an instrument of devotion, gave them a meaning,
attached to them a lesson which they reproduce forever after. Even
those which have a certain intrinsic fitness to signify what they are
established for, derive their chief efficacy in this respect from
their having been chosen for the purpose, or having gradually received
a social meaning, well understood in the Christian family. These have
the additional advantage of speaking out, as it were, a whole
instruction at a glance. The moment you look at one of these acts, a
lesson is presented which could scarcely be communicated in many
words, and in performing them the heart says more, and that more
simply and more effectually, than it could in a long discourse.

{727}

I have referred to the flag of the country; of its being raised, and
how a look at it, or a salute, powerfully expresses at once the most
important emotions and lively enthusiasm. Well, we do the same through
the Christian's glorious standard, which is the sacred symbol of the
cross. Be it of wood or of the most precious metal--be it the
production of the most unskilful or the most cunning workman--it is
for us the symbol of man's redemption, and around it cluster our most
tender feelings of veneration and love. It is placed over our altars,
over our churches; it hangs in our rooms; where Catholic feelings can
save it from insult, it is raised up in the highways, and is made to
meet our eyes wherever we turn. We impress its form on our persons
whenever we call on God in prayer, whenever we find ourselves exposed
to temptation or danger. In that one act the faith, the hope, the love
of the church for Christ and Christ crucified, are all expressed. All
these feelings are imbedded in it. All are called out again whenever
that sign is made. What we have heard of him from the pulpit, what we
have read in our private study, what has occurred, to our own minds in
meditation, is all brought before us with the accompanying sentiments
and feelings as soon as that sacred symbol presents itself to our
eyes. All are a wakened, are revived, and seized again at its glance.
No wonder, then, that the Catholic loves the cross; that he loves to
prostrate himself in adoration before it; that he looks to it when he
seeks consolation in suffering, support in affliction, light in his
difficulties, purity of spirit in his joys. Do not tell me that it is
of lifeless wood or of metal, that it is but the work of the
craftsman, Oh! this is like stopping the soldier in battle, to direct
his attention to the price per yard of his flag, or to the name and
address of the store where it was bought, while he is advancing
enthusiastically under its inspiration against his country's foes.
Yes; who does not know that it is of wood or metal? but to me it is
the symbol of my Saviour's love. As such, I love it; as such all my
most sacred feelings cling around it: I impress kisses on it; I bathe
it with my tears. And when, on Good Friday, the priest after bringing
before us the whole scene of Calvary, having led us, in the service,
to look on the death of Christ' as the great turning-point in the
world's history, having shown us the woes of the past that were there
to find a remedy, and the blessings for the future that were thence to
spring forth, holds up the crucifix before the prostrate multitude,
and sings out, in a solemn tone, "Ecce lignum Crucis," "Behold the
wood of the cross on which did hang the salvation of the world," will
we not all send up our whole souls in the deacon's answer, crying out,
with him, "Venite adoremus," "Come, let us adore"? And when the priest
looses his shoes, and on bare feet approaches the sacred symbol of
redemption, that he may kneel down and kiss it with fondness, on the
anniversary of the day on which the tragic scene was enacted; who is
there that will not vie with him in kneeling and pressing the sacred
symbol to his lips?

The same thing can be applied in different degrees to the various
rites throughout the year, when succeeding festivals bring before us
the other great mysteries of religion, or when we are called on to
express the ordinary feelings of Christian devotion. He who has
studied the simple devotions of the rosary, or the way of the cross,
will be astonished at the mine of devotion, of enlightened piety
contained in them, and at the treasures that are drawn from them by
faithful souls, simple and unpretending as they are, and puerile as
they appear to the self-sufficient.

But these acts and exercises intended to express and nourish our
Christian feelings, can only be appreciated where there is faith. It
is only into {728} hearts animated by faith that they can enter. It is
only in such they can be aroused. A certain amount of instruction is
even necessary to understand the conventional meaning of many. This
instruction and training is received by the Catholic almost with his
mother's milk. As he learns the meaning of words, which is still more
arbitrary, and acquires a practical skill in the use of language,
notwithstanding its complicated laws, so he learns the meaning of the
ceremonial, and is initiated into its use. With clasped hands the
child kneels before the crucifix, and imprints kisses on it. Little by
little he learns the history of him whose figure is nailed to that
cross, and knowledge grows in him with reverence and love. He goes to
the church, and is struck with what he beholds. He catches reverence
from those around, and infuses it into his own imitation of their mode
of acting. As he learns more and more of what is there done, this
reverence becomes more and more enlightened, and he grows up a devout
and enlightened Christian, performing the acts expressive of worship
with the same ease and intelligence with which he uses the ordinary
expressions of social life. The looker-on who is without faith or
instruction, who has no sympathy, and wishes to have no sympathy, with
him, thinks his acts a mummery, if he do not give them a harsher name.
Such a person may be compared to one who has no ear for music, to whom
the enthusiasm of those who are aroused by a beautiful composition is
incomprehensible; or to one who listens to an eloquent discourse in a
tongue which he does not, and cares not to understand; or he is like
Michol, who laughs at David dancing before the ark, because she has no
sympathy with his jubilant gratitude. The Catholic ceremonial is made
for Catholics. If it enable them to express and strengthen their
reverence, it answers its purpose. Those who have no such feelings to
be awakened cannot be surprised if it strike them without producing
emotion. The ceremonial is useful, not only as an expression of
feeling, it is eminently instructive and educational, if I may use the
expression, by instilling and developing both the knowledge and the
devotion it is intended to express. While it teaches, it leads to act
in accordance with the teaching; properly performed it is itself such
action. It thus instils truth into the mind, and shapes the heart in
accordance with it, which is the highest aim of the best education.

Some are pleased to look upon the mass of our people as very ignorant
in matters of religion. If by this it be meant to say, that all are
not experts in quoting texts of scripture; that they know nothing of
many controversies that appear of great importance to our separated
brethren; that they do not understand the meaning of many phrases that
have become households words amongst them, though, sometimes, I fear,
passing round without any very, definite meaning, I am willing to
acknowledge the charge. But if it be meant to say that they are
ignorant of those great facts and truths of religion which it is
necessary or important for men to know, I repudiate it most solemnly.
Nay, I contend that there is a better knowledge of these amongst many
or most Catholics who can neither read nor write, if they have only
followed in the paths where the church led them, than amongst many of
our opponents who are considered learned theologians; and this they
owe chiefly to this very ceremonial of which I am treating. They may
know nothing of Greek particles, or of many other things good enough
and useful in their place, but which God has not required anyone to
learn; but they know that the incarnate God died for the salvation of
man. They know the mystery of the Trinity, which is implied in that of
the incarnation. They know the sinful character of man, their need of
such a Redeemer. They are led to thank him, to love him, to {729} obey
him. They know his sufferings, one by one; they are familiar with his
thorns and his nails; they have pondered over his wounds and mangled
flesh; they penetrate into the side pierced for their love. He who
knows even this much is not ignorant. Yet all this, and, much more, is
familiar to every one accustomed to look with faith on the crucifix.
He sees in the face of the crucified One patience, resignation,
compassion for sinners, love even for his enemies. He sees the
consequences of sin, and he beholds their remedy. Looking on this, the
Catholic finds support in his trials or afflictions and moderation in
his joy. Show me the volume he could ponder over and learn as much.
All that he heard at his mother's knee and from the preacher's lips is
brought before him in a single glance at his crucifix. All is brought
up again when he makes the sign of the cross. Yet the cross, so
fraught with instruction and moving appeals, is that which is
presented to him a thousand times in the rites of the church, inasmuch
as it is the great pervading principle that must animate all his
devotion and all his actions. It is brought before him, not in a cold
way, merely teaching him a lesson. He is taught to know and to
believe; he is led to adore and to confide; he is brought to invoke
through it all the graces of which he stands in need. All this is done
every time that he makes the sign of the cross, pronouncing the
blessed words, "In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost."

While many of your learned expounders of scripture are comparing text
with text on these subjects, trying to remove, but scarcely removing
the doubts which they know to exist among their hearers, which they
feel, perhaps, rising up in their own breasts, or what is worse while
they are proposing theories in a Christian pulpit which make nought
the cross of Christ and the mystery of redemption as ever taught in
the Christian family, the poor Catholic, on whom they look with
contempt, is making his starting point what others are but trying to
prove, and while signing himself with the cross, believing, adoring,
penetrating into the depths of the love of the incarnate God, and
endeavoring to shape his own soul into conformity with its teachings.
And you call him ignorant. Indeed, a pure though simple faith, among
these people enables them to see the great truths of religion with a
clearness that supplies frequently an apt reply to difficulties that
seem very embarrassing to their opponents.

Yet, this is the first lesson that the Catholic child learns at his
mother's knee, As he goes on, he learns more and more of God's works
of mercy toward man, of his institutions for our salvation and our
sanctification, and all he learns he sees reproduced in a glance in
the ceremonial of the church, which speaks to him in accents more and
more eloquent, as his knowledge expands and his heart is brought more
fully into conformity with God's holy teachings. In the liturgy and
the various other rites of the church, she has enshrined all the great
dogmas of religion. There she teaches them, there she keeps them
beyond the reach of the innovator. The priest himself, the bishop, and
the pope, there see them inculcated, and from thence, as from a rich
treasury, draw them out to present them to the faithful. This teaching
by rites in use from the beginning of the church, addresses itself to
all with power, for in it they find the teaching of the saints and the
sages of by-gone ages, and feel themselves breathing the same
atmosphere with them. The martyrs, who bore testimony to their faith
with their blood, the apostolic men, who by their preaching, their
labors, and their prayers, brought nations to the knowledge of Christ,
the holy confessors and virgins, who, in frail vessels, showed forth
his power in every age, practised these same rites, and were therefore
animated by the same faith. The church, throughout the whole world,
uses them, and therefore believes as we do. What {730} more powerful
for bringing home to each one the faith of the universal, everlasting
church!

There is great security for the faith of a Catholic in his receiving
it through the teaching of a pastor in communion with the church of
the whole world, and sanctioned by its highest authority; but I would
venture to say that there is something even more solemn in this voice
of the ceremonial, which is a voice of the living and the dead--of
the church of the Catacombs, and of the church of this day--throughout
the world. With all the force which this gives, leaning as the church
does upon Christ, who died to sanctify her in truth, we are taught the
great dogmas of the Trinity and the Incarnation; of the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ; the plan and means of the redemption,
the need in which we stand of divine grace, and the means of obtaining
it. We are taught the character of the great Christian oblation, the
nature and effects of the sacraments, as well as the dispositions they
require, and the duties they impose.

Far be it from me to undervalue the oral teaching of the ministry.
That found in the ceremonial presupposes it, and is based on it. Both
are, as they should be, combined in the ministrations of the church;
but the ceremonial fixes the oral teaching. It gives the Christian
system a body, as it were, in which it enables it to prolong its life
beyond the moments of the passing voice. When once embodied in a rite,
the impressions of oral instruction, which otherwise so easily pass
away, live for ever. They are seized in their whole entirety at a
glance; they are brought down to the comprehension of the lowest; they
are put forth with a majesty that the highest may admire. Men are
taught there, and, what is most important they are led to act on the
teaching, and thus conform their hearts as well as their minds, to the
holy dogmas of faith, which is the best and most useful way of
imparting Christian instruction. But I will be told that this
teaching, however useful for those who understand it, is lost for the
great mass of the people, as the language used is a dead one, which
few understand. But, in the first place, it is not lost, even though
the clergy alone should understand it. Is it not an important thing
that the clergy themselves should have something to keep alive
powerfully, amongst them the one, universal and everlasting faith?
Will not all the faithful find strength in their strength, and light
in their light? If they are kept right, the truth spread abroad by
them will easily he preserved pure among the masses of the people.
Almost all heresies--be it said to our shame--either had their source
in the sanctuary, or could not have succeeded if they had not found
support there. And is it not a great thing that he who would become a
prevaricator, must first brand himself as unfaithful, must cease to
minister today, all he did yesterday, and thus give public notice, as
it were, that he seeks to devour the flock which he had undertaken to
feed; that instead of keeping the deposit which was the first duty of
his office, as dispenser of the mysteries of God, he is substituting
some new-fangled theory of his own, palming it off as an institution
of heaven? Luther can establish a new system only by ceasing to say
mass. The church of Cranmer is not at ease until it has formed for
itself a new liturgy. The Greeks and other orientals by preserving
their ancient rites and ceremonies, have preserved almost all their
ancient dogmas, and to re-enter the church have little else to do but
to submit to the authority of its supreme pastor. But apart from this,
the ceremonial itself speaks to all the people in a language which all
understand. The rites are themselves a language easily learned, and
speaking with silent eloquence to men of every tongue. They are to
some extent what the learned have been so long looking for, a
universal language. In fact, when the priest raises up the host, the
Irishman and the German, the Greek and the Armenian, see the presence
of Christ {731} preached to them, and they kneel down and adore. When
the water is poured on the head of the child that is baptized, men of
every clime know that the regenerating rite is being performed. The
rite once properly explained ever after expresses to them better than
any combination of words, the internal change that is effected in the
soul. Then, it must be remembered that the main thing in the public
service is what is _done_, not what is _said_. Every moderately
instructed Catholic is fully aware of what there takes place, and with
this knowledge he can assist, not only devoutly but intelligently,
though he may not understand or even hear one word.

The great source of mistake, in this connection, with our separated
brethren, arises from the fact that they go to church merely to hear
instruction, or to have words put into their mouths, in which to
address Almighty God. The Catholic also often goes for instruction,
and this he receives in the language which he understands. But he goes
for what is even more important--he goes to take a part in the great
act that is performed in God's holy temple. He knows the nature and
ends of this, and the dispositions required of him, and as I said
before, he can perform his part though he may not even hear, much less
understand one word that is pronounced. I will suppose a case of the
surrender of a large army. The vanquished soldiers march to the place
appointed. They lay down their arms, they lower their flag. The
victorious general, with his warriors, stands, by and receives them. A
speech perhaps is made. But all who are present take an intelligent
part in the Proceedings, though many may not hear one word that is
uttered. So it is with the great action at mass. I will not have
recourse to the common reply, that all that the priest says at the
altar is translated and published; that any one who desires may read
and know for himself; for though the fact be true, it is not the true
solution of the difficulty. I have no hesitation in saying that in
assisting at the most solemn part of the celebration of the divine
mysteries, it is best not to attend to the particular prayers recited
by the priest, whether one hear them or not whether he be or be not
capable of understanding them. It is better to assist with an
enlightened faith in the action that is performed, and then give full
play to such sentiments as this faith will awaken in each individual
soul. This is evidently the view of the church. For this reason, after
the offertory, that is, when the most important portion begins, the
priest is made to recite almost all his part of the liturgy in a low
tone, so that those present cannot hear him even if they be capable of
understanding what he says. Among the Greeks a curtain is drawn across
the sanctuary, so that they cannot even see him, but merely know by
some signals, if I may so call them, given from time to time, in what
part of the sacred act he is engaged.

The church, by, this evidently tells us, that by an assistance in
faith, each one yielding to the promptings of his own devotion will
derive more profit than by following the priest's words. Indeed, the
parts of the priest and people in this sacred act are so essentially
different, that it is scarcely to be expected that the same prayers
should be best for both. While the church has minutely arranged the
rites and prayers used by him who offers the sacrifice, she is
satisfied with awakening the faith and enlightening the devotion of
others who assist: and then leaving it to their enlightened faith what
each shall say to God on such occasions. She acts like the master of
the house, who prepares the banquet, where each guest finds abundance
of everything agreeable to the palate, and nourishing to the body.
With great care he has prescribed the parts of those who are occupied
in preparing or serving it up, so that all present may receive
substantial proofs of his interest; but when, this is done, he {732}
leaves the invited to partake of what is prepared, as their own tastes
will prompt. It is thus that the Catholic system, which is accused of
tying men down to a performance of mere routine, is that which really
gives more scope to individual liberty in public worship, while public
decorum and dignity are effectually secured by an established ritual.
With your extempore prayers, he who utters them has indeed full scope
for his feeling and his fancy, but he is liable also to their
vagaries, and his hearers are at his mercy. As he weeps or rejoices,
all must weep or rejoice, or he becomes to them a hindrance. Their
hearts move or try to move, not as the spirit, but as the leader
willeth, and not unfrequently may he lend them into paths from which
their instincts will recoil. They, whose whole time is engaged in
following a prescribed liturgy, must ever go on in the same groove.
Whatever be the feelings or the wants or the temper of mind of each
individual habitually or at the moment, the same unchanging road is
chalked out for all. What they hear may be beautiful, but it may be
far from being the best suited for many at that moment. Hence disgust
or cold indifference is sure to follow, of which beautiful forms may
be only a pompous covering. Amongst Catholics on the other hand, while
the church to secure order and truth and public decorum, has carefully
regulated every word and act of the priest, and presents in the
celebration of the divine mysteries the most powerful incentive to
faith and devotion in all its bearings, she leaves each one else who
is present to assist as his own wants and dispositions may prompt.

The ingenious zeal of pious men has provided helps for all in manuals
of various kinds, and each one will select what he finds best suited
for himself. He will use it or interrupt its use, or drop it
altogether as experience will show him to be most useful in his own
case. When it is not done through apathy or listlessness, he may find
it better to dispense with them all, being satisfied with a look, with
vivid faith, and such other interior acts as a faithful soul will soon
learn to perform with alacrity. Knowing what he himself is, and who is
before him, he will not be at a loss what to say. At one time he will
weep over his sins; at another he will give thanks to God; at another
he will lay open his wants, or ask pardon for his transgressions.
Where can he do any of these things more effectually than in the
presence of him who died for our sins, and to procure for us every
blessing.

And many, in fact, thus assist in silent prayer, but with more
intelligent and true devotion, though they neither use a book nor hear
a word, than others who are pondering over most beautiful manuals.

The danger of cold formality from the steady use of prescribed forms,
and nothing else, is so thoroughly realized by the church, and this
fear is so fully justified by her experience that the priest himself
is warned over and over against it. The remedy that is given him, is
the practice of what might be called private individual prayer. All
spiritual writers tell him that if he be not fond of this, if
especially he be not careful to renew his spirit by it, in immediate
preparation for the exercise of his sacred functions, they will
degenerate into mere formalism. With this private preparation he will
prepare and carry into them a proper spirit and will then find them a
heavenly manna, having every sweet taste; without this, he will be but
as the conduit pipe, carrying to others the refreshing waters, but
retaining himself' none of the effects of their invigorating powers.

These remarks apply to the most sacred and most important part of' the
mass. If the church do not wish us even to hear them, much less
require us to understand them, if she be right in believing that we
may thus assist most advantageously, it is a matter of no consequence
what language the priest uses in addressing the Almighty {733} God,
for he understands him, and that is enough. The rites he performs give
all the instruction of admonition that is useful at that moment, and
this instruction does not disturb our individual devotion. On the
contrary, whatever turn it may take, it enlivens, supports, and
directs it.

As to the first parts of the mass, to which these remarks are not so
applicable, the "Gospels," which vary at every festival, are required
to be read at least on festivals in their own language, and explained
by each pastor to his people. The "Collects," are known to be all
substantially supplications for grace, to which, therefore, we may
heartily answer, _Amen_, though we do not understand each word. Little
else remains but the "Kyrie," the "Gloria," and the "Credo," and these
like the "Pater Noster," and a few other things sung by the priest,
might be easily learned, so as to be understood by any diligent
person. Indeed, I may say it is the wish of the church that all should
learn them. She would be glad that all would take a part in singing
them, as the people do in many countries. The study of Latin required
for this is not much; for all that I have referred to might be
contained in two or three pages, and is not beyond the reach of
anyone, not even of those who cannot read. Many such learn it by
heart, and understand what they have learned. Doing so would be but a
light task in view of the many advantages gained. All might then join
in the public chants of the church and be gainers in spiritual life,
even if they did not discourse equally elegant music; or, if our
apathy compels the church to let our parts be discharged, as it were,
by deputies in the choir, we would assist and join in the beautiful
sentiments which are expressed, and not merely sit inactive to receive
the sweet impressions of their melodies.

But though this would better accord with the spirit of the church, if
these parts also through our own apathy are unintelligible, the
intrinsic character of the act for which we are preparing will suggest
pious sentiments that will enable us to pass the time with substantial
profit to our souls.

But, be it that there is some little disadvantage in having the mass
in a dead language, what I have said, I think, abundantly proves at
least that it is not very great. Look, on the other hand, at the
immense advantages gained by keeping it uniform and without change,
which implies keeping it in the language in which it was first
established. By this, uniformity and steadiness is secured in the
faith. The faith of every nation embalmed, as I said before, in the
liturgy, is before the eyes of the universal church; it is transmitted
untarnished from generation to generation. This uniform and steady
liturgy becomes as an anchor to which every church is moored. As long
as it clings to this, it is safe. And can anyone who knows the value
of faith, of that faith for which legions of martyrs shed their blood,
deem the little loss that is sustained, if any, by our Latin liturgy,
not well compensated by the stability of faith which it secures. For
this reason, though the world in the apostolic days was even more
divided in language than it is now, yet in those times, as we know
from all antiquity, the liturgy was celebrated only in three
languages--the three languages of the cross. These are, the Hebrew,
in its cognate dialects, which are but branches of the one Semitic
tongue, as a homage to the ancient dispensation; the Greek, which was
the language of the civilization of that age, and that adopted in the
New Testament; and the Latin, which was the language of the people
whose capital was to be the seat of the government of the Church of
the New Dispensation. In these three languages was written the
inscription over the bloody sacrifice on Calvary; in these, and in no
others from the beginning, was the unbloody one offered to God by the
church. No others having been adopted was a clear proof that in the
apostolic {734} view it was not deemed necessary that all should
understand the language used in the sacred mysteries; and, when even
these ceased to be popular languages anywhere, what had always been
the condition of the great number became the condition of all.

In after ages a few exceptions, and only a few, were permitted or
rather tolerated. The liturgy was allowed to be celebrated in one
other language in Asia, the Armenian; in two in Africa, the Coptic and
the Ethiopic; and in one in Europe, the Slavonic. No others were used.
But these were exceptional cases--they occurred at a later period, and
under peculiar circumstances, showing rather the sufferance than the
genuine spirit of the church, while she cordially adopted from the
beginning, and ever clung to the three languages of the cross.

It is both beautiful and useful to the Catholic to assist at the
divine offices in the same language, and in the main, with the same
rites, in which they have been performed for eighteen hundred years.
They seem like the voice of the martyrs, the confessors, the saints
who have lived through these eighteen centuries. They echo their faith
and their devotion. We feel that in them we are breathing the life of
a church now and ever spread throughout the whole world, everywhere
offering to God one sacrifice of praise.

A dignitary of the Protestant Episcopal Church in this country has
lately written an angry letter against those of his brethren who are
called "Ritualists," because they are anxious to introduce into their
church many Catholic, or, as he calls them, "Romish" ceremonies. His
ground of complaint is that behind these ceremonies stand the
doctrines of the Catholic Church. "Their course," he says, "means
return to what the reformation cast out with indignation." "It means
Romanism in all its strength and substance," and he enumerates the
various doctrines which it implies, which he considers abominations. I
do not wish to pronounce an opinion on the extent to which his remarks
are justifiable in their application to the parties against whom he
writes; but he is certainly right in believing that behind the
Catholic ritual stands Catholic doctrine, which is nothing else but
Christian doctrine; and as the reformation "cast out" many of the
rites in use in the Christian family from the beginning, with them it
"cast out" a great portion of the Christian dogma. The good man's
charge will only make those who preserve the dogma see more clearly
the value of the rites in which it is enshrined, and cling more
tenaciously to dogmas thus shown to be coeval with Christianity.

Every rite has thus a lesson, and becomes an act of devotion. The
cross above our churches and our altars, continually reappearing in
all our ceremonies, impresses on us the incarnation, death, and
atonement of Christ crucified, as the great central point of all
religion. To this we are constantly brought back in every prayer which
concludes by asking what we demand, through Jesus Christ, the familiar
closing of which, the "_per omnia saecula saeculorum_," known to every
child, calls forth from all, the heartfelt _Amen_! To this, and to
what should accompany it, the Catholic is constantly directed by the
ceremonial. The church bell, signed with the cross, and anointed with
oil, which is a symbol of Christ, swings in the tower, and as his
messenger, calls us in his name to his house--now, ringing out with
joy, when some great mystery is to be commemorated--now, in deep
solemn notes, to pray for one of his departed members. Three times
every day it summons us to the recital of the Angelus, in which we
commemorate the great mystery of the incarnation, and invoke the
merits of the Saviour's death, and ask the benefit of his
resurrection. If we enter the {735} church, the font at the door, from
which we take a drop of blessed water to sprinkle our foreheads, is
itself a sermon on the purity with which we should approach, and bids
us cleanse our souls before we come near to him in prayer. The burning
lamp speaks to us of him who is the light of the world, now dwelling
on the altar, as well as of the constant fire of devotion, and pure
adoration, due to the present God. The priest whom you see at the
altar, clad in those quaint old vestments, tells you at a glance that
you are in the presence of a worship that has come down from the
remotest ages. The burning lights on the altar, which have now become
an emblem of gladness, speak to you of the catacombs, in which our
fathers took refuge, and preserved for us the sacred deposit, at the
cost of property, of liberty, and of life.

Like old heirlooms, with their quaint old forms and their several
indentations, these vestments and rites tell at the same time of their
real antiquity and of the many vicissitudes through which they have
passed. They are not like those imitations of the antique in use
amongst some of our friends got up by studying ancient drawings and
descriptions, having all the inconvenience without anything of the
venerable character of what is truly ancient. With us they are
inherited through uninterrupted use from the beginning. Whatever
changes have occurred in minor details, only render them more
venerable, for if on the one hand we are brought back to ancient days,
these are marks of the many ages through which they have passed.
Everything in the rites of the church is fraught with instruction,
with devotion. It enables you to know, and what is better, to
practice--for while it teaches, it leads you to love and adore. Do you
wish to know the efficacy of that ceremonial? Look at those who have
been nursed under its training. See the all-pervading influence of
religion, that exists among them. Long and powerful discourses may
make men skilful talkers and ardent partisans. Those who have been
reared under a divinely inspired ritual have religion deeply engraven
on their hearts. It takes possession and enters into the whole nature
of the man; and even when he gives way to the allurements of iniquity,
it retains its hold on him. This may indeed make him appear, and be,
an inconsistent object of pity or of scorn. But, happy inconsistency!
For if he will not be consistent in good, far better that he be
inconsistent or not consistent in evil. He would otherwise become a
monster. The links by which he is yet bound to what is good, may one
day draw him within the pale of that mercy to which no sinner appealed
in vain, before which no sinner is too great to be pardoned.

To the Catholic, in every position, the ceremonial is light and
nourishment--a plentiful source of vigor and life.

----------

{736}

From Le Correspondant.

MADAME DE SWETCHINE.

BY REV. FATHER LACORDAIRE.


Many times already have I rendered to illustrious Catholics who have
died in our day, a funeral and a pious homage. In turn, General
Drouot, Daniel O'Connell, and Frederic Ozanam have heard my voice
above their tomb, a voice far below that which their glory merited,
but which, nevertheless, holds from a sincere admiration the right to
praise them. To-day, after these familiar names for which praise can
do nothing, I pronounce another name, a name which may appear almost
unknown, perhaps even that of a foreigner, which, however, belongs to
the nation of the great minds of our age. A superior writer, Madame de
Swetchine published nothing; a conversationalist of the first order,
the fame of her salon never penetrated beyond that circle which,
though not public, is more than privacy; a woman of antique faith and
of active piety, she neither founded nor presided over any orders; and
yet, for more than forty years she swayed an empire, to which the
Count de Maistre submitted, before which Madame de Staël inclined, and
which retained around her, even to her last days, admirers accustomed
to act on public opinion, but still more accustomed to enlighten their
own by hers. To the Count de Maistre succeeded M. de Bonald. The Abbé
Frayssinous, M. Cuvier, to these M. de Montalembert, the Count de
Falloux, Prince Albert de Broglie, and many others, a younger
generation, but not less submissive to the ascendency of a soul where
virtue served genius.

Why should we be silent? Why not tell the living what they have lost
in the dead? While a man lives, modesty should guard all his actions,
and friendship itself should be restrained by it; but death has this
of admirable; that it restores to memory as to judgment all its
liberty. In taking away those from whom it strikes the double rock of
weakness and envy, it permits those who have seen to lift the veil,
those who have received to acknowledge the benefit, those who have
loved to pour forth their affection. Even the obscurity of merit adds
to the desire of making it known; and if this merit was illustrious,
being all hidden, it is almost a religious duty to draw it forth from
the tomb, and to render it before men the honor it has before God. So
I hope I shall be pardoned these few pages; but did I not, yet I
should still write them. I owe them to a friendship which began in the
shadows and perils of my youth, and which since, through all the
vicissitudes of a quarter of a century, never ceased to open to me
perspectives of honor so difficult to recognize in the confused and
agitated times when faith itself is troubled by earthly events, and
seeks a route worthy of its mission.

Madame Sophie Jeanne de Swetchine was born in Russia, on the 4th
December, 1782. Her family name was Soymonoff. She had a sister who
married the Prince de Gagarin, a former Russian ambassador at Rome;
she herself was united at the age of seventeen to General de
Swetchine, Military Governor of St. Petersburg. She belonged by birth
to the Greek religion, but her education had abandoned her to the
scepticism of the eighteenth century, and {737} according to the
natural course of things, she would have died an unbeliever or a
schismatic in the depth of some half-oriental estate. God willed it
otherwise, and hence arises from the first the lively interest
attached to her life. For a Christian, a soul's predestination, and
the mysterious ways by which God conducts it to its end without
infringing its liberty, are a spectacle that has above all others an
inexhaustible charm. The secrets of grace and free will, so intimate
in our own hearts, are less enlightened in a history which is not our
own; and the communion of saints which makes us all, believing and
loving, one in a single light and a single goodness, gives us, in the
account of a difficult conversion, the feeling of a conquest in which
we ourselves have shared.

The young Sophie de Soymonoff was then a Greek and an unbeliever. She
had been beguiled from her birth by the illusions of rationalism, and
the snares of the most singular fortune which error ever had; for the
Greek religion has this trait solely its own, that it presents a much
restricted and very firm negation to the true faith, under an
authority cut loose from its base; yet which, however, preserves all
the rest with a profound respect for antiquity. In seeing this exact
episcopal succession, this unaltered symbol, this inviolable
discipline, these sacraments which Rome herself recognizes, we ask if
an error, respecting so long and so well the limits which it traced
when it first arose, does not seem like those rocks which an irruption
has thrown from their foundations and which remain immovable under the
eye and the action of ages? Whilst in the West, Protestantism is
unable to create either dogmas or discipline or hierarchy, and floats
as a wandering cloud from mind to mind, the East, on the contrary,
sees produced the fixity of error. Here dissolution, there
petrifaction; and between the two the truth which is immutable without
being inert, progressive without being subject to change. However
surprising may be this contrast, it is not difficult to account for
it, if we consider, on the one hand, the difference of nature between
the eastern man and the western; and on the other, the diversity of
the political destiny assigned them. The eastern man contemplates and
adores, while his rival, less happy in contemplation, is more so in
acting. Thus the one has created generous institutions, under which he
has from age to age extended his empire, while the other has passed
from servitude to servitude, incapable of seating himself in the shade
of a regular authority, and of developing in a free atmosphere either
the evil or the good which, he has conceived. Hence in Europe error
takes a character of life which conducts it to its most extreme
logical consequences, at the same time that it wears at Constantinople
a character of death, which leaves it what it was, by impotence, not
by virtue.

Nevertheless, it is easy for a vulgar intelligence to be deceived,
especially where family and national traditions give to error the
reflex of patriotism, and when an absolute government, the jealous
guardian of a religion of which it is the head, suffers no emanations
of the truth to reach the soul. Sophie de Soymonoff was born a
prisoner in an empire of seventy millions of souls. She was six
hundred leagues from St. Peter's, and a thousand years from the true
faith. But, however vigilant despotism may be, however thick its
dungeon walls, God remains ever near, and he draws therefrom, when he
wills, the instruments which his Providence uses to preserve for man
the share which he assigns him in all his works. At an age when Madame
de Swetchine could not yet sound either the poverty of the Greek
schism or the abyss of unbelief, a man of God came to her. He was not
a priest, but an ambassador of a king despoiled of the greater part of
his possessions, shut up in an island of the Mediterranean, and who,
in sending to St. Petersburg a {738} representative of his
misfortunes, thought not that he sent there a _chargé d'affaires_ of
divine grace, marked with the seal of the elect. Count Joseph de
Maistre, tor he it was, detested with all his soul the two Colossuses
of his day, the French revolution and the French empire, because in
the one he saw the oppression of European nationalities; and the
other, because he thought he saw it imprinted forever with an
anti-Christian spirit. But he loved France, because, though it was the
seat of the revolution and of the empire, he discerned there an
indestructible faith, the faith of Clovis, of Charlemagne, and of St.
Louis, and I know not what predestination that ravished his judgment,
and rendered him the prophet of that very country which he esteemed so
culpable and yet so great. Born in Savoy, in the country of St.
Francis de Sales, and of Jean Jacques Rousseau, he was French like
them in his genius, but even more so by his faith and his heart, which
had but two pulsations, one for the church, the other for France;
generous mortal who silenced his antipathies by his convictions, in
whom blindness did not extinguish the light, and who, like
Philoctetes, wounded by the arrows of Hercules, could be separated
from Greece, neither in his accusations nor in his affections. Madame
de Swetchine soon met this extraordinary man in the saloons of St.
Petersburg, and it was the first great event of her life. A positive
spirit, but amiable, as his posthumous correspondence proves, M. de
Maistre loved conversation. He did not love it as a throne from which
his genius could display its brilliancy, but as a free and delicate
interchange of thoughts, in which grace unites with intelligence,
taste with boldness, freedom with reserve, bringing together in an
hour all times and all gifts; and forming a bond of union between men
who are pleased with sentiments of kindness and esteem. Generous focus
of cultivated minds of all countries, conversation is the last asylum
of human liberty. It speaks when the tribune is silent; it supplies
the place of books when books are not to be had; it gives currency to
thoughts which despotism persecutes; finally, it warms, and agitates;
it moves, and is, where it can live, the principle and the
all-powerful echo of public opinion. It is not astonishing then that
great men find in it a pleasure which is for them like the
accomplishment of a duty. So long as society converses it is safe.

It did not look much as if the Count de Maistre could find at St.
Petersburg an aliment for this noble want of his heart. The Russian is
endowed with facility of expression, a quickness of apprehension, and
it is no flattery disrobed of justice which has named him the
Frenchman of the North. But he is closed up as soon as he comes into
the world; deprived of all political liberty, he has not even in his
religion room for his breast to expand, and the Christ he adores
appears to him only under the sceptre of his masters and behind their
implacable majesty. A fortress encloses at St. Petersburg the temple
where sleep the Czars, and, once dead, their people cannot even freely
visit their ashes. Fear, suspicion, doubt, all the shades of
inquietude dwell in the Russian, and are translated on his brow by a
calm which nothing destroys, on his lips by a reserve which nothing
dissipates. To converse it is necessary to be open; and to open one's
self, one must possess his life, his goods, his honor, his liberty.
When therefore the Count de Maistre entered St. Petersburg, he might
say that he entered the capital of silence, and that his genius would
be there only a monologue.

He was deceived. I knew Madame de Swetchine only during the last
twenty-five years of her life; and she was fifty when I first rested
my eyes on her benevolent countenance. Doubtless age had ripened her
art of thinking and speaking, but it is impossible that she should not
have had something of it in that young outburst which early announced
to others, and to herself, the treasure which was carried in her
bosom. Certain it is that M. de Maistre had soon discovered it. In
{739} the midst of that society of great lords and diplomatists, he
discovered a young woman who bore in her language the marks of
superiority, and whose conversation, springing from a source still
purer than the mind, touched with remarkable tact the frontiers of
liberty, without ever passing beyond them. Confidence is an
irrepressible want of our poor heart; it cannot live alone; it opens
itself unconsciously, and when life's experience has revealed the
peril of abandoning it to itself, it becomes wiser but no fonder of
reserve, and counts it a supreme happiness to meet with security in
the intercourse of society. Less happy, however, than the greater part
of men, the man of genius has need also of a certain elevation in the
minds that come in contact with his own; and, though the crowd has its
charm and its power, were it only in hearing him who rules, yet it is
in the shock of two intelligences, each worthy of the other, that
conversation has its highest flight, and reaches the last fibres of
our being, and reveals to it the eternal pleasure of minds speaking
with minds. Demosthenes discoursing before the Athenians, Cicero
pleading in the Forum or the Senate of Rome, did not make, as perhaps
some may think, a monologue: the multitude responded, and their
eloquence was the fruit of a great soul heard by a great people. There
is no solitary eloquence, and every orator has a double genius, his
own and that of the age that hears him.

Madame de Staël, who was the first conversationalist of her time, said
she was unhappy because of the universal mediocrity, and yet she
conversed at Paris among the people the most prompt in the world to
speak, and the most confiding: what would she have said at St.
Petersburg? M. de Maistre was there, but he was there with a
Frenchwoman, born in Russia, who would one day, recognizing the
mistake of her birth, live and die in her true country, the country of
an incorruptible faith, and of a liberty which had only an eclipse,
because conversation has always sustained it. Louis XIV. conversed at
Marseilles without suspecting that conversation would kill his
despotism. In the East, the destined seat of absolute power, the
prince does not converse; he gives his order, and is silent.

It is impossible for two souls to meet each other in a conversation
which mutually pleases them, without having religion, sooner or later,
enter into their discourse. Religion is the interior vestment of the
soul. There are some who tear this vestment to tatters; there are
others who soil it; but there are a few who despoil themselves of it
all save some shred, and this shred, such as it is, is sufficient to
prevent them from appearing absolutely destitute of divinity. Madame
de Swetchine was an unbeliever, and, she had behind her, and beyond
her unbelief, the Greek schism. The Count de Maistre was a Catholic,
not only by faith, but by direct mental intuition. He was at that
point where a man can say, so obvious was the truth to him: I believe
not, I see. What were the talks of these two souls on a subject in
regard to which they had nothing in common, except their genius? What
did they say from 1803 to 1810, from the day when they met for the
first time, to that on which one of them bent before the other, owned
herself vanquished, and, on the bosom of friendship, sighed the last
sigh of error? Doubtless God alone knows. God alone knows the
stratagems which suspended for seven years the efficacy of an
eloquence sustained by divine grace, and disputed with it, step by
step, the victim and the victory. However, two immortal books of the
Count de Maistre: Soirées de Saint Petersbourg, and the book Du Pape,
may give us the secret of that controversy lost to the memory of man,
but which we shall one day find in that of God.

It is manifest that the wife of the Governor of St. Petersburg opposed
from the first to the ambassador of Sardinia all the negations of the
eighteenth century, those shadows which Voltaire had invested with all
{740} the transparency of his mocking spirit, and around which Jean
Jacques Rousseau had thrown the poetry of his melancholy imagination.
Doubt, which in all men is a profound abyss, is still more so in the
heart of woman. Nature cannot be denied with impunity, and the nature
of woman is to believe, for it is her vocation to love. Happily Madame
de Swetchine was strong and sincere; she could follow with her mind's
eye her friend's thought, and penetrate, little by little, as she
became accustomed to it, into those regions of truth where mockery had
not left even a trace, and where imagination raised not a single
cloud. Laughter ceases as we ascend nearer to God, and so also do
tears without cause; the intellect becomes serious, and the heart
contented.

When the Count de Maistre had dispelled the phantoms, did Madame de
Swetchine see at a glance the whole reality of Christianity, or did
the Greek Church interpose itself, as a half-light between a doubt
which was no more, and a faith which was not yet? In considering the
slowness of her progress it is natural to believe, and the Count de
Maistre's correspondence confirms it, that the neophyte took the
longest route, and that she did not give herself up to any sudden
illumination. It was then the book Du Pape which succeeded to the
Soirées de Saint Petersbourg. M. de Maistre had dictated it with one
eye on Russia and the other on France. Not that there was any relation
between the two countries in the point of view of religion. France,
since God had made her the eldest daughter of the church, had not been
for a single day a traitor to the sacred unity of her mother; and from
the battle-fields of Tolbiac to the scaffolds of the Reign of Terror,
she held herself faithful on the only and immovable rock where God had
sealed in this world the mystery of truth. But if is true that she was
withdrawn from the public law of Europe, which during several
centuries had accorded a political supremacy to the Roman pontiff and
that she had derived from this sort of resistance, I know not what of
personal independence, which without detracting from her theological
submission, had given her in certain matters a more apparent reserve.
Yet if Louis XIV. had not taken it into his head to establish as a
maxim what was only a national instinct, regulated by a profound
faith, the sentiments of France would never have assumed in the eyes
of Christendom the doubtful coloring which after the ruins of the
revolution struck the genius of the Count de Maistre and inspired him
with the book, Du Pape. He saw in Russia the immense fall of the Greek
Church, caused by this single point of infidelity to St. Peter, and
without fearing for France what no one feared for her, he erected to
the papacy that beautiful and proud, statue, which posterity will ever
regard with honor, even though they should accuse the artist of having
known the past less well than the future.

_Thou art Peter, and on this rock I build my church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it_. These simple words, regarded in
the gospel and in history, taught Madame de Swetchine that the Greek
Church, although preserving the traditions of episcopal authority, was
detached from the centre of unity, and consequently from the throne
itself of life. After this it was easy to recognize its effects in the
spiritual miseries she had under her eyes. The clergy are not the
whole church; they are only a portion of it. The church is the
assemblage of all souls who know God, and do not consciously reject
either the words he has given the world, or the authority which he has
founded to preserve and propagate his words and his grace. Though a
visible body in the faithful exteriorly marked with his seal, she yet
embraces under the eyes of God, who penetrates and judges all
consciences, a multitude unknown to herself, in whom invincible
ignorance {741} creates good faith, and who live unknowingly the truth
of which she is the depositary. This is the church. As to the clergy,
all is said in these words of our Lord ascending to heaven: _Go and
teach all nations, baptizing them and teaching them to keep my
commandments._ The clergy are the apostolate of the church; they are
the venerated summit of faith, the army of souls called by God to
spread the only law which is infallible, the only force which conquers
the flesh, the only unction which gives humility. "_Who hears you
hears me_," our Lord has said: "_who despises you despises me_." All
may and must befall the clergy, hate, exile, torture, death; there is
but one thing which they cannot and should not merit, contempt. When
Christ suffered in the judgment hall under the blows of the vilest
executioners, when he bore his cross from Jerusalem to Calvary, when
he was raised on it in the face of the whole world, there was against
him from heaven to earth, from Satan to man, a hate deeper and broader
than the ocean. But respect survived; and Pilate in washing his hands,
the centurion in beholding the cross, the virgins in weeping, the sun
in hiding its light, were the revelations of a conscience greater than
the punishment, and which held the astonished universe in expectation
and awe. Now, by a judgment of God, which is the chastisement of a
fault of centuries, the Greek clergy are despised. They are despised
not only by the unbeliever but by the believer; they are despised by
the penitent whose confessions they hear, by the purified Christians
to whom they give the body and blood of their God. This contempt is
striking and universal; the pope or Greek priest bears it on his
forehead as an avenging sign, and even the kiss of the Czar confirms
and enlarges it.

Placed between this spectacle and the vision of the Count de Maistre,
the whole light came to Madame de Swetchine, and then commenced for
her the second struggle, the struggle of the truth against the holiest
affections of the heart. Truth is, no doubt, the great country of the
mind; it is father, mother, brother, sister, and native land; but man
has on earth another family and another country, the better he is the
more he loves them, and virtue; in so far as it is human, makes them
the cherished centre of all that is good, amiable, and generous. To
these ties already so strong, religion adds its divine influence, and
from the same table to the same altar man leads his happiness, and
there attaches by a single chain time and eternity. What a blow is
that when some day, by an evidence which leaves no possible retreat,
the daughter shall see God standing between her and her mother,
between her and her husband, between her and her native country, and
there shall be said to her in the same voice which Abraham heard: "_Go
out from, thy land and thy kindred, and from the house of thy father,
and come to the land which I shall show thee_." There are some, it is
true, who think this voice should never be heard, but for three
thousand years, since Abraham, it has commanded and been obeyed. God
is stronger than man, and man is great enough to sacrifice to truth
more than himself.

Madame de Swetchine had not only to fear the rending of her heart, she
had before her an intolerance which the opposition of our century had
only irritated. The Emperor Nicholas did not yet reign, but the
conversion of a Russian soul to the Catholic Church was none the less
an act of high treason, which exposed her to the severities of the
morrow, if she escaped the inattention of the evening. After having
endured this stormy situation for six or seven years, Madame de
Swetchine turned her eyes toward France, and obtained from the Emperor
Alexander, a generous prince, himself agitated by an unknown
inspiration, the permission to live there. France received her in 1818
at the age of thirty-four, in the plenitude of her faculties ripened
by a long intercourse with men and events.

{742}

It is not without a purpose that God draws to himself' a creature
condemned to error by all the ties of family and country, and
transports her far away to a foreign capital in the midst of a new
people. Much less so is it when this grace falls on a choice
intelligence, placed in the first ranks of society, and who unites in
herself all the gifts of nature, and all those of the world. Paris
since 1750 had been the centre of the European mind. It had by half a
century's crusade against Christ, drawn the nations from those old
certainties to which they owed their existence. An unheard of
revolution had been the chastisement of this fault, a chastisement so
much the more remarkable, as France had invoked just principles,
conformed to its ancient traditions, and as it was the defect of a
superior light to restrain herself, that she had traversed everything
with a devastating impetuosity. She had remained faithful only to her
sword, and still after twenty-five years of victory, worthy of her
happiest days, she had just succumbed by excess in the battlefield,
and twice the foreigner had soiled with his presence that superb city,
the mistress, by the ascendency of her intelligence, of the modern
world. It was there on the day after its reverses, that Providence
conducted Madame de Swetchine. The question was to know if France,
aware of the need she had of God to reconstruct her, would hear the
voice of her misfortunes; if recalled to her ancient kings, and
reconciled in her old temples, she would, consent to be again
Christian in order to give her liberty the sanction of the faith which
had always guided and always served her.

Few minds in either camp discerned this relation of Christianity with
the institutions of a liberally governed people. The example of
England, where the church had always supported the commons, said but
little to the publicists who were the most charmed with her
Parliament. Madame de Swetchine herself had had in the author of
Considerations sur la France, a master who saw plainly the vices of
the French revolution, but who without betraying civil and political
liberty, did not well comprehend, perhaps, either all its necessity or
all its future. Happily she had lived under absolute power; she had
had under her eyes for nearly forty years a Christian Church in a
servile land, and this lesson could not be lost on a mind as true as
hers. The evils of liberty are great among a people who do not know
how to measure it, who at every moment refuse it by jealousy, or go
beyond it through inexperience. But these evils, great as they may be,
belong to the apprenticeship of liberty and not to its essence; they
still leave it daylight, space, and life, a resource for the feeble, a
hope for the vanquished, and above all the sacred emulation of good
against evil. Under despotism good and evil sleep on the same pillow;
souls are invaded by a dull degeneracy because they have no longer a
struggle to sustain, and Christianity itself, a protected victim,
expiates in unspeakable humiliations the benefits of its peace. Madame
de Swetchine saw this. Her great heart was full of this when she
entered Paris, and amid the roar of tempests she knelt, for the first
time in her life, at altars combated, but esteemed. It is necessary to
have suffered for liberty of faith to know its price. It is necessary
to have passed under the gibbets of schism, to be able fully to know
what it is to breathe the atmosphere of truth. How often have I seen
Madame de Swetchine's eyes fill with tears at the thought that she was
in a Catholic country! How often has she been inwardly moved at seeing
a good priest, a good religious, a good brother of the Christian
Schools, in a word, our Lord's image on a sincere brow or in a
virtuous life! Ah! this it is which here we never lose. We {743} can
dishonor I know not how many human and even divine things; but in the
shipwreck Christ remains visible to us in many who worthily love and
serve him.

The life of Madame de Swetchine during the forty years she passed in
our midst was one continual thanksgiving. More than once under a reign
of persecution, like that of the Emperor Nicholas, she had fears for
the security of her sojourn in France. Once, notwithstanding her great
age, she believed it necessary not to leave it to the zeal even of her
most tried friends, and rushed to St. Petersburg to implore the
forgetfulness of the Czar. God still saved her. She had acquired such
a prestige, that it might be said that she represented at Paris the
honor and intelligence of Russia, and this, it is probable, was what,
in the most difficult times, saved her from being recalled.

This dependence which she still had on her country, because her
estates there might be held to answer for her personal conduct,
imposed on her an extreme prudence in a saloon which was frequented by
her compatriots and by men of all ranks and all opinions. But this
reserve, which she had acquired as a habit in her own country,
detracted nothing from the grace and sincerity of her discourse;
whether she was silent or whether she expressed her thoughts,
according to the degree of confidence inspired by those present, she
never betrayed it; and in her silence even, she seized things on the
side which remained accessible, and gave them clearness enough, to
instruct without displeasing. An exquisite naturalness covered her
speech, though tact and unexpectedness were its most usual
characteristics. When she met Madame de Staël for the first time, each
knew the other without being told; and happening to be placed at
opposite corners of a large hall, they observed each other with
curiosity. Madame de Staël, accustomed to homage, waited for Madame de
Swetchine to come to her. Seeing she did not, she all at once crossed
the long space which separated them, stopped before her, and said in a
lively and caressing tone: "Do you know, Madame, that I am much hurt
by your coldness toward me?" "Madame," was the reply, "it is for the
king to salute first." This remark can give some idea of the ingenuous
and submissive style of Madame de Swetchine's conversation. Different
from Madame de Staël, who disserted rather than conversed, Madame de
Swetchine raised her voice but slightly, and had no accent of
domination; she waited her time without impatience, without caring for
success, always more happy to please than ambitious to dazzle. An
inexhaustible interest in those whom she had once loved, gave to her
intimacy a sweet and maternal character. Her genius was approached as
a focus of light, no doubt, but with a filial disposition which
endeared its brilliancy, which was the fruit of a goodness as manifest
as was her intellectual superiority. Introduced into the highest
French society by the Duchesse de Duras and the Marquise de Montcalm,
sisters of the Duc de Richelieu, she was not long in making felt
around her that attraction which is produced in society by
acknowledged eminence of character. What she had been when young at
St. Petersburg in her husband's salons, she was in the heart of
France; but what at St. Petersburg was only a conquest of suffrages
and of admiration, became at Paris an apostolate.

When a soul passes to God's side, that is to say, to the side of
Christianity, the only expression here below of the divine life, she
can find nowhere else the principles and motives of her actions. All
in her proceeds from the sacred height and returns to it, Madame de
Swetchine lived in the world, but was not of it; she was held to it
only by its good--only to make her protest for God, and to serve him;
an admirable office in which the world assumes all its grandeur; in
which fallen under the strokes of a mind that {744} knows what it is
worth, it arises and occupies with him every instant of thought and
every vibration of the heart. He who is disabused by the simple
experience of life, despises the world, while he who is disabused by
light from on High esteems it. Being then no longer in the world for
the world, Madame de Swetchine was more than ever there for God; she
followed his course with all-powerful interest, attentive to seize
whatever might remove or approach her to the principle of all life. M.
de Maistre was no more. A different school from his was forming;
Madame de Swetchine saw unfold its first germs, and she surrounded
with her counsels and her affection the young representatives of an
idea which her recollections, perhaps, would have repulsed, but which
the freedom of her mind rendered her capable of judging, for this was
the character as the temper of her genius. In a time of intellectual
dependence, in which parties bore away everything in their train,
Madame de Swetchine made no engagement, and submitted to no
attraction; she isolated every question from the noise around her, and
placed it in the silence of eternity. Thus was one sure after having
heard all that was said, to encounter on crossing her threshold
something which had not been heard, an original view of the truth; and
even when she was mistaken, a proof that her thought did not belong to
herself alone, because she sought it in God.

It was after the failure of L' Avenir that I first saw her. I
approached the borders of her soul as a seaweed broken by the waves,
and I remember yet, after twenty-five years, how she placed her light
and strength at the service of a young man unknown to her. Her
counsels sustained me both against despondeney and exaltation. One day
when she thought she noticed in my words a doubt or lassitude, she
said to me with a singular accent, the simple words: "Take care." She
was wonderful in discovering the point to which one inclined, and
where it was necessary to bear assistance. The measure of her thought
was so perfect, the freedom of her judgment so remarkable, that I was
long in comprehending to whom and to what she was devoted. Where in
others I should have known in advance what was to be said, here I was
almost always ignorant, and nowhere did I feel myself more out of the
world. This charm from above was not diffused over me alone. Other
minds, my predecessors or my contemporaries, felt its action, and it
is impossible to say for how many souls this single soul was a lamp.
Not only the day, at fixed hours, not only the evening until midnight,
but at almost every moment, confidence sought her with an importunity
which was never complained of. Thus was formed around a foreigner I
know not what country, which was of all times and of all lands, for it
was the truth which was its ground, its atmosphere, its light, and its
motion.

Nature, it is evident, could not suffice of itself to feed this
inexhaustible conversation. It was nourished by an assiduous reading
of all that was remarkable which appeared in Europe. No book, as no
man, escaped her ardent curiosity. After the example of the Count de
Maistre, who inspired the taste, Madame de Swetchine pencil-marked
every page which struck her, and in her first leisure hour between two
conversations she engraved on a light leaf of brass the thought which
had illumined hers. She added her own reflections with the rapidity of
a first glance, and this triple commerce with books, men, and herself,
which was never interrupted, gave to her intelligence a spring which
was never exhausted. What, however, in the midst of the contradictions
of her century were the principles which guided her, and of which she
shed around her the unfailing clearness? In recalling my recollections
of her, I should say they were Our Lord the life of heaven and earth;
the Catholic Church, the only society of the mind, because it alone
possesses the foundation of faith and the {745} inspiration of
charity; Rome, the centre of the world, because she is the centre of
the church; the human family progressive on a basis that does not
change; civil and political liberty, the daughter of Christianity;
commerce, industry, science, all grand things, but under things
grander still, honor and justice; all man's toil powerless to diminish
poverty without virtue; France, a people loved by God--its revolution
a vengeance and a mercy, a germ under ruins; philosophy, as old as
man, the vestibule of Christianity when not as yet enlightened by
faith, and its crown when faith has transformed it; reason, the inborn
light whence philosophy proceeds, and which Christianity perfects; the
future, an uncertain abyss, but in which God is ever found; error, a
crime sometimes, a weakness oftener; tolerance, an homage to the
truth, a proof of faith; force, which is next to impotency; authority,
an ascendency which has its source in antiquity and in right;
property, the union of man with the earth by labor, the first liberty
of the world, without which no other subsists; liberty the guaranty of
right against whatever is not right. These, if my memory is faithful,
are the sound which at every hour and under every touch was given
forth by that harmonious lyre which we now hear no more. A constant
simplicity in an equal elevation, a goodness which came from Christ,
gave to her doctrines, apart from their merit as truth, a personal
influence. In hearing her this double charm might be resisted, but she
could not be hated or despised; she could not but be loved, and
inspire the desire to become better. Happy mouth, which for forty
years made not an enemy to God, but which poured into a multitude of
wounded or languishing hearts the germ of the resurrection and the
rapture of life.

Yet, perhaps I deceive those who read me. They may persuade themselves
that the friend of the Count de Maistre and of so many eminent
Christians won their friendship only by the merit of a superior
intelligence. That would be much, but in Madame de Swetchine it was
not all. Intellect, when it comes from God, is inseparable from
charity. Madame de Swetchine loved the poor. Like Frederic Ozanam,
another blessing of Providence that we have lost, she knew how to
forget science in presence of misfortune, and her lips, accustomed to
things profound, had only divine things in the face of suffering and
death. In entering her dwelling this might not be believed. Pictures
by the great masters, dazzling candelabras, precious vases, books
enclosed under crystals richly encased, flowers and drapery, all
suggested the idea of costly magnificence hardly compatible with the
secret love of the unfortunate. But, as I have said, Madame de
Swetchine had in all things, even in duty, a point of view which was
her own. Persuaded that she owed it to her family and to her country,
to represent them worthily in the capital of a great people, she had
the art of being simple in the midst of a splendor which she
considered necessary, and to find economy in unseen privations. Long
before her death, for example, she had no carriage. She walked with
scrupulous exactness to the offices of St. Thomas of Aquina, her
parish church, although she had a private chapel, and though her age
as well as her infirmities would permit her to remain at home or go
out only in a carriage.

One day her secret escaped her, Troubled, I imagine by something she
had read, or some discourse which I had made her, she asked me with a
kind of anxiety if I believed that in giving a sixth part of her
income to the poor, she accomplished the precept of almsgiving.
Another time, when some early vegetables were served at her table, at
which I appeared surprised: "What would you?" she said to me; "there
are people who raise these for us; would it not be ungrateful for
those who can, not to recompense them for their labor?" This remark
opened to me a new order of ideas. I understood that riches should not
be {746} used simply to support those who cannot gain their own living
whether from want of strength or want of work, but that they should
also, according to their amount, be used to protect all the honest
developments of human toil. It is thus that in the beautiful days of
Venice, Genoa, Florence, and of Pisa, so many Christian merchants
raised immortal monuments to their country, and that at Rome so many
cardinals have built palaces. Magnificence is a virtue, says St.
Thomas Aquinas, when it is regulated by reason, and very different
from luxury, which is vanity and ruin.

At Madame de Swetchine's house was seen a mute, whom she had adopted
as if in return for the gift of speech, which she had received in so
eminent a degree. It was her custom to associate the care of the poor
with the happy events of her life. Each of them recalled a happiness
which he represented. She visited them on fixed days; she herself
carried them assistance, and above fill the light of her presence.
This intercourse kept alive in her the memory of the man, so quick to
be effaced from those who have not the memory of God. She continued it
even to the last days of her life; and when already the breath was
uncertain and trembling on her lips, she asked for accounts of her
poor. I saw, when we were seated around the sad couch of this
beautiful light, her dear mute watching from an adjoining chamber, a
vigilant sentinel of a life which had given her so much of itself, and
which was fading away between friendship remaining faithful, and
poverty remaining grateful.

Shall I speak, after the poor, of that beloved chapel, where the
former unbeliever of St. Petersburg opened her heart before the God of
her maturity? It was there, above all, that she lived, and there that
she had gathered into a narrow space all that taste and riches could
do to express and satisfy her love. Charming and pious sanctuary! you
could not contain many souls, but there was one which sufficed to fill
you, and which you filled also. Now you are no more. Death has
despoiled the seats where so many friends came to pray; where prayer
was so sweet, and peace so profound. We shall see you no more, nor
your images, nor your precious stones, nor the tabernacle where at the
side of the Lord reposed the virtue all entire of our friend. You had
her last thought; it was of you she murmured at the moment eternity
seized and carried her before God. Can I, then, better end than with
you? For whom should I still ask a remembrance, a tear, an admiration?

For several years Madame de Swetchine had had preludes of her end. The
consequences of a fall had left on her face a serious hurt which at
intervals and without warning, rendered speaking very painful. This
pain did not arrest the rapture of her communications. She remained
what she had ever been, the mistress of herself, and occupied with
all, winning hearts as in the days of her youth, when the Count de
Maistre sent her his portrait with these words, written by his own
hand:

  "Docile à l'appel plein de grâce
    De l'amitié qui vous attend,
  Volez, image, et prenez place
    Où l'original se plait tant."

Happier than this great man who saw only the first dawning of Sophie
de Soymonoff, we have enjoyed her perfect day; he formed her for us,
and happier herself than her master, she could, by the clearness of a
tempered reason, bring to her age a judgment in which hope surpassed
fear, and which best indicated the true route to minds desirous of
knowing and serving it. But at last we had to lose her. Every star
below fades, every treasure vanishes, every soul is recalled. God did
not spare his servant the agonies of death, but he left her to
surmount them the influence which she had acquired over all things by
seventy-five years of combat. Seated in her parlor to the last hour,
she continued to receive those whom she loved, to speak {747} to them
of themselves, and of the future, to foresee all, and to animate all.
Her reclining figure raised itself to smile, she kept the accent and
the thread of her thought, and her eyes with their serenity still
brightened the touching scene in which we disputed for her with God. A
last shock took her from us on the 10th September, 1857, at six
o'clock in the morning, having a few days before received the viaticum
and the unction of eternal life.

Alas! dear and illustrious lady. I cannot attach to your name the
glory of those Roman women whom St. Jerome has immortalized, and yet
you were of their race: you were of the race of those women who
followed Christ through all the stations of his pilgrimage, who
watched him as he died, who embalmed him in his tomb, and who were the
first to salute him on the morning of his resurrection. You believed
all and saw all. Born in schism, brought up in unbelief, God sent you
to open your eyes, one of the rarest minds of this century; his hand
touched your eyelids, and the sight which your country refused you,
came to you from foreign skies. A Christian, you aspired to the
liberty of Christ; conquered for, God through the language of France,
you wished to live under the French speech, and quitting a country you
always loved, you came among us with the modesty of a disciple and of
an exile. But you brought us more than we gave you. The light of your
soul illumined the land which received you, and for forty years you
were for us the sweetest echo of the gospel, and the surest road to
honor. No failure annoyed you, no success ensnared you; you were ever
the same, because truth and justice do not change. Ah! doubtless your
mission was to do us good in our pale West, but you had another
mission, I believe; you were near us as an advance guard of the
conversion of the East. Daughter of Greece! God wished to show us in
your person, as he already had in several of your compatriots, what
will, one day, be that old church of our first fathers in the faith,
when, brought back from a fatal separation, she shall receive from the
might of St. Peter that emission of unity which she formerly sent us
from Jerusalem and Antioch, and of which we guard for her with
fidelity the precious deposit. Yes, we trust the love which you
preserved for your country; trust the presentiments of your
Evangelist, the great Count de Maistre; trust in the long hopes of the
Latin Church, and its constant respect for Christian Greece. Yes,
sooner or later, the East will bend before the West, as a brother
before a brother. St. Sophia will hear resound again in the two
languages the symbol which has not ceased to unite us. Liberty of
conscience, acquired by the human race, will no longer permit error to
guard itself by persecution. Veils will fall; the obscure victims of
political fear shake off their chains; all minds from one end of
Europe to the other will follow the inclination of nature and grace;
and if there remain, as there must, unbelievers and Protestants, at
least there will remain no longer a nation crucified for error. In
those days, dear and noble friend whom we have lost, and live here to
weep--in those days, you will raise a little your cold stone at
Montmartre, you will breathe an instant the air in which you lived,
and recognizing at once the balm of your first and of your second
country, you will bless God who called you before others, and to whom
you responded with that faith without stain which enlightened us
ourselves, and by that unconquerable hope which sustained us against
all the failures of a century so fruitful in lapses and abortions.

--------

{748}

ORIGINAL.

THE CRY.

  I sail on an ocean at midnight.
    With darkness above and below;
  And never a star in the heaven
    To pilot me where I would go.

  Fierce tempests that roar in the midnight,
    The tempests both cruel and strong,
  Are driving me hither and thither;
    What wonder if I should go wrong?

  Many thousands of others are sailing,
    Like me, o'er this tempest-vexed sea,
  All bound for the very same haven,
    All bound to the same land with me.

  But some to the leftward are sailing.
    Whilst others they steer to the right;
  I oft hear the voice of the captains
    Who hail me aloud through the night.

  Each one, though so diversely sailing,
    Calls out to me, "You are astray!
  For this is the course you should steer by
    To enter the kingdom of day.

  "See, yonder the light shineth clearly,
    Right full on the way that we go."
  But which is the right and the true way,
    Oh! tell me, for how can I know.

  I look where they're pointing before them,
    But never a star do I see;
  Where they tell me the beacon is shining
    Is nothing but darkness to me.

  My soul is athirst with its longing
    To rest on the beautiful shore.
  Where is felt not the surge of the billows.
    Where the tempest is heard nevermore:

{749}

  Where the gardens of amaranth blossom,
    And meadows of green asphodel
  Fill the air with a fragrance immortal;
    Where the satisfied voyagers dwell

  Who have passed o'er this ocean before me,
    And rest with the holy of old,
  In the city whose walls are of jasper.
    And roofs of the finest of gold.

  O Lord of the wonderful city!
    O King of the kingdom of day!
  Let the light of thy truth shine out clearly
    To pilot me safe on my way!


THE ANSWER.

  I hear thee, my child, in the darkness;
    I know where thou wishest to be:
  But why in a pilotless vessel
    Didst venture alone on this sea?

  Thy way is in doubt and in darkness.
    Because thou dost voyage alone,
  Rejecting the old Ship of safety.
    To choose a frail bark of thine own.

  That vessel is sailing beside thee.
    Its course the great Pilot controls.
  The tempest will ne'er overcome it--
    It never will wreck on the shoals.

  Who sail in this old Ship of safety,
    Know nothing of doubt or of strife.
  How can they with him who commands it--
    The Way, and the Truth, and the Life?

  And all through the mist and the darkness
    Faith shows a mysterious way,
  O'er which sails the good ship of Peter
    Straight on to the kingdom of day!

A.Y.

--------

{750}


ORIGINAL.

THE GODFREY FAMILY; OR, QUESTIONS OF THE DAY.

