CHAPTER XXIV.

DEATH OF MRS. GODFREY.

A missive soon brought M. Bertolot to the trio. He came as secretly as
possible, and departed in the same way; not so secretly, however, as
to prevent his visit being shortly made known to Alfred Brookbank,
who, with the view of making a final breach between Sir Philip and his
wife, had set spies to watch the movements of the party. He discovered
from the jealousy of the neighbors the intimacy at the Irish cottage,
and surmised the attraction which produced these visits, but could
make no use of this surmise until his agent recognized in M. Bertolot
the French priest who had accompanied the countess to England. The
secrecy of the visit told its purport. Alfred now informed Sir Philip,
as if he had just made the discovery, that Annie had been in Eugene's
company all the time she had been away; that Catholics were their only
society, and that a priest visited them in secret, adding that there
could be no rational doubt that Lady Conway and her mother were both
Catholics.

Sir Philip's indignation was excessive. Without taking time to
consider the matter at all, he ordered his carriage and drove
post-haste to Estcourt Hall, to which place the family were now
summoned in consequence of the increasing weakness of Mrs. Godfrey.

Mrs. Godfrey had been brought there by short stages, and had arrived
the night before. Mr. Godfrey and Hester were there to meet her, and
to Hester's great joy she was once more pressed lovingly to her
mother's heart, who was more than happy to see her children united
again in affection. Adelaide was hourly expected; and when Sir Philip
made his appearance he was supposed to come in obedience to a similar
summons. Mr. Godfrey received him; but Sir Philip's agitation was such
that he made no answer to the customary greeting. He looked round the
room, and seeing they were alone, he said in a choking voice:

"Is Lady Conway here?"

"She is; she arrived last night."

"And her brother Eugene?"

"Is here also."

"And have they been together all this time? O Mr. Godfrey, how you
have deceived me!"

Mr. Godfrey was puzzled. He was constitutionally timid, and certainly
was just now in no mood for quarrelling; so he said quietly: "Why, has
any harm come of it?"

"Harm! What can be greater harm than that Annie and her mother should
both of them be papists?"

"Is it that which frightens you? Be composed, my dear friend; put such
thoughts from your mind; Annie has too much sense for that. And my
poor wife, she has been a little weak in the head lately, it is true,
but she is not given that way in the least degree; besides, I greatly
fear she cannot live long; her strength is less than I could have
imagined. Come, and see her."

But Sir Philip was absorbed in one idea. "I tell you," said he, "that
the mischief is already done; that your wife and mine have both been
on their knees to a priest, and that the secrets of both families are
already on the way to Rome."

"Impossible!" said Mr. Godfrey.

{751}

"Try," said Sir Philip; "ask the question; if they dare deny it, I
will produce the proofs."

Mr. Godfrey laid his hand on the bell-rope. A servant appeared.
"Request Mr. Eugene to come to me immediately." The man bowed and
disappeared. Eugene soon entered. The door was carefully closed. Sir
Philip could scarcely keep himself from springing on him; but Mr.
Godfrey stood between them, and said in a hollow voice: "Eugene,
answer without circumlocution or disguise, say yes or no, are your
mother and sister Annie Catholics?"

"They are."

Mr. Godfrey pointed to the door; he could not speak. Eugene left the
room. The two strong men trembled with impotent rage.

"A curse has fallen upon the house," muttered Mr. Godfrey at length,
as he paced the room. "Who could have dreamed of this?"

"Mr. Godfrey," said Sir Philip, in tones of thunder, "you will tell
your daughter that she never again will enter my doors. Prepare what
settlements you please, send them to my lawyer; anything in reason I
will consent to, but see her again I will not."

He quitted the house, nor did he ever see his injured wife again.

Scarcely had Sir Philip's carriage driven away when another drove up,
containing Adelaide, the young Dowager Duchess of Durimont. She
entered the house in a scarcely less agitated state than Sir Philip
had left it in; but her excitement proceeded altogether from a
different cause. Among Adelaide's numerous faults, want of affection
for her mother certainly did not form one. On the contrary, she was
accustomed not only to love but to reverence her mother as a very
superior woman. Through the sunshine of youth, while enjoying the
warmth of a mother's fondness and protection, Adelaide's affections
had strengthened without that sentimentality of expression which Mrs.
Godfrey would have taught her to repress had she seen it manifested,
but they were none the less deep or tender for having hitherto found
no occasion, of great display. On the first intimation she had
received of her mother's illness, Adelaide had hastened at once to
Estcourt Hall, and was with difficulty persuaded by Mr. Godfrey to
retire. He feared that Adelaide's presence would but increase the
excitement under which Mrs. Godfrey labored, and as the doctor's
opinion was to that effect also, Adelaide was compelled, however
reluctantly, to yield. They gave her no clew whatever as to the cause
of her mother's malady, and though she had a general idea of some
unworthy transaction in which Eugene was wronged and Hester enriched,
she did not enter into particulars, nor mentally connect the facts
with her mother's illness. The only effect it had upon her was to
estrange her from Hester, and in a slighter degree from her father
also.

When she heard that Eugene and Annie were summoned to her mother's
side, again she endeavored to share their cares; but Mr. Godfrey was
fearful of suffering too great intercourse between Adelaide and
Eugene, and used his utmost endeavors to dissuade her. He insisted
that the physicians absolutely ordered that none should approach her
save those she asked for. The father dreaded the judgment of the
daughter when she should know the cause of her mother's trouble. He
was accustomed to be looked up to by his children, and shrank from
incurring the disapproval of this one in particular; for Adelaide had
ever been considered the most talented and the most intellectual of
the family. He had a sort of consciousness that to the mother's
influence in veiling his foibles from his children's eyes, he owed
much of that reverence with which they habitually approached him; and
he could but feel that he had made but a poor return for a life of
devotedness, when he refused to yield to the first {752} important
demand she had ever made him, and that in favor of his own son.

But now Eugene had written to Adelaide to say her mother was calm, and
would welcome her. Adelaide entered her father's house pale and
trembling, an attendant supporting her.

"Is she still alive?" she whispered, as she saw her father; then, as
if fearful he would still oppose her seeing Mrs. Godfrey's, she
refused by a gesture to enter the sitting-room, but made her way at
once up the broad staircase to the room her mother had ever been wont
to occupy. She opened the door, and flinging herself on her knees by
the side of the bed, took the pale hand, and, as she kissed it, said,
with streaming eyes: "Ah! dear mother, why was I not permitted to come
to you before?"

"And who forbade you, my love?"

"My father said the doctors--"

Mrs. Godfrey looked at her husband, who had followed Adelaide into the
room; there was surprise and sorrow, but no anger on her countenance.
She pressed Adelaide's hand and whispered, "Perhaps he was right, I
was unconscious and delirious a long while, my poor child; but now you
will stay with me the little time that I remain on earth."

"You feel better to-day, my dear mother," said Annie, hopefully.

"I do, but it cannot last; we must not deceive ourselves. I am glad to
see my dear Adelaide, but I cannot talk to her yet."

The effort of saying even so much exhausted her; she lay back, and
they watched long hours in silence by her pillow.

Day after day passed away, the loving children surrounding her, and
Mr. Godfrey sharing their watch. All traces of excitement had gone, in
the solemnity of that watch. Mrs. Godfrey seemed so thoroughly in
peace, that that peace seemed to pass into the circle of hearts
surrounding her. She became, however, perceptibly weaker everyday. Ten
days after Adelaide's arrival she whispered to her one morning: "Tell
your father I wish to speak to him."

Adelaide summoned her father. Whatever were the words spoken, they
appeared to distress him very much. He gazed at his wife as though in
a stupor. She held his hand and faintly whispered, "My last wishes,
can you refuse them?" "No," said he, half choked, "he shall be sent
for;" and he left her to seek Eugene. That evening a stranger was
ushered by Eugene, as it were by stealth, into his mother's room.
Annie alone was present. The last sacraments of the church were
administered, and the stranger priest passed down the back staircase
so secretly that none knew of or suspected his visit save those
present and Mr. Godfrey, who had insisted on such secrecy being
observed.

Adelaide had at length gathered all the facts concerning her brother
being disinherited, and the effect the transaction had produced on
Mrs. Godfrey's mind. A great feeling of repulsion for Hester was the
consequence, and her manner soon betrayed symptoms of the feelings
that swayed her.

"I can never again call her sister," she whispered, half-aloud, one
day, in her meditation, by her mother's side; Mrs. Godfrey's eyes
opened. "My children, love one another," she said. "Love, for he loved
even sinners; forgive, for he forgave those who crucified him." She
sank to sleep after pronouncing these words, and when the watchers
bent over her to see what prolonged that sleep to so unusual a time,
they found that the sweet purified spirit had already winged its way
to the mansions of the blessed.

Of all the mourners there, perhaps the grief of Adelaide was the most
violent. The feelings of Annie and Eugene were tempered by the hope
that their mother was now happier than she had ever been before.
Hester's were modified by the deep meditation in which she was plunged
by the fact that her mother had received full insight into that faith
of which she had caught but a glimpse, and of which {753} she so
earnestly desired to know more. But she dared not question Eugene or
Annie, for fear of angering her father and her mother! "O mother, pray
for me!" was in her heart, and checked the outward demonstration of'
her grief.

They were standing round the coffin, those four children, whom she had
brought so faithfully through the cares and dangers of childhood! No
pride of station had withdrawn her from fulfilling her nursery duties;
no sloth, no command of riches had caused her to delegate to hireling
hands the cultivation of their infant minds; riches to them had been
as an accessory, not, as too often happens, causing a withdrawal of
maternal offices. How had they requited her? Oh! happy they who can
stand by the bier of those to whom they are bound by duty or by love,
and feel no remorse for duty oft neglected.

Adelaide was standing on one side at the head of the coffin, rapt in
grief, Eugene and Annie were on the other side. Hester at the foot
absorbed in intense thought, but tearless and as it seemed to Adelaide
not paying homage in her thoughts to that dear mother. "Was she even
then dwelling on her own wild schemes?" The thought maddened Adelaide,
and forgetting the self-control for which she was usually so
remarkable, she in the overmastering impulse of the moment seized
Hester's arm, led her to the head of the coffin, and, pointing to the
sweet pale face before them, said in a frenzied tone, regardless of
the presence of Mr. Godfrey, who just then entered the room: "And did
you dare to wring the heart of that most noble woman? Was it for you,
whom she loved so dearly, to crush her loving spirit, and then stand
by so calmly contemplating her remains? How my heart loathes you!"

"Hush! hush! dear sister," said Eugene tenderly, as he disengaged her
clasp from Hester, who fell nearly fainting into her father's arms.
"Hush! Adelaide, hush! she bade us love each other; you have
misconceived this matter. Come with me, I will explain it"--and he
took her to another apartment, and tried to make her understand
Hester's intentions of ultimately settling all according to equity,
while Mr. Godfrey and Annie did their best, to restore Hester to her
usual equanimity.

Mr. Godfrey was so much moved by this affront put upon his darling
that he forgot his intention of keeping Mrs. Godfrey's change of
religion secret, and in the evening he called Adelaide to his private
study, and there explained that the delusions under which her dear
mother had labored had no particular reference to Hester, but were
caused by religion. "In fact,'" said; Mr. Godfrey, "what she wanted
the day you came to summon me to her, was a Catholic priest. Of course
I refused her nothing; the priest came that night, but secretly, out
of respect to the reputation of the family."

"Was my mother a Catholic?"

"She became one latterly."

"And was it for her religion that you persecuted her?"

"Persecuted her! Why, Adelaide, how dare you apply such words to your
father? Your mother was never persecuted; even when out of her mind
she had everything she asked for, and as I tell you, a Catholic priest
attended her the other evening. Persecuted, indeed!"

Adelaide cared not to pursue a theme which brought her out as her
father's accuser, though the impression still remained on her mind
that injustice had occasioned the illness and subsequent death of her
mother, and this prevented her from recalling the offending words.

The father and daughter parted somewhat coldly that evening, nor were
matters much mended by the family consultation held shortly afterward
as to what was to become of Annie. Sir Philip's message was now first
delivered to her, as Alfred Brookbank had arrived as his agent, with
offers of settlement for Mr. Godfrey's approbation.

{754}

"And is Annie not to see her own children again?" asked the duchess,
as she gazed on the speechless, the agonized face of her sister.

"So says Sir Philip."

"But have you reasoned with him on the subject? Have you protested
against such a monstrous piece of tyranny?"

"It were useless, may it please your grace," interposed the soft low
tones of Alfred Brookbank, who was secretly gloating in the agony of
his victim. "It were perfectly useless. Sir Philip's hatred of
papistry--"

"Please to speak with more respect of the Holy Catholic Church, Mr.
Brookbank," interrupted the duchess.

"I beg pardon; I knew not that your grace--"

"It matters not what you knew," haughtily rejoined the duchess. "It
behoves every man of common sense, or of common education, to speak
respectfully of a faith which for so many centuries has formed the
religion not only of the commonalty but of the heroes of the race. The
names of Alfred the Great and Charlemagne, of Copernicus and Michael
Angelo, with countless others, may weigh a little perhaps against the
opinion of so enlightened an individual as Sir Philip Conway."

The withering sarcasm of tone with which this was uttered made Mr.
Godfrey bite his lips. He felt at once that he had not lowered her
mother in Adelaide's estimation by informing her of that mother's
becoming a Catholic; and he began to wonder which would be the next
seceder from rationalistic principle. "A curse is fallen upon our
house," he again muttered between his teeth.

The conference was necessarily a painful one; but it was with
indescribable surprise and emotion that the assembled family heard Mr.
Godfrey propose that Annie should take refuge in the convent in which
dwelt her friend Euphrasie.

"Why, papa;" whispered Hester, "have you changed your opinion of
convents? You used to call them sinks of iniquity. Why do you wish to
imprison Annie in one?"

"Hush, my dear," answered her father, in the lowest possible whisper,
"all convents are not alike. I happen to know the antecedents of the
superioress and of several of the nuns in this one; they are all
ladies of high birth, and are altogether above suspicion. They are
austere fanatics, that is all. Annie will take no vows, and there she
will see the extent of the folly to which religious enthusiasm lays us
open. If a twelvemonth's residence among the poor Clares does not set
her brain in order, then she is irrecoverably lost to us--we may set
her down as incurably insane."

While this little dialogue was going on, Eugene and Adelaide, jointly
and severally, were urging Annie to make a home with one or other of
themselves, each promising to do the utmost to regain for her the
custody of her children; but Annie, while she mournfully thanked them
for their kindness, decided that, at least till she had taken time for
reflection, she would abide by her father's advice, that is, provided
the sisterhood would consent to receive her.

After vainly endeavoring to shake her resolution, the duchess resolved
on accompanying her to the north to see whether suitable arrangements
could be made for her comfort.



