CHAPTER XIV.

EXEUNT OMNES.

This story which I have then telling, acted now long years ago, was
wearing to an end. The unfortunate housekeeper's confession cleared up
almost entirely what had mystified and baffled our inquiries for so
many months; and, standing beside his mothers bier--the mother who
had loved him all too well for her peace--Lister Wilmot, in the depth
of his humiliation and the grief which the tide of natural affection,
so recently aroused within him, had wakened, added what little was
wanting to throw complete light upon the dark mystery of the past.

On the day before the remains of his unhappy parent were consigned to
the grave, as he took his last farewell of the corpse, he told me his
own story, his temptation and his fall. Alas! for him the sins of his
parents had returned with double vengeance upon his head; the evil in
them had reproduced itself in him. Deluded with the belief that {241}
he was the heir to immense wealth, he had given full swing to his
besetting vice--gambling. The billiard-table, the gaming-house, and
that curse to young man, secret betting clubs and societies, had been
his familiar though unknown resort. There, too, he had met with and
fallen into the meshes of a creature but too familiar to the
frequenters of such places--a man (if such can claim pretence to
manhood) mature in years, even to gray hair; one of those who gain the
substance which supports their infamous lives by sponging upon the
young, by in tangling in their web young men destined to be the pride
and hope of high-born families with stainless lineage; or the scions
of noble houses; or the youth of houses not less noble, though perhaps
more in the sense of present deeds than departed worth; or sadder and
more shameful still, the young man who is the only son of his mother,
and she a widow, her sole stay and support. Into such hands did Wilmot
fall when he met the man Sullivan or De Vos. Through him he became
mixed up in some disgraceful gaming affair; and De Vos used it to get
him more thoroughly into his power, and upon the strength of it to
extort money from him. Then came his real but misplaced attachment to
Ada Leslie, and consequent jealousy of Hugh Atherton. An affection
requited might have been his salvation; unreturned and hopeless, it
became his moral ruin. Deeper and deeper he plunged into vice, faster
and faster he gambled. None save those who haunted the same scenes as
himself knew how far he was involved, how far lost; none even
suspected a tithe of it, save one. But the mother's eye, the mother's
heart could not be deceived. She whom he had been taught to look upon
only as his uncle's housekeeper, who had nursed and tended and petted
him as a child--she saw the care and trouble of his mind; she sought
and won his confidence to a great extent. He told her he was
overwhelmed with debt and difficulty, and she urged him to apply to
Mr. Thorneley for a sufficient sum to free him at least from danger.
That application was to be made on the very evening of the murder. She
hinted to him darkly that she had the means of forcing Thorneley to
give what he required, and that she would risk everything and hesitate
at nothing for his (Wilmot's) sake. The first suspicion which entered
his mind that she had indeed not scrupled even at the worst, was on
the morning after Old Thorneley was found dead. This had strengthened
more and more; but the temptation of his opening prospects, of the
princely fortune which he found he alone was inheriting, dazzled,
blinded him, and stupefied his conscience. A yet greater inducement to
evil lay in the alluring thought that if the murder of Old Thorneley
were saddled upon Hugh Atherton, and his disgrace, his banishment, if
not his death secured, there might be a chance of winning in time Ada
Leslie's affections for himself. To this end he had labored,
ostensibly endeavoring to establish belief in Hugh's innocence, and
acting as his best friend, but in reality undermining Mrs. Leslie's
faith in him by the most subtle diplomacy, and shaking, by the most
specious representations, Hugh's trust in and friendship for me. With
Ada alone he had met entire defeat. Steadfast and unwavering had been
her solemn, unqualified declaration that her affianced husband was
guiltless; steady and unwavering likewise--God bless her for it!--had
been her childlike trust in her old guardian. And this maddened him.

Then came Hugh's acquittal, accompanied by public censure and public
disgrace. Here was a loophole through which a ray of hope gleamed upon
Wilmot's dark soul. Atherton writhed beneath the shame that had fallen
upon him with all the anguish of a keenly sensitive nature; and Wilmot
played his game with this. He lost no opportunity of making Hugh feel
his position; constantly, though skillfully, {242} he brought before
him the shadow that was over him, and would artfully represent to him
the magnanimity of Miss Leslie's conduct in wishing to share his
blighted name and fortune. Hugh's first proposition of emigrating he
had opposed outwardly, working in the dark to bring about its
realization; and when Hugh was actually gone, he felt at last that the
field was clear for him. Wilmot described his rage at finding that I
had outwitted him as ungovernable, his desire for revenge burning and
deadly. Then came the discovery of the will. Of its existence he had
in truth been ignorant; and though suspecting some complicity in the
matter on the part of Mrs Haag, once possessed of Old Thorneley's
money, he had buried his suspicions in his own breast. Three days
after the will was found by Inspector Keene, he received a letter from
the housekeeper. In it she told him of their relationship in brief
words, with no further explanation; she said that the discovery of the
missing document involved her in serious trouble, and that she was
hastening to Liverpool to catch the first vessel for America. Then he
felt for the first time that his heyday was over, that the worst might
shortly come; and he too began hasty preparations for leaving England
secretly. In the midst of these came the telegram from Liverpool, and
the subsequent tragic events.

This was the epitome of what Lister Wilmot (I keep his assumed name)
told me the day before his mother's funeral. I said to him, "You have
not explained one thing. Why, when I went down to the Grange, did you
send De Vos to follow me and drug the coffee?"

"I did not," he said. "I knew absolutely nothing of it." And at such a
moment I felt he was speaking the truth. He continued: "I have not
seen De Vos for months; and I believe he has left the country."

I found afterward that another person was to clear up this remaining
item of the mystery.

Of Wilmot I have little more to tell. In the abyss of his humiliation
and degradation the message of divine mercy reached his soul; in the
depths of his heart, chastened and and purified, he listened and
responded to its whisper. So far as Hugh Atherton was concerned he
went scatheless; and through the generosity of the man whom he had so
deeply injured, he was enabled eventually to emigrate to the same land
whither his unfortunate mother was flying for refuge when she met her
death. But before that he had a duty to perform, a stern, hard duty of
pain; and he set his face to the work resolutely, unshrinkingly.

In the Liverpool prison late Robert Bradley the elder, biding his
trial for the murder of his wife; and from his lips we were to learn
yet more to complete the history of the past. Once, and once only, the
father and son met. In the bitterness of his trouble and his newly
wakened penitence, Lister had turned and clung to the one who had
ministered to his dying mother, and in Father Maurice, after God, he
found his best friend. At his request the old priest went with him to
that single interview with his father.

"I never meant to kill your mother, Robert," the convict said to his
son. "Heaven is my witness, I never had a thought of harm to her when
I went after her in Cross street. I loved her, ay, I loved her, little
as you may think it now. I loved her though she left me, though she
hid my boy away, though she brought him up not know his father; though
she branded me with a crime I never committed, and got me sent to
prison and chains, and a life in comparison with which death will be
sweet; though she spurned me and defied me, I loved her with all the
might of my heart, all the passionateness with which I loved her when
she came to me a fair young bride. Away in that penal settlement,
amongst that hideous gang, beneath that burning sky, I had longed and
thirsted more for one look at her face, for one touch of her hand,
then {243} ever longed for a drop of water to slake my parching thirst
or cool the fever of my lips. They tell me she has revealed the story
of our lives--all is misery and shame. I have heard a few particulars.
In one thing I believe I have wronged her; I thought her guilty of
Mrs. Thornely's death; I thought she wished to usurp her place. I used
the threat of what I suspected to induce her to make out with me; but
she spurned me from her; she told me she would die on the gallows
rather than live with me again; and then the madness seized me; I
struck her--once--twice--and killed her."

Of all that passed in that single meeting between the two Robert
Bradleys little was heard; it was not meet that much should be known.
They met solemnly, in bitterness, in shame, with agony in either
heart, with a world of anguish, of feelings surging over their souls
to which they dared not give utterance. They parted solemnly, but in
peace: the son who had never you known his father until now--and then
in what a terrible manner! the father who had never looked on his
child since the time when he had taken him on his knee and listened to
his infant prattle. Parted, never more to meet on this side the grave.

I saw the convict once or twice before his trial came on, and I found
from him that he had known Sullivan of De Vos all his life. That he
was on his wife's track when she went down to the Grange, and De Vos
was with him. That the latter, seeing I was bound thither likewise,
and having reason to fear me both for his own and Bradley's sake, had
given me the stupefying dose in my coffee at Peterborough Station,
trusting to the results which did really happen. That it was his
appearance which must have alarmed his wife and caused her to
relinquish her visit to the Grange. Further than that he could give me
no information. Strangely enough, the bad companion of the father had
proved the bad companion of the son, though in totally different ways.
There is nothing more to tell of Robert Bradley. He was tried,
condemned, and sentenced to death; but the sentence was commuted to
transportation for life by the exertions of his son. Father Maurice
had the satisfaction of receiving from his lips the assurance before
he left the Liverpool Docks bound for his final journey, that he
accepted his sentence as the only expiation he could make for his long
career of sin.

And what of those who were once so near and dear to me--dear still,
though far away, Hugh Atherton and Ada, now for many years his wife--
what of them! We never met again; humanly speaking, we never more
shall meet upon this earth. There is a writer--to my mind the essayist
_par excellence_ of this age, with power to touch the finest chords
and sound the most hidden depths in the heart of man--who says that he
knows no word of equal pathos to the little word "gone." And it is the
word which expresses the long blank, the great vacuum of all these
latter years since they went away--since they have been among the
"gone." And how is it, you will ask, my readers, that still they
should be far away when all the storms and clouds which had shadowed
their horizon passed away, and the sunshine and fair blue sky once
again greeted them? Well, it was in this wise:

Tidings of all that took place in Liverpool were instantly forwarded
to Hugh Atherton at Melbourne, and we thought we should welcome them
all back to England ere long; but he did not come--he never will come
now. He wrote that the thought of returning to England was
insupportable to both himself and Ada; that they would remain where
they were, and where he had received the greatest happiness of his
life--his true and tender wife. They settled in Australia, some miles
from Melbourne, doing much for the new colony in the way of
usefulness; and Hugh devoted {244} himself to the interests of his
adopted country. His name is well known there, and it is coupled with
everything that is good and great. I hear sometimes from them, most
often from Ada. Her mother died a few years ago, and she has lost two
children. They have three living, two boys and a girl; the youngest
boy is called John after me. She would have it so. No, the old
friendship between me and Hugh has never been rekindled into the same
warmth; we are friends, but not the friends of yore. I do not blame
him; he was blind, blind; and so we drifted away from one another, or
rather he from me. It was just one of those clouds which come between
human hearts because they are human; and then we see through a glass
darkly whilst earth clings so closely about us. By and by all will be
clear. He thought I should have confided his uncle's secret to him or
Merrivale under the circumstances. Perhaps I ought. If I was mistaken,
if I kept my solemn promise to the dead too rigidly, God pardon me; I
did it for the best. But we may make mistakes in our shortsightedness,
in our finite views, in our imperfect comprehension of events over
which we have no control, and in which we have very little hand. If he
outlives me, he will perhaps know this; and the knowledge of it, the
memory of our ancient friendship will bring back the tenderness of his
heart for me; he will feel, I pray not too sadly, that he also was
mistaken when he withdrew the trust and confidence that never before
heaven had for one moment been betrayed.

Some years ago I buried Gilbert Thorneley's idiot son; he lived with
me up to the time of his death, harmless, but irrational to the last.
It was a satisfaction to his guardian that with me he would receive
every kindness and attention; and the poor fellow died in my arms,
repeating in his indistinct and childish manner the words I had taught
him to address to his Father in heaven--he who had never known a
father's love on earth.

I am alone in my old study, and I turn to write the last page of my
story.

The stillness of evening is creeping on afast, and the fire burns low;
before it lies old Dandie--he is blind now and stiff with age. Neither
he nor I can ramble out far into the country lanes, or across
Hempstead Heath, as once we used. Years have come and gone, and the
little golden circlet on my finger has grown thin and worn, but it
will last my days. Shadows of the past are around me, and voices of
the past are busily whispering in my ear. What is this that has fallen
upon my hand? O Ada! is this "worse than foolishness," the tears
should rush to your old guardian's eyes when he thinks of you, and
writes your name for the last time? Nay, that has passed--past with
the bygone years that have rolled on into eternity. A little longer,
and the dark strait that divides us from our beloved shall "narrowed
to the thread-like mere;" a little longer spent in hope and patience,
and then the hand will come. Not now, Hugh--not now, Ada: I shall see
you by and by.


--------

{245}

Original.

DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONALITIES.


Each age through which civilized humanity has passed, has its special
characteristic. If, as most people admit, the nineteenth century has
inaugurated a new era in the history of mankind, the characteristic of
that era will be found in the rapid strides which the various races
are making toward the attainment of a national existence. This
development of nationalities is not, however, peculiar to our time; on
the contrary, through its entire course modern history presents the
same scene--a scene varied indeed and often interrupted, but
preserving its unity to such an extent as to justify us in discerning
therein a law of Providence. The constant yearning of each individual
after happiness is used by philosophers as a proof that he is destined
to one day attain it, and we are not quite sure that the noble
aspirations of the great popular heart do not indicate on the part of
the great Ruler a design to one day furnish it with a realization of
its hopes. The individual attains his end in the future world--the
people in the present. Those who respect but Little the popular
feeling call it mercurial. They are right. Dash some mercury on the
ground, and observe how the particles you have separated float wildly
on the surface as though seeking to be reunited. Do you see how
naturally they coalesce when brought in contact? There is an affinity
most perfect between these particles, and so there is between peoples
of the same race. Both were originally separated by violence, and the
process of reunion is in both quite natural. Modern history presents
no picture more vivid than that of the disintegrated peoples of the
earth slowly but uniformly tending toward a reunion of their separated
portions. Just now the figures seem more distinct--they stand out in
such bold relief that prejudice herself perceives them. A gigantic
war, commenced and finished almost with the same cannon's roar, has
knocked out the keystone of a governmental fabric once admired for
symmetry, and rulers see that in their structures they must imitate
those architects who seek for stones that fit well one with another.
People say that Beelzebub once gave a commission to a painter, for the
portrait of his good dame Jezebel, and that when the poor artist
despaired of picturing a countenance fit for the queen of hell, the
fiend turned to a collection of handsome women, and taking a nose from
one, an eye from another, mouth from another and complexion from
another, he manufactured so foul a visage, so dire an expression, as
to cause the votary of art to die outright. Various fishes make a very
good chowder, and various meats, well condimented, produce an
excellent _olla podrida_; but history shows that the various races
into which it has pleased God to divide mankind, cannot be
indiscriminately conglomerated without entailing upon the entire body
chronic revolution, with all its attendant evils. If you can so merge
the individual into the country as the United States have done with
their cosmopolitan population, no difficulty will be experienced; but
if you take various peoples and fit them together as you would a
mosaic, the contact will prove prejudicial to their several interests,
and powers {246} which would have otherwise developed for the good of
the body corporate, will either lie dormant or exercise a detrimental
effect upon the neighboring victims of short-sighted policy. Something
more than interest is felt in noticing the way in which the peoples
now enjoying national existence have attained so desirable an end; we
are enabled to thereby judge, with something like accuracy, of the map
those who will come after us must give of the world. So long as man is
man, just so long will it be in one sense true, that history repeats
herself; but we do not believe in that system of Vico which would make
of her a mere whirligig--introducing now and then something new to
certain portions of mankind in rotation, but nothing new to the world
in general. Such a system might satisfy that conservative of whom some
one has said that had he been present at the creation, he would have
begged the Almighty not to destroy chaos; but our prejudices are
against it, and though in avowing some prejudice we are pleading
guilty to the possession of a bad thing, we think that in this case
history will turn our fault into a virtue. We do not contend that
modern times present a picture of national development according to
the system of races so uniform as to contain no deviation whatever,
but history does show us that such deviations have been more than
counterbalanced by subsequent changes. The general rotundity of the
earth cannot be denied, because of the inequalities of its surface.
The American Republic furnisher us with no conflict of races on
account of the fact already alluded to. The various peoples of Asia
and Africa scarcely afford us a theatre for observation if we take our
stand upon modern history, since for all practical purposes they are
yet living in the days of Antiochus. Europe shows us a field worthy of
research, for there were thrown together the mongrel hordes of Asia
and the North, and with their advent and to the music of their
clashing weapons a new scene unfolded itself to the gaze of man. With
the fall of the Western empire commence all reflections upon modern
history, for then dawned our era by the release from the unnatural
thraldom of the Roman Caesars of the innumerable peoples of the earth.
To notice the manner in which these tribes grouped themselves into
national and integral existence is our present purpose. In the early
summer of 1866, had we been asked to classify the peoples of Europe,
we would have spoken as follows: The nations of Europe worthy of
consideration, and which are now regarded as united or "unified," are
France, England, Spain, Sweden and Norway, and Russia proper. The
nations as yet disintegral are Germany and Italy. The disnationalized
peoples are those of Ireland, Poland, Hungary and her dependencies,
Venice, Roumania, and Servia. Europe may hence be regarded as composed
of, 1st, nations which are _in se_ one and undivided and leading
therefore a national existence; 2d, peoples not under are you foreign
to themselves, but still not one with others of the same stock; 3d,
peoples governed by foreign nations. Of this latter class the most
prominent evil is furnished by the heterogeneous Austrian empire, to
compose which a draft is made on Hungary and the Hungarico-Sclavic
dependencies, on Germany, on Poland, and on Italy. The late war has
changed the situation somewhat, but the classification may remain
unchanged.

The first class of nations became integral by the grouping to gather
of peoples of common origin; and the steadiness with which they
pursued their destiny and the easy manner in which they consummated
it, cause us to believe that the others will yet attain a like end. Up
to the time of Alfred, England was composed of seven kingdoms. The old
Briton stock had been hidden in the mountains of Wales, and the
Anglo-Saxon race, which held undisputed sway over the land, became
one. France, now {247} the most unified of all nations, was for
centuries the meet distracted. In A.D. 613, she was composed of four
kingdoms: Neustria, Austria, Bourgogne, and Aquitaine. After the
conquest of Neustria, Austrasia conquers Aquitaine in 760. The Romans
found a new power in the north, but the people bear ill the yoke. The
French kings give them the aid of their arms, and after various losses
and successes Charles VII., in 1450, unites the regions definitively.
The powerful duchy of Burgundy, which, for five hundred years, impeded
the unity of France, was at length united to the crown in 1470. Spain,
once composed of Leon, Castile, Aragon, and Navarre, was not unified
until 1516. Scandinavia (Sweden and Norway) was, before the tenth
century, composed of twelve states. It was then reduced to two, Sweden
and Gothia, while in the thirteenth century these two were united. In
1397, the "union of Calmar" added Norway, and to-day the probabilities
are not very small for the annexation of the remaining Scandinavian
power, Denmark. Especial attention is merited by Russia proper, by
which term we mean the nation so called exclusive of her foreign
conquests, Finland, Lapland, Poland and her dependencies, Caucasus,
and Georgia. The groundwork or foundation of this people in blood,
language, and customs, is Sclavic. The proper name of the nation is
Muscovy. When, in the middle of the fifteenth century, Ivan lV. shook
off the Tartaro-Mongol yoke, the Muscovites commenced that headlong
career of annexation and amalgamation which in four centuries has
united more than twenty once independent Sclavic peoples, and has
formed what is now denominated the Russian nation. Although not
directly coinciding with him, we must here allude to the prediction of
the first Napoleon that in a century Europe would be either Republican
or Cossack. We half suspect that he leaned toward the first horn of
his dilemma, and we do not think he imagined that his second should
include a physical sway of Russia over Western Europe. If, however,
the lance of the Cossack seemed to him to weigh heavily in the balance
of power, history sufficiently justified him to prevent our regarding
his remark as absurd. When he saw that either by force or persuasion
the Sclavic peoples were being slowly but surely united, he might
naturally regard as probable the incorporation of the remaining
Sclaves of Poland, Bessarabia, Roumania, and Servia. Thirty years
after he so talked, Bessarabia went the way of her sisters, and
Roumania and Servia are year by year nearing St. Petersburg. We do not
think, however, that history will warrant the application of
Napoleon's theory to Poland and her dependencies, although they are
Sclavic. When history shows us the innumerable tribes of Europe, left
free by the fall of the Western empire, little by little grouping
themselves by races and situation, so that in a few centuries are
formed the nations now integral, she informs us that if such groupings
were sometimes violent, they were still conquests _sui generis_. They
were not _national_ but _political_. The great Baron de Jomini, in his
_Precis de l'Art de la Guerre_, insists most strongly upon the
importance of a general understanding whether the war he is about to
undertake be a national or a political war. We think the principle is
just as important for the historian. A national war is one of a people
against another; a political war, of a dynasty against another, either
to revenge an insult or to extend its own domain. The effects of a
national war are terrible, and the prejudices engendered are not
easily eradicated; those of a political war are light, while there are
entailed but few prejudices since the people have had no voice in the
matter. In a political war the people are not conquered--they merely
change masters, and often instead of receiving any injury {248}
experience a great benefit. Thus, when Ivan of Moscow conquers
Novgorod, the Sclaves of Novgorod are not conquered--a dynasty falls
and not a people. Such a conquest leaves behind it no heart-burnings
in the masses, while, on the contrary, if the people united were
hitherto not only disintegrated but also disnationalized, it is a
consummation by all devoutly wished. Poland, however, belongs to
another category, owing to the religious antipathy existing between
her and Russia. So great has this hatred of late years become, that
the war for the incorporation of the unfortunate kingdom is at last
national, not political--a war of peoples and not of kings. Such a war
cannot be terminated by annexation--nothing can end it but an
annihilation of the popular spirit. Let us bear in mind, then, that if
modern history shows us a gradual development of nationalities and of
unity in national government, there are certain principles according
to which changes are wrought. But how is it with the two nations of
Europe as yet disintegral? Have they hitherto tended toward unity? An
impartial and conscientious study of their history convinces us that
they have been uniformly nearing the goal which more fortunate nations
have already reached.

In the eighth century Italy was, the Roman States alone excepted,
entirely in the hands of the barbarian. From A.D. 1050, however, the
two Sicilies commenced to enjoy a half-autonomous existence, there
being but a personal union by means of a common sovereign between them
and the countries whose rulers successively wore the Sicilian crown.
In 1734 the kingdom became independent, and thus in this part of the
peninsula was made the first step to unity, namely, independence of
foreign rule. Parma became independent of the foreigner while under
the sovereignty of the Farnesi in 1545. Tuscany became independent in
828, and with the exception of eighty years, during which the German
emperors usurped the investiture of the duchy, remained so. The small
republics need no allusion. Venice was independent from 697 to 1797.
The Milanais was always more or less subject to the empire. Savoy and
Piedmont were ever independent. Italy was slow in becoming free from
foreign domination, but not so slow in the concentration of her
strength. The innumerable states and principalities of which she was
once composed gradually amalgamated, until in 1859 there were but
seven; two hundred years ago there were twelve really independent of
each other, and many more virtually so. We do not intend to touch upon
the question of Italian unity in its bearings upon the independence of
the Holy See. God will work out the problem long before any
disputation of the point could come to a conclusion. This, however we
feel, that if Providence has guided the peoples of Europe in the way
of national development, it is for the good of man and in aid of true
progress; and if in the case of Italy no compromise can be effected
without injury to Holy Church, the future of Italy will prove that she
has not attained the end of other countries; but history will show
that until now she has tended to it. When studying the facts of
history, one should not allow his feelings to blind his perception of
the scenes that pass before him, for his insincerity would prevent his
being a successful defender of any cause however good.

A few reflections upon German history as bearing upon the theory of
national developments cannot but interest us, both on account of the
late war, and on account of the apparent objection accruing to our
position from the fact of Germany's seeming to be an example of a
great nationality slowly disintegrating herself.

The history of Germany may be divided into three periods: 1st, under
the "Holy Roman Empire" until the rise of Prussia; 2d, under the same
from the rise of Prussia until 1806; {249} 3d, under the Confederation
until the present day. In the first period there were an immense
number of principalities, rivals not only of each other, but but also
of him who held the imperial sceptre. The emperor depended so much
upon his foreign vassals for his influence that he could scarcely be
regarded as a German sovereign governing German states. Suddenly
Prussia arose from nothing, and with majestic strides overran nearly
all the north; then for the first time the Germans beheld a power of
respectable strength, essentially German. When a nation is divided
into many parts, its first step toward unity is the acquisition of a
centre toward which all may tend. We pass by the origin of Prussia
since we are dealing with facts and not principles at present. We know
it is the fashion with a certain school to excite sympathy for Austria
by alluding to Albert of Brandenburg; but as we are of those who
believe that a man's own sins are scarcely less discreditable to him
than those of his ancestors, and have our memory fresh with
recollections of the long unbroken chain of outrages which the House
of Austria, when powerful, heaped upon the Church of God, we ask to be
excused if we allow no false sentimentality to intrude upon us. The
rise of Prussia and the interest manifested in her by the unitarian
party, forced the emperor and the secondary princes to be more German,
less foreign, in their policy. This second period, therefore, had
elements of unity which were wanting in the first. The third period,
however, gave something more. In 1806 Napoleon I. bade Francis II.
abdicate his title of Emperor of the Romans, and assume that of
Emperor of Austria, and then disappeared even the name of that which
for two hundred years had been a shadow. Then came the federal union
of all the German, and only the German provinces--a confederation in
which the interests of Germany might be consulted without prejudice
from foreign connections--a union full of faults, we confess, and in
many respects a sham, but yet an advance toward national unity.

We know of no records by means of which we can ascertain the exact
number of independent states with which Germany was accursed under the
feudal system, but we know that after Prussia had swallowed up many
there were before 1815 nearly a hundred. Before the late war there
were thirty-seven. How many there are now the telegraph has not
informed us, but we imagine the number has become small by degrees and
beautifully less.

Since 1815 the march toward German unity has been more steady and more
uniform than at any other period. The pressure exercised upon Austria
by Prussia, upon the secondary princes by their people, has forced
them to seek German rather than foreign alliances, to study German
more than dynastic or local interests. The Zollverein, the Reform
associations, the hue and cry openly made about unity, the very
entrance of Austria into the Holstein war, and latterly the alliance
between the liberals and a statesman whose principles they have
uniformly opposed, all indicate the popular effervescence, and excite
a suspicion that ere long Germany will be united. All the machinery of
which governments can avail themselves is used by Austria and the
secondary princes to ward off the danger which menaces them.

The friends of the system of which Austria is the last important
standard bearer, give us a bit of news which, if true, would be
interesting, since it would be the first time we could conscientiously
receive it, that the cause of the Kaiser is the cause of the church;
that to his banner are nailed her colors. The jackal follows the lion
to pick up his leavings, but his eating them does not make him a lion.
The fact of the matter is, that the history of the church gives so
painful a picture of her struggles with kings and princes, that it is
to us a matter of complete indifference whether the {250} victory be
won by the impersonation of military autocracy, or by the sickly
anomaly now catching at straws for an extension of life--unless,
however, the victory of the former were to vindicate the principle
that the peoples of the earth have rights to claim, and were to result
in the end in the collapse of its winner, and the leaving thereby of a
powerful nation in the hands of popular government. If this latter
consummation is reached, we shall be ready to do what we can to attach
the children of the church to a particular government, for we believe
that then the church will have in Europe more than ever a fair show,
so to speak, at humanity. The church is for the people, and for them
alone--when she approaches a king, she approaches him as a man--and
she need fear but little from those for whose interest she lives. The
popular heart quickly conceives an affection, and is seldom mistaken
in its impulses.

We have alluded to an opinion held by some that Germany is an example
of a great nationality disintegrated after centuries of integral
existence. If history deals with words and not with facts, if empty
titles and enthusiastic notions are criterions of national condition,
then that opinion is correct; but if the calling the Emperor of China
the Child of the Sun gives him no solar affinity, we must hold the
contrary one. The ancient so-called unity of Germany was not only an
empty word, but the very title Emperor of Germany had no foundation in
law. When the imperial crown was transferred from the French
Carlovingians to the House of Saxony, its mode or conditions of tenure
were not changed by the Holy See. Just as Charlemagne, though Emperor
of the Romans, was not Emperor of France, but as before King of the
Franks, so Conrad of Franconia, Otho of Saxony, and their successors
were emperors of the Romans, and mere feudal superiors of the other
German princes. If, in the lapse of time, the holder of the sceptre of
the "Holy Roman Empire" (which alone was the legal title from which
imperial rights derived) came to be called Emperor of Germany, the
title did not originate in law, but in the common parlance of the
Italians, French, and English, who recognized in the emperor a foreign
Prince, and who--at least the two latter--being naturally repugnant to
the universal monarchy system, constantly insisted upon the emperor's
primacy being as to them purely honorary. So much for the title. As
for the Holy Roman empire itself, nothing to prove the ancient unity
of Germany can be deduced from it. The public law of the middle ages
was based upon the principle, then the foundation of all economy, of
sacerdotal supremacy and princely subjection--a blessed thing for
humanity at that time by-the-by, which thus found some protection from
the tyrants who then ruled the earth. European government became
hierarchical; at the head stood the pope, then came the emperor, then
kings, etc. Now, according to the titles of courtesy in use at the
time, it might be supposed that France and England were subordinate to
the emperor, yet their constant history proves them to have been
independent of his sceptre. If, then, this so-called resurrection of
the western empire was purely nominal, was it merely honorific? Was
there no authority attached to it? If there were none, especially as
to Germany itself, of a part of which the emperor was a hereditary
prince, we would conclude at once that as Europe could not then be
called one, so could not Germany. Our proposition, however, is not so
self-evident.

There was an authority resident in the imperial sceptre over the
princes of Germany, but for all matters all practical importance it
was, with the exception of a few privileges, the same as that enjoyed
over Italy, Hungary, Bohemia, etc, viz., that of right of investiture.
If, however, from this fact of imperial suzerainty any argument can be
gathered for the ancient unity of Germany, we must say that at the
present time Egypt, Roumania, and Servia are {251} one with Turkey,
Liberia one with the United States. If before the late war Germany was
not integral, it was not so under the ancient system. Then it had an
emperor, in our days it had a federal diet--the emperors' decisions
were generally laughed at, while the decisions of the diet were
respected when allowed to decide. Nor, while speaking so disparagingly
of the imperial power, do we allude to the time when the imperial
dignity had become a mere puppet show--to the period between the rise
of Prussia and the annihilation of the title. We need not confine
ourselves to the time when the great Frederick could laugh at his
"good brother, the sacristy-sweep," trying to rival his power; the
same want of efficacious influence was ever felt from the day when
Conrad accepted the diadem--one only period excepted, that of Charles
V., and even he was wanting in force, and was obliged to succumb to
his powerful "vassals." The history of no country, either in Europe or
in Asia, can afford an example of such persevering strife for
ascendancy as that which the princes of Germany presented, either
among themselves--the emperor a spectator--or united in factions
against him and his factions. The imperial dignity was in some things
great, and over some periods of its existence there is a halo of
glory, but only in its external relations. The Hohenstaufen emperors
were by inheritance both internally and externally powerful princes;
their principality of Suabia and their immense possessions of the
Palatinate furnished them such a number of personal vassals that they
did much toward making the imperial sceptre respected, while there
kingdom of Sicily and lordship of Milan caused them to be feared
without. But then it was not the emperor who was feared, but the
Prince of Suabia, the Count Palatine, the King of Sicily, and lord
suzerain of Milan and Tuscany; just as under the Habsburgs and the
Lorraines it was not the emperor but the Archduke of Austria, King of
Hungary, of Lombardy, of Naples, of Illyrium, who, by means of his
personal and hereditary states in foreign lands, commanded that
respect from his German rivals which a purely German emperor never
extorted. The unity of Germany under the Holy Roman Empire was
therefore not of fact. It was an idea--quite poetical certainly, but
still an idea.

When we consider the obstacles which had to be surmounted by those
peoples who have already attained a national existence, we must fain
believe that those who are yet panting for it will not be long
disappointed. Roumania and Servia have been for centuries dreaming of
independence, but we must remember that only at a recent period did
civilization commence to act upon their peasantry. Even now many of
the boyards seem to be removed scarcely a generation from their Dacian
ancestry. All the Sclavic peoples of Eastern Europe have much to
acquire before they can be called fully civilized. The tyranny,
however, to which they owe most of their backwardness has of late
years very much diminished, and already they commence to ask
themselves the question which has so long preoccupied other minds, Are
the people created for the ruler, or is a ruler established for the
people? When men commence to think seriously on such subjects, action
is not far off. Bucharest and Jassy have been the scene of tumults
which have made many a European conservative cry out that nothing but
an iron rule will benefit the Roumanian--that Roumanian nationality
will prove a seminary of trouble for Europe. We believe in lending a
helping hand to a degraded people that they may in time raise
themselves to the level of their fellows--we would deem ourselves
worse than their tyrants if we regarded the passions which tyranny has
engendered as an excuse for that tyranny's perpetuation.

{252}

A bright day seems to have dawned for Hungary--at least so think the
Austrian wing of the Hungarian patriots. For these gentlemen the
ungermanization of Austria means that Pesth is to be the capital of a
new heterogenous empire. They should remember those long years during
which they mourned the short-sighted policy which drowned Hungarian
nationality for the benefit of Germany, and reap from them a knowledge
of other sins they will commit if they repress those nationalities
which are as sacred as their own. Heaven cannot bless those who claim
liberty for themselves and deny it to others.

And in the midst of this conflict of the peoples of the earth for real
or imaginary rights, how fares the church of God? Excellently well,
for no change man will here below experience can ever unman him. So
long as there are people on the earth, so long will there be souls to
save, and the church will be ever on hand to do the work. But there is
more to be said. Of those people who are now so strenuously laboring
in the cause of liberty, a large proportion are outside of the church.
Many of them are working from a pure love of justice, as God has given
them the light to see it, and if they are true to their natural
convictions the supernatural will yet be engrafted upon them. It
cannot be denied, however, that there are many who throw their weight
into the scale of liberty as for they think Catholicity is in the
other scale, and that they will hence contribute to weakening the hold
the church has upon man. Would they could live to see the day when
liberty shall have triumphed--were it only to realize the true mission
of that church they now so bitterly hate! From the day the church
entered upon her glorious career she has been constantly contending
with the potentates of the earth. Her first struggle was with brute
force, and she triumphed. Her second contest was more terrible, for
the means brought against her were more insidious. Under the pretext
of honoring her, the gods of the earth encircled her limbs with golden
chains. How pretty they seemed, and how complacently some of her
members regarded them! How anxiously some yearn after them yet! But
they were torn away, and--great providence of God!--by those who
thought to thus ruin her. Her enemies say she yearns for that society
now disappeared. Has she forgotten how much those struggles cost her?
Gentlemen of the liberal world, you are mistaken if you think the
church fears the success of your designs. You are another illustration
of the truth of the saying, that God uses even the passions of men to
further his ends. When you will have succeeded in obliterating all
artificial distinctions of caste and privilege, and will have actuated
your vaunted ideas of liberty and equality, the church will confront
you, and thrusting you aside, will render real what with you would
always be an idea--fraternity. Those who now applaud you will lift
from the church their eyes of suspicion and jealousy, and will realize
how greatly you were mistaken when you called her retrograde and
tyrannical.

--------

{253}

PHYSICAL SCIENCE AND CHRISTIAN REVELATION



BY REV.  JAMES A. STOTHERT.


If the philosophers of the nineteenth century are proud of its
scientific character, it is not without reason; if they congratulate
themselves on having penetrated further into the secrets of nature
than their predecessors, the impartial judgment of future times will
confirm the opinion. It is no ordinary age that has, in the first half
of its course, produced men of the first eminence in every branch of
science, and contributed discoveries, remarkable alike for their
intrinsic value, and their influence on the welfare of mankind. The
progress of the physical sciences, since the year 1800, has been rapid
and unprecedented; some of them have assumed a character and position
entirely new, in consequence of the number and brilliancy of the
discoveries, and the importance of the principles unfolded in relation
to them. Another era in the history of chemistry opened with Dalton's
atomic theory, aided by the amazing industry of Berzelius, in its
practical application; the labors of Davy, in reducing the number of
simple elements by means of voltaic electricity, and Faraday's patient
and even-advancing discoveries in the wide field of electro-magnetism,
have developed chemical science to an extent, and in a direction,
which a former generation would have deemed fabulous. During the same
period, geology has been rescued from neglect, and from serious
charges of unsound tendencies, and been placed in deserved rank among
the sciences by the eminent labors Smith and Buckland, of Sedgwick and
Delabeche, of Lyell and Murchison, and Miller. Thee stamp of the age
has been put on the science of optics by the discovery of the
polarization of light by Malus; by the subsequent extension and
perfection of that discovery by Brewster and Arago; and, more
remarkably still, by the profound investigations and independent
research of Young and Fresnel, on the subject of the wave theory of
light. Zoology, especially in its bearing on geology and the history
of the earth, has been carried to astonishing perfection, by the
intuitive genius and sagacity of Cuvier and Agassiz and Owen and
Forbes. In the history of astronomy, the queen of the sciences, the
nineteenth century must be ever memorable as that in which was first
established the appreciable parallax of some among the stars commonly
called fixed; at once spanning the hitherto illimitable abyss which
separates the solar system from those distant luminaries, and opening
up to human intelligence clear and better defined views of the
vastness of the universe. The names of Bessel, Struve, and Argelander,
of Airy and Lord Rosse, and the two Herschels, are associated with
observations and discoveries, for which future ages will look back to
our time with admiration and gratitude. The more recent observations
of Herschel on Multiple Stars may be assumed to have established, the
existence of the great law of gravitation in regions of space, so
remote from our sight, that the diameter of the earth's orbit, if
searched for at that distance, through telescopes equal to our most
powerful, would be invisible. The circumstances attending the
discovery of the most distant planet, Neptune, are perhaps the most
extraordinary proof of the high intellectual {254} culture of our
time. Another planet, Uranus, its next neighbor, had been long
observed to be subject to perturbations, for which no known cause
could altogether account. By an elaborate and wholly independent
calculation of these disturbances, and a comparison of them with what
would have resulted from all the known causes of irregularity, two
mathematicians, Leverrier in France, and Adams in England, were
enabled, nearly at the same time, and quite unknown to each other, to
say where the disturbing cause must be, and what must be the
conditions of its action. They communicated with practical
astronomers, and told them where they ought to find a new planet;
telescopes were directed to the spot, accurate star-maps were
consulted, and there it was, the newly discovered planet Neptune,
wandering through space, in an orbit of nearly three thousand millions
of miles' semi-diameter. Other discoveries had been the result of good
fortune, or the reward of patient accuracy and untiring perseverance;
here discovery was anticipated, and directed by the conclusions of
purely mathematical reasoning.

The nineteenth century, little more than half elapsed, can also point
with satisfaction to numerous observatories in both hemispheres,
where, in nightly vigils and daily calculations, the accumulating
observations and details are amassed and arranged, which for years to
come are to guide the mariner through the pathless seas, and to
furnish materials for future generalization in regard to the laws of
the physical universe; where untiring account is kept of those occult
and variable magnetic influences which permeate the surface of our
globe and the atmosphere around it, to which the distinguished
Humboldt first urged attention, and in the investigation of which the
names of Kater and Sabine are conspicuous. In chemical laboratories at
home, and on the continent, the progress of investigation into the
internal constitution of matter is so extensive and so fruitful in
results, that as we were lately informed by an eminent chemist, it is
hardly possible even for a professional man to keep up to the mark of
weekly discovery. The triumphs of steam-power in connexion with
machinery; the perfection attained my modern engineering, and the
multiplication of its resources; the wonderful results produced by the
combination and division of labor, illustrated by the completion of
vast works, and the supply of materials for our world-wide commerce;
and, not least of all, the application of the electric current to the
transmission of messages, originally suggested by a Scotsman, in the
year 1753,  [Footnote 40] and perfected by Wheatstone and others, the
influence of which, in flashing intelligence from one side of the
world to the other, is not improbably destined to act more powerfully
than that of steam and railway communication, on the future history of
mankind; all these valuable in enduring evidences of the scientific
preeminence of our age, are no inconsiderable or unreasonable cause of
elation and self-congratulation among contemporary philosophers. There
never was a time when juster views on the subject of physical science
were more generally diffused among the community at large; when a
readier ear could be gained for any new and well-supported claims of
science; when the public mind thirsted more eagerly for fresh draughts
from the fountain of knowledge; or when more competent persons were
engaged in providing means for satisfying this universal thirst.
Scientific societies are numerous and active; mechanics' institutes,
philosophical associations, athenaeums and other reunions alternating
kindred nature, are organized and flourishing in every large town in
the country, for the purpose of conveying a little rill of this
coveted knowledge to the tradesmen and artisans in the short intervals
of their daily toil. The very credulity with which some {255}
unscientific and preposterous theories of motion have been lately
accepted and believed by multitudes of educated persons, and which
Faraday has the merit of first boldly denouncing, is another proof of
the desire of something new in physics, which animates large masses of
thinking men, and which is often much more developed than their power
of distinguishing what is true from what is false, or empirical, in
the philosophy of nature.

  [Footnote 40: See Scots Magazine, February, 1753.]

The contemplation of this picture of the nineteenth century suggests a
question of some moment: What is the relation of this scientific
development to revelation? What influence is it likely to have on the
conclusions of faith? A simple mind, or a simple age, receives these
implicitly: will the influence of science on either dispose, or
indispose it, to similar confidence? Are modern discoveries likely to
throw a reasonable doubt on the province of revelation; or are they
more likely to reflect light upon it, and establish its landmarks?

This is a question of the last moment. The age is bent on acquiring
knowledge; it is justly elated by its progress in search of this
precious gift; and, all the while, its dependence on the great truths
of revelation is not less than that of a simple age. Faith, if ever
necessary, is not less so now, than when all the brilliant discoveries
of our era lay in the folds of the future time. They will not, with
all their brilliancy, direct and save one human soul, or illuminate
the obscure region which lies beyond the grave. If science must
dissolve the charm of belief, alas! for the elation of our age at its
own high attainments; better had it been for it that the ancient
ignorance of physical laws had never then dissipated, than that its
dispersion should have been so dearly purchased.

Of course, by revelation, the author must be understood to mean the
whole will of God, revealed to the world, and taught by the Catholic
Church; as well that part of it which Protestants reject, as the
mutilated part of it which the greater number of them are agreed in
accepting; all the doctrines peculiarly and distinctively belonging to
Catholicity, together with others which it holds and teaches in common
with all calling themselves Christian. What relation, then, we ask,
has the modern advance of science to this undivided sum of revealed
truth? Is it one of hostility or of harmony, of illustration and
confirmation, or of antagonism? Is physical science the handmaid, or
the enemy of faith?

(1.) Now, a very great number of persons, understanding revelation in
the sense in which we have defined it, would answer this question by
saying that science is the enemy of revealed truth, as maintained by
the Catholic Church; that the more generally scientific and accurate
ideas of the laws and constitution of the physical universe are
diffused, the more difficult must grow the belief of sensible men,
claimed by the Catholic Church for apparently impossible exceptions to
those laws. We can even imagine some good Catholics, little versed in
scientific pursuits, of the same opinion, and therefore jealous of
this general craving of the people for secular knowledge. Among the
Protestants of this country it is currently believed that the Catholic
Church is as keenly and doggedly opposed to science as science is to
her; that her unchanging policy has always been to keep her children
in ignorance, so as the more easily to subdue their intelligence to
her bidding.

(2.) An answer of a different kind we should expect to receive from a
numerous class of friends, and from a few opponents; namely, that the
relation of science to revelation is one of indifference, as they
belong to spheres of knowledge totally distinct and independent. A few
remarks on each of these answers will best introduce the author's own
attempt at a solution of the question.

{256}

As to the first: well informed and candid inquirers into the truth of
things are beginning slowly to perceive that the Catholic Church has
been misrepresented, as invariably the enemy of science; especially in
the critical and much agitated controversy of the geocentric and
heliocentric theories of the planetary motions, which has been chosen
as the weakest point of attack. Two writers of the highest eminence in
science, with no religious bias whatever toward Catholicity, have
given remarkable testimony on this subject. Sir David Brewster in his
Life of Galileo has adopted a tone of fairness to the Catholic Church,
unhappily rare in Protestant treatment of such topics in general. We
do not think he has done full justice to Galileo's Roman judges; but,
at least, he has given the Roman pontiffs some credit for their
patronage of men of science. We recommend the whole life to the notice
of our readers, and shall cite the following passage from it. After
mentioning the pension granted to Galileo by Pope Urban VIlI., in
1624, Sir David adds: "The pension thus given by Urban was not the
remuneration which sovereigns sometimes award to the services of their
subjects. Galileo was a foreigner at Rome. The sovereign of the papal
state owed him no obligation; and hence we must regard the pension of
Galileo as a donation from the Roman pontiff to science itself, and as
a declaration to the Christian world that religion was not jealous of
philosophy, and that the church of Rome was willing to respect and
foster even the genius of its enemies."  [Footnote 41]

  [Footnote 41:  Martyrs of Science, ed. 1846, p. 68.]

The other writer whom we shall cite is a no less celebrated authority
in science than the present astronomer royal, who, while condemning
the treatment which Galileo received at the hands of the Roman
Inquisition, is free to admit that Rome did not always oppose science;
and even this qualified admission, from so eminent a person, is worth
a good deal to our purpose. His remark is this: "This great step in
the explanation of the planetary motions was made by Copernicus, an
ecclesiastic in the Romish Church, a canon of Thorn, a city of
Prussia. The work in which he published it is dedicated to the pope.
At that time it would appear that there was no disinclination in the
Romish Church to receive new astronomical theories. But in no long
time after, when Galileo, a philosopher of Florence, taught the same
theory, he was brought to trial by the Romish Church, then in full
power, and was compelled to renounce the theory. How these two
different courses of the Romish Church are to be reconciled, I do not
know. But the fact is so."   [Footnote 42]

  [Footnote 42: Airy's Lectures on Astronomy, p. 85.]

We are not concerned at present with Galileo's unhappy story, farther
than to remark, that there is as usual much to be said on the side of
his Roman judges, which is perhaps nowhere so well said as in the
pages of the Dublin Review, No. IX., July 1838. The views there
advanced have never been called in question; we may therefore assume
that they are substantially unassailable. As to the general question
of the assistance which the Catholic Church has lent, directly or
indirectly, to science, we should like to know what other church, or
body of ecclesiastics, has done anything in this field compared with
the labors and the successes of the Society of Jesus alone. The names
of Clavius and Kircher, of Boscovich, De Vico, and Pianciani, may
stand for a memorial of the prosperous union of science and Catholic
revelation.  [Footnote 43]

  [Footnote 43: F. Christopher Clavius, S. J., an eminent German
  mathematician and astronomer, was employed by Gregory XIII. in the
  reformation of the calendar. His Gregorian Calendar, published in
  1581, tardily adopted in Protestant countries, and now regulates our
  system of leap-years. His collected mathematical and scientific works
  amount to five volumes folio. He was killed in 1612, page 75.

  F. Athanasius Kircher, S. J., also a native of Germany, was a
  diligent cultivator of science. His works, in twenty-two folio and
  eleven quarto volumes, embrace learned and original treatises on
  many recondite branches of physical science; on Magnetism, Optics,
  Acoustics, Geography, etc., etc. He filled the chair of Mathematics
  in the Jesuit Roman college, and laid the foundation of its
  extensive and valuable museum. He died in Rome, in 1680, at the age
  of 79.

  F. Roger Joseph Boscovich, S.J., a native of Ragusa, filled the
  chair of Astronomy in the Jesuit Roman College for thirty years, and
  was highly distinguished for the depth, originality, and variety of
  his aquirements in Natural Philosophy. He published several valuable
  treatises on the philosophy of Newton, on optics, etc. He is best
  known out of Italy for his ingenious theory of the molecular
  constitution of matter: a theory which the increasing knowledge of
  more modern philosophy has only confirmed. After the suppression of
  his order in 1778, he was welcomed to Paris, and taught philosophy
  there for a time; he returned to Italy, he died at Milan, in 1787,
  page 73.

  F. De Vico, S.J., was also an eminent astronomer in the Jesuit Roman
  College. His discovery of several comets introduced him to the circle
  of men of science. When the Jesuits were driven from Rome in 1848,
  he was received with open arms in the United States; but, unhappily
  for science, he died in London a very few years ago, while procuring
  instruments for his observatory in the far West. He was highly
  esteemed and beloved by his pupils, of whom there are many in this
  country.

  F. Pianciani, S.J., for many years taught chemistry in the Jesuit
  Roman College. He is admired for the simplicity of his manners no
  less than for the valuable contributions he has made to the nature
  of chemical science. Besides all larger and smaller treatise on it,
  he has published a work on the cosmogony of Moses; and we believe,
  is still preparing other treatises for the press.]

{257}

As to the second solution of our question--that science and
revelation are indifferent, because entirely dissimilar to each other
in nature and objects; it appears to us that analogy points quite the
other way. For, (1.) they both have a common origin in the will of
God; and it is not unreasonable to expect that they shall exhibit some
traces of common principles. And this, especially, if we direct our
attention to the difficulties which lie in the way of our acceptance
of the conclusions proposed to us by either; if they are actually
found to resemble each other in many of these, their relation can no
longer be considered one of indifference. Nay,  on the principles on
which Dr. Joseph Butler constructed his immortal work, if revealed
truth proceeds from the author of nature, we may expect to find the
same difficulties in it as we find in nature. And, conversely, it is
no objection to the divine origin of revealed truth, that its
reception implies difficulties as great as the acceptance of the facts
and laws of nature presupposes us to have overcome. And, (2.) we may
argue from the mutual analogy of other sciences to one another; how
dissimilar soever they appear to a superficial observer to be, there
is a community of principles, and of general laws, which binds them
together, and connects them with their common origin in the divine
mind. This idea is, as many of our readers are aware, beautifully
developed by Mrs. Somerville in her charming work on the Connexion of
the Physical Sciences.

From these preliminary remarks, the author's own solution of the
question of hostility, or indifference, between science and revelation
may be gathered; namely, that though in their nature, objects, and
details widely separated, yet they are linked together by a thousand
delicate ties, unperceived by a careless observer, but well repaying
elaborate study. Science is the true handmaid of Revelation, doing
service to the superior nature, but exhibiting tokens of a commission
to do so, imparted to her by the divine creator of both. The author
has devoted some attention to this interesting subject; and at some
future time, if granted health and leisure, he hopes to state and
illustrate his views more at large, and in a more permanent form;
meanwhile he proposes briefly to sketch some of the conclusions and
trains of thought suggested to him by these studies; confining his
remarks entirely to those portions of revealed truth which are the
exclusive property of the Catholic Church, and which are generally
known in the Protestant world as popish doctrines, such as the Blessed
Eucharist; the question of Miracles in general; and all that is
supernatural and imperceptible to the senses in Catholic belief.

I. A preliminary difficulty lying in the way of belief in the
supernatural character of revealed religion, is the flat contradiction
which it apparently gives to the evidence of the senses, the manifest
discrepancy between what is alleged and proposed to our belief, and
what is seen with our eyes, and appreciated by other sensuous organs.
{258} Modern science, however, is as inexorable in her demands on
human credence, in defiance of the senses, as was ever revelation on
the assent of faith. The senses have their empire much restricted by
the canons of our philosophers. For, (1.) it is fully established that
each organ of sense is susceptible of one class of impressions only,
which it passes on to the sensorium, or seat of thought. Thus the
organ of vision admits and communicates impressions of light alone;
that of hearing, impressions of sound, or of the wave of air set in
motion by the cause producing sound, and no others. The organs of
taste and smell, in like manner, have their own classes of
susceptibilities, which, again, are not the same as those belonging to
the nerves of touch. For every other class of impressions than its
own, each organ of sense is absolutely inert and useless. The eye can
take no cognisance of sound, nor the ear of light: if the eye can feel
a touch, it is because certain parts of its structure are furnished
with branches of the nerves of touch; and so of the rest. Electricity
alone seems to have the remarkable power of exciting in all the organs
of sense, sensations proper to the nature of each; in the eye, for
example, a flash of light; distinct sounds; a phosphoric odor, a
peculiar taste, and a pricking feeling, in the same person at the same
time.  [Footnote 44]

  [Footnote 44: Sommerville's Connexion, etc., § xxix. p. 339.
  Carpenter's Manual of Physiology, § 932.]

Again, (2.) sensations arising from those impressions are so
exceedingly complex, that we attribute many more of them to each
separate sense than really belong to it. By habit we have become so
much accustomed to associate several of those impressions together, as
to be unable, without difficulty, to analyze them, and to separate the
simple results of the sensuous impression from the more complicated
judgments which experience and reason add to it, and by which they
interpret it. The eye, for example, receives and conveys impressions
purely and solely of light, and its absence, including those of color,
which belong to light. Form, extension, sense of distance, etc., are
no part of the simple impression made upon the eye, and through it
upon the mind, further than they influence the condition of the light,
as by bounding it, shading it, etc. These belong exclusively to the
sense of touch, combined with experience, so as to be suggested,
without actual contact, by certain conditions of light. An
inexperienced eye, looking for the first time at a plain surface, as a
disc, or at a cube, or a ball, would see only the color, and the edges
where that changed. It could not enable the mind to judge how far the
object was distant; nor why the light and shade were differently
disposed in each; why the light reflected from the disc was uniform,
and bounded by a circle, while that from the ball was softly shaded,
though bounded by a circular line similar to the disc; nor why the
light coming from the cube was divided and bounded by straight lines
and sharp angles. To judge of these peculiarities, and their meaning,
touch must come to the aid of sight; and afterward memory will recall
the conclusions of former experience; and comparison will enable the
reasoning mind to form a judgment regarding the shape, size, and
distance of the object. In a similar manner, the organs of hearing
convey impressions of sound alone; distance, direction, exciting
cause, are quite out of the province of its information. Sight and
touch, and experience and judgment, all enter into the complex
information, now communicated to a practiced observer. This fact is
strikingly exemplified in musical sounds. A skillful musician will
tell you the notes and chords composing a series of such sounds, in
which an uninformed and unpractised ear will be able to detect nothing
but concord or this court. Thus Mozart, at two hearings, was able to
note down the score of Allegri's _Miserere_. Thus, too, there are many
substances which we of {259} by taste, as it is supposed, but which
are in reality operative on the sense of smell. For instance, if the
nose is held while eating cinnamon, we shall perceive no difference
between its flavor and that of a pine shaving.  [Footnote 45] The same
fact is observed with regards to many aromatic substances: if held in
the mouth, or rubbed between the tongue and the palate, the nostrils
being all the while dosed, their taste is hardly, if at all,
recognized; but it is immediately perceived on reopening the nasal
passages. Thus, too, the wine-taster closes his mouth, and sends the
aroma of the wine through his nostrils. Other substances, again, there
are, neither aromatic nor volatile, taste very strongly irritates the
mucous membrane both of nose and tongue, as mustard does, for example,
just as it would the skin, if applied long enough externally. Such a
sensation, therefore, as the taste of mustard, evidently belongs to
the organs of touch, differing in degree of sensitivity only. Hence we
are taught that the substances properly the objects of the sense of
taste, are those only which produce sensations purely and exclusively
gustative, perceived neither through the nose nor through the nerves
of touch, but acting on the tongue and palate only. Salt, sugar,
quinine, tannin, and citric acid, types of the saline, saccharine,
bitter, astringent, and sour, are said to possess sapid properties.
[Footnote 46] From these simple considerations it appears undoubted
that the province of each separate organ of sensation, and its
resultant impressions on the mind, are much limited, when compared
with the wider empire attributed to them by popular language and
opinion. Reason is ever correcting and enlarging the simple
impression, adding the conclusions of experience and judgment and
comparison to the primary suggestions of the sensation; making
allowances for what is faulty or imperfect; measuring circumstances,
and comparing all the conditions of the impression with each other,
before even an approximately true result can be arrived at.

  [Footnote 45: Herschel's Discourse on the Study of Natural
  Philosophy, § 72.]

  [Footnote 46: Carpenter's Manual of Physiology, § 945.]

Further (3.) there is much in nature of which the senses totally fail
in giving us any information whatever. "None of the senses," says Sir
J. Herschel, "gives us direct information for the exact comparison of
quantity. Number, indeed, that is to say, integer number, is an object
of sense, because we can count; but we can neither weigh, nor measure,
nor form any precise estimate of fractional parts by the unassisted
senses. Scarcely any man could tell the difference between twenty
pounds, and the same weight increased or diminished by a few ounces;
still less could he judge of the proportion between an ounce of gold
and a hundred grains of cotton by balancing them in his hands."
[Footnote 47] Nay, even in their own proper and peculiar province, the
senses are singularly deficient in certain kinds of information,
especially when comparison is involved. "The eye," says the same high
authority, "is no judge of the proportion of different degrees of
illumination, even when seen side by side; and if an interval elapses,
and circumstances change, nothing can be more vague than its judgment.
When we gaze with admiration at the gorgeous spectacle of the golden
clouds at sunset, which seem drenched in light, and glowing like
flames of real fire, it is hardly by an effort we can persuade
ourselves to regard them as the very same objects which at noonday
pass unnoticed as mere white clouds basking in the sun, only
participating, from their great horizontal distance, in the ruddy tint
which luminaries acquire by shining through a great extent of the
vapor of the atmosphere, and thereby even losing something of their
light. So it is with our estimates of time, velocity, and all other
matters of quantity; they are absolutely vague and inadequate to form
a foundation for any exact conclusion."   [Footnote 48]

  [Footnote 47: Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy,§ 117.]

  [Footnote 48: Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy,§ 117.]

{260}

Again (4.) there is a large class of phenomena whose causes, and even
whose existence, are far too remote or too minute to be revealed to us
by our senses. What are telescopes and microscopes, but the means
which science ingeniously devises to supply this innate and
irreparable deficiency of our organs of sense? Satirists of the middle
age, and its scholatic philosophers, have said that they would dispute
as to the number of spirits that could dance on the point of a needle.
Modern science shows us, in the infusoria, animals of perfect
formation, endowed with functions suited to their condition, many
thousands of which could pass at once through the eye of the finest
needle; a million of which would not amount in bulk to a grain of
sand. No less wonderful is the world of minute existence, revealed by
the microscope, in a drop of stagnant water. It is a world within
itself, an epitome of the earth, and its successive geological races.
A variety of microscopic creatures make their appearance, and die; in
a few days, a new set succeeds; these disappear in their turn, and
their place is occupied by a third race, of a different kind from
either of the former--the remains of all of them lying at the bottom
of the glass.  [Footnote 49] "If for a moment," says Humboldt, "we
could yield to the power of fancy, and imagine the acuteness of our
visual organ to be made equal to the extreme bounds of telescopic
vision, and bring together that which is now divided by long periods
of time, the apparent rest which reigns in space would suddenly
disappear. We should see the countless hosts of fixed stars moving in
thronged groups, in different directions; nebulas wandering through
space, and becoming condensed and dissolved like clouds, the veil of
the milky way separated and broken up in many parts, and motion ruling
supreme in every portion of the vault of heaven, even as on the
earth's surface, where we see it unfolded in the germ, the leaf, and
the blossom, the organisms of the vegetable world. The celebrated
Spanish botanist, Cavanilles, was the first who entertained the idea
of 'seeing the grass.' He directed the horizontal micrometer threads
of a powerful magnifying glass at one time to the apex of the shoot of
a bambusa, and at another, on the rapidly growing stem of an American
aloe, precisely as the astronomer places his cross of network against
a culminating star."   [Footnote 50] Without speculating so deeply in
what is distant and hidden, the very atmosphere in which we live and
breathe is imperceptible to every one of our senses, except, indeed,
when viewed through its whole depth, to that of sight in the blue
color of the sky, or indirectly to that of touch, by the resistance
which it offers to the hand, or the face, in passing rapidly through
it, or when it is set in motion by the wind. We perceive its effects,
indeed, in the modifications which the phenomena of light and sound
undergo, in consequence of its action upon them; in the barometric
column, and in a thousand other physical and chemical agencies which
attest the presence of the atmosphere, and the important functions
which it performs in our terrestrial economy. But as far as sight or
hearing, taste or smell, are affected by it, directly, it has
absolutely no existence.

  [Footnote 49: Somerville's Physical Geography; II., xxxii. 348,
  note.]

  [Footnote 50: Cosmos, I. 189, 40.]

Modern science, indeed, coming to the aid of the senses, can enable
them to attain the results of an almost inconceivable acuteness. Thus
while quantity and comparison are inappreciable, or nearly so, by the
unaided organs of sense, balances have been constructed with a
sensibility so exquisite, as to turn with the thousandth part of a
grain, and yet pretend to no extraordinary degree of merit.
[Footnote 51]

  [Footnote 51: Herschel's Discourse on the Study of Natural
  Philosophy, § 338.]

{261}

By the aid of an instrument called a spherometer, which substitutes
the sense of touch for that of sight, an inch may be divided into
twenty thousand parts; and the lever of contact, an instrument in use
among the German opticians, enables them to appreciate quantities of
space even yet smaller.  [Footnote 52] Instruments have been devised
capable of measuring intervals of time equal to the 1/1000 part of a
second. By the revolution of a toothed wheel, striking against a piece
of card, human ear is enabled to appreciate a sound which lasts only
1/24000 of a second, and thus to measure that extremely minute
interval of time. [Footnote 53] Wheatstone, in the course of his
experiments on the velocity of the electric fluid, constructed an
apparatus which enables the eye to perceive an interval equal to less
than 1/1000000 of a second of time. The exact value of this almost
infinitesimal interval was ascertained and measured by the known
effect of a sound of high high pitch upon the ear.  [Footnote 54] It
is unnecessary to multiply such examples; but so many we have adduced,
for the purpose of demonstrating the extent of the world of physical
observation which lies forever concealed from the natural organs of
sense. We owe this knowledge of their incapacity for more than a very
limited range of observation to the inventions of science, applied to
remedy and supplement this very incapacity. Thus science tells tales
against the human senses, of which a less inventive and informed age
could never have even dreamed.

  [Footnote 52: Herschel's Discourse on the Study of Natural
  Philosophy, § 338.]

  [Footnote 53 Somerville's Connexion, etc., § xvi. p. 147.]

  [Footnote 54: Ib., § xxviii. p. 325.]

Once more, (5.) the senses are not only restricted in their sphere of
action, and incapable of penetrating beyond a certain limit into the
mysteries of physical nature, but even within their own proper
province of observation their indications are constantly false and
erroneous; so that if we were implicitly to receive and adopt these
indications, without due correction, our notions of the constitution
of nature would be singularly wide of the truth. As they appear to the
naked eye, the sun and moon seem nearly of the same size; flat discs,
about as large as the crown of a hat. Uncorrected sense teaches us no
more; it furnishes no means of measuring either their absolute or
their relative distance. But from other sources, we learn that one is
about four hundred times further off than the other; that the mass of
the one would fill a space bounded by double the orbit of the other;
and that the centre of the sun is nearly half a million of miles
nearer our eye than his limb, or the bounding line of his disc, a
space equal to more than twice the distance of the moon from the
earth. The limits prescribed to himself, forbid the author to enlarge
on this interesting portion of his subject, which, however, he regrets
the less, that any one anxious to follow it out, will find an
excellent paper on "Popular Fallacies," in Lardner's Museum of Science
and Art, January 1854; a new scientific and popular serial, which has
started under the best auspices, and deserves to be widely circulated.

Did space permit, we might illustrate the fallacious teaching of the
senses regarding the phenomena of nature, by the corrections made
necessary in every scientific observation, as to the position of
distant objects, in consequence of the refraction or bending of the
rays of light in their passage through the air, which has the effect
of making distant objects in space seem higher than they really are;
of the correction necessary for the aberration of light, depending on
the time taken to transmit it from a distant object in space; together
with others which enter into the daily experience of the observers of
nature. Other circumstances also materially influence the impressions
conveyed through the organs of sense. Thus a person going into an
ordinarily lighted apartment from the dark night, will be painfully
affected by the brightness of the light {262} for a few moments; while
another, entering the same room from a brightly illuminated chamber,
will hardly be able for a moment or two to see anything. [Footnote 55]
If we plunge our hands one into ice-cold water, and the other into
water as hot as it can be borne, and after letting them stay a while,
suddenly transfer them both to a vessel full of water at blood heat,
the one will feel it hot, and the other cold. If we cross the two
first fingers of our hand, and place a pea in the fork between them,
moving and rolling it about on a table, we shall be fully persuaded,
especially if we close our eyes, that we have two peas.  [Footnote 56]
The other senses are similarly affected by circumstances, so as to
convey erroneous impressions. Mrs. Somerville sums up the evidence on
this head in one word, when she remarks that, "a consciousness of the
fallacy of our senses is one of the most important consequences of the
study of nature. This study teaches us that no object is seen by us in
its true place." [Footnote 57] And elsewhere she adds, "A high degree
of scientific knowledge has been necessary to dispel the errors of the
senses ." [Footnote 58] Herschel has the following remark in his
Outlines of Astronomy:  [Footnote 59] "No geometrical figure, or
curve, is seen by the eye as it is conceived by the mind to exist in
reality. The laws of perspective interfere and alter the apparent
directions, and foreshorten the dimensions of its several parts. If
the spectator be unfavorably situated, as, for instance, nearly in the
plane of the figure, they may do so to such an extent as to make a
considerable effort of imagination necessary to pass from the sensible
to the real form."

  [Footnote 55: Carpenter's Manual of Physiology, § 93.]

  [Footnote 56: Herschel's Discourse, § 72.]

  [Footnote 57: Collection of Physical Sciences, § xxv. p. 264.]

  [Footnote 58: Ib.,  § iv. p. 37.]

  [Footnote 59: Chap. i. §78.]

There is one form of illusion to which the senses are liable, so
remarkable and irremediable as to deserve a moment's notice; we mean
their erroneous testimony regarding motion. We have the authority of
Sir. J. Herschel for saying, that "there is no peculiar sensation
which advertises us that we are in motion. The rough inequalities in
the road are felt as we are carried over them, by the successive
elevation and falling of the carriage; but we have no sense of
progress if we are prevented from seeing surrounding objects. The
smoother the road, and the faster the speed, the less able are we to
feel our motion forward. Every one must have felt this in night
travelling by the railway, or in a tunnel. In a balloon, with a steady
breeze, which merely propels, without gyration or oscillation, the
motion is described as a sensation of perfect rest. The same is
observed on shipboard, in still water or a calm. Everything goes on as
if on land."  [Footnote 60] To complete the illusion, nothing is more
common than apparently to transfer our own motion to the stationary
objects around us. This is peculiarly observable at railway stations,
when a train first gently moves off. If another training is standing
near, and parallel to our own, it is impossible to tell which is
moving, our own, or the other in an opposite direction, without
calling in the age of a third object, to correct the doubtful or
erroneous impression, by the direction in which it seems relatively to
change its place; or by examining the wheels of the other training. In
the same way, many persons, while witnessing a panorama, are painfully
affected by the shifting of the scenes, which conveys to them an
impression as if the room were going round, and the picture remaining
stationary. It was this illusion of the senses, as to motion, that
perpetuated to a very late date the capital error regarding the
supposed circulation of the sun and planets round the on moving; the
dispelling of which, by Galileo and subsequent observers, was the
greatest triumph ever achieved my philosophy over the empire of the
senses.

  [Footnote 60: Outline of Astronomy, § 15, 16.]

{263}

The simple matter of fact is this, that our senses were given us for a
certain definite and practical end, not for the acquisition of
universal knowledge. We use them thankfully within their own domain,
but we should err by inferring that their indications are the measure
of the true, or of the whole constitution of things: their teaching
falls far short of what exists in the universe of material nature;
into the world of spiritual existence and operation they have no
mission to enter. Catholic doctrine, therefore, is in no worse
position, as regards the contradictions of the senses to the results,
than is the great mass of scientific knowledge; to deny the one is as
unphilosophical as to deny the other, merely because the organs of
sense fail to appreciate it, or afford indications directly contrary
to it.

--------

ORIGINAL.



HOME AT LAST.

  They gathered 'round the dying stranger's bed,
  They heard his words, yet knew not what he said--
          "Oh! take me home!"

  With earnest looks they pressed his feverish hand,
  And sorely grieved they could not understand--
          "Oh! take me home!"

  The busy host forgot his clamoring guests.
  Wistful to answer this of all requests--
          "Oh! take me home!"

  The good-wife scanned the stranger's pallid face,
  And wept. But to his meaning found no trace;
          "Oh! take me home!"

  The hostess' fair-haired daughter stood apart,
  "What can he mean?" she asked her beating heart;
          "Oh! take me home!"

  "Whence had he come? His name?" None knew. And yet
  He speaks in tones I never can forget--
          "Oh! take me home!"

  With timid step she softly neared the bed,
  And took his hand. The stranger raised his head,
            And deeply sighed.

  Weeping, she sang a simple, childish rhyme.
  He smiled and said: "Jetzt bin ich endlich heim!"   [Footnote 61]
            And then he died.

  [Footnote 61: I am home at last.]


----------

{264}



Translated from the Etudes Religieuses, Historiques et Littéraires.


THE OLD OWL.


When I was living in my native village, about twenty years ago, I made
the acquaintance of an old owl who lived in one of my forests. One of
my forests I say, and with good reason; for I was the only being who
could appreciate them, although a few landed proprietors in the town
were wont to make clearings therein, on the plea of having bought them
and paid down certain moneys in the presence of our notary public.
Therefore in my forest dwelt my owl, who was a personage of mature
years, and had first attracted me by the singular similarity of his
tastes and opinions with mine. Our first meeting took place under
rather peculiar circumstances. One evening, after belaboring my brains
over some enigmatical Persian verses for hours, I left the house,
still conning over an enigmatical hemistich; and strolling on until I
gained the edge of the forest, plunged in without noticing whither I
went. I might have wandered about all night, lost in the mazes of this
mysterious satire, had not the sweet odors of a cherry tree in full
blossom attracted my attention, penetrating through the olfactory
nerves to the inmost recesses of my brain; even to the bump of
pedantry itself. This brought me to myself; and astounded to see how
far I had wandered at that late hour, I turned to go home at once; but
the tangled path and deepening shadows threw me into confusion, and at
the end of a quarter of an hour I found myself completely lost. "Never
mind," said I, yielding gracefully to circumstances, "this is just
what I meant to do;" so on I plunged, through brake and thicket, until
I reached the confines of the forest, where an ancient ruined castle
frowned down upon the valley, with my little village sleeping at its
feet. I sat down by one of the towers to rest, but had hardly drawn
one long breath, when there came a flapping of wings about my head,
and raising my eyes I beheld--_monstrum horrendum_--an owl. He flew to
the left of me, fanning my cheek with his heavy grey wings.
Superstitious as an ancient, I turned instinctively that he might be
on my right and, so dreadful seemed the omen; but hardly had I yielded
to this involuntary impulse, when good breeding warned me that the
self-love of the work hermit might be wounded;--for an owl has
feelings as well as other people. But I was mistaken, he replied to
the insult only with a disdainful laugh; and perching himself on the
top of the tower, glared at me out of his red eyes with an expression
of profound pity.

The laugh irritated me; so I said, wishing to recover his respect if
possible, (and here in parentheses be it said that this narrative is
addressed, not to those who maintain that animals cannot speak, but to
sympathetic beings who enjoy the singing of birds in the woods, and
understand their mysterious language; who know what various emotions
their songs express; who listen, in short, with reverence to the
accents of nature and respond to them;--to such of these we tell this
authentic tale, begging the vulgar herd to withdraw from the
audience.)

Then I said to the owl, "Pray pardon my silly rudeness; I merely
obeyed an instinctive feeling, without the least intention of annoying
you; on the contrary, it would really grieve me if you doubted the
high esteem in which I hold you."

{265}

"Where's the good of excuses?" said he, shaking his head; "if you
really wish to serve me, take yourself off and leave me in peace."

"I cannot go," said I, "until you pardon my offense."

"And if I did pardon you", rejoined he, "what use would it be? But
I'll do no such thing. I cannot forgive you for being a man, or for
being here. Begone! you are a miscreant like the rest of your kind."

"You are a miscreant yourself!" retorted I, "and very unjust and
distrustful to boot. I never injured the smallest creature--I have
been the unfailing defender of birds' nests against children and
fowlers. I have incurred the contempt of mankind by my
knight-errantry. At least I ought to be treated with common civility
by those whom I have loved and protected."

"Oh, well! well! well!" said he, "don't say any more about it. You are
young, and seem to be well-meaning enough. I will trust you and rue
the indiscretion at my leisure."

"You must have been unfortunate," I remarked respectively, "to have
grown so distrustful."

"What's that to you?" he answered shortly; "my wretched story will do
you no good if you are destined to remain innocent; and if you are to
become like other men, it will not touch you."

"Nay," said I, thinking to tickle his vanity by a neatly turned
complement, "it would teach me wisdom and prudence. What less could I
learn from the favorite of Minerva and the protector of Athens?" But
my Timon's wisdom was proof against assault, and he replied:

"You think probably to flatter me, but I never knew the goddess you
mention. She was, I am told, is exceedingly turbulent person,
continually whirling and setting up her heroes by the years. And what
were the Athenians but a set of frivolous, shattering magpies,
incapable of forming a sound idea, or of putting it in execution if
they had."

"You seem to have a great contempt for mankind," said I, rather
abashed at the failure of my little complement. "What has shaken your
faith in us, if I might venture to ask?"

"That is a long story," answered he; "but I will tell it to you one of
these days if you and death can wait so long."

"Why not now? Everything is at rest; even the squirrels are sound
asleep, coiled up in the beech boughs, unmindful of you and me."

"No, no," said he snappishly, "I'm too tired to think now. Besides, I
don't know you, nor what you would be at with your teasing questions.
Go away and let me alone."

Fearing to vex him further and rouse his suspicions, I bade him
goodbye and retreated, promising to return the following night. The
next evening, just after sunset, I turned my steps toward the forest,
and heard as I drew near the tower my poor hermit shooting out into
the darkness his dismal cry houloulou! houloulou! which was answered
by a dreary echo.

"Poor old soul!" said I to myself, "it is frightful even to hear him,
his cries are so full of hatred, menace, and irony. Either he is
wicked or--" but I was standing at the foot of the tower and the voice
of the solitary called out: "Oh! is that you? It never occurred to me
that you would be so punctual. I must confess that your exactness
charms me."

And from that hour the anchorite and I were bound together by the
strongest friendship. He told me that from the first he had felt drawn
to me by a singular sympathy, but had vigorously resisted the
attraction for fear of fresh disappointment. His words shocked me by
their harshness, but our disputes were always friendly and his rebukes
were administered with a fatherly tenderness which touched me
extremely.

{266}

"But," said I one evening, "what would become of society if we adopted
your maxims? The noblest friendship, the most heroic devotion, would
be but deceitful snares. We should see in our companions only knavery,
hypocrisy, and treachery beneath a fair outside. And at this moment
you are not in harmony with your theories, for you are confiding in me
without dreaming that while I speak to you I may be planning your ruin
and destruction."

He smiled, and I believed him convinced; but a moment after the
doleful theme was resumed, and he was preaching his lamentable
doctrines as if I had not interrupted him.

"You are sincere and perhaps even virtuous now," he said. "But that is
no more than your duty, so you deserve no credit. I am so old in
experience that sometimes my wisdom seems to have been bought with
every drop of blood in my veins, and with every hope of happiness.
Now, this is the fruit of my experience, which I will give you, and
you can digest it at your leisure. Have no friends--live by
yourself--never marry--live in a village rather than in a city, and in
a forest rather than in either. You laugh, but let me tell you that it
is no laughing matter, as you will find when you know the world as
well as I do; and you will know it one of these days, when experience
has come too soon and death too late for your prayers."

So spake the misanthrope, and I replied: "We must take men as they are
and life as we find it; remembering that other people's faults are
sooner seen than our own, and that they have as much reason to shun us
as we have to despise them. God made us to live with our
fellow-creatures, and if each person followed out your dismal precepts
the world would become a vast solitude--a living tomb to engulf
humanity."

"Alas! young man!" was his mournful reply, and it was only by dint of
entreaty that I at last discovered the grounds of his grief and
disappointment. One beautiful evening lie told me his story. The
forest was radiant with a sunset glow; and the little birds were
hopping about and building their nests in the branches of the trees,
twittering and singing in the fulness of their joy.

"I was born," said he, "in the very place where I live to-day, for the
one illusion, the supreme consolation that I have left, is a love of
my native land. I was hatched in that crumbling old tower yonder
covered with moss and ivy. My two brothers came into the world with
me, and it was a dream of ours that we would go through life together,
always sacrificing private interest to mutual happiness: promises
suited to infancy and destined to be forgotten before youth had fled.

"We were the pride of our parents' hearts, and as we grew from day to
day our mother gloried in our size and beauty--our father in the
fancied promise we gave of strength and virtue. One day, when we had
grown old enough to take a little care of ourselves, our parents
addressed these words to us: 'In another month, little ones, you will
need our help no longer, and will enter boldly upon life. Now listen
to our directions: if we should die before you are old enough to take
care of yourselves, go to our neighbor, the old owl, who lives in the
oak that was struck by lightning last year, and who comes to see you
sometimes. He will be father and mother in one to you, if a parent's
place can be supplied. And another piece of advice: never let a silly
curiosity prompt you to leave this wood and go in search of new
places. Beyond this forest you would find treachery, misfortune, and
death. Now mind and remember our words when we are taken from you, and
never forget the father and mother who have love you so dearly.'

{267}

"All this made us cry so bitterly that we could hardly speak. The
words had a dreadful sound, though we did not know what they meant.
'What was it all about?' thought we; and yet with a sense of dread and
ill omen, we promised with tears to follow their device. We pledged
ourselves to everything, and thought our fidelity unimpeachable--for
childhood has such unbounded faith in itself. Our parents rejoiced in
our docility, and for several days our happy life continued unclouded.

"One evening they went out as usual to get food for us after saying
goodbye very tenderly. For a long time we awaited their return in
vain, and fell asleep at last worn out with watching and listening.
When we awoke they had not come back, and we asked each other in
terror if this could be the eternal separation they had spoken of. The
ruins rang with our cries, and the mocking echo sounded to our excited
fancy like the laugh of some mysterious enemy. Then hunger came to add
bodily misery to our sufferings; and I made up my mind that I, as the
eldest, was bound to sacrifice myself to save my little brothers.
Telling them to keep up their courage and wait for me patiently, I
threw myself boldly out of the nest and flew off in search of the old
friend of my mother and father. By help of all sorts of landmarks, I
succeeded at last in finding the shattered oak, but he, alas! was not
there; and trembling with fatigue I perched myself on a bough to wait
in dumb resignation for whatever might come next. A few hours had
taught me life's bitterest lesson, and I felt a century older than the
day before. At length, hungry and tired, and crazy with grief, I made
my way back to my brothers, who were waiting to tell me good news. Our
old friend, our only protector now, was with them. From his hermitage
he had seen his two poor friends pursued by an eagle and torn with his
cruel claws. Then he had remembered us and flown to our nest, bringing
food for us all. So my strength was restored, and I awoke once more to
the full vigor of life and suffering. When the first anguish of grief
passed away, it was only to leave room for fresh trial and
disappointment. One day--it was in the beginning of June--I heard the
birds singing in the foliage, I saw on every side living beings
enjoying life in the great forest, and the thought came to me for the
first time that I too might mingle in the festival of nature. I flew
out of the nest and perched quietly on an oak that stood at the edge
of the glade where all the little birds had met together for a
concert. They were listening to a linnet; every one was attending in
silence to her joyous notes, and all, even to the nightingale, were
filled with admiration for the pretty songstress. And I too admired
her. I too was penetrated with love for all these little birds who
looked so kind and good. 'How sweet it would be to live among them!'
thought I, and I determined to give up solitude and come with my
brothers to live among them, to be their friend and admirer. Love
seemed so sweet! Admiration of others so ennobling!

"Such were the thoughts in which I was luxuriating while the linnet's
song lasted. When she ended, I was still rapt in attention and cried
out: 'Oh! how beautiful, how exquisite that is!' Hardly were the words
uttered when they discovered me. In an instant I was surrounded,
hustled, assailed, insulted in a thousand discordant voices.

"'An owl! an owl! Gracious, how ugly he is! What a queer sort of a
_dilettante_! Just look at his solemn face and his great beak! and his
great round eyes! and is feathers! He's too hideous--what a fright!
There's a _connoisseur_ for you! Ugh! the brute!

"'Let's peck him,' said the gentle nightingale.

"'Yes, yes, hurrah! let's peck him well!' assented the thrush.

"And then they all crowded round me--nightingales, woodpeckers,
linnets, thrushes, blackbirds, tomtits, even to the turtle doves and
wood pigeons themselves. I felt the strokes of twenty beaks fall upon
me. It was like a quarry. 'Alas!' thought I, 'can such cruelty be
allied to such genius?' And I struggled wildly, stupefied, panting,
powerless amid the furious rattle. At last I succeeded in disengaging
myself {268} and flew away in desperation to hide from my persecutors.
Now at last I knew what evil was, and I asked myself, with odd
simplicity, you will say, if it was not the contrary of good. It was
true, then, as I had heard so often, that there were wicked beings in
the world! Could it be true? And while such thoughts whirled
confusedly through my unlucky brain, I flew to confess my defeat to my
old friend.

"'Oh, well!' said he, 'I don't blame you; you yielded to an impulse of
youthful confidence and learned a valuable lesson. Do you suppose that
I don't see as well as you that spring is fair and this forest
beautiful, and the linnet's song enchanting, and that everything bids
us be happy? I know it all very well, and yet I stay all alone in my
hole while everything outside is singing and rejoicing. You would not
believe my words, perhaps you will believe your own experience. You
thought there was no wickedness in the world, only innocence and
virtue? Well, your ignorance came from a kind heart, and, after all
you are happier in being good than your enemies in being victorious.'

"'But--just heaven! why did nature make these wretches so beautiful?
or rather, why did she make such beautiful creatures so wicked? Why is
not the perverseness of their hearts to be read on their faces?'

"'Ah, my son, that is a vexed question that many persons have agitated
before now, and that no one has succeeded in solving. Why has nature
made the good ridiculous and the wicked handsome? The best way is to
resign ourselves to what we cannot understand.'

"'And then,' said I, 'they said I was ugly enough to scare anybody.
But that cannot be true, for I look like my brothers, and my
brothers--"

"'No, my son,' answered the hermit, smiling sadly, 'no, you are not
ugly; nothing on earth is ugly excepting cruelty and vice. The
beautiful goldfinch, with his ash-colored throat and yellow wings, was
ugly to-day, and the linnet too, and all the pretty little birds who
tormented you so. Yes, they are hideously ugly; their hearts are black
as night, lovely though the plumage may be that covers them.

"'Then am I condemned to close my heart to love forever? Must I live
alone because there is wickedness around us?'

"'Alone, always alone,' he answered, 'otherwise you will have neither
rest nor happiness. But don't fancy that you have any cause for
lamentation or complaint on that account. See life, once for all, as
it really exist, and accept reality instead of pursuing phantoms.
Would you have every one resemble you? is every creature by to be the
hero of some dream of yours? Ah! I see that you are not cured even
now.'

"He was right; I was not cured, if you choose to say so. Of course I
had to confess that the small birds were wicked, that they were as
cruel as they were pretty, and that I must distrust and avoid them.
But I sought all kinds of plausible explanations of this incongruity.
I said that they had received from nature genius instead of virtue,
and that I had no more right to complain of their cruelty than they
had to ridicule my ugliness (for ugly I certainly must be) or my harsh
voice.

"And having persuaded myself of the truth of this, I flew away and hid
myself in the gloomiest part of the forest, weeping over my loneliness
and in deceived hopes. And now my eyes were opened to another
delusion. To the society of my two brothers I had looked for
consolation in every trouble, but before long they declared that one
hole was too narrow to satisfy their desires, and that they must seek
their fortune elsewhere. In vain did I use and elder brother's right
in dissuading them from this mad design. In vain I reminded them of
the fate of our parents who had perished in spite of every possible
precaution, and showed them how much more they would be exposed in
thus throwing themselves in the way of danger. Nothing influenced
them--not even the memory of our vows of {269} mutual fidelity, not
even any entreaties that they would not leave me alone in this dreary
solitude. One--the youngest and handsomest, my especial favorite--was
possessed by some crazy longing for travel and foreign adventure. He
dreamed of some land of promise where all would be good and happy; and
on the faith of these dreams he left us one day, bidding good-by to
his country, his cradle, and his only friends, to go in search of the
Utopia he longed to find. I never saw him again. Did he find the
object of his desires? Did he die on the journey? I know not; but one
thing we may be sure of--that fate cheated him of his wild and
ambitious hopes.

"My other brother left me to follow a scatter-brained young
screech-owl who had entangled him in her fascinations. He established
himself with her in a neighboring wood, but parted from me with a
thousand protestations of eternal friendship and devotion.

"And thus I found myself in that enviable solitude which my sage
friend had recommended to me--left to myself and my own sad thoughts.
I only went out toward evening to look for food, and then returned to
my gloomy hole and left it no more. But isolation, instead of making
me courageous, only disgusted me more and more with the life I was
leading. From the depths of my retreat, I used to watch with envy the
gaiety and animation of other birds. Not that I dreamed of joining in
their mirth, for my own experience of their society had taught me to
keep at a safe distance; but the sight of their enjoyment led me to
believe that I might find companionship quite as agreeable without
leaving my own circle. I mingled more and more among the other owls of
the forest; I visited them in their own homes, and counted the hours I
spent with them and their families as so much gained against grief and
dullness. My most intimate friendship was with a highly respectable
family who lived not far from my castle, and especially with a young
owl, the fourth child of venerable parents who had known and valued my
unhappy father. Her sweetness and innocence made her very lovely in my
eyes. What was it to me that her beak was too hooked, her eyes too
hollow, and her head angular! beauty is the form of the ideal, not a
material regularity. While autumn lasted I visited her every day at
the hole of her aged parents, and before long we were bound together
by ties of indestructible love. In the midst of our happiness winter
separated us. What is winter? Why should this spoil-sport intrude on
our fairest days? And yet, after all, nature has a right to be cruel
and mischievous, since all her children are so! For several months I
was parted from her whom I loved; but as soon as spring returned she
became my companion, and I brought her home to my bower, which was to
serve me now as a nest and as the cradle of my children. There we
spent blissful days, the happiest perhaps of my life. Soon the nest
was full; two newly hatched little ones raised their bald heads, and
filled the air with infantile cries. With what solicitude we watched
over them! what care and anxiety we felt for these darling little
creatures! At last we had the happiness of seeing them open their eyes
and look up at us with that knowing air of intelligence so enchanting
to young parents. I thought that happiness was restored to me, and
that fate was tired of persecuting me. 'What matters now,' said I,
'the cruelty of the world and its unjust disdain? Do I need any other
happiness than this?

"It seemed as if we could see the children grow from day to day, and
their good health, noble mien, and cheerful disposition were fast
filling our cup of happiness to overflowing. One day their mother went
out in search of food, leaving me to watch the nest, for they were as
yet too young to be trusted alone. Hour after hour passed on, and yet
she did not return. I became very uneasy as I remembered my parents'
fate, and at last, telling the children to be very {270} quiet and
prudent, I sallied forth in search of her. Soon she appeared, flying
toward me at the utmost speed of her rushing wings. 'At last I have
come,' she cried, 'let us be grateful for my escape! A falcon has been
chasing me for two hours past, and I only eluded his pursuit by hiding
in the hollow of a tree. We must get back to the children as quick as
possible.' And we hastened back to the nest. As we approached the
tower, we heard--oh, horror!--sharp cries of pain, and recognized in
those screams the voices of our little ones; on we plunged, distracted
with fear; and saw the falcon--it was he--rising up into the air
clutching in his horrid claws one of our children, the little
creature's blood dropping down about us, while he struggled and cried,
'Mother!--Father!'--and then all was still, and the falcon sailed away
out of sight.

"You think that was enough, but not so. When we reached the nest and
looked for the other one, there we found his poor little body
stretched on the wall, torn open with a frightful wound. What shall I
tell you? Wild with grief, we wandered for days about the forest,
insensible to rain or wind, to hunger or thirst, even to the mocking
sneers of the birds who hunted us, pecking at us and tearing out our
feathers. What did we care for that or anything else?

"At last my companion said: 'If you have no objection, let us leave
forever this hateful wood, which has brought us such misery and
bitterness. Let us give up this odious world and find some other
home.' 'But where would you have us go?' I asked. 'If we have not
found peace in this retreat, why should we find it anywhere else? We
could not be more completely hidden in any other place than we have
been here, and yet here we have been discovered. I don't feel like
beginning a new life nobody knows where.' 'Let us go among human
beings,' answered she. 'There, at least we shall find goodness,
generosity, and greatness. Just think how admirable their towns and
villages are! To be sure I can only judge them by hearsay, but I have
every reason to suppose that we should meet with a cordial reception.
The very day the falcon chased me I took refuge in a hollow oak, and I
listened to the talk of two men who were sitting at the foot of the
tree. You never heard anything so beautiful as their words! Anybody
could see that they were the kings of the animal creation. They were
complaining of the mice that make such havoc among their bins and
granaries. Let us go and deliver them from these pests.' 'You have
convinced me,' I replied. 'Yes, we will go to mankind an serve them
faithfully. How they will respect us and reward our services.' And so
after taking a sad farewell of our old friend and adviser, who saw us
depart with many forebodings of evil, we winged our way through the
forest. Toward evening we reached its outskirts and saw before us a
village. We had reached our new country.

"We chose one of the largest barns in this village for our home, and
at once opened a desperate warfare against the rats and mice who were
attracted thither in large numbers by the provisions. This novel mode
of life brought us so much occupation and distraction, that we had no
time to dwell upon our grief. Our courage rose once more, and we used
to say to each other: 'What sublime beings men are! How grand are all
their actions! They are born ignorant and they know everything! They
are born feeble and they conquer nature!' These perfections formed the
subject of our morning talks when the night's work was over, their
hospitality and goodness, our faithful devotion to them, and the
gratitude it could not fail to win.

{271}

"Little by little we became familiarized with our position and enjoyed
it. The more we studied human nature the more we admired it's
clemency, justice, and rectitude. One evening we ventured cautiously
out of our retreat, and looked about the village. Before each window
hung cages filled with solitary prisoners. There I recognized the
cruel nightingale, the linnet who had caused me so much anguish, and
many other birds who had been in the habit of tormenting us in the
forest. We returned home enchanted with our expedition. 'Here at last
we have found justice,' cried I. 'In this happy land the wicked are
punished for their cruelty and prevented from doing further mischief;
while the good are left free and happy. Why, there was not an owl to
be seen among the prisoners! We have reason to be grateful that at
last we have reached a haven of rest and tranquility.'

"We at once decided that I should go in search of our old friend, and
induce him to share our happiness. 'Poor soul!' we said, 'at last the
destiny which he has so long sought is within his reach. Now, at last,
he will see that our hopes of final happiness were not mere dreams.'

"A few nights after I set out on a visit to our friend in his obscure
retreat. We parted full of joy in thinking of the good old solitary,
whose last days we were to make so peaceful. I flew at full speed, and
reached the wood without fatigue. Full of hope, and picturing the
pleasant surprise my coming would arouse in him, I entered his
dwelling quite suddenly, exclaiming, 'Here I am, father; I have come
to take you away from this place, and show you that happiness which
you have always treated as a chimera.' 'Is it you, my son?' he said
with joyful astonishment, but in a weak, choked voice; and I saw that
a great change had come over him. A shutter ran through me. 'Oh, yes,
it is I,' replied I cheerfully. 'We have not forgotten you, and we
shall not be able to enjoy our happiness unless you are there to share
it with us. Come, I will tell you the rest on the way. But what ails
you that you do not move?' 'Nothing, my son; it will soon be ended.
Before this day closes I shall be cured.' 'Cured!--why, are you ill?
you who were so strong and hearty!' 'The illness from which I am
suffering has always afflicted me,' he said, 'but the time of cure has
come; the physician is at hand.' 'The physician! what physician?'
'Death,' he answered in a hollow voice. 'Death!' cried I, 'what do you
mean? would you leave us? we cannot live without you. Oh, come away!
come with me! have you no pity on me?' 'Pity! yes, child, I pity you
for your youth, and because you do not stand where I stand now. It is
you who have no pity in holding me back from my repose. Let me rest,
my son, in the eternal peace of nature.'

"His head dropped forward heavily. He was dead. Dead at the moment
when I offered him the accomplishment of hopes long since abandoned.

"I flew away horror stricken, as if an enemy were tracking me to
destruction; but what I fled from was planted in my heart never to be
uprooted. The night fell--one of those dreary autumn evenings when
cloud and mist contend for mastery. With a heart oppressed with grief,
I returned to the scenes I had passed through so gayly a few hours
before. What had I left? Parents, brothers, children, friends, all
dead--my opinion alone remained to sustain and comfort me; to be
consoled and supported.

"Absorbed in these gloomy ideas, I reached the confines of the
village. Afar off I recognized the hospitable roof that had given us
shelter, and my heart beat with joy in spite of my affliction. But who
were that troop of children gathered before the barn door? What did
these cries of joy, and stamping of feet, and clasping of hands
portend, and the smiling old folks looking on and encouraging their
sports? Of course it must be some pure and virtuous amusement since
children joined in it, so I flew on with a sense of kindly interest.
As the distance lessened, I thought I saw--I {272} knew I saw a bird
banging with outstretched wings on the born-door--nailed there,
bleeding, dead. Oh! heaven's justice! my companion murdered! dead!
butchered! And that before the eyes of nature, under the light of
heaven! And no protesting voice raised from the bosom of the earth! I
hung about there, staring at the horrid sight with my heart turned to
stone within me. As night deepened the children dispersed, and then I
fell upon that inanimate form like a wild beast, and fastened upon the
nails with beak and claws to tear their prey from them. My furious
struggles only served to lacerate me till I bled; and all the time the
dead thing looked at me; its cold, fixed glassy eyes glared at me with
a cruel irony that scared me from the place. Yet night and day I
wandered about the barn, and night and day watched that dreadful
object, until at the end of two weeks madness relieved me of reason
and self-consciousness. Then I went away with a heart bubbling over
with hatred of humanity. Oh, that I could have clutched the human race
in one single body within these claws, to tear out its eyes, devour
its heart, and fling the carrion to be the sport of winds and
tempests!

"The thread of my life was broken. What more had I to do with the
earth, that wicked stepmother who gives us light only to make its
glare insufferable. With frantic speed I rushed through the valley,
and paused only when fatigue and hunger forced me to rest. I stopped
on the margin of a little stream shaded by bushy alders, while the
turf along its edge was strewn with wheat. I drew near to eat, but
hardly had I touched the earth when I felt myself caught and held
fast, 'Well,' thought I, 'man would be unworthy of his name if he did
not use all his splendid gifts for the destruction of others. At least
I will thank him for ridding me of life.' And then I fell into a
gloomy stupor, and became indifferent to everything around me, while
in my memory there arose visions of childhood--of the old nest in the
tower of my parents, and the pretty little brothers whom I had vowed
never to part from; and as my heart swelled with the woeful regrets
these images brought up to me, I suddenly caught sight of the fowler
running toward me in all haste, and at the same instant I beheld my
brother--my brother whom I had never seen since our childhood. A
transport of joy came over me; now I was safe, and he it was who would
release me. We would fly away somewhere together and begin life over
again. Divine hope! it restored strength and courage to me. 'Brother,
brother!' I cried anxiously, 'here I am--come this way. Don't you see
me?' He turned his eyes toward me. 'Why, is that you? Caught in a
trap, aren't you? I really wish I had time to stop and help you, but I
am in full chase after a young owl who has given me considerable
encouragement. You had better get out of that snare pretty quick, for
the keepers coming. Good-by till we meet again.'

"And now anything, everything seemed possible, explicable, credible.
All my other miseries faded away in view of this lie against
friendship, this insult to humanity, this blasphemy against pity.

"But after all is said and done, the instinct of life is of all
feelings the most irresistible. A moment before I had loathed
existence; now, when I saw the fowler draw near, I struggled wildly
with beak and claws and wings to save myself. In the presence of death
the sun looked bright to me once more, and life again seemed good. A
few more desperate springs and struggles and I was free--flying
whither? to my native forest, where I had first known misery and
disappointment, now my only companions. There all would be unchanged,
I thought, except myself. I only should be hopeless, I alone gloomy
and silent amid the undying joys of serene nature. But--ah me! when I
reached the old place disappointment was lying in wait for {273} me
there too. The dear old nest was gone; the wall had crumbled away and
was strewing the mountain-side. The kindly ivy that sheltered us once
was crawling on the earth; the beeches had decayed and scrub bushes
choked up the place where they had stood. Everything in me and in
nature was dead, and so nothing was left but to bid good b to memory
and joy--aye, and to trouble too, for the matter of that.

"This was my last deception. From that day to this I have stagnated
here, learning, hoping, fearing nothing' Joy and sorrow are so far
away in the past that they seem never to have belonged to me. And this
is peace."

There was a long silence, broken only by the sound of my oppressed
breathing. At last the owl said, with a weary sigh:

"You wished to know my story. There it is, and you are welcome to the
lessons it may give you. In the mean time I can only say that I pity
you--pity your innocence, your candor, and your destiny."

And I replied, "You are right. I know life now, and its promises shall
never delude me."

He smiled and repeated, "I pity you."

This history impressed me profoundly. I rehearsed the miserable
details, and saw in his life my own. I was the credulous being who had
trusted implicitly to life. The wretch who had sown kindness among his
fellow men and reaped contempt, was again myself. Was I then to
clamber the rocky path to the end only to see hope receding in the
distance? Society became to me every day more unbearable; I avoided my
companions with horror, and their railleries, which up to that time I
had borne with indifference, seemed like so many poisoned arrows aimed
at my heart. Intercourse with my old friend only increased my contempt
for men and existence; yet in tins mute revolt against nature and
humanity, I selected him as the sole confidant of my woes, and
invariably left him with a heart more bitter and oppressed than
before.

One day, toward sunset, I was wandering through the great arches of
the forest, going as usual toward the retreat of my bosom friend. A
serious silence was creeping slowly down from the tree-tops. The birds
were still, the winds asleep; no sound or sign of life to be anywhere
discerned, except the crushing of dried leaves beneath my tread. And
as I went dreaming on amidst this solitude, I heard in spirit the
melody of Nature dropping through the tender evening air, and I tried
to give it words in this little song:

  When Spring with loft maternal hand
    Spreads all the earth with green,
  And 'gainst the sun's too ardent gaze
    Weaves many a leafy screen,

  Build your neats, bright-plumed minstrels,
    Forgetting not to praise
  The bounty that so lavishly
    Sheds gladness on your ways.

  Think not, in missing old-time friends,
    Some favorite bower or hedge,
  That Nature has misused her power,
    Or broken a sacred pledge:

  This is Spring's immortality;
    Youth must replace decay.
  Grieve not that your turn too must come:
    Less brief than bright your day!

  Build your nests then, my chanters sweet:
    Bloom flower, vine, and tree:
  Let no discordant wail disturb
    Spring's song of rapturous glee.

I reached the hermit's cell. He was not there as usual, crouched on
the edge of his nest; and I called to him, thinking he had fallen
asleep or wandered off, as he sometimes did, into a thicker gloom to
meditate. No answer. I stood on tiptoe and looked uneasily into his
retreat. There I saw in the confusing obscurity a greyish, motionless
mass. I laid my hand upon it, and what was my horror to find my
friend, my owl! I turned in upon him the last beams of the sun, hoping
to rouse him. Alas! the light did not penetrate his eyeballs; the rays
did not warm his frigid form. I lifted him up; the head dropped
lifelessly, the wings were rigid, the shrivelled claws were cramped
and clenched with the death struggle. He was dead! he suffered no
longer.

{274}

I replaced him in his hole and stopped up its mouth with stones and
turf, sweeping a great branch of ivy across this improvised tomb. When
the wall crumbles, soft verdure will shield those poor remains. Oh! my
dear, tired owl! I could only give thee a tomb; sleep well and
peacefully therein! And so I turned away, thinking of my old friend
and of his reverses, precepts, sufferings, and misanthropy.

"Such is the term of existence," said I "so end our joys and our
pains." But higher and higher in my soul swelled the song of the
forest, until I cried, "This is the voice of God, and he cannot lie:"
and entering into myself I understood at last the merciful and
providential law that governs nature, attaching to each suffering a
consolation, to each pang a hope. To what was my contempt of life
leading me? To the gradual debasement of my being, to a forgetfulness
of the duties that God imposes on his creatures. Man is made for
struggle, and he who deserts the field is a coward. If his strength
fails, can he not draw fresh force from prayer? Does our Heavenly
Father ever forget his weary children? Yes, life is a hard, rough
road, but it leads straight to a goal where the sanctified soul shall
find reward and rest. My poor owl might well feel sour and
exasperated, since death meant to him only the peace of nothingness;
but man has other destinies, and rebellion is for him unjustifiable
revolt. What matter passing trials to him who is to possess eternity?
Should we not blush at our cowardice when we remember that the
infinite God is our consoler?

And all these grave thoughts anent a poor bird of whom nothing is
left but a bunch of feathers! Well! there are days when a slight
emotion makes the human heart spill over, like a full vase overflowed
by one drop too much.

--------

ORIGINAL.

SONNET.


  And thou wouldst live for ever, poet soul
  In love of human kind! What must thou do?
  Look o'er the past, scan well whose worth is true--
  Not those mere forms that with the ages roll--
  And say what readst of them on Time's bright scroll:--
  "Names faint or fading, save a fadeless few,
  Like rare Etruscan colors, ever new."
  Yet tell me, seer, how shine the favored whole:--
  "Some glitter as the icy mountain peak
  Remote, whence flow a thousand generous streams:
  Some glow as morn or even, or blushing cheek
  Of one beloved, or angels known in dreams;
  These touch upon the universal--speak--
  Lo! Nature, Love, Religion, are the themes."

------

{275}

From The Month.

THE MUSÉE RETROSPECTIF IN PARIS.


It is probable that there has never been an Exhibition so singular in
its contrasted contents, so rich in market value, prepared so abruptly
for submission to public inspection, as that which, during the latter
half of the year 1865, was to be seen in the Palais de l'Industrie in
Paris, under the name of "_Musée Retrospectif_" In a general way, its
character may be comprehended in England by a reference to the
Kensington Museum Exhibition of 1862, from which its conception was
drawn, and which it outstripped. Like that Exhibition, it came into
existence in especial connection with an institute the primary object
of which is to promote the cultivation of art in connection with
manufactures. This was formed in Paris three years ago, under the
title of "_L'Union Centrale des Beaux Arts appliqués à l'Industrie_;"
and under circumstances not a little curious, and not a little
gratifying to those who have led on the great movement of improvement
in art for the last quarter of a century in England. They will find
that it has come to pass that the best leading spirits among our great
rivals have felt and admitted, with no little alarm, the success of
that movement, and the formidable competition with which it has
threatened their previous preeminence. The simplest and most sincere
evidence of this appears in the published Report of M. Prosper Merimée
in reference to the London Exhibition of 1862, and the adoption of its
sentiments by the conductors of that admirable periodical, _La Gazette
des Beaux Arts_. In that Report M. Merimée, who was official reporter
for the French section of the International Jury, thus expresses
himself:

  "Since the Universal Exhibition in 1851, and even since that of
  1855, immense progress has taken place in Europe; and although we in
  France have not remained stationary, we cannot conceal from
  ourselves that our lead has become less sensible, and is ever
  tending to its termination. It is our duty to remind our
  manufacturers that, however successful they may have been on this
  occasion, they may possibly sustain a defeat, and that at no very
  distant date, if from the present moment they fail to address all
  their energies to the maintenance of a preeminence which can only be
  secured by an incessant aim at perfection. English industrial
  produce more especially, so markedly behindhand in point of art
  previous to the Exhibition of 1851, has made in the course of ten
  years _prodigious advancement_; and if it should so continue its
  onward movement, we might find ourselves unexpectedly surpassed."

This startling avowal from an authority not to be contravened led,
among other consequences, to such reflections as the following: "The
contact of England and France, rendered so frequent by the Universal
Exhibitions of Paris and London," observes the _Gazette des Beaux
Arts_, "will not be without its use in reference to a regenerative
movement now in contemplation, to which we wish to draw the attention
of our--so contiguous to us in locality, so severed in habits--we
have learned how much can be done by a few men of resolute
purpose--citizens generously devoted to the public good, and
unrestricted in their freedom of action. This lesson was well
condensed in the words, often quoted, of a sovereign who has passed a
portion of his life in England, {276} and has brought from thence
certain English conclusions; namely, 'Individual initiative, urging on
its plans with indefatigable ardor, saves Government from monopolizing
the management of the vital energy of the nation. . . . Stimulate,
then, among individuals an energetic spontaneity for promoting all
purposes having in view the beautiful and the useful.'"

The result of the very pregnant views thus unreservedly avowed has
been an effort in emulation of that much-commended individual vigor of
operation; and accordingly a small band of artistic and literary
Frenchmen, led on by a distinguished and very zealous architect, M.
Guichard, constituted themselves the nucleus of a society the great
aim and object of which is an incessant application of the most
effective means for fertilizing the wide domain of native art and
manufacture, so as to sustain it in its present rich power of
productiveness. They have assumed the name of _L' Union Centrale des
Beaux Arts appliqués â l'Industrie_. They have instituted a museum for
the collection and exhibition of all manner of objects akin to their
undertaking, where lectures are to be systematically delivered to the
same end.

In fine, they have developed so rapidly in their proceedings, that
they have designed, and we may say founded, a college wherein special
education and special distribution of honors are to be dispensed to
students of industrial art. Until a suitable structure for this has
been erected, within which the Society will establish its centre of
action, its headquarters are in that quaint and spacious square in the
Marais de St. Antoine Quartier of Paris, the Place Royale; noted for
its clever white marble equestrian statue of Louis XIII., and recently
deriving a melancholy interest from being the death scene of Rachel.

In addition to these great projects for permanent organization, of
which the germs will be found at the Adelphi and South Kensington,
that special Exhibition of 1862 in the latter quarter, the success of
which was so extraordinary, and we may add the influence of that noble
display of mediaeval ecclesiastical art which which was to be seen at
Malines in 1864, were the occasions of suggestions which fell most
productively upon the zealous minds of our projectors. It was deemed
expedient in the councils of the Place Royale, that Paris too should
have its "Retrospective" exhibition. The French government, eschewing
all jealousy of this independent association, lent its help as soon as
application was made: and Marshal Vaillant placed at its disposal
abundant space for the proposed undertaking in the large saloons of
the Palais de l'Industrie.

It was not, however, without some apprehensions of success in their
experiment--without some nervous misgivings as to the realizing of
ways and means, and winning the loan of the treasures of antique vertu
from their possessors, that they entered upon their work. However, _en
avant_ was the word, and full success ensued. The undertaking had the
good fortune to win favor in four quarters of immense influence--the
Emperor, Prince Czartoriski, the Marquis of Hertford, and the Messrs.
Rothschild. When this became known, it acted as an "open sesame" to
the masters of lesser stores; and from that time streams of
undreamt-of and unhoped-for valuables came pouring in upon the
society, until at length an inconvenient overflow seemed imminent, and
it became necessary to select and decline. The ultimate result,
however, was, that the accommodation of twelve large saloons was
absolutely exhausted by the contributions; and it has been estimated
that the whole might realize on sale something like a million and a
half of  pounds sterling.

It was a patent defect of this Exhibition, that works of the same kind
were not classed together. This was in consequence, doubtless, of the
exactions of contributors. Each proprietor of a collection of
treasures, however various and unconnected their contents, required,
both for safety's sake and with {277} a pardonable vanity, that his
own galaxy should shine apart The spectator, therefore, was for a
while bewildered in discerning the various elements of this vast and
most miscellaneous collection.

A small, neatly arranged selection of stone-weapons stood as a
foundation for the whole. From this we had to pass by a prodigious
bound--for the next element was excellence itself, the masterpieces of
Greece. The collection of these, if brought into one range and
receptacle, would have been sufficient to constitute a most valuable
Museum of statuettes, vases, and other objects--some of perfect
beauty. We cannot in a brief sketch like this attempt any detailed
description, which could but be tantalizingly imperfect. We may make a
statuette of Minerva, thus noted as No. 98 of the catalogue: "_Athène
Toromachos; reproduction du Xoanon, conservé dans le Temple
d'Erechthée. Bronze fondu en plein, du travail le plus archaïque. Un
des plus vieux bronzes grecs connus_." With what pardonable veneration
might not the lover of the Greek marvels of art bend over this, "one
of the oldest Greek bronzes known"!

Another violent leap of transition brought us from the schools of
Phidias and Praxiteles to the middle ages and the renaissance period.
Here, again, the contributions were profuse. In the former the ivories
were of much interest--diptych, poliptych, and single subject--in
which the deep sincerity of sentiment of their era struggled through
and gave sterling value to imperfect art. All these, as well as the
larger portion of other works of the same time, were connected with
sacred subjects. Although not equal, upon the whole, the Malines
collection, there was here abundant food for deep meditation and
admiration. Here, as there also, was a commemoration of the murder of
St. Thomas--a reliquary in the form of a rectangular box of silver,
gilt and embellished with niello, its cover pyramidal, topped with a
large garnet stone, surrounded by a setting of pearls. On either
larger side was pictured the slaying or the entombment of the martyr,
with inscriptions. Figures of angels completed the ornaments of this
choice work, which has been attributed, with some doubt, to a German
hand of the twelfth century.

Numerous works in iron, of the twelfth century, many of great beauty
--others in brass, silver, and gold, together with specimens of enamel
and jewelry, of middle-age handling, were exhibited on this occasion.
Few, however, of the curiosities of this period drew more attention
than the manuscripts in simple scroll or illuminated. The greater
portion of these came from the collections of M. Ambroise Firmin Didot
or M. Le Carpentier. The Marquis de Ganay sent one article worth a
hundred others, viz., the Books of the Gospels which had belonged to
Charlemagne, and which, as tradition tells us, were wrung from the
abbey of St. Maurice d'Argaune in the civil wars of the fourteenth
century. On one side of its binding was a gold plate, impressed with
the figure of Christ Blessing--a work of the ninth century. It was
also adorned with a set of uncut precious stones, added in the twelfth
century. Near to this were the Gospels, written in the eleventh
century at the monastery of Ottenbeuren in Swabia, in characters of
gold and silver. A copy of Josephus, from Saint-Tron in the province
of Lemberg, Belgium, of the twelfth century, was also extremely fine.
An Italian manuscript of the fourteenth century was also there,
written on vellum, with ornamental capitals and miniatures--the
revelations of St. Bridget Among these precious works not the least
singular was a _Livre d'heures_ on vellum, having 330 pages,
illustrated and ornamented with as many different subjects. Of these,
fifty-six were taken from the Dance of Death. This was a work of the
fifteenth century, and, strange to say--whether in melancholy jest or
otherwise--had been presented by Louis XV. to his physician Dr. Mead.
The works of the renaissance and subsequent period, in this
collection, {278} were most numerous in what may be termed miniature
objects--light branches and lovely blossoms springing from the great
main trunks of painting and sculpture. For them chiefly, so full of
winning instructiveness, this _Musée Retrospectif_ would seem to have
been especially got up. They appeared in forms of gold, silver, and
much more cherished bronze, in ivory, and again the happier vehicle
wood, in crystal and in glass, in steel, in gems and miniatures, in
enamelled terra cotta, in furniture, in time-pieces, in tapestry, and
numberless other ways.

The bronzes, scattered among the collections on every side, were
admirable. The miniature model of an equestrian statue--a condottiere
leader by Donatello--was universally felt to be a model in that most
difficult branch of art. It excited an absolute _furore_ amongst the
critics. In contrast to its graceful swing of boldness, there was a
_basso relievo_ from an unknown hand, representing the figure of
Charity--a draped female figure--clasping a child to her bosom
caressingly, while other fondlings of the like age cling round her
neck and her knees. Exquisite sweetness of expression is here found
united to perfection of form and masterly arrangement of elaborate
drapery. Yet the author is wholly unknown. Numerous statuettes
sustained the honor of this class. We pass them to note three
busts--full size--which could not fail to arrest the attention and
command the deep admiration of every amateur or artist who passed
through these saloons. The first was that of Beneviani, an Italian
noble of the fifteenth century; the second, of Jerome Beneviani, a
poet and philosopher of the sixteenth century; the third, of the great
Buonarotti. The rigid adherence to nature, full of sincere force of
expression, impressed on all three, compelled one to pause and ponder
and commune with character so deeply significant. Such busts leave
impressions not easily to be effaced, and are most instructive to the
sculptor.

The great strength of this Exhibition lay, however, not so much in the
subjects to which we have alluded as in its singular profusion of
examples in the vast field of pottery and Limoge enamelling. It is
probable that never have so many and such various specimens of both
these branches of art been hitherto brought together. It is but just
to say, that by far the greater part of the voluminous array had
attached to it the names of Baron G. Rothschild and M. Alphonso
Rothschild. Every variety of pottery or porcelain having any claim to
reputation (with the exception of our own English works) seemed to
have here, in one quarter or another, its representative.

Here were Moorish and Hispano-moresque vessels, comparatively rude in
design and tinting, from which the great susceptibility of Italian art
drew its first inspirations. Then came the majolica, in all its
progressive modifications; the varnished sculpture of Luca della
Robbia; the relievo of Palissy, of which we had here every contrasted
variety of subject, and all the different schools of Italy fully and
most interestingly illustrated. The value attached to some of the
rarer specimens might be thought fabulous were we not familiar with
the extravagances into which the long-pursed amateurs are led, in
their devotion to the singular, if not the unique. Thus there appeared
in the treasury of the Rothschilds a morsel--a small candlestick--of
the almost extinct _faience_ of Henry II., to which, it was affirmed,
the value of forty thousand francs was attached. If the whole thirty
or so subsisting specimens of this rarity were swept away, what, in
point of general grace of form, elegance of linear detail, or delicacy
of color, would be lost to the world? Something infinitesimally
inconsiderable. Around this precious relique there was a wondrous
profusion of Limoges enamels, belonging to various persons, and
exhibiting in every degree the beauties of that exquisite specialty of
{279} art applied either to portraiture or five historic or sacred
subject. These, indeed, deserve to be cherished with watchfulness and
affection.

Among other contributions to this Exhibition were a large collection
of fine Chinese and Japanese curiosities, to which with great truth
the title _Retrospectif_ could be affixed. They combined admirably
great strength of construction with charming delicacy of
embellishment.

In contrast to all these gentler productions of human genius came the
special contribution of the emperor, presenting art and ingenuity as
handmaidens to war--not as ministering to the amenities or luxuries of
peace. In other words, it gave, in review, a complete array of the
heaviest heavy armor of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries--some
thirty suits, standing cap-à-pie--illustrating the period when almost
the entire frame of the man militant was encased in metal plates;
when, consequently, to fall in battle was but too much after the
fashion of Lucifer--never to rise again, unless as a prisoner, or
unless assisted from mid mêlée by the smart hands of some sturdy
squire, and thus once more restored to the perpendicular on the back
of that singular hippogriff, a horse in armor. In this collection of
panoplies the variety of helmets was most striking--some singularly
extravagant in their steel contour, and all with as little
accommodation as possible for the functions of breathing or seeing. A
few offered most ludicrous mockeries of the human face divine, a nose
alone projecting in Roman ruggedness: truly an iron joke. Among the
rest, a German tournament-casque was conspicuous. It belonged to the
second half of the seventeenth century, was wholly of silver, and
richly ornamented both in carving and indenture. This gem of the
collection was, it appears, a present from the empress to the emperor.

The armor of the central and most conspicuous group in the saloon had
the like honor. It presented a knight on horseback--man and horse in
full panoply, and an attendant man-at-arms. It seemed intended to
unite the aspect of lightness with genuine metallic strength. A
tradition is connected with it: that at a period when the progressive
development of the fatal use of fire-arms, of cannon, arque-buss,
petronel, and pistol, had gradually weakened faith in the utility of
the chivalric steel coat, Louis XIII. and his potent minister Cardinal
de Richelieu were both staunchly true to the olden creed of the olden
time, where

  "None of your ancient heroes
    Ere heard of cannon-ball.
  Or knew the force of powder,
    To slay their foes withal;"

and it was thought expedient by both that his majesty should have this
splendid model-suit made, in order to use influence of the most potent
kind against the new martial heterodoxy. The progress of time has
proved how vainly the recalcitrant effort was made. The great
explosive agent has prevailed--until at length, in our own time, the
management of the _bouches à feu_ is the beginning and end of all
scientific strategy; and even the cuirassier--the last of the
steel-clads--is surmised to be on his last legs.

While thus on one side of this saloon these numerous examples of armor
were ranged--a terrible show--and the helmets occupied, in close
muster, an encircling shelf, the _arme blanche_ had its honors
sustained by a series of radiating groups attached to the walls, in
which blades of Italy, Germany, and France, with matchless Toledo
rapiers, showed their quality unsheathed. The thrilling simplicity of
the cold gleaming steel in these deadly implements was, in many
instances, strangely contrasted with the exquisite artistic
elaboration of ornament upon their hilts. This anomaly was completed
by the adoption, for this purpose, of subjects taken from Holy Writ,
and the most tender illustrations of religious charity, sculptured in
gold or silver, or tinted in the most delicate enamel. Thus we found
{280} upon one the for phases of the Prodigal Son's career admirably
composed in miniature _basso relievo_. One sword of this kind could
not fail to hold attention. It had been sent to Henry IV. by the pope
on his abjuration. On its pommel two metals were inserted--the one
having for its subject the Crucifixion, the other the Resurrection. On
other metals, combined with the hilt, were represented the
Annunciation, the Visitation, the Nativity, the Adoration of the Magi,
and the Circumcision. Finally the portrait of Henry himself was
introduced supported by Angels.

Here also was the blade of a different man, and of a different import,
once grasped by the strong hand of Charles XII. Of Sweden, vigorous
for cut, or subtly tempered for trust [thrust?]. No mincing ornament
of delicate tracery embellished its hilt; but it was appropriately
wreathed with oak foliage in iron, and it bore an interlaced cipher of
C's, surmounted by the words, _Soli Deo gloria_.

This weapon,

  "A better never did itself sustain
  Upon a soldier's thigh,"

was worn by Charles at Bender, and was given by him to General
Mayenfelt. It was presented to the Emperor Louis Napoleon by the
present King of Sweden.

Associated with these specimens of the _arme blanche_ were
well-preserved examples of the cross-bow and earlier invented
fire-arms, with their attendant accoutrements; the whole forming an
extremely rich set of illustrations of the centuries to which it more
especially referred.

Take it for all in all, this room was pregnant with suggestion. No
extraordinary susceptibility of imagination was required for one
lingering over its relics to shadow forth fearful episodes without
number of tale or history connected with these crowded weapons of
slaughter.

Independent of this splendid collection of arms, there were many
others among the miscellanea of the Exhibition. By far the finest
belong to the Marquis of Hertford, figuring conspicuously in the
chamber specially devoted to _chefs-d'-oeuvres_ contributed from that
nobleman's collection; and evidencing that it was not alone on
masterpieces of painting that it could depend for its well-merited
celebrity. The most prominent arms here were Circassian helmets and
sabres, all fresh in brilliant preservation, as if they had just come
from the anvil or workshop; the former more particularly remarkable
for their exquisite inlaid golden tracery, the latter for their
gorgeous richness of minute carving. These, with many other specimens
of Oriental ornament--creeses, poniards, or scimitars, here enclosed
in glass cases--almost compelled one to the conclusion that in the
East there is a more delicately inventive genius for ornamentation
than can be found in Europe. This we may again see exemplified in the
carpets of Persia, the shawls of Cashmere, and in the muslins of
Hindostan, gleaming with fire-fly splendor of metallic foliage.

Having dwelt on the specialties of warlike equipment, the footsteps of
the visitor were led to the last of the saloons, and found it
dedicated, in almost monumental melancholy, to reminiscences of Polish
royalty. Members of the Czartoriski family, Prince Ladislaus, and the
Princess Iza, had furnished forth almost all the contents of the
cases, which lined three sides of the apartment. A very copious
miscellany of jewelry and ornaments in gold and silver--some singular
for their artistic beauty, and others for their quaint antiquity--was
here to be seen. Of special note amongst the former was a charming
morceau of jewelry, wherein the letter A, standing for Auguste, was
set in diamonds, and supported by two exquisite enamel infant figures,
attributed to the hand of Benvenuto Cellini. Also a chain which had
belonged to Maria Louisa Gonzaga, enameled and enriched with pearls
and precious stones. {281} For purity of taste this could impeach with
the best French works of its class of the sixteenth century. It was
not, however, with a critic's eye, but with painful historic musing,
that one contemplated these objects. Here was the ivory sceptre of
King Frederick Augustus; and here also a flagolet, in the like ivory,
that had been fingered and blown by the same sovereign. Here a great
silver goblet, with portraits inserted in its indentures of two kings,
Sobieski and Korybut. Here a fair cross of sapphire and a chain of
Anne de Jagellon; and here, not the glass slipper, but the
crimson-velvet shoe--thick, as if the Chinese model--of good Queen
Hedwige. Here was the most splendid of field-marshal's batons--as long
again as those of modern times--of ebony enriched with diamonds, and
bearing a kingly cipher. Here were a brace of pistols that once had
been clasped by the vigorous hand of Saxe; and here a watch and chain
recall to mind the poets tribute--

  "And freedom shrieked when Kosciusko fell."

These gems and all this orient pearl and gold once gave brilliancy to
scenes such as are long since passed away from the festivities of
Poland. These veteran sword-blades vainly remind us of the noble race
of warriors by whom the reckless Turk was swept back from the walls of
Vienna, and the possible conquest of Europe arrested. They all,
however, tell the old and ever-to-be-repeated tale. Like other
valuables of Royal Association, with which this _Musée Retrospectif_
was in every quarter redundant--forgetting that pretty, ivory-piped
_cornemuse_ or bagpipe, knotted with its still unfaded green ribbons,
which once made music to the touch of Marie Antoinette--they express
with mute melancholy eloquence the stern old apothegm, _Sic transit
gloria mundi_.



--------

MISCELLANY.

_The Colosseum and St. Peter's_--Now when I recall my impressions of
Rome, I find only two that efface or at least predominate over the
others: the Colosseum, the work of the Roman people, and St. Peter's,
the master-peace of Catholicism. The Colosseum is the gigantic work of
an almost superhuman people, who, in a ferocity of pride and pleasure,
erected only such buildings as contained an entire nation, rivaling
nature, if possible, in massiveness and duration. The Tiber would have
drained the mud of its banks, that the Colosseum might command it
forever. But St. Peter's is the work of a thought, of a religion, of
an entire humanity, at an epoch of the world. Not an edifice simply to
contain an ignoble people, but a temple admitting all of philosophy,
of prayer, of grandeur--every aspiration of man. The walls themselves
seem to rise and grow, not in proportion of a people, but a God.

Michael Angelo alone has understood Catholicism, and in St. Peter's
has given it its most sublime and complete expression--an apotheosis
in stones, the monumental transfiguration of the religion of Christ.
The architects of gothic cathedrals were sublime barbarians--Michael
Angelo a philosopher in conception. Saint Peter's is itself
philosophical Christianity from which the divine architect chases
darkness and superstition, and bids enter the imperishable stream of
beauty, symmetry, and light. In its incomparable beauty--a temple that
might serve any worship, a temple deistical, if I may use the word
applied to stones--God himself reclothed in his splendor. Christianity
itself might perish, but St. Peter's would still remain the eternal,
universal, and rational temple of whatever religion succeeded
Christ's, provided that religion was worthy of God and humanity. The
most abstract Temple that ever human genius, inspired by divine ideas,
has constructed here below. {282} When one enters, one knows not if it
is ancient or modern. No detail offends the eye, no symbol distracts
the thought. Men of all religions enter with the same respect;
sufficient to know the idea of God alone pervades it, and none other
could occupy the place.

Change the priest, take away the altar, detach the pictures, carry off
the statues--nothing is changed, it is always the house of God, or
rather, St. Peter's is to him alone the great symbol of that eternal
Christianity, which in influence and sanctity is but the germ of
successive developments of the religious thought of all men and every
age; and in proportion as God has illuminated it, so it opens to
reason, communicates with him in this light, enlarges and elevates
itself in proportion to the human mind, growing endlessly, gathering
all people in a unity of adoration more and more rational, and making
of each form of divinity an only God, of each age a single religion,
and of all people a single humanity. Michael Angelo is the Moses of
monumental Catholicism, and as such will one day be understood. He has
constructed the imperishable arch for the future--the pantheon of
divine reason.

LAMARTINE.



_Oriental Translation Committee_.--An attempt is being made to
resuscitate the operations of the Oriental Translation Committee. The
Oriental Translation Fund was established in 1828 by several Oriental
scholars and others interested in Eastern literature, "for the
translation and publication of such works on Eastern history, science,
and _belles lettres_ as our inaccessible to the European public in MS.
form and indigenous language." This scheme received at first very
considerable support, and the reigning sovereign has from its
commencement always been the patron of the undertaking. During a
period of thirty-two years the committee have published, or aided in
the publication of more than seventy translations. Of these many are
highly valuable, all are curious and interesting, and several of them
are of such a nature, that without the aid afforded by the Society
they could scarcely have been undertaken. The Sanskrit translations
include those of the Sankhya Karika, Rig Veda, and Vishnu Purana.
Among those from the Arabic, are found the travels of Ibn-Batuta, and
of the Patriarch Macarius, Al-Makkari's history of the Mohammedan
Dynasties in Spain, and the extensive Lexicon of Hajji Khalfa. There
are also on the list translations from the Persian, Syriac, Ethiopic,
Armenian, Chinese, and Japanese languages. For the last two or three
years no work has been issued from the press of the society, nor is
any one preparing for publication; but as there are signs in the
literary world of a renewed interest in Oriental learning, the
committee invite[s] the special co-operation of all those who are
anxious to bring the East and West into a still closer communion with
each other--_London Reader_.



--------

NEW PUBLICATIONS.


ELEMENTS OF INTERNATIONAL LAW.
By Henry Wheaton, LL.D., Minister of the United States at the Court of
Prussia, corresponding member of the Academy of Moral and Political
Sciences in the Institute of France, honorary member of the Royal
Academy of Sciences at Berlin, etc. Eighth Edition, edited, with
notes, by Richard Henry Dana, Jr., LL.D. 1 vol. 8vo., pp. 749. Boston:
Little, Brown & Company. 1866.

Whoever will examine Fulbecke's Pandects of the Law of Nations,
published at London in 1602, which the author styles the first, to his
knowledge, that hath been written on this subject, and compare it with
the first addition of Wheaton's International Law, published in 1836,
must be astonished at the great progress which has been made in this
most interesting science in a period of two centuries and a third. But
a glance at Dana's Wheaton will satisfy the most superficial Inquirer
that the last thirty years have still more fully develop the
principles of that code of law which professes to find the nations of
the civilized world.

Mr. Dana has well and faithfully performed a duty, requiring for its
proper {283} and efficient discharge talents of the highest order. He
has produced a book which will be read with interest, not only by the
professional man, but by the general reader; for he treats on subjects
that the people of the United States are, at the present time, and
have been for the last five years, more nearly concerned with than
ever before in the history of their government. And as the work is
edited with signal ability, it is the more to be regretted that, in a
Treatise on International Law, Mr. Dana has deemed it proper to
incorporate his own political opinions on a question not of
International, but of American Constitutional Law.

On pages 82 and 85, in a note on the United States as a supreme
government, the editors says:

The United States "is a new state or government, acting directly upon
each individual, by its own officers and departments, in the execution
of its own laws. Within its sphere it acts as if there were no
separate states in existence. _It is also the final judge in a dispute
between itself and a state as to the limits of its sphere of action."_

"The civil war saw the final and complete establishment of that
construction of the Constitution which makes the United States a
_State_ in the scientific sense of the term, having direct authority
over each citizen, to be exercised by its own officers independently
of the states; and a right to the direct allegiance of each citizen,
from which no state action can absolve him; _with the right to
determine the limits of its own jurisdiction_; with no appeal from its
decision except through constitutional methods of altering the laws,
or the administration, by the ballot, or through public revolution."

The editor entirely ignores the theory that the federal government is
one of delegated powers, as well as the 10th article of the amendments
to the Constitution, by which it is declared that "the powers not
_delegated_ to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited
by it to the states, are _reserved_ to the states respectively, or to
the people." If the federal government has this exclusive right to
determine the limits of its own jurisdiction, then has this provision
of the bill of rights become nullity. Besides, the argument is an
illogical one; if it be once admitted the powers of the federal
government are _delegated_ powers, it is difficult to maintain the
theory that either an individual, or a government acting by virtue of
delegated powers, is competent to decide, without appeal, on the
extent of the powers delegated. There is always this great question to
be solved, Have the people delegated such a power? If not, how can the
determination of the federal government, that the people have done so,
be construed to confer it?

If Congress should, by statute, enact that the presidential term of
office should continue during the life of the incumbent, and the
executive should ratify the act, and the judiciary decide that it was
a constitutional exercise of the powers delegated, inasmuch as the
federal government has the exclusive right to determine the limits of
its own jurisdiction, would any sane man believe that this could give
efficacy to such a gross usurpation?

But it is useless to follow out the argument; the mere statement of
the principal is its own reputation.

Nor has the Civil War just ended established any such principle.
Slavery has been abolished as a result of the war, but this has been
done under the forms of the Constitution. The heresy of secession has
also been overthrown forever; this, however, has been accomplished,
not by virtue of any power in the federal government to determine the
extent of its own jurisdiction, but because the majority of the people
of the North have decided in favor of such a construction of the
Constitution, upon a point left undetermined at its formation, upon
which two great parties have ever since held opposite views, and which
could only be settled by the _ultima ratio regum_; there being no
other tribunal to which they could submit their differences.

The civil war was not waged for the purpose of enlarging the powers of
the federal government, nor for the purpose of overthrowing or
interfering with the rights or established institutions of the states;
as was emphatically declared by both branches of Congress in 1861; and
its effect has been simply to maintain the authority of the
constitution, with all the powers which it confers, and all the
restrictions which it imposes, unabridged {284} and unaltered. No such
authority having been previously vested in the government, it cannot
be assumed as one of the results of the civil war.

Putting aside, however, this only blemish upon a great work, we
desired to call particular attention to the masterly manner in which
Mr. Dana has treated the great topics of the day.

His note on the Monroe doctrine will well repay perusal, as it is a
subject on which much apprehension exists in the public mind. This
enunciated of American policy, he shows to have consisted of two
points: 1. That inasmuch as the whole of the American continent is now
within the territorial limits of some one or other civilized power, it
is no longer open to colonization by European nations.  2. That the
United States will view, as an unfriendly act, any attempt on the part
of European powers to interfere for the purpose of controlling the
political affairs of any of the American States, or to extend to them
the operation of the European political system. The question is well
worth the study of the statesman, and it is ably treated in this work.

Another question of more than common interest, especially to our
naturalized citizens, is the extent to which the government of the
United States will afford them protection in foreign lands. The
doctrine extracted by Mr. Dana from the cases of Martin Koszta, Simon
Tousig, and others, is, that the government will afford protection to
a domiciled resident of the United States whilst travelling in a
foreign country, under her passport, against any arrest or seizure by
the government of his native sovereign, in any event except that of a
voluntary return to his place of birth; but in such case he will not
be protected against military service owing by him to his native
sovereign at the time of his emigration.

The case of the Trent, in which Messrs. Mason and Slidell, the rebel
commissioners to Great Britain and France, were removed from that
vessel, at sea, by the commander of an armed vessel of the United
States, and brought in as prisoners of war, is the subject of a
learned note by Mr. Dana. He considers this case to have settled but
one principle: "that a public ship, though of a nation at war, cannot
take persons out of a neutral vessel, at sea, whatever may be the
claim of her government on those persons." A doctrine always held by
the government of the United States, and one which they were glad to
see authoritatively established on a claim made by that of England.

We have not space to point out in detail the many interesting
questions discussed in Mr. Dana's learned notes, such as those of
Intervention, Mediation Extradition, etc. But we cannot, injustice to
him, omit a reference to the question now agitating the public mind,
arising out of our reclamation on Great Britain for compensation for
the ravages of the Alabama and other Confederate privateers, fitted
out in the ports of that country. The question at issue is a somewhat
different one from what is generally supposed. Our own supreme court
has decided that it is no breach of neutrality, in the absence of any
treaty stipulation, or local statute, to build, arm, and equip a
vessel of war, and send her, under American colors, to the port of a
belligerent, with the _bonâ fide_ purpose of there offering her for
sale as a commercial enterprise; though she may be subject to capture
by the other belligerent, as contraband of war. Mr. Dana, after a
thorough examination of the authorities and of the diplomatic
correspondence between the two governments, thus sums up the points at
issue:

  The United States claims reparation from Great Britain for injuries
  done to her commerce by cruisers under the rebel flag, for the
  following reasons:

  1. Because Great Britain made a precipitate and unwarranted
  recognition of belligerency of the rebel power, and thereby
  established in law, and to some extent brought about in fact, a
  state of things which made possible and probable the illegal acts of
  individuals complained of.

  2. Because the measures taken by the British Government to prevent
  the sailing of vessels from British ports, fitted and equipped
  therein in violation of her neutrality, were tardy and feeble, as
  well as ineffectual; whether this arose from mistakes of law in the
  advisers of the crown, or bad faith, or incapacity in inferior
  officials, or from the insufficiency of the Acts of Parliament,
  being purely an internal question, with which the United States were
  not bound to deal.

  3. Because Great Britain did not seize and detain or disarm these
  vessels, or refuse them asylum, or otherwise deal with them in such
  manner has the law of {285} nations authorized her to do, after
  their fraudulent escape from the original ports.

  4. Because the British Government refused even to suggest amendments
  of her Acts of Parliament in any respect whatever, or to introduce
  the subject to Parliament when their inefficiency had been proved,
  and the government had then requested so to do, not only by the
  United States, on terms of reciprocity, but by citizens interested
  in preserving neutrality.

  5. Because the government had neglected or refused to prosecute
  citizens of the so-called Confederate States who work openly
  residing in England as agents for that power, and notoriously
  engaged in fitting out vessels in violation of British neutrality,
  though abundant evidence had been furnished to authorize
  proceedings.

  6. Because, by reason of this course of the British Government, the
  rebels had been able to set forth and maintain an effective force of
  steamers cruising against American commerce, having asylum and
  making repairs and getting coal and supplies in British ports;
  built, fitted out, armed, and manned in and from England, and never
  even expecting, or pretending to visit a port of the confederacy,
  when otherwise they would scarcely have had a single cruiser; the
  result of which had been a most effective belligerent aid to the
  rebellion, and the great advantage to England and detriment to the
  United States of driving from the seas the greater part of the
  American mercantile marine, heretofore the equal and rival of Great
  Britain, and transferring the commerce of the world to the British
  flag.

The British Government replies:

  1. That the recognition of belligerency was justifiable, and made
  necessary at the time it was done, and dictated by a duty to the
  United States as well as to Great Britain: and that the United
  States gained by it the rights of blockade and search.

  2. That the government acted in good faith and with reasonable
  diligence in in enforcing its laws for the preservation of it's
  neutrality; and that, if subordinate officials failed in capacity or
  diligence in particular cases, their acts or failures being but a
  part of the entire proceedings otherwise proper and effective, the
  nation cannot be expected to hold itself responsible their remote
  consequences, in the way of making compensation for acts done by
  belligerents out of the jurisdiction.

  3. That the government did seize and prosecute, in her colonial
  ports, vessels which were charged with being fitted out at home in
  violation of neutrality; and that she was not bound by the law of
  nations to refuse asylum to, or seize or disarm or insist on the
  disarmament of vessels afterward commissioned as public ships of war
  of a belligerent visiting her ports, on the ground that they had been
  originally, and before their commissioning as vessels of war, fitted
  out in her jurisdiction in violation of her neutrality.

  4. That the government was not satisfied that the Acts of Parliament
  had proved inadequate to such an extent, and after so full trial, or
  that any amendment would be likely to improve them so materially as
  to justify the United States in charging the refusal to attempt
  their amendment as a want of good faith.

  5. That the government had judged in good faith, on the advise of
  competent counsel, whether, in cases suggested, prosecutions against
  individuals should be instituted.

  6. That if vessels fitted out and dispatched from Great Britain ever
  so clearly in violation of her neutral rights, had fraudently
  escaped, without bad faith on the part of the government. Great
  Britain was not responsible for acts of hostility done by such
  vessels beyond her jurisdiction. Her duty was fulfilled if she
  restored any prizes such vessels might bring within her
  jurisdiction.

  7. That it was inconsistent with the dignity and honor of the
  government to submit to arbitration claims of another government,
  the decision of which involved a question whether the advisers of
  the crown had correctly interpreted the law, or the executive
  officers of the crown had acted with diligence, good judgment, or
  good faith.

The points we have thus briefly noticed are but a few of the most
important ones which are fully discussed by Mr. Dana; for a proper
appreciation of his labors we must refer the reader to the book
itself, with the assurance that it will well repay the time devoted to
its perusal. It is no ephemeral production, but a good, solid, and
deeply interesting work, which will long preserve its place as a
landmark in the literature of the nineteenth century.

{286}

LIFE OF SAINT CECILIA, VIRGIN AND MARTYR. By the Reverend Prosper
Guéranger, Abbé de Solesmes. Translated from the French. 12mo, pp.
404. Philadelphia: P. F. Cunningham. 1866.

This work from the pen of the learned Benedictine will, no doubt, be
warmly welcomed, both because of its authorship and its own intrinsic
merit. It will take its rank, however, rather among works of profound
hagiological research than as a contribution to popular biographies of
the saints. The history of the life and martyrdom of St. Cecilia
occupies but a very small portion of the volume. The rest is devoted
to the confirmatory testimonies to her life afforded by the liturgies
of the church, both Greek and Latin, the history of her relics and of
the Roman basilica erected in her honor, and the homage paid to her
throughout Christendom in literature and the arts. All this is of the
greatest interest and value, and no little thanks are due to the
eminent author for his labor and research. As a life of Saint Cecilia
it does not satisfy us. The style is crude and laborious, and lacking
in the elements of a finished biography. The author has collected
materials which would have come from the hand of a Wiseman or a Newman
a masterpiece of literary art, a living picture of the life and times
of one of the most illustrious saints of the church. But he does not
appear to know how to take advantage of the treasure which he has
gathered together with so much painstaking labor. Hence the scenes in
the life of Saint Cecilia furnished him by the quaint and charming
descriptions in the "Acts" of the saint--her espousals, the vision of
the angel seen by her husband, the martyrdom of the two brothers
Valerian and Tiburtius, her own interrogatory before the Roman
prefect, and sublime death--scenes replete with varied interest, and
affording matter for the most powerful dramatic description, and
presented to us in the tamest and rudest style. What, for instance,
can be more commonplace than the following: Valerian, in presence of
Cecilia and the angel, is assured by the heavenly visitor that in
return for his consent to the vow of virginity made by his saintly
spouse, any request he might make will be granted him. The young man,
overcome with gratitude, threw himself at the feet of the divine
messenger, and thus expressed his desires: "Nothing in life is more
precious to me than the affection of my brother; and now that I am
rescued from peril, it would be a bitter trial to leave this beloved
brother exposed to danger. _I will, therefore, reduce my requests to
one_: I beseech Christ to deliver my brother, Tiburtius, as he has
delivered me, and to perfect us both in the confession of his name."

The translation we should judge to be a faithful one, and is, in the
main, correct English. We hardly see how it could be much improved
considering the formal unsympathetic style of the original; but we
wish that in certain descriptive passages the historical present had
been preserved throughout, or altogether avoided. We are surprised to
see the authors styled upon the title page as the _Reverend_ Prosper
per Guéranger, _abbé de Solesmes_. It is not common to attach the
title of Rev. to the name of authors and prelates of such note as Dom
Guéranger, and abbé de' for 'abbot of' is not in good taste.

A fancy portrait accompanies the volume, representing Saint Cecilia
with a harp, which ill accords with the Antiphon quoted on the
title-page: "_Cantantibus organis, Cecilia Domino decantabat_," and
which is, moreover, so completely at variance with all representations
of her by both ancient and modern artists, and we would willingly
dispense with that; but the book is, for the reasons we have assigned,
of such value, that we thank the enterprising publisher for the
opportunity afforded the American public of perusing the work in
English.


SPANISH PAPERS AND OTHER MISCELLANIES,
hitherto unpublished or uncollected, by WASHINGTON IRVING. Arranged
and edited by PIERRE M. IRVING. 2 vols., 12mo. With a portrait after
Wilkie. New York: G. P. Putnam. Hurd and Houghton. 1866.

In the first of these volumes we are presented with a choice selection
of papers by the illustrious author, consisting of several charming
Spanish legends, illustrative of the events of the conquest of Spain
by the Moors, the greater portion of which is newly published. The
second volume contains some early contributions to the Morning
Chronicle, when the author was but nineteen years of age. These were
his first essays in print, but they are none the less remarkable for
the fine humor they display, and for which he became so much admired
him after years. {287} The biographical sketches, which follow, of
Captain James Lawrence, Lieutenant Burrows, Commodore Perry, and
Captain David Porter possess no little historical value; and the
extended memoir of the child poet, Margaret Miller Davidson, the
younger sister of the well-known youthful authoress, Lucretia Maria
Davidson, is full of the most touching and romantic interest. A number
of reviews and miscellaneous papers close these volumes, which need no
further praise from us than to say that they are all marked with the
genius of Washington Irving. We have been so much charmed by the
perusal of the Spanish legends that we could not refrain from placing
one of them entire before our readers--the Legend of Count Julian and
his family. It will be found in the pages of the present number of THE
CATHOLIC WORLD. The form in which the publication is given is as
credible to the publishers, as it is worthy of the  interesting
matter.




LAURENTIA: A Tale of Japan. By Lady Georgiana Fullerton. (American
Reprint) Baltimore: Kelly and Piet, 174 Baltimore street. 1866.

Lady Georgiana Fullerton consecrates her high intellectual gifts and
finished culture with a noble devotion to the sacred cause of the
Catholic religion. In her latest story of Laurentia, she has chosen
her theme from the comparatively unknown history of the Catholic
Church in Japan, and appears to have derived her materials chiefly
from the work of F. Charlevoix on that subject.

F. Charlevoix's History of Christianity in Japan is one of the most
intensely interesting books we have ever read, and unfolds a page in
the annals of the church equalling the records of the first three
centuries in glory. The persistent misrepresentation and suppression
of truth, which the enemies of the Catholic religion make use of just
so far as the credulousness of the public will permit, have hitherto
kept the facts in regard to this topic under a veil of mist. This veil
is lifting, however, and is destined soon, we trust, to disappear
before the rays of truth.

Lady Fullerton's story is well adapted to awaken attention to this
subject, if the general apathy and aversion to all Catholic literature
does not prevent its being read. Its incidents are mainly historical,
with just enough of embellishment and portraiture of imaginary
characters and incidents to make it life-like. It is written with that
ardor of feeling and in that glowing style, chastened by good taste,
which are characteristic of Lady Georgiana's productions. As a work of
art it is not equal to her master-piece, Constance Sherwood. The
events described are, however, so replete with the highest and most
absorbing interest, that one feels no inclination to advert to the
mere artistic merit of plot, style, or description. It combines the
fascination of a well-written sensation novel, with the utility of a
solid book of spiritual reading. We recommend it to all who read
anything at all except the daily papers, and advise all parents,
whether they read or do not read themselves, to give it to their
children. The latter, we are sure, will not find it hard to take.



VIGNETTES, Biographical Sketches of Madame Swetchine, La Soeur
Rosalie, Madame Pape Carpentier, Madame Lamertine, etc. By Bessie
Rayner Parkes. London and New-York: Alexander Strahan. 1866.

These sketches are all full of interest, some of them most touching
and beautiful. The life of La Soeur Rosalie cannot fail to win
admiration from every heart. The most wretched faubourg of Paris was
the scene of her labors; here with heart and hands, with every power
of soul and body, she labored year after year, never weary, but simply
and quietly performing a work which man has been proud to honor, a
work which God alone fully knows. We quote a short passage describing
the funeral of La Soeur Rosalie:

  "She was followed to the grave by a multitude such as could be
  neither counted nor described: every rank, age, and profession was
  there; great and small, rich and poor, learned men and laborers, the
  most famous and the most obscure. Instead of going straight toward
  the church, the body was borne through the streets where she had
  been accustomed to visit, and women and children who could not walk
  in the great profusion fell on their knees and prayed. A band of
  soldiers surrounded the bier and rendered military honors to the one
  who lay upon it, for she had been decorated with the Cross of the
  Legion of Honor."

{288}

This lowly Sister of Charity felt not that her sphere was narrow, but
her love, her energy, and activity found everywhere opportunities;
they never failed her, she never failed them. This life of Sister
Rosalie alone would give interest to any volume of biographies; but
several others have almost an equal interest, particularly that of
Madame Swetchine, a noble Russian lady. She embraced the Catholic
faith, spent many years of her life in Paris, associating with the
noblest spirits of the day--Lacordaire, Chateaubriand,
Montalembert--by all of whom she was admired with a sort of tender
reverence. Though influencing for many years the highest circles of
Parisian society, her life was most simply, humbly, and devoutly
Christian. The sketch of one of our own countrywomen, Harriet K. Hunt
of Boston, who has done much toward enlightening the women of the
working classes by her lectures on physiology, is also pleasantly
given. We think our authoress has shown in this volume that women have
power to do a great work, and that this work can easily be found, and
easily done, if but the heart and soul are in it. The volume is
beautifully gotten up.


THE SHAM SQUIRE, AND THE INFORMERS OF 1798, with a View of their
Contemporaries. To which are added jottings about Ireland seventy
years ago. By William John Fitzpatrick, J.P., Biographer of Bishop
Doyle, etc., etc. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 379. Boston: Patrick Donahoe.

In THE CATHOLIC WORLD for April last, page 122, will be found an
article entitled: "Ireland, and the Informers of 1798." That article
gave a synopsis of portions of "The Sham Squire," of which the copy
under notice is a reprint from the last Dublin edition. It is a
curious book, and contains many highly interesting incidents of the
rebellion of 1798; of the death of Lord Edward Fitzgerald, Emmet, and
other Irish patriots of that day. The facts disclosed show that
through bribery and the spy system, England succeeded in crushing out
all efforts for Ireland's independence, even better than her ministers
hoped. This system of bribery, however, is not peculiar to Ireland, as
many writers have asserted; but is the same in all countries, and in
all times. It has been used in this country by both sides in the late
or, with as much success as it ever was in Ireland. The only
difference being that the Irish patriots never had money to use for
such a purpose, while England had plenty, hence her success. The book
is well worth reading, and throws white on many disputed points of
Irish history, especially that portion of it relating to 1798.



FIRST PRINCIPLES: A letter to a Protestant friend asking information
about the Catholic Church, by the Rev. G. H. Doane. New York: P.
O'Shea, Publisher, No. 27 Barclay Street. 1866.

The title of this pamphlet speaks for itself. It is a plain statement
of the difference between Catholics and Protestants on the way pointed
out by Christ to find true Christianity.


LAWRENCE KEHOE, New York, will soon publish a new volume of Sermons by
the Paulist Fathers. It will contain several Sermons by the late
Father Baker.


MESSRS. JOHN MURPHY & CO. announce a new edition of "Good Thoughts for
Priest and People." By Rev. Father Noethen.


RECEIVED:

From J. J. O'Connor and Co., Newark, N. J. Curious Questions. by Rev.
Henry A. Brann, D.D. 1 vol. 12mo. pp. 292.



D. and J. Sadlier and Co., New York. Disappointed Ambition; or,
Married and Single. By Miss Agnes M. Stewart 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 248.


Wanted to purchase, at this Office, several copies of Branchereau's
"Praelectiones Philosophicale." Second Edition.

--------

{289}

THE CATHOLIC WORLD.

VOL. IV., NO. 21.--DECEMBER, 1866.

------

ORIGINAL.

PROBLEMS OF THE AGE.

THE STATE OF PROBATION--IT'S REASON
AND NATURE--THE TRIAL OF THE ANGELS.

In our preceding number we have endeavored to show what is that order
of regeneration or supernatural grace, in which rational nature, and
through it all nature, attains the end of creation metaphysically
final. The position we have taken is, that the creation returns to God
as final cause through the hypostatic union of created nature with the
divine nature in the person of the incarnate Word, and the
participation in this union by angels and men who are elevated through
grace to the rank of sons of God.

We have now another problem to deal with. The Catholic doctrine
teaches that angels and men are not brought to their destined end, in
view of which they were created, by an immediate, indefectible
operation of divine power alone; but by a concurrence of this divine
operation with the spontaneous, contingent, and defectible operation
of their own free-will. Moreover, that in consequence of the
contingent, defectible operation of the second cause which is
concurrent with the first cause, a multitude of angels and men finally
and irremediably fail to reach their destination.

This statement of the relation of the rational creature to God as
final cause, involves a number of the most difficult and perplexing
questions. The reason for placing creatures in a state of probation by
which their eternal destiny is decided, the relation of divine
foreknowledge to contingent events, the conciliation of the efficacy
of grace with the liberty of the will, the nature of free-will itself,
the reason for permitting the existence of evil, predestination, and
similar vexed questions, start up at once to trouble and compound the
feeble human intellect.

They are all summed up in the problem of probation. The creature is
placed in a state where he is to decide in a certain brief span of
time, by his own voluntary choice, his eternal destiny; this destiny
including the alternative of the attainment or the forfeiture of
supreme beatitude. What reason can be given for this? Why is the
rational creature defectible or liable to fail of reaching his
destination? Why does God place him in a state of probation, knowing
his defectibility? Why is it that some fail and others do not fail to
attain their destination?

{290}

A de-Christianised and de-Catholicised philosophy cannot get even a
plausible solution of this great problem, and the problems arising out
of it. It must either deny the problem, or throw out some ingenious
guesses which satisfy no one. It is wholly at fault, always has been,
and always will be. With those who deny the whole problem, by denying
the whole supernatural order, we have nothing to do at present; for we
cannot raise anew questions already discussed. We are concerned only
with those who would admit the moral order of the universe; and these
admit the existence of a period of probation, although some of them
may extend the limits of this probation indefinitely, and doubt or
deny some of its consequences.

The very notion of probation springs from the notion of a free will,
permitted and even compelled to choose between good and evil. Now, why
is the created will permitted and even compelled to exercise this
prerogative which is too often the occasion of the greatest injury to
its possessor?

A certain class of philosophers answer this question by asserting that
it could not possibly be otherwise. They exaggerate beyond all measure
this liberty of choice as something essential to all voluntary
operation. They have no conception of any moral goodness, virtue, or
sanctity, except that which is the product of this continual striving
to make a right choice between two rival objects of desire, the good
and evil. They even extend their notion so far as to include God; as
if he were in a kind of infinite state of moral probation, amenable to
a standard or law above himself, and only preserving his holiness by a
continual effort of will to choose among various possible
determinations that which is most perfectly conformed to this
standard. Of course, then, when he created intelligent spirits like
himself, he was obliged to leave them to their liberty of choice. They
could not become holy or happy in any other way. Indeed, according to
this system, they must remain in this state of moral probation for
ever. There is no conceivable way of determining them to good without
destroying the liberty of will which is essential to a rational
nature. The only immutability of will possible is that which arises
from a confirmed, long-continued habit of choice. Therefore God has
not absolutely determined the wills of his rational creatures to good,
because he could not. He has left them with the power and exposed to
the risks of wrong choices because he could not help it.

This solution of the problem must be rejected as completely
unsatisfactory. God is good, and is blessed, by his nature. The human
nature of Christ is holy, impeccable, and beatified, by its hypostatic
union with the divine nature. The Blessed Virgin was impeccable from
the instant of her immaculate conception. The holy angels and just men
made perfect have finished their moral probation, and are in an
unchangeable state. The perfection of the intelligent nature,
therefore, so far from implying, excludes liberty of choice between
good an evil. If this be so, this liberty of choice is an
imperfection. Why, therefore, did God create rational existences with
this imperfection? Without doubt he could have given them
impeccability. He could have elevated them to a state of perfection
without requiring them to pass through any probation. He could have
placed all rational creatures at once in the state of beatitude, and
kept all sin an evil out of the universe. Why, then, is evil allowed
to enter?

Moreover, _whence_ and _what_ is evil? How is it possible that there
should be any evil? Extrinsic to the being of God which is the
absolute good, nothing does or can exist, except that which God has
created after the similitude of his own being, and which, therefore,
participates according to its measure in his goodness. Besides, God
has created all things in view of an end. Being infinitely wise, he
{291} knows how to attain this end through his works, and being
infinitely powerful, he is able to do it. Being also infinitely good,
only good can terminate is volition. Therefore, if evil were possible,
he could not will to actualize it; and if, by an impossible
supposition, it could come into actual existence without him, he must
will to destroy it. The superficial theology and philosophy which
dates from the Reformation, is tied up here in a Gordian knot, which
no skill can unravel. It contains two dogmas which are absolute
contradictions: creation, and the substantive essence of evil. These
two can never coexist in harmony. One or the other must be modified or
given up. Either the dogma of creation must be so far given up as to
admit of some eternal self-existent _materia_ in which lies the
essential principle of evil, or the substantive existence of evil must
be denied. Those who deny or impair the first, have ceased to be
Theists in the strict and proper sense of the word, and are already
moving toward Pantheism. Those who deny the second, throw up with it
the conception of a moral order in the universe, of a state of
probation, strictly so called. There is no Theistic, Christian
philosophy of any depth or comprehensiveness on these topics, except
that which is included in the theology of St. Augustine, St. Thomas,
and other great Catholic writers.

It is well known how completely the ancient philosophers were befogged
in regard to the nature and origin of evil. Plato taught that the
_materia_ out of which God formed the universe is eternal, and that,
from an inherent intractability in its essence, it is incapable able
of perfectly receiving the of the divine ideas. The constructor of the
universe was, therefore, hindered from realizing his ideal and fully
executing his design by the defectiveness of his material. He was like
an architect who has only soft, crumbling stone, or a sculptor with
veined marble. From this source, according to Plato, is all the evil
existing in the universe.

The Persians, whose great master was Zoroaster, resorted to the theory
of two subordinate creators, both the offspring of the Supreme Being,
one Ormusd, being good, and the other Ahriman, being evil. All that is
good in the creation comes from the first, and all the evil from the
second of these great master-mechanics. Ahriman is destined, however,
to be eventually converted, with all his liege subjects, his botched
workmanship will be repaired, and the universe will come all right in
the end. This ingenious theory left out, however, one essential point;
namely, how Ahriman came to have an evil nature, since he was created
by the good God as well as Ormusd, and how he and his works could
become good, if they were essentially evil.

Manes and the Manichaeans carried their dualism to a point of more
complete consistency, and more absolute absurdity. They taught the
existence of two eternal, self-existing principles, one good, the
other bad, who are engaged in perpetual warfare. Spiritual existences
proceed from the good principle, corporeal existences from the evil
one. Human souls, having been in some way allured into corporeal
forms, are polluted by them and involved in evil. It is necessary for
the soul to disengage itself from matter, and it will then be fit to
return to the supremely good being from whom it proceeded.

Any system which teaches that evil has anything essential or
substantive, must give up the pure dogma of creation. For it is
inconsistent with that dogma to suppose that God can create anything
essentially evil, or that any creature can create anything, or that
any substance essentially good can become essentially evil by
corruption; since corruption produces no new substance, but modifies
substance already existing.

{292}

_Whence_, then, and _what_ is evil? What can there be as an
alternative of good before the intelligence and will of a rational
creature to form the material for a dilemma, and oblige him to
exercise a faculty of choice? Where is the substratum of a state of
probation?

Metaphysical evil, or that evil which is included in the metaphysical
essence of all created things, is merely the limitation of their
possible good. Simple being, _ens simpliciter_, is alone the absolute
good in possibility and in act. Jesus Christ has said, "There is one
good, God."  [Footnote 62] In actual existences, evil is merely a
recession from God. It is only relative, and negative, therefore, and
expresses the absence of that good which exists in some other
creature, or in God. In created existences, good is relative and
positive, and evil, or the absence of good, is relative and privative.
It is a mere deficiency, but nothing substantive, any more than
darkness, cold, or vacuity are substantive.

  [Footnote 62: St. Matt. xix. 17.]

If we can suppose, therefore, a certain good proposed to a rational
creature as attainable by his free volition, with a power to the
contrary, we have the necessary conditions of a state of moral
probation. That is, the possibility is proved of a certain good being
made contingent on the voluntary choice of rational creatures; and
with it, the possibility of this good being forfeited by the
deficiency of this choice. This answers the question whence and what
is the possibility of evil as the concomitant risk annexed to a state
of probation. It is only necessary, therefore, to show that we can
make this supposition, by explaining how the will can be constituted
in an equilibrium between this proffered good and some other object,
with complete liberty to incline itself to either.

That other object cannot be an essentially evil object, for there is
no such thing in existence. It must be, then, an inferior good. In the
state of probation the will is inclined to all kinds of good
indifferently, and capable of choosing any which the intellect judges
to be best or most desirable. It is capable of making a false choice,
because the intellect is capable of making a false judgment.
Intelligent spirit has self-dominion where it is not determined by
intrinsic necessity. It is lord over its own acts. It can determine
its own judgments and volitions. And this makes it a proper subject of
precept and moral obligation, capable of being placed in a state of
probation.

It may appear very difficult to understand how this can be, but our
own consciousness and practical experience give us an intimate sense
of it's truth. Let us take, then, a familiar example in illustration.

A child is capable of appreciating the good of delicious fruit, the
good of approbation and reward, the good of play and amusement, and
the good of knowledge. His parents allow him to eat peaches under
certain restrictions, and forbid him to eat them without their
permission. They allow him to play at certain times and under certain
conditions, and forbid him all other amusement and recitation. They
require him to devote a certain time to study, and to apply himself to
this study with diligence. It is plain that the will of the child is
in equilibrium toward all the various kinds of good in respect to
which he receives precepts from his parents, and is thus placed in a
state of probation, the issue of which is in great measure left to the
arbitration of his own free choice. He can determine himself to obey
his parents for the sake of their approbation and rewards, or to
disobey them for the sake of eating forbidden fruit. He can determine
himself to study for the sake of knowledge, or to neglect it for the
sake of play. When he determines himself to the inferior, sensible
good, he does so by a false judgment, that in the particular instance
the present sensible enjoyment is best for him for most desirable. Yet
he has power to the contrary, and both can and ought to make a right
judgment. He is determined to neither side by any {293} necessity, but
determines himself and destroys the equilibrium of his will by a free
choice, by virtue of his self-dominion. The necessity of exercising
this self-dominion proceeds from imperfection of nature. It is easily
conceivable that his nature, if it were rendered more perfect, would
determine him always to prefer the approbation of parents, and of his
own conscience, of the pleasure of eating fruit, and the pleasure of
knowledge to that of play.

This illustrates our present point, and shows how the imperfection of
an intelligent creature, which makes him capable of false judgments in
regard to the eligibility of different objects of volition, renders
him a fit subject of probation.

But why is he created in this imperfect state, and obliged to run the
risks of a difficult and dangerous probation? It is evident that God
might easily pour such a flood of light upon his intelligence that he
would be incapable of making a false judgment, and communicate to him
such a degree of felicity in the enjoyment of the true good, that his
will would be rapt away without effort beyond all possibility of
attraction from any inferior objects. He might communicate the
beatific vision simultaneously with the first act of reason, as the
does to those infants who are translated to heaven in their infancy.
Thus he might secure the eternal beatitude of all intelligent
creatures without placing any of them in probation.

It is evident that God must have a reason for establishing a state of
probation, and that this reason must involve some great good to be
attained by it. This reason is, also, in part intelligible to us. So
far as we can understand it, it is, that God and the creature are more
glorified through the elevation of created nature to supernatural
beatitude, when the created nature concurs with God as First Cause, by
its own activity, as Second con-creative cause, in the highest manner
possible. It is the will of God that beatitude should be the prize of
merit, and merit implies liberty of choice. Supernatural beatitude is
a pure boon from God to the creature, not due to him as simply
existing. Therefore, God may bestow it on whom he pleases, and upon
any conditions he pleases to establish. As probation implies
imperfection, and the creature is created for his proper perfection,
when he attains it probation must cease. The period of probation must
therefore be limited. It must be also a real, _bonâ fide_ probation;
that is, the attainment of beatitude must really depend on the right
use of the term of probation. Consequently, when the term of probation
has expired, those who have failed in it must be left to the eternal
consequences of their own voluntary error. That species of virtue
which makes an intelligent creature capable of attaining supernatural
beatitude is itself supernatural, and therefore impossible without
divine grace. When this grace is lost, there is no natural power to
regain it. Sin is therefore in itself irreparable. It can be repaired
only by a second supernatural grace. If this grace is not conceded,
there is no second probation, but the sinner must remain perpetually
in that state to which his sin has reduced him. If this grace is
conceded, and the limits of probation are extended, those who fail
finally and pass out of the fixed period of probation must also remain
perpetually in that state to which they have reduced themselves by
their own free and voluntary election.

Another great difficulty here presents itself, namely: it appears that
the fulfilment of the divine purpose is left to the contingencies of
second causes, and at the mercy of the arbitrary wills of creatures.
God appears to be like one who makes his plans in the dark, without
being able to know what their success will be, or to take efficacious
measures for securing their success. For how can he foresee future
events that are purely contingent on the free choice of created wills?
How can he predetermine an end, to be infallibly accomplished, when
this accomplishment is contingent on the free arbitration of the
creature? {294} The Catholic doctrine teaches that a multitude of
angels and men destined to supernatural beatitude finally fail of
their destination. Does not this failure partially thwart the divine
plan, mar his work, and deprive his universe of its perfection?
Although the divine plan has a partial success, through the
concurrence of a certain number of angels and men with the divine
will, is not this success even due to hap-hazard? Must we not suppose
that the divine plan ran the risk of a complete failure, so far as the
co-operation of free-will is concerned?

It is evident that these suppositions are all incompatible with the
essential attributes of God. He must necessarily have a perfect
foreknowledge of all things that will ever come to pass. He must also
have supreme dominion over his entire creation, and be able to
accomplish all his purposes without any liability to be thwarted by
his own creatures. He must have decreed from eternity whatsoever he
does in time through his creative act.

Therefore some, overwhelmed by the difficulties which encompass the
doctrine of the freedom of the created will, in its relation to the
divine, have adopted the part denying it altogether. The denial of
free-will, however, makes the state of probation, and the entire moral
order of the universe, with its retributions, completely illusory and
fantastic. It is a denial of a fact of universal human consciousness.
Whoever makes it ought to become a pantheist at once, and maintain
that all individual existences are mere emanations of the divine
substance.

The Catholic doctrine distinctly proclaims both the divine
foreknowledge and decrees, and also the liberty of choice in the
created intelligent nature. A Catholic theologian, therefore, cannot
dispose of the difficulty in the case, by summarily denying either
side of the dogmatic truth. St. Thomas Aquinas, with those who follow
his school strictly, endeavors to resolve the difficulty by the
hypothesis of a physical premotion of the will, or an efficacious
grace, which has an infallible connection with a right choice, but yet
leaves the will to make this choice freely and with power to the
contrary. God has therefore predestined, by an infallible decree, all
those to whom he gives this efficacious grace, to the attainment of
beatitude. His foreknowledge is also explained as the knowledge of his
own determination through which all events, even contingent, are made
certain.

This system has a certain hypothetical finish and completeness about
it, and it appears to vindicate the supreme dominion of God over all
contingent existences, second causes, and events taking place in time,
more effectually than any other. It fails, however, to reconcile with
the attributes of God the freedom of the created will and the state of
probation. For, according to this system, the will, although in
equilibrium, and intrinsically capable of motion to either side,
cannot put itself out of equilibrium by its own self-determining
power, but needs a previous, efficacious concurrence of the divine
will, in order to pass from the potentiality of choice to the act of
choice. All acts of the created will are, therefore, determined by the
will of God as efficient cause. If this is consistent with the liberty
which is necessary to the created will, that it may be second and
con-creative cause in concurrence with the first cause to the effect
of its own beatitude, God could infallibly determine all rational
creatures to beatitude without infringing on their liberty. The
creature could evolve into act all its causative activity, free-will
could receive its fullest scope, the principle of merit and reward
could be fully exemplified in the universe, without risking the
eternal destiny of a single individual, or permitting even the
smallest sin to be committed. It become very difficult, then, on this
hypothesis, to explain the permission of sin, and the eternal loss of
so many millions of rational creatures. The reason usually given, that
sin is an evil incidentally necessary to a system of probation, {295}
permitted on account of the greater good attained through the
probation of free-will, falls to the ground, and we have never yet
seen any other satisfactory reason substituted for it.

It may be true that, without this hypothesis, the foreknowledge of God
and his supreme dominion over his creation are more incomprehensible.
This is no decisive argument, however, provided that these divine
attributes can be shown to be intelligible without thus said
hypothesis.

First, in regard to the divine foreknowledge, it is argued that God
cannot foresee that which is purely dependent on the created will,
unless there is some cause or ground of certainty that there will
shall actually place the effect which is foreseen. This cause or
ground of certainty can only be the divine determination to concur
efficaciously with the will, that it may infallibly place the foreseen
act.

To this it is replied, that God foresees all contingent, future
events, by a kind of knowledge called the super-comprehension of
cause. Knowing completely all causes, he knows all there effects in
them. This does not explain, however, his knowledge of the
self-determining acts of the will, since in these the same cause is in
equilibrium to opposite effects. It is better explained, we think, by
the theory of Suarez, that God sees all things in their objective
verity. He knows with certainty all that depends on the
self-determining action of free-will, because he directly beholds the
free-will determining itself. There is no succession in God. He
coexists from eternity and in eternity to all the successive periods
of created duration. What we call future is equally visible to God in
eternity with the past. There is no more difficulty, therefore, in his
knowing from all eternity all future contingent events, than there is
in our knowing anyone of these events in the time of its taking place,
or after it has happened.

But, it is further argued, if God knows the acts of his creatures by
an immediate vision of them in their objective verity, he is perfected
by the creature, which is incompatible with his essence. God is the
adequate object of his own intelligence; therefore he knows all things
in himself.

God is the adequate and sole object of his own intelligence in the act
of simple intelligence in which his essential being in the Three
Persons is constituted. Created existences are not included in this
act, and the knowledge of them is not perfective of the being of God.
God knows them in himself by the knowledge of vision, _scientia
visionis_, and sees them in himself as in a mirror. This perfection of
vision, by which God sees and knows all things which exist, is a
perfection proceeding from his infinite intelligence, not given to him
by the creature. The creature is its terminus, but the changes of the
terminus affect itself alone, and do not make the essential attribute
of God less immutable or infinite. The same objection might be made to
the statement, that created existences are the terminus of the divine
volition or love. The essential act of volition or love is completed
in the act of God _ad intra_, or his infinite love of himself. Yet God
loves the creature, delights in the love of the creature, wills the
beatitude of the creature. That he may do this, the existence of the
creature as the terminus of his volition is necessary as the _conditio
sine quâ non_. It might be said, then, that the existence of the
creature, and his act in loving God, is perfective of God. It is not.
For it is altogether distinct from that which is the terminus of the
divine act of love, in which the perfection of the being of God is
constituted, viz.: from the essence of God itself. God has the
plenitude of love in himself, and it remains the same whether more or
fewer created existences are its recipients. So the infinite power of
vision in God is the same, whether more or fewer created existences or
acts of existing agents come within its scope. There is no objection,
therefore, to the theory {296} respecting the science of God, which
maintains that he knows all future contingents which depend entirely
on his divine decree in that decree, all that depend on second causes
determined of necessity to produce certain effects in his
supercomprehension of cause, and all that depend on free-will in his
foresight of the self-determination of free-will. The whole
incomprehensibility of this foreknowledge is reduced to an identity
with the essential incomprehensibility of God, as eternal and as
coexisting to all the successive periods of time.

Secondly, as regards the divine supremacy over creation, and the
ability of the Sovereign Creative Spirit to bring the universe to an
end predetermined by himself.

It is argued, that if we reject the Thomist hypothesis, we reduce
everything to the hap-hazard of capricious, eccentric, lawless
free-will, which makes it impossible to suppose any plan regularly and
infallibly carried out through the medium of second causes, in the
universe.

This is not so. Free-will is not mere lawless caprice, directed by
mere accident. It is directed by intelligence, and acts according to
the law of motives. It must choose the good, and can never choose that
which is evil, _ratione mali_. Since, by a law of its probation, the
real chief good and the apparent chief good are presented before it in
such a way as to leave it in equilibrium toward both, without any
dominant or necessitating motive toward either, it makes the motive on
one side preponderant by its exercise of self-dominion. This is not by
chance or caprice. It is by the exercise of intellect, and through the
impulse of powerful motives. Its circle of variability is restricted,
and its determination is capable of being influenced by intellectual
and moral considerations. It is perfectly evident that a man, even
without the slightest power of exercising any determining influence on
the wills of other men, can nevertheless, without infringing on their
perfect liberty, reason them into a co-operation with himself in
carrying out a plan, or persuade them into it by proving its
advantages before them. Much more, then, is God able to bring a
sufficient number of angels and men to a voluntary co-operation with
himself to secure the success of his great design. It is in this way
that God manifests his infinite wisdom and divine art, by arranging
all things with such consummate and complex skill and harmony, and
directing all things from end to end by such a wise far-reaching
Providence, that he is able to bring out in the end the desired
result, through the concurrence of free, con-creative second causes.
It may be said that, since all angels were free to reject the
beatitude proffered to them, God, in creating them and giving them
this freedom, exposed his plan to the risk of being completely
thwarted by their unanimous refusal to comply with the terms of their
probation. The same might also be said of mankind.

We must understand, however, that, although Almighty God does not
deliberate, change, modify, watch for results, make experiments,
profit by experience, devise new expedients, like a man of creative
genius, and although his creative art is one, simple, and from
eternity, yet it includes in itself in an eminent mode all these
operations of the finite intelligence. If by an impossible
supposition, God had delegated creative wisdom and powered to a
created spirit, such as Arians fancied the Logos, and others the
Demiurgus, to be; and this mighty intelligence had proceeded to
execute his task in the same manner, but on a grander scale, that men
execute great undertakings, and we should endeavor to describe the way
in which he accomplished his work, we should have a correct though
imperfect representation of the actual operation of Almighty God in
the execution of his works _ad extra_. The conceptions we are able to
form of the operation of God are all analogical. We cannot transcend
{297} these analogies. And although we know them to be imperfect and
inadequate, yet we know also that they have all the verisimilitude
necessary to give us true conceptions. In this way we understand that
God knew all the risks to which his plan was exposed, and made
provision for them. Wherever it was necessary, he protected his
designs from the risk of failure through the non-concurrencc of second
causes. For instance, having determined to create a heaven containing
a multitude of beatified spirits, and foreseeing that a certain number
of those who were destined to this high position would forfeit it by
sin, he took this into the account in determining the number to be
created, and the conditions of the trial through which they were to
pass. A profound theologian, who was of the strict Thomist school, the
late Bishop of Philadelphia, expressed to the author on one occasion
the opinion, that only the lower orders of angels were made liable to
sin. He thought that the higher orders received a grace incompatible
with sin, though not with merit, and that Lucifer was therefore the
chief, not of the Seraphim, but of the Archangels. On this
supposition, the risk of sin was confined within narrow limits, so far
as the angels were concerned. Whether this be a well-grounded
hypothesis or not, it is evident that these pure and exalted spirits,
possessing the highest natural intelligence, being impelled to good by
their nature, having received the gift of supernatural grace, and
having the prospect of a still greater glory before them, were very
likely, speaking after a human mode of thought, to make the requisite
act of concurrence with the divine will and thus secure their
confirmation in grace. In other words, there appears to be an _à
priori_ probability that at least a great number of them would do so.
We know that, in point of fact, a great number of them did, and,
according to the common opinion, much the largest portion of the whole
number who were tried.

Now, this to us apparent probability was a certainty to God, as
clearly known before as after the fact. In view of this certainty he
created them and placed them in the state of probation. He foreknew,
also, how many would fail, and therefore, if his purposes required it,
could easily create such a multitude that the angels who fell would
not be missed from their ranks. Those who fell did indeed thwart the
benevolent designs of God, so far as their own particular persons were
concerned. But these designs were conditional, as respecting
individuals, and were made in full view of the actual event. God could
not be thwarted or disappointed in regard to his grand design, because
this did not depend on any particular individuals.

So in regard to men. Jesus Christ as man, and the Blessed Virgin, on
whom the fulfilment of the divine plan absolutely depended, were
absolutely predestined, and rendered impeccable; Jesus Christ by
nature, and the Blessed Virgin by grace. If any other particular
individuals were placed in a position which required it, they too
received a grace which gave them immunity from any liability to fail
in their necessary concurrence with the divine will as second causes.
A vast multitude of human beings are elevated to beatitude without
running any of the risks of probation. Adam, it is true, was able to
thwart the first design of God in regard to the mode of bringing the
race to its destination. But he could not thwart God's ultimate
design, because he was able to accomplish it by another mode.
Particular men, in vast numbers, are able to thwart the designs of God
toward themselves. But they cannot thwart his designs toward the race.
For he is able to regulate and order times, events, and circumstances,
and to continue creating generation after generation, until, by moral
means alone, he has completed the number of his saints and peopled
heaven sufficiently to fulfil his purpose. Moreover, if necessary, he
can always {298} touch the springs of the will directly, and determine
it to any act which he has positively decreed must be performed. He
can also modify, restrict, alleviate, set aside, or shorten the risks
of probation, according to his own good pleasure, in regard to any or
all of men, with an infinite and infallible wisdom.

But it is again argued, that according to this view, God is not the
absolute cause of all things, nor the absolute sovereign over all
things. The created will has an independent sovereignty of its own,
and God is dependent in certain things on his creatures, obliged to
modify his plans and to condition his decrees to suit their
determinations.

This is not a conclusive argument. It is a maxim of philosophy, that
_causa causae est causa causati_; the cause of a cause is the cause of
that which is caused; _i.e._, caused by this second cause. God is the
creator of free-will, and his perpetual influx gives it always the
power of choosing and acting. Free-will is not, therefore, an
independent, but a delegated and dependent sovereign. God can deprive
it of the opportunity of choosing, or frustrate its determinations. It
is sovereign within a limited sphere, because God has chosen to create
it and give it sovereignty.

If God is absolute sovereign, can he not concede to a creature the
power to do his own will within a certain sphere, if it [is] his
sovereign pleasure to do so? Can he not determine to do certain things
on the condition that the creature uses his free-will in a certain
way, if he pleases? He has pleased to do it. He has made his eternal
decrees with a full view of all that his creatures would do before
him. All the incidental and partial evil resulting from the misuse of
free-will in the universe he has foreseen, and determined to permit.
He has decided on his great plan, notwithstanding the incidental evil,
in view of a greater universal good. Not that sin and evil are
necessary means of the greatest good, or directly conduce to a greater
good than that which could exist in a universe without sin; but that
the concession of the liberty on a grand scale, the particular and
incidental misuse of which occasions sin and evil, is the necessary
means to that greater good. The greater good itself is the obedience,
homage, love, service, and fidelity given to God by a multitude of
creatures who have been left free to sin, and who have not sinned, or
not sinned irremediably and finally.

We conclude, therefore, _pace tantorum virorum_ who have maintained
it, that the theory of the strict Thomists on this point is not
conclusively established. To our mind, the theory which is in
accordance with the philosophy of the great fathers before St. Thomas,
with that of the Scotists in the middle ages, and with that of the
most prevalent Catholic schools since the Jansenist controversy, is
the more probable one. According to this theory, in a system of strict
probation, a physical premotion, or a grace efficacious _in se_ and
_ab intrinseco_ is not metaphysically necessary in order that
free-will may actually concur with the divine will to secure the
permanence of the creature in a supernatural state. Nothing is
necessary beyond liberty of choice and the grace which gives power to
elicit supernatural acts. When the angels passed through their
probation, therefore, we cannot go behind the exercise of their
liberty in choosing or rejecting the proffered boon of celestial
glory, to seek a deeper cause, determining some to choose and not
determining others. They were free to choose; and being free, some
shows wisely and well, others foolishly and ill. So, also, with Adam.
He might have stood, but he did not. He had the power to choose, and
he chose wrongly. By the very same power he might have chosen rightly,
without any additional Grace, The _arbitrium mentis_, the exercise of
free self-dominion, is the only reason that {299} can be given. This
prerogative is indeed mysterious and inscrutable. We do not pretend to
have removed all difficulty of comprehending it. But it is
incomprehensible to us in our present state of imperfect intelligence,
because the soul itself is an inscrutable mystery. Its relation to the
divine will and operation is a mystery full of inexplicable
difficulties. But it is because of that ground mystery of mysteries,
the coexistence of God and the creation, which was the insoluble
enigma of all ancient philosophy. The great Aristotle saw the
difficulty so clearly which is involved in the relation of a
contingent world to the necessary being of God, that, unable to find
an ideal formula which could unite the two terms by a dialectic
relation, he denied all relation between them. He affirmed the
existence of God and of the world. But he affirmed also, that the
world exists independently of God, as self-existent, eternal, and
necessary. Moreover, that God has or can have no knowledge of the
world. For, he argued, God can have no knowledge of the world unless
the world is the object or terminus of the divine intelligence. But if
the world is the object of the divine intelligence, God is not perfect
as intelligence in himself alone, but is conditioned and perfected by
that which is inferior to his own being. Thus we see that the
objection to the divine foreknowledge of the contingent in its
objective verity which is found in scholastic theology, is one derived
from Aristotle, and that the extremely subtle and acute reasoning of
St. Thomas and the Thomists were directed toward a reconciliation of
the Aristotelian philosophy with the Catholic dogmas. The difficulty
lies in the creative act of God, which is a mystery not fully
comprehensible by human reason, and, therefore, not fully to be
explained by any hypothesis or theory of philosophy. The activity of
free-will as concurrent, con-creative cause with God approaches the
nearest of anything in creation to the creative act of God, and,
therefore, is the most mysterious and incomprehensible fact of
psychology. It is incomprehensible in itself, and it complicates still
further the incomprehensibility of the creative act of God. It is not
strange, therefore, that there should have been such a long and still
unsettled controversy in the Catholic schools respecting this topic,
since the church has hitherto abstained from deciding it. Still less
can we wonder that non-Catholic schools, having no fixed dogmas or
authoritative formulas of doctrine to check the spirit of private
speculation, go round and round continually, involving themselves more
hopelessly every day in entanglements from which they can never
extricate themselves.

The explanation we have endeavored to set forth as the most probable
will, we think, commend itself to the minds of most of our readers as
the most intelligible and satisfactory which can be given. If a better
one can be furnished by some one more competent to the task, we shall
welcome it. Meanwhile, we leave what we have written to find what
acceptance it may.

It will be seen at once, by those who are at all versed in these
matters, that, according to the theory we have proposed, the
predestination of those who attain eternal life as the term of a
period of probation is consequent on the foresight of their fidelity
and merit, at least as a general rule. It does not follow from this,
however, that we reject the doctrine of efficacious grace. As this
doctrine is immediately connected with the points we have been
examining, we will give it a brief consideration now, in order to
avoid returning to it hereafter.

In the Thomist theology, efficacious grace means a grace distinct in
its own nature from sufficient grace. Sufficient grace gives the power
to elicit a supernatural act, efficacious grace gives the act itself.
It is therefore efficacious _in se_ and _ab intrinseco_. {300} This
notion of efficacious grace is derived from the philosophical notion
of the previous and efficacious concurrence of the will of God with
every act of free-will, in the exercise of the faculty of choice.
According to this philosophy, it is impossible for this faculty, as it
is for every second cause _in potentia_ to its proper act, to pass
from potentiality into act without a special movement from the first
cause.

The contrary hypothesis, sustained by Molina, the great body of the
Jesuit theologians, Thomassinus, and the generality of modern Catholic
authors, is, that the grace which is auxiliary to the will in
eliciting free supernatural acts, is not efficacious _ab intrinseco_,
but is made efficacious by the concurrence of free-will. This implies
a different notion of divine concurrence from the one just stated,
according to which the influx of divine power into free, spontaneous,
active second causes gives merely an aid which is indeterminate,
leaving free-will to its own election among two or more terms upon
which it can direct this indeterminate aid. When an artilleryman
sights his gun, the divine power which supports and gives efficiency
to all natural laws and forces must propel the ball. But this divine
power stands ready at his disposal, and will propel the ball in
whatever direction, toward whatever point, he selects. So it is with
the choice of free-will.

We have already indicated our adhesion to this latter hypothesis. It
is far more in accordance with the doctrine of the Fathers, Latin as
well as Greek, including St. Augustine himself, than the other. The
former one was wholly unknown to the Greek Fathers, and does not
appear in the Latin Fathers before the Pelagian controversy. Even
after this period it appears, in the writings of St. Augustine and
others of his school, in an entirely different form from that which
was given to it by St. Thomas. That is to say, it is applied to the
case of fallen man, who is supposed to need an efficacious grace on
account of the weakness of his will, and to receive it as a special
gift of mercy through Christ. The perseverance of those angels who
stood their trial successfully is attributed, not to a grace
efficacious _ab intrinseco_, which was withheld from the other angels,
but to a right use of the same grace which was equally conceded to
all, and abused by some. So, also, the fall of Adam is attributed
simply to his failure of concurrence with a grace which needed only
his concurrence in order to become efficacious, but was frustrated of
its effect by his abuse of his own free-will. Moreover, all that St.
Augustine says about efficacious grace in fallen man is reconcilable
with the doctrine of congruity and sometimes directly favors it, as is
proved by Antoine and others who have written in vindication of his
theology from Jansenist perversions. This doctrine of congruity has
been introduced in order to explain more satisfactorily the perfect
liberty of the will, without denying the existence of efficacious
grace differing _in actu primo_, or antecedently to the consent of the
will, from grace merely sufficient. Although the opinion that the
actual efficacy of divine grace is to the sought exclusively in the
consent of the will has not been condemned, it has nevertheless been
received with disfavor and generally rejected. It is commonly taught
that God confers, whenever he pleases, upon men, a grace which
infallibly secures their co-operation, and their final perseverance.
In our view, this doctrine can the sustained by ample and certain
proofs from Scripture and Tradition, and is the only one which can be
completely developed in consonance with the decisions of the church,
especially those of the Council of Trent respecting final
perseverance.  [Footnote 63]

  [Footnote 63: Si quis _magnum illud usque in finem perseverantiae
  donum_ se certo habiturum, absoluta et infallibili certitudine
  dixerit, etc. A. S.

  If any one shall say that he will certainly have that _great gift of
  perseverance to the end_, with an absolute and infallible certitude,
  etc.

  Si quis dixerit, justificatum vel sine _speciali auxilio Dei,_ in
  accepta justisia perseverare posse, vel cum eo non posse. A. S.

  If any one shall say that the justified man either can, without a
  _special aid of God_, persevere in the justice he has received, or
  can not persevere with it, let him be under the ban. De Justif. Can.
  16-22.]

{301}

The reason why certain graces are actually infallible in their effects
is to be found in their congruity he to the character, disposition,
and circumstances of the subject, and in their multitude. The
necessity for them is not a metaphysical but a moral necessity. The
fragility of our nature is such, that although a grace merely
sufficient makes us metaphysically capable of persevering without sin,
we are you sure to become wearied, and through fickleness, weakness of
purpose, changeableness, etc., to break down somewhere. Our own
consciousness and experience teach us that we need a divine and
protecting arm to encompass us continually and secure us against
ourselves, and they incline us to utter that prayer of the Divine
Liturgy: "Compelle, Domine, rebelles voluntates nostras:" "Compel, O
Lord, our rebellious wills." God, who knows human nature perfectly,
can, in a thousand ways, by ordering the circumstances of life,
shortening or prolonging it, regulating the influences which act on
the character, alluring or terrifying the heart, illuminating the
mind, impelling without coercing the will, and adapting his influences
with infinite wisdom to the special state of the soul, convert whom he
will, sanctify whom he will, give perseverance to whom he will, and
still gain his point with the free consent and concurrence of the
creature. "Non est volentis neque currentis, miserentis est Dei:" "It
is not of him who willeth or of him who runneth, but of God who
showeth mercy." The difficulty may still be raised, that God withholds
these graces of congruity and the gift of perseverance from those who
do not in the first instance accept the proffered Grace, or who do not
finally persevere. But this is removed by the doctrine so ably and
strenuously advocated by St. Alphonsus Liguori, that common grace is
sufficient to enable one to pray fervently and do ordinary good acts;
and that by prayer, with the use of other facile means, efficacious
graces and the gift of perseverance may be infallibly obtained from
God.

We may now return to our theme of the state of probation originally
established by God for those who were made candidates for supernatural
glory. We have endeavored to clear our track of difficulties impeding
the clear view of the truth that God established this probation
through goodness and love, or with the simple view of communicating
the greatest good to the creature.

The principle questions respecting probation having been already
discussed, there remains now but one, viz.: what was the precise and
specific nature of the trial to which rational nature was subjected.
This divides itself again into two, one respecting the trial of the
angels and the other respecting the trial of man.

The angels, according to the doctrine of St. Thomas and theologians
generally, were created at the summit of intelligent being, incapable
of error or false judgment in their natural, intellectual operation,
and therefore impeccable in the natural order. Supernatural grace was
conferred upon them simultaneously with their creation, although, as
F. Billuart holds, they may have concurred actively to the reception
of this grace, by a spontaneous act preceding all deliberation. Grace
made them capable of eliciting supernatural acts, but did not
determine them to those acts without the free concurrence of their
will. Their intelligence must have been, therefore, left in a certain
obscurity as regards the supernatural object, in order that an error
of judgment should be possible, or even an act of deliberation
terminating in a free volition. What the precise object of
deliberation and choice was cannot be certainly and precisely
determined. It must in some way have presented the alternative of
either eliciting a supernatural act by the aid of the obscure
supernatural {302} light, or of falling back on the free, natural
operation of intelligence. God must have exacted some act of homage to
his sovereign will, disclosed some condition as the indispensable
prerequisite to obtaining the crown of supernatural glory, which the
natural intelligence of the angels could not see to be just and right
without the aid of a supernatural light. This light was given, clear
enough to enable the will, by a strong voluntary effort, to determine
itself to act by this light, in preference to its natural light; dim
enough to allow the will to turn from it voluntarily, and find in its
natural light a plausible reason for withholding its submission to the
supreme will. Certain passages of Scripture, and the common
traditional Catholic doctrine, indicate that the angels who fell, fell
through pride, and that Lucifer, in particular, their chief spirit, in
some way aspired to a resemblance with God. Some have thought that he
desired to become God. St. Thomas, however, says that this is
impossible, because his intelligence was too perfect to permit him to
conceive such a thought. He explains the sin of the angels to have
consisted in a refusal to accept supernatural glory as a pure boon
from God, and a wish to attain beatitude by the exertion of their own
natural powers.

The most plausible supposition, in our view, is one that may be said
to be contained under the more generic statement just given. It is,
namely, that the angels were tried by the revelation of the
Incarnation. The union of the Second Person of the Trinity with human
nature, the elevation of human nature to divine glory and honor, the
obligation of doing homage to Jesus Christ, as King, and to the
Blessed Virgin, his mother, as Queen of Angels, was revealed, as the
crucial test of the absolute obedience of the celestial spirits.
According to their natural reason, and natural love of their own
nature and kind, it would appear to them a violation of order and
justice to pass them by, in order to assume an inferior nature partly
corporeal and animal, into a hypostatic union with the Godhead;
elevating this nature above their own, which was the highest in the
natural order. Supernatural light suggested to them that God, as
sovereign, had a right to bestow his supernatural gifts according to
his own will, and, as infinitely wise, must have a secret reason for
apparently inverting the order of nature in establishing the
supernatural order of the universe. Those who voluntarily submitted
themselves to the decree of God were rewarded by an illumination which
disclose to them the wisdom and goodness of the decree of the
Incarnation, and the glory which they themselves as well as the whole
universe would receive from it; and thus became incapable for ever of
erring in their judgment respecting the highest good, and consequently
of swerving from it through sin. Those who fell turned their minds
away from the supernatural light toward the consideration of their own
private good, and the glory of their own persons and their own order.
They revolted at the idea of being subordinated to human nature, and
desired that the angelic nature should be the subject of the
hypostatic union. Lucifer, in particular, as their chief, desired that
he himself might be assumed into union with the Word, exalted to the
throne of the universe, and deified. He and his associates demanded it
from God as a right due to their natural dignity, and thus rebelled
against his sovereign majesty, were cast out of the celestial sphere,
and forfeited for ever the crown of supernatural glory. Hence their
enmity to the Incarnate Word, to the Blessed Virgin Mary, and to the
human race. Hence their efforts to establish their own supremacy over
man, and the continual conflict which the holy angels and the children
of God on earth must wage against them in the sacred warfare for the
triumph of Christ's kingdom upon earth. This brings us to the
consideration of human probation, a topic which must be reserved for a
future number.

------
{303}


From the Dublin University Magazine



MISSAL-PAINTING.  [Footnote 64]

  [Footnote 64: _Authorities_: Plinii Nat. Hist.; Cornel. Nepos;
  Giraldus Cambrensis; Anglia Sacra; Brompton's Chron.; Humphreys' Art
  of Illumination and illuminated Books of the Middle Ages; Sylvestre
  Paléographic Universelle (Sir F. Madden's edition); Muratori Antiq.
  Ital. Mediaevi; Lanzi Hist. of Painting; Baldinucci Notizie;
  Froissart's Chronicles; Mrs. Jamieson's Life of Our Lord; Cotton.
  MSS.--Claud. B iv.--Faustina, B vi.--Galba, A xviii.-Nero, C
  iv.--Tiber. A ii., C vi.--Vesp. A i.; Harleian MSS. 2904, 5102,
  7026, 2900, 2846, 2884, 2853; Bib. Regia, 2 A xxii., 1 D i., 2 A
  xviii., and 2 B vii.]


The review of monastic literature which we can present in the limited
space of a single paper must necessarily be a concise and condensed
one, a mere skeleton of the superstructure, not exhaustive but rather
suggestive of the sources where information may be found by others who
may care to investigate the merits or demerits of a subject about
which there have been such varying representations. A complete history
of monastic literature would occupy as many volumes as this essay will
pages, for it would not only necessitate a review of certain portions
of the literature of every civilized country in Europe, but to a great
extent at some periods of the whole of European literature. The
materials of history, the hymnology of the church, the elements of
science, art, and the very woof, as it were, of modern literature,
were all handed down to us by that great institution, whose fate as it
chanced in England we are endeavoring to delineate. We have hitherto
striven to make this investigation a fair and impartial one, based
upon facts not as represented by the biassed pens of Protestant
historians, but upon facts gleaned almost entirely from the works of
men who lived and died in the bosom of that church of which this
institution was the cherished offspring. Still more unreasonable is
the prejudice of many who refuse to award any meed of praise to the
literary labors of monasticism, who look upon the monk as a lazy,
sensual, selfish misanthrope, who have heard of the dark ages and are
therewith satisfied that they must have been totally
dark--intellectual obstinates who wilfully shut their eyes and
maintain there is no light. We may have doctrinal prejudices,
theological prejudices, social prejudices, against monasticism, but
these things ought not to prevent a reasoning man from paying his
homage to the genius which may be found in its works. Genius is
universal; it is not confined to any doctrine, for it is found in all
doctrines; it is not limited to any age, for it is common to all ages;
it does not flourish merely under enlightened and free governments,
for it has lived triumphant through the dull oppression of tyranny;
riches cannot create it nor poverty crush it out: it is born in the
hovel; it is nurtured on bleak mountains; it will flourish even under
the weary training of indigence and wasting toil: like air, light, and
beauty, it is the free, the unbought gift of God.

We have already in a former chapter described the scriptorium, or room
adjoining the library, where books were copied and multiplied by monks
chosen for that work. We will only add to that description what we
glean from the rule of St. Victor--that no visitors were allowed to
go into the scriptorium except the abbot, the prior, the sub-prior,
and the precentor--that the abbot ordered what books were to be
transcribed, and that the writers were appointed by him. At all
periods it was a great ambition amongst the monks to be a {304} good
transcriber and decorator of manuscripts. Not only was it a matter of
distinction but a sure path to promotion; many who have worked well in
the scriptorium were rewarded for their services with abbacies and
bishoprics. In the thirteenth century a monk of the monastery of St.
Swithin, at Winchester, was recommended for the vacant abbacy of Hyde,
as being well versed in the glosses of the sacred text, a skilful
writer, a good artist, and clever at painting initial letters.

In this scriptorium was cultivated and brought to perfection an art
which has been the admiration of all subsequent ages, but which
printing completely swept away, and failed to supply anything adequate
in its place--that art is called illumination. It has a career of its
own, and a value as a beautiful eloquent monument in the history of
the church, and under these two phases we shall proceed to investigate
this first part of the literary labor of monasticism.

The art of illuminating manuscripts was not, as has been supposed,
originated by Christianity, though it was brought to perfection under
its sway. There are two periods in its history, the first goes far
back into the remote past, to the times of the Egyptian papyri,
sixteen centuries before Christ, and the second period commences with
the chrysography or writing in gold of the Greek manuscripts, between
the fifth and eighth centuries after Christ. The more ancient rolls of
Egyptian papyri are written in red, with a reed, decorated by rude
drawings similarly traced, representing mystical scenes of the
Egyptian mythology--some of these papyri, however, are of higher
finish, being elaborately painted, gilded, and extending to the length
of sixty feet. There is preserved in the museum of the Louvre a
specimen of the plain style of papyrus, ornamented with illustrations,
drawn in outline. It is said to be one of those rituals which are
often found enclosed in mummy coffins; it is about forty feet in
length, and is in a good state of preservation. There are directions
on it for the illuminator, such as were adopted also by the Christian
penmen. In the corner of the space left for illumination there was
inserted a small sketch of the subject to guide the artist. The French
recovered also a specimen of the superior kind of papyri at Thebes, in
1798.  [Footnote 65]

  [Footnote 65: Published entire by the Imperial Government, in a work
  called Description de l'Egypte, 1812.]

It consists of a number of religious scenes, comprising many figures
of human beings and animals, drawn with a pen, and brilliantly
colored. It is about forty-four feet in length, though imperfect. It
is more than probable also that the Romans had some knowledge of the
art of illustrating manuscripts. The passage usually quoted in support
of this theory occurs in the Natural History of Pliny,  [Footnote 66]
where we are told that Varro wrote the lives of 700 Romans, which he
illustrated with their portraits.

  [Footnote 66: Marcus Varro benignissimo invento, insertis, voluminum
  suorum fecunditati non nominibus tantum septingentorum illustrium
  sed et aliquo modo imaginibus non passus intercidere figuras aut
  vetustatem aevi contra homines valere, inventor muneris etiam diis
  invidiosi, quando immortalitatem non solum dedit verum etiam in
  omnes terras misit ut presectes esse ubique et claudi
  possent.--PLINII: Nat. Hist. lib. xxxv., c. 2.]

But there is also an account of a similar work by Pomponius Atticus,
recorded by Cornelius Nepos, who tells us that Atticus wrote about the
actions of the great men of Rome, which descriptions he ornamented
with their portraits.  [Footnote 67]

  [Footnote 67: Namque versibus qui honores rerumque gestarum
  amplitudine ceteros Romane populi praestiterunt exposuit: ita ut sub
  singulorum imaginibus facta magistratus qui eorum non amplius
  quaternis quinisve versibus discripserit.--CORN. NEP.: Atticus.]

It is impossible to fix the time when the art of Christian
illumination sprung up, but most probably it occurred when the ancient
fashion of rolled manuscripts gave way to something more like the
present book form; that is, instead of one long narrow sheet of some
forty or sixty feet, a number of square sheets placed upon each other,
and sewn together at the back. The ancient manuscripts were rolled
either {305} upon one or two rollers. The second roller was adopted
for the convenience of the reader, who might roll off his manuscript
as he read it from one to the other; thus one roller was placed at the
end of the MS. round which it was rolled first, then a second roller
was attached to the commencement of the MS., and upon this the reader
rolled it off as he read; it was the duty of the librarians to roll it
back again for the convenience of the next reader. As long as this
mode prevailed there could be no elaborate painting or gilding of
MSS., such as we are familiar with, and this is attested by the fact
that the MSS. of this rolled form which were dug up from Herculaneum
and Pompeii have no trace of decoration. But in the very earliest
specimens of the book form which came into vogue early in the second
century of the Christian era, there were decorations of various
degrees of richness. The Discorides in the Vienna Library, and the
celebrated Virgil of the Vatican, said to have been executed in the
fourth century, are among the earliest specimens of illuminated MSS.
Still the miniature prevailed in these, the decorations in the
Discorides being very simple, but absent altogether in the Virgil,
whilst the miniatures are large and clear. Decoration, however, was
prevalent in that early time, for St. Jerome, who lived in the fourth
century, complains of the abuse of this art of filling up books with
ornamented capital letters of an enormous size. It is there for in
this fourth century that we find a marked advance in the art of
illumination. The most valuable books were written in gold and silver
inks by scribes who were called chrysographi; the vellum was stained
with rose colored or purple dye, to throw up the gold and silver
letters. One of the most valued authorities on the text of the New
Testament is the version by Ulphilas, the Gothic bishop, who lived in
the early part of the fourth century. A copy of this in letters of
silver, with the initials in gold, was executed in the fifth century,
and is now preserved in the royal library at Upsal, under the
well-known title of the Codex Atgenteus. Some of the MSS. of this
period were written on a blue ground in silver, with the name of God
in gold. This magnificent form of copying was devoted principally to
the Gospels and Scriptures generally. To this succeeded as an
influence of Byzantine luxury the style of writing on a gilded ground
in letters of black. During these early periods miniatures formed the
principal features of the ornamentation, but toward the seventh
century, two centuries after the fall of Rome, a change came over the
style of art, and miniatures gradually gave way to more elaborate
decoration. In this age, too, the initial letter sprang up. In the
most ancient manuscripts it was not distinguished from the text, but
from the seventh to the eleventh century separate capital letters of a
large size were the characteristics of the volumes most decorated. It
is to this period that the origin of the various schools of
illumination may be traced. Rome had succumbed to barbarian violence,
and her arts, though decaying, still exerted an influence upon this
new style of painting, then in its infancy. That influence was
naturally stronger in Italy, and therefore the early illuminations of
the Italian school bear traces of the old Roman style. In France the
same influence was manifest, mixed up with national peculiarities, and
this school was consequently called the Franco-Roman. Miniatures now
were gradually displaced by intricate ornamentation, interlaced
fretwork, or twining branches of white or gold, on a background of
variegated colors. But far away in the distant west, in a country
which had never been under Roman domination, and was therefore free
from Roman influence, a style of art rose up of a purely original
character. Historical research has placed it beyond question that in
these remote times Ireland was far in advance of other nations in the
scale of civilization. Her fame had extended over Europe, her
monasteries were adorned {306} with men of great piety and learning,
who were the trainers of the leading spirits of the age. She was the
first to break through the dense darkness of the times, and as she
gave Christianity to Scotland, so she also imparted to the Saxons the
art of illumination. The very earliest mention we have in the history
of our country of an illuminator is of Dagaeus, abbot of Iniskeltra,
who lived in the early part of the sixth century, and died about 587.
Adamnanus, the Saxon abbot of Iona, retained Genereus, who had taught
illumination in the Irish monasteries, to impart that knowledge to the
Saxons; and in the eighth century another Irish monk, Ultan, is
mentioned as having a great reputation as an illuminator of MSS. Bede
also confirms this fact of Irish civilization, for he asserts that it
was the custom to send youths out of England into Ireland to study at
her monasteries. It was from Ireland, then, that the Anglo-Saxons
learned the art of illumination.  [Footnote 68] Later in the tenth
century, a style, peculiar and original, was started, it is said by
Dunstan, who was a great illuminator, which consisted in a novel use
of the foliage, quite distinct from all other styles. It prevailed to
the end of the Saxon rule, and is known by the name of Opus Anglicum.
One of the finest specimens of the Anglo-Saxon school is extant in the
Cottonian library, in the shape of the Durham Book, or St. Cuthbert's
Gospels; it was the work of Eadfrith, bishop of Lindisfarne, in honor
of St. Cuthbert; its execution extended from the year 698 to 721; it
is peculiarly a Saxon piece of art, and belongs to that species known
as "tesselated" Giraldus Cambrensis, who wrote in the twelfth century,
speaks of having seen a similar MS. at Kildare, which was called The
Evangelisterium.  [Footnote 69]

  [Footnote 68: Mr. Noel Humphreys, in is beautiful little work upon
  the Art of Illumination and Missal Painting, has given, as a
  specimen of this Anglo-Hibernian school, a page from the Gospels of
  Maelbrigid Mac Durnan, the MS. of which is preserved in the Lambeth
  MSS.]

  [Footnote 69: Inter universa Kyldariae miracula nil mihi
  miraculosius occurrit quam liber (ut alunt) Angelo dictante
  conscriptus. Continet hic liber quatuor Evangelistarum juxta
  Hieronymum concordantiam: ubi quot paginae fere sunt tot figurae
  diversae variisque coloribus distinctissimae. Hic majestatis vultum
  videas divinitus impressum, hinc mysticas Evangelistarum formas:
  nunc senas nunc quaternas nunc binas alas habentes. Hinc acquilam,
  inde vitulum hinc hominis faciem inde leonis ailasque figuras pene
  infinitas. . . . Haec equidem quanto frequentius et diligentius
  intueor semper quasi novi obstupco semperque magis ac magis
  admiranda conspicio.--GIRALD CAMB.: Topogr. Hibern., lib., ii., c. 88.]

The finest specimen of English illumination of the tenth century is
the Duke of Devonshire's celebrated Benedictional, by St. AEthelwald,
bishop of Winchester, written and painted between 963 and 984. The
first page is a magnificent picture of a number of glorified
confessors; it was written by a monk, of whom we shall speak
hereafter. Up to the twelfth century decorations were the peculiar
characteristics of illumination, although some Saxon MSS. written
during those periods have pictures drawn in outline; but the great
point in all richly illuminated MSS. was the initial letter, and every
effort of art was exerted to make that as rich and magnificent as
possible. After that time we find these initial letters ornamented
also with drawings of the human form, animals, birds, etc, in addition
to the foliage which had hitherto predominated. The coloring of the
period was richer also, and these MSS. so decorated with pictures were
called "historiated," and led by degrees to the fine historical
illuminations of subsequent centuries. Gradually these initial letters
became larger and longer, until their tales reached nearly the whole
length of the page. They were then carried round the bottom, until out
of this progression of the initial letter arose what is called the
"Gothic bracket"--and ornamentation like a clasp which ran round three
sides of the page. During the fourteenth century miniatures were again
introduced, and were improving and becoming more finished up to the
middle of the sixteenth century. The Gothic bracket was also extended
gradually, until it at last embraced the whole page, and became {307}
one of the great features of of subsequent illumination--the "border."
In these borders all kinds of subjects were crowded--foliage,
flowers, birds, animals, and miniatures, and toward the end of the
fifteenth century a background was added, first in parts, and
ultimately entirely. A work which appeared in the thirteenth century
exerted, however, a great influence over the art of illumination, even
down to the time of its decline, three centuries later. It was a
series of meditations on the life of Christ, known as St. Bonaventura,
by John Fidenza, and the minute descriptions it gave of the various
scenes of which it treated formed a sort of ideal, the influence of
which may be traced in nearly all subsequent treatment of similar
subjects, and accounts for their general uniformity. During the
Byzantine period illuminating was confined to manuscripts of the
Scriptures, the works of the fathers, and books for the services in
the church. To these were then added volumes for private devotion,
such as Horae, or prayers four hours and holy days, sometimes called
Missals. Legends, history, and poetry followed, and in the fourteenth
century the works of Chaucer and the Chronicles of Froissart opened a
vast field to the illuminators for the delineation of battles, sieges,
religious ceremonies, public events, and scenes of domestic life. Some
copies of classical authors also were then illuminated, until by the
end of the fifteenth century nearly every kind of formal document was
illuminated, including charters, wills, indentures, patents of
nobility, statutes of foundations, and mortuary registers. But the
printing-press was looming in the distance, and the death-knell of
this beautiful art began to toll. Its fall, which was inevitable, was,
however, gradual. Men could not be weaned at once from these
illuminated books, and a sort of temporary alliance between the two
arts was effected. The earliest printed books were illuminated, spaces
which had been formerly left by the copyist were now reserved by the
printer, and the whole work when it left his hands was given over to
the artist; then the subjects were engraven on wood, and transferred
to the vellum by means of ink and the press; but the manuscript style
was still preserved, and the closest imitation of written volumes was
retained by the early printers, and with such dexterity that it is not
an easy thing to detect some of the earliest printed books from
manuscripts. Perhaps the last effort to illuminate a book by the
printer's art to the extent of the older MSS., was an edition of the
Liturgy, brought out in 1717 by John Short, entirely engraven on
copper plates. The pages were surrounded by borders, and embellished
with pictures and decorated initial letters. Even down to the early
part of the present century books were printed with ornamental initial
letters, and borders on the top and bottom of each page, both of which
may be seen occasionally in the present day, more especially in books
issued from presses which seek to revive the antique type and style.
In concluding this portion of our sketch, we may mention another
characteristic of early MS. writing which exists in some of our books
in present use. If we take up an edition of a Greek classic printed
some forty or fifty years ago, or even less, we shall find it almost
unintelligible, from the number of contractions used in the printing;
and if we go further back still, we shall find these contractions more
numerous. It arose in the eighth or ninth century; the scribes
introduced in the copying of Greek MSS. a system of contraction called
tacygraphy, by which two, three, or more letters were expressed by one
character, which was termed "nexus litterarum." The editors of the
early period of printing adopted them in their type, and they
continued in use down to the beginning of the present century.

{308}

As we have thus given a condensed review of the history and
development of that most beautiful art of illuminating MSS., we shall
proceed to describe the details of the work as it was carried on for
centuries in the various monasteries in Europe. The parchment was cut
into sheets of the required size, and prepared for the copyist in the
following manner--They were first rubbed over with the powdered bone
of the cuttle-fish, or with the ashes of a certain kind of bone or
wood burned and pulverized; a wheel with sharp teeth at equal
distances was then run down each side of the sheet, and lines ruled
across from point to point between which the matter was to be written;
it was then handed to the scribe, who began his work. In the ancient
manuscripts there is to be found no paging or table of contents. The
whole work was divided into packets of parchment sheets, each
containing about four leaves; these packets were sometimes marked with
a number temporarily on the first page, which was cut off when the
whole was bound. At the end of each section of leaves the scribe wrote
the word with which the next section should commence, a practice
continued by printers under the title of "catch-words." If a
manuscript contained several treatises on different subjects, a list
of contents was appended, the initial word of each tract, and the
number of sections. As soon as the copying was finished, the work of
illustration commenced. The outlines were traced with a pencil made of
silver, or brass with a silver point; then the metallic outlines were
gone over with a fine quill pen, dipped in a preparation of lampblack
and gum. There are many MSS. extant originally intended to be
illuminated, but from some unknown cause have come down to us in this
unfinished state of outline sketches. The next step was to wash in the
shades with ink and water of three degrees of strength; at this point
the gilding was done, in order that the burnishing might not interfere
with the colors. The raised or embossed gold grounds were done first
by laying the metal leaf on a thick smooth bed made of fine plaster,
carefully ground; they were then burnished, and if it were intended to
decorate these raised gold grounds with engravings or patterns cut in
the metal, that was done as the next stage. After this the large
masses of flat, painted gilding were added and the colors laid on with
the utmost care as to the tint. The last process, which was intrusted
only to superior hands, was that of diapering, pencilling, inserting
brilliant touches of gold and white, and in fact finishing the whole
work. These two forms of gold work, the embossed and the flat, are to
be found in perfection in MSS. of the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries. They prepared their gold with great care. In the fourteenth
century the gold leaf was ground with honey carefully washed, and the
powder mixed with gum water. In a treatise written by Theophilus,
[Footnote 70] the pulverization of gold for painting forms a difficult
process; he directs that the pure gold should be filed into a cup, and
then washed with a pencil in the shell of a sea fish, after which it
is to be milled in a mortar made of copper and tin, with a long pestle
worked by a strap and wheel.

  [Footnote 70: THEOP.: De Diversis Artibus.]

Then the gold filings are to be milled in water for two or three hours
and gradually poured off. The powder thus produced was to be tempered
with isinglass and laid on a ground of red lead, mixed with the white
of an egg; after this it was burnished with a bloodstone, a shining
horn tablet being placed under the gilded picture. The Anglo-Saxons
used to rub gold filings in a mortar with sharp vinegar, and then
dissolve them with salt and nitre. The principle colors used,
according to Theophilus, were vermilion orpiment, Greek green,
dragon's-blood, granetum carminium, saffron, folium, brunum, minium,
white and black. After they had ground their colors on a slab of
porphyry, they placed them in covered glass vessels under water, which
not only only preserved them from dust, but {309} kept them always
soft and ready for use. The old painters never touched their colors
with iron, but used as a palette-knife a thin blade of wood. They made
their own pencils and brushes, the pencils being made of minever
tails, set in quills, and the brushes of the bristles of the white
domestic pig, bound to a stick. When a manuscript had passed through
all these stages of copying and illuminating, it had to be bound, a
work also done in the scriptorium. The sacred MSS. at an early period
were bound between two wooden boards, covered with engraved plates of
gold and silver set off with crystals and rubies. But the usual
binding of volumes for the services for the church was in the skins of
deer, sheep, and calves, pieces of which were stretched over the
boards, and the leaves were sewn together by the same material cut
into strips. The ecclesiastics were forbidden to indulge in the
pleasure of the chase, although the love of that sport was a universal
passion, and it was with great difficulty they could be restrained
from joining in such diversions; but Charlemagne granted permission to
priests to hunt for the purpose of procuring deer-skins to bind books.
Grants were made to monasteries by other sovereigns of a certain
number of skins annually. The corners of the covers of large
service-books were protected by plates and bosses of metal; there was
a metal center with a large projected hemisphere on each side, and
across the book were too strong loops of leather for the purpose of
lifting it when closed. The service-books of the church were
necessarily very large, because they were placed on a high sloping
shelf, around which the choristers stood while the precentor, standing
behind them, turned over the leaves with a staff from above their
heads. Such are a few of the details of the art of illuminating
manuscripts, which flourished in the monasteries from the eighth to
the eighteenth centuries, when it died in Europe under Louis XIV. The
schools of this art, which sprung up from its cultivation, may be
enumerated by six denominations, as shown in the following table:

GREEK or BYZANTINE, from the eighth to the tenth century: the
_Irish-Saxon, Anglo-Saxon, Franco-Saxon_, and the painting of _Russia_
belong to this school.

EARLY ROMAN, tenth to the fourteenth century, which includes also the
_Anglo-Norman_.

ITALIAN, fourteenth to sixteenth century, including the _Spanish_ and
_Portuguese_.

EARLY FRENCH, fourteenth to seventeenth century, under which may be
ranged the _later English_.

FLEMISH, GERMAN, AND DUTCH, from the close of the fifteenth century.

LATER FRENCH, during the seventeenth eighteenth centuries.

We have already remarked that a genius for illumination and excellence
in copying were at one time sure recommendations for promotion. The
memory of men too who had spent their lives in this occupation were
tenderly cherished; and two incidents preserved in history attesting
the fact we shall mention. Baldinucci, in his History of Painting,
gives an account of two brethren in the Camaldulan Monastery, Degli
Angeli, at Florence, who were most indefatigable copyists. Dom Jacopo
Fiorentino made his appearance at the Monastery of Degli Angeli, in
the year 1340; he is described as a monk of holy manners who, when he
was not engaged in monastic duties, spent all his time in copying. He
acquired an extraordinary expertness and elegance in writing the
peculiar character used in the books of the choir. His talents were
appreciated, and Dom Jacopo was seldom idle. He wrote twenty massive
choral books for his own monastery, the largest ever seen in Italy,
and a great many others for Rome, Venice, and Murano. His fame spread
abroad, and after his death the brethren of the order preserved {310}
the right hand of this scribe, which had done so much good work, as a
lasting memorial of his name. Dom Silvestro, another monk living in
the monastery of Degli Angeli at the same time, excelled in miniature
painting, and to his lot fell the decoration of those very books, as
they issued from the facile pen of Dom Jacopo. His work was thoroughly
appreciated by the great artists of the best ages of Italy. Lorenzo
the Magnificent, and Leo X., his son, were pleased to accord their
admiration. When he died his right hand was also embalmed. Although
this work of copying and illuminating was carried on generally in the
scriptorium of the monastery, yet occasionally a monk had a room to
himself for the purpose, bearing the same name. Giraldus Cambrensis,
in his Life of St. David, tells us that the great bishop commenced
writing a copy of St. John's Gospel in gold and silver letters in his
own scriptorium at Menevia:

  "Scriptorium suum locumque laboris."   [Footnote 71]

  [Footnote 71: Anglia Sacra, vol. ii., p.635.]

Many of the names of great illuminators are lost in oblivion, but some
have been preserved. Of these, as our investigation is more
particularly into the monachism of our own country, we shall dwell
more largely upon those men who were born on British soil. We have
already adverted to the peculiarly advanced state of the Irish
monasteries in the very earliest times. There can be no doubt that
both as missionaries and educators they took the lead in those remote
periods. Muratori, the groat Italian historian of the middle ages,
mentions Ireland as surpassing other nations in the west in the career
of letters,  [Footnote 72] and we have already quoted the testimony of
Bede.

  [Footnote 72: Muratori--Antiq. Ital. Medii AEvi, Dissert. 43.]

We shall therefore commence our review of the English art of
illumination with the name of the Irish abbot already alluded to, as
the first upon record, _Dagaeus_, abbot of Iniskeltra, who died about
the year 587, and excelled not only in writing, but in binding and
decoration. The next in order is the monk _Genereus_, an Anglo-Saxon,
who had both studied and taught in the Irish schools; his services
were retained by Adamnanus to teach the Saxon monks in the monastery
of Iona; and the third, as we have before mentioned, is an Irish monk,
_Ultan_, who, at the end of the eighth century, was renowned as an
illuminator. The seed fell upon good soil, and bore abundant fruit,
for we next read of _Eadfrith_ and _Ethelwold_, both abbots of
Lindisfarne, and bishops of Durham, who, early in the eighth century,
wrote and illuminated the magnificent copy of the Gospels in golden
letters, to the honor of St. Cuthbert, which is now preserved in the
Cottonian Library at the British Museum, and known as the Durham Book.
There is good reason to suppose that _Dunstan_ excelled in
illumination. In a manuscript in the Bodleian Library, there is a
drawing purporting to be by his hand--a figure of Christ appearing to
the prelate, who is prostrate at his feet. _Godeman_, whom we have
also mentioned, was chaplain of Ethelwold, bishop of Durham, at whose
instigation he undertook the task of writing and illuminating the
celebrated Benedictional, which is preserved in the Duke of
Devonshire's library. In return for this work, Ethelwold made him
abbot of Thorney. He flourished about 970. _Ervenius_, a monk of St.
Edmonsbury Abbey, was renowned as illuminator, about ten years later.
In a life of Wulstan, Bishop of Winchester, written by William of
Malmesbury, we are told that Ervenius was his tutor, and that young
Wulstan was first attracted to letters by the beautiful illustrations
of a sacramentarium and Psalter, from which he was taught. "Thus,"
says the biographer, "the youth Wulstan acquired, almost by miracle,
the chief heads of the most precious things, for while those lustrous
beauties entered in at the apertures of his eyes, he received the
{311} knowledge of sacred letters into his very part."   [Footnote 73]

  [Footnote 73: Habebat tunc (Wulstan) magistrum Ervenium nomine, in
  scribendo et quidlibet coloribus effingendo peritum. Is libros
  scriptos Sacramentarium et Psalterium quorum principales literas
  auro effigiaverit puero Wulstano delegandos curabit. Ille
  preciosorum apicum captus miraculo dum pulchritudinem intentis
  oculis rimatur et scientiam literatum internis haurit
  medullis.--GULIEL. MALMS.: _De Vita Wulstan, in Ang. Sacra_, vol.
  ii., p. 224.]

A similar instance is recorded in the life of Alfred, who, when a
child, was drawn toward books by the charm of the illustrations. In
Brompton's Chronicle we are told that _Osmund_, the Bishop of
Salisbury, in the year 1076, did not disregard the labor of writing,
binding, and illuminating of books.  [Footnote 74]

  [Footnote 74: Ipse episcopus libros scribere, illuminare et ligare,
  non fastidiret.--Brompton Chron. ann. 1076.]

Eadwinus, a monk of Canterbury, in the middle of the twelfth century,
has left a monument of his labors behind him, in the shape of an
elaborate psalter, preserved in Trinity College, Cambridge. At the end
of this psalter are two drawings, one of Christ Church and the
monastery at Canterbury, and the other a full-length portrait of
himself. In the same volume are many historical figures, with initial
letters in gold, silver, and vermilion. We include in our list
_Matthew Paris_, the historian, who, although he is supposed to have
been a Frenchman, yet passed his life in St. Alban's monastery, wrote
an English history,  [Footnote 75] and may at least be taken as a
naturalized, if not a born Englishman.

  [Footnote 75: Or rather a continuation of one, the first part of it,
  from 1066 to 1235, is attributed to Roger of Wendover, who was in
  the same monastery. William of Rishanger continued it to the year
  1273, from the point where Matthew Paris leaves off (1259), but the
  whole is frequently quoted as by Matthew Paris. The probabilities
  are greater in favor of his being an Englishman than the contrary.
  His works were admired by the early Reformers, for the bold and
  vigorous manner in which he wrote upon ecclesiastical affairs.]

He is reported to have had a good knowledge of painting, architecture,
and the mathematics. The history which is called Historia Major, up to
the year 1235, was in all probability the work of another. Matthew
Paris wrote the continuation, and copied the whole as it is now in the
British Museum, and illustrated it. The next English name rescued from
the oblivion of the past, is that of _Alan Strayler_, who was also a
monk of St. Alban's, about the year 1463. His work is contained in a
volume called the Golden Register of St. Alban's, extant in the
Cottonian library.  [Footnote 76]

  [Footnote 76: Cotton MSS.--Nero, D vii.]

It is a record of the benefactors of the monastery down to the year
1463. His own portrait is inserted as a benefactor, inasmuch as,
according to the text, "he had given to the adorning of the present
book very much labor, and had also remitted a debt of 3s. 4d. due to
him for colors." Beneath his portrait are two lines in Latin, to the
effect that--

  "The painter, Alan Strayler, here is given.
  Who dwells forever with the choir of heaven."

There are many other portraits of royal and noble personages, holding
their respective donations. About thirty years afterward died an
eccentric recluse, _John Rous_, called the hermit of Guy's Cliff. He
was chantry-priest at a small chapel, founded by Guy, earl of Warwick,
at Guy's Cliff, and from the austere solitary life he led there,
acquired the appellation of the "hermit." He was an antiquary and an
historian. He wrote a life of Richard Beauchamp, fourteenth earl of
Warwick, and illustrated it with fifty-three large drawings, executed
with a pen, which style of sketching in those days was called
"tricking," or "drawing in trick." This MS. is still to be seen in the
Cottonian collections.  [Footnote 77]

  [Footnote 77: Cotton MSS.--Julius, E iv. ]

Rous spent his time in the study of history and genealogy, and wrote
and ornamented several manuscripts, one of which was a roll of the
earls of Warwick. This is the last Englishman who is recorded to have
attained to any excellence in the art of illumination. We must not
omit some of the most prominent of foreign artists who distinguished
themselves in this study, and in the thirteenth century _Orderico_,
canon of Sienna, is mentioned as being one of the most renowned.
Lanzi, in his History of Painting in Italy,  [Footnote 78] gives a
description of one of here's MSS., which is preserved in the library
of the academy at Florence, decorated with initials, ornaments, and
figures of animals, painted by him in 1213. The names of two
celebrated illuminators are mentioned by Dante in his Divine Comedy.

  [Footnote 78: Lanzi--Hist. of Painting, book ii., Siennese School.]

{312}

_Oderigi d'Agubbio_, whom Dante wrote of, was born at Agubbio, near
Perugia, and died about the year 1300; he was the friend of Giotto and
Dante at Rome. He was introduced by Giotto to Benedict VIII., for whom
he illuminated many volumes. _Francis of Bologna_, the other mentioned
by the poet, was also in the employ of Benedict, and executed many
works for the Papal library. There is an account in Baldinucci of one
_Cybo_, who lived in the fourteenth century, and is better known as
the Monk of the Golden Islands, from his custom of retiring from his
monastery at Lerino every spring and autumn to an island in the
Mediterranean off the coast of France, for the wise purpose of the
contemplation of nature. "He would walk abroad," we are informed, "not
only to contemplate the beautiful prospects offered by the shores of
those islands, the mountains, villages, and the sea itself, but also
the birds, the flowers, the trees, the fruits, the rarer fishes of the
sea, and the little animals of the earth, all of which he would draw
and imitate in a wonderful manner."  [Footnote 79]

  [Footnote 79: Baldinucci--Notizie de' Professore del Disegno.]

Would that such an inspiration might steal over the minds of some of
our modern artists! In 1433, according to Lanzi, flourished one _Fra
Giovanni da Fiesola_, a Dominican friar, who attained to great fame as
an illuminator. Then from the monastery of Degli Angeli came again
another artist _Dom Bartolommeo_, abbot of St. Clement, who was a
painter from youth. Vasari speaks of books and beautiful illustrations
executed by him for the monks of Sante Flora and Lucilla in the Abbey
of Arezzo, and in a missal given to Sixtus IV. Two great French
illuminators come next up on the scene, one of whom, _Andrieu de
Beauneveu_, is mentioned in the Chronicles of Froissart.  [Footnote
80] One of his works, called Le Petit Psautier, was valued at eighty
livres, about £120 of modern English money. Another of his works was
The Great Hours of the Duke de Berri, fac-similes of which will be
found in the works of Sylvestre and Noel Humphreys.  [Footnote 81] He
died in the year 1416, leaving a volume of Hours behind him
unfinished, which was bought by the French government for 13,000
francs. The other French artist was _Jean Foucquet_, a native of
Tours, who is spoken of as one of the glories of the fifteenth
century. His principal works were the illumination of a book called
L'Anciennrté des Juifs, and the Hours of Anne of Bretagne, two
specimens of which may be found in Mr. Noel Humphrey's excellent work
before alluded to.  [Footnote 82] The greatest artist in the Italian
miniature was _Don Giulio Clovio_, whose advent closes the history of
the art in the fifteenth century. The incidents of his career may be
found in Vasari; they are eventful; he was driven into a monastery in
early life, when the Spaniards devastated Rome in 1527. He through up
the cowl some years after by the Pope's permission, and went into the
service of Cardinal Grimani, for whom he executed many of his best
works. An office of the Virgin occupied him nine years in painting; it
is still extant in the Musco Borbonico at Naples. He also illuminated
a copy of Grimani's Commentary on St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans:
this is now in the Soane Museum. In Sylvestre's Palaeography,
[Footnote 83] is a copy of one of Clovio's miniatures from the MS. of
Dante's Vision, now in the Vatican.

  [Footnote 80: Chroniques de Floissart, vol. iv., p. 71, Lyons.]

  [Footnote 81: Paléog. Univ., plate 195: Madden, ii. 544-7.
  Illuminated Books of the Middle Ages, plate xxi.]

  [Footnote 82:  Illuminated Books of the Middle Ages, plates xxxi.
  and xxxii.]

   [Footnote 83: Sylvester--Paléog. Univ.. plate 162.]

{313}

Another splendid relique of this artist consists of a large miniature
of the crucifixion, executed for Gregory XIII.; it was brought from
the Vatican during the campaigns in Italy, in the time of the French
Revolution, by the Abbé Celotti. He was called the Michael Angelo of
painters, and died in 1578, at the advanced age of eighty. His last
days were spent in peace, as Vasari tells us "he does not study or do
anything, but seek the salvation of his soul by good works, and a life
spent wholly apart from mundane affairs." _Godefroy_ and _Dutillet_
were two distinguished French illuminators of the sixteenth century,
and _Johan Banzel_ of Ulm, is the one with whom Vasari concludes his
anecdotes of painting. This list is scanty enough, and there can be no
doubt that hundreds of names have sunk in the oblivion of the times;
devotees to this beautiful art, and victims to the negligence with
which the art-historians of the times treated their labors; they
slumber in their unknown graves, but their works exist to the
admiration and speculation of modern times. We have given a very
cursory and rapid review of the rise and development of this most
beautiful art; the most beautiful thing that mediaeval Christianity
has bequeathed to us. We have  endeavored also to give a few names of
such of our countrymen who excelled in its exercise, and it only
remains to say a few words upon its use, as a  work of refined piety,
before we proceed to glean a few historical lessons as to the
doctrinal development of the church, to be drawn from these art
expressions of different periods, for there is nothing upon which a
nation or a community stamps the characteristics of its individuality
more clearly than upon its art.

These illuminations have a great historical value, as evidences of the
life of the times. Were it not for them the past as a life would be
lost to us. We should be almost ignorant of the modes and manners of
existence of our ancestors. We might have descriptive representations
of the deeds they did, but their customs, their habits, their
amusements, and their interior existence would have been lost to us
forever. It is that which enables us to put as it were a soul into
history, to revive a past life in our minds, to resuscitate it, and
make it live again before us; all this, but for the preservation of
illuminated MSS., would have been irretrievably lost. It is from them
alone we can see the customs of the domestic life of our ancestors,
their habits at home, at table, in the field, in society, for those
pictures, though executed to represent a life of Eastern and Biblical
incident, have this peculiarity about them, that the paraphernalia of
the scenes are in keeping with the times of their execution; so that
unconsciously these monks, when decorating their psalters and their
missals, have handed down to us the very best illustration of the
written history of their times.  [Footnote 84]

  [Footnote 84: I know of no better evidence of the value of these
  MSS. than the excellent and valuable work compiled by Mr. Thomas
  Wright, a great authority on Saxon antiquities, called The Domestic
  Manners and Sentiments of the Middle Ages in England. The work is
  compiled principally from these sources, the illustrations are
  copied from ancient MSS., and it contains a repertoire of nearly all
  that can be gleaned from them, forming a picture of the life of
  Saxons, Normans, and early English, as it was sketched by
  themselves--a most valuable work, both for the historian and general
  reader.]


We have hitherto reviewed this labor as a work of art, but we must not
forget its higher and nobler motive. Art may be kindled by the fire of
ambition or the love of gain, but the motive which inspired the
monastic illuminator was a far higher one. Whatever we may think of
what we sometimes call the folly of spending years in illustrating a
gospel or a psalter, we must be driven to the conclusion that as these
monks were situated, it was a work of devotion. No other feeling could
prompt them to give their lives to such a labor, because it was labor
unrequited. In our times, or in fact in all times, men will accomplish
marvels for money, but these men were paid nothing for their labor,
not even the flattery of admiration. In the {314} early periods of the
art, it is true that in one or two cases an illuminator was made an
abbot or a bishop, but those cases were so exceptional that scarcely
half a dozen instances could be found in history of such honor being
conferred upon an obscure monastic artist. The works over which they
spent their long days and longer nights were sent into the church for
use; gems of art they were, but exhibited to no public admiration, to
no applauding critics; there they lay hidden in monastic libraries, in
church vestries, in convent chests, to moulder in obscurity for the
amusement and commercial speculation of an after age, when the life
they embellished had died out in the world, and it should become
impossible to ascertain the names of the men whose busy fingers were
plied with such magic skill. Nothing but devotion could have prompted
such labor as that, and how are we to say that in the eyes of the
Almighty the devotion which could spend years lovingly over the
embellishment of a gospel, to illustrate it with the choicest
productions of genius, and to offer up to it all that was beautiful
and good in thought, fancy, and execution--how are we to say that such
an offering may not have been, under the circumstances in which they
were placed, as acceptable in the eyes of God as the limited devotion
of modern life, with its mechanical modes, its periodical days of
worship, amid long intervals of sin? The devotion of modern times may
sometimes manifest itself in the erection of hospitals and churches,
but we are not always sure that such deeds are free from the taint of
ostentation of wealth or jealousy of hated heirs--to flaunt the one or
to balk the others; but the devotion which found vent in
missal-painting and copying the scriptures by hand in the dark ages
must have been pure; for we cannot, even by the most prejudiced
investigation, discover any sordid or ambitious motive for it. Where
there is no payment we may rest assured that labor is a labor of love.
The best proof of the fact is the difficulty to get people to
illuminate missals now. It was an exquisitely beautiful art, and ought
not to have died out so completely. Latterly however, in the church,
to the scandal of vigilant Protestants, there has been a sort of
attempt at a revival of mediaevalism; it has become the vogue to
appeal to the fathers to sing mediaeval hymns, and to decorate the
corners of prayer-books and the interiors of churches with mediaeval
art; but it has proved to be more a revival of mediaeval forms than
mediaeval devotions. It has also become fashionable to study
illumination--an elegant amusement for an idle hour--and many have
tried it as an art, but it has failed both as an art and a work; as an
art, even in these days of art excellence, it has failed, and as a
work, it has not been pursued with that avidity to bring success,
because the modern stimulant is wanting--it pays not; it is lifeless,
automaton-like, a dead body galvanized, missal-painting without
devotion.  [Footnote 85] But in our admiration of the genius and piety
of these monastic artists we must not overlook one great fact, that
this art is not only a representation of the interior life of the
nation, a representation of its manners, customs, and modes of
existence, but it is also a reflection of the state of the church at
each successive period. Chroniclers may differ in their accounts,
historians may quarrel with each other, but the history which a church
rights in its art and literature, in it's sculpture, painting, and
poetry, is traced, as it were, by the events themselves, and graven by
the very fingers of time.

  [Footnote 85: It must be borne in mind that the author of this paper
  is a Protestant, and we believe a minister of the Church of England.
 --Ed. C. W.]

We take up a manuscript supposed to be written about the year 900.
[Footnote 86]

 [Footnote 86: Cotton MSS.--Tiberius, A H. ]

{315}

It is an evangeliarum. It contains a picture of St. Matthew,  with his
left hand resting upon a desk, and his right holding a pen. On the
next page is the word "Liber," the beginning of the gospel written on
a crimson ground in letters outlined in vermilion and gold; at page 72
there is a picture of St. Mark; all the evangelists are delineated,
but no other figures. In a Psalter,  [Footnote 87] written in the year
1000, the same simplicity prevails. It is written in capital letters,
with an interlinear Anglo-Saxon version. The title-page contains the
figure of Christ in the act of blessing, but the principal picture,
which occupies a whole page, is a representation of David in his
youth, playing on a lyre-shaped psalter, accompanied by six smaller
figures, below which are two others dancing. In another Psalter
[Footnote 88] of the same period there is a picture of the
crucifixion, with Mary, the mother of Jesus, on the one side, and St.
John the Baptist on the other. A Psalter of the year 1000,  [Footnote
89] very fully illuminated, is a fine specimen of the purely Biblical
nature of the illustrations of that period. The calendar at the
beginning contains a representation of three persons at a table, and
two kneeling attendants. On page 7 is a youthful Christ, holding a
large scroll, upon which the word "vita" is written; also God the
Father, as creator of the world, in the Mosaic type; the figure is
hidden up to the face by a globe, and from the mouth issue two blue
lines, representing streams of water, over one of which a dove
hovers--one of the oldest specimens of this conception of the
Almighty. Another representation, on the next page, is the figure of
David tearing open the lion's jaws; then the temptation of our
Saviour--the devil is represented as having a beaked nose and claws.
On page 10 is the washing of the disciples' feet, with an angel
descending from heaven with a cloth. Page 14, Christ appearing to Mary
Magdalene. On page 18, the Last Judgment, in which Christ is most
prominent, holding in one hand a horn, and in the other a cross; below
him is the Book of Life open, and at his side are two large angels
blowing trumpets. Page 30 contains David playing on the psalter; and
on page 114 there is a large figure of Christ, holding in his left
hand the Book of Life, in his right a sceptre, with which he is
piercing the jaws of a lion beneath his feet, and a dragon at his side
is biting the lion (see Psalm xci. 13).

  [Footnote 87: Cotton MSS.--Vespasian, A i.]

  [Footnote 88: Harleian MSS., 2904.]

  [Footnote 89: Cotton MSS.--Tiberius, C vi.]

One of the most interesting specimens of the opening of the eleventh
century (1006) is a manuscript called AElfric's heptateuch, in
Anglo-Saxon.  [Footnote 90] Its principal subjects of illumination are
the fall of angels, the first person in the Trinity enthroned,
Lucifer, the days of creation, the creation of Adam, the fail, and the
expulsion from Paradise. But we wish to call attention to the close
resemblance of the Saxon of that period to our modern English. We
shall quote a passage from the Anglo-Saxon text, which might almost be
translated by the same words in modern English. The passage is Genesis
iv. 9, 10. The Saxon runs: "Tha cwoeth drihten to Caine, hwoer is Abel
thin brothor? Tha answarode he and ewoeth, ic nat. Segat thu sceolde
ic minne brothor healdon? Tha cwoeth drihten to Caine, hwoet dydest
thu? thines brothor blod clypath up to me of eorthan." Which may be
rendered in English by almost the same words, thus: "Then quoth the
Lord to Cain, where is Abel thy brother? Then answered he and quoth, I
know not Sayest thou should I hold my brother? Then quoth the Lord to
Cain, What didst thou? thy brother's blood crieth up to me off the
earth."

  [Footnote 90: Cotton MSS.--Claudius, B iv.]

In the first half of the eleventh century, representations of the
Virgin are multiplied in the MSS. of the period, though not yet as the
predominant figure. In a Psalter of that date  [Footnote 91] we have a
representation of David in prayer; then Christ enthroned, with angels
around him; below in a row are eleven heads; and below all, the Virgin
and twelve Apostles in full-length figures.

  [Footnote 91:  Cotton MSS.--Galba, A xviii.]

{316}

In the representation of the ascension, Christ is the main figure
borne up by two angels, and below are two other angels and the Virgin
with her hands raised in prayer. In a picture Bible   [Footnote 92] of
this period, she is again introduced.

  [Footnote 92: Cotton MSS.--Nero, C iv.]

Page 8 contains a representation of the root of Jesse--below lies
Abraham, then David, and next the Virgin, above all is Christ; but at
page 20, we have the death of the Virgin, and the Virgin enthroned in
heaven. In the thirteenth century MSS., we find the Virgin taking the
most prominent position, and Christ represented as a child; saints,
too, creep into the illuminations, more especially Thomas à Becket,
whose murder appears to have been always diligently inserted by the
monks in their MSS., as we shall see. In a Psalter   [Footnote 93] of
the year 1200, among many other pictures, is a burial of a saint in
his episcopal mitre; and the anointing of David is followed a few
pages after by the murder of Thomas à Becket.

    [Footnote 93: Harleian MSS., 5102]

In Matthew Paris's History of the English nation (died 1259), there is
a picture of the Virgin enthroned as the queen of heaven, with Christ
as a little child; she is bending her crowned head, with her hair
flowing down, toward the child, pressing her cheek against his, while
with her right hand she gives him a fruit. In a Psalter   [Footnote
94] of the same period we find the annunciation of the Virgin, the
visitation of the Virgin, and the Virgin crowned, with Christ again as
a little child.

   [Footnote 94: Biblia Regia, 2 A xxii]

In a copy of the Vulgate  [Footnote 95] the fourth page is full of
pictures; there is the Virgin, with Christ as a child, St. Peter on
one side, and St. Paul on the other; below is St. Martin, above the
crucifixion, with the Virgin and St. John; above that are two cherubim
and quite above all, in the position formerly accorded to Christ, is a
representation of the coronation of the Virgin.

  [Footnote 95: MSS. Regia, 1 D  i.]

In the fragment of a lectionary  [Footnote 96] executed for Lord
Lovell by one John Siferwas, a Benedictine monk, there is on the
title-page a portrait of Lord Lovell looking at a book, upon the cover
of which is a picture of the coronation of the Virgin; on the inner
border of page 3, there is the Virgin as the queen of heaven, holding
the child with her robe in the left hand, and a sceptre in her right.

  [Footnote 96: Harleian MSS., 7026]

After three or four more representations of her, we meet with the
presentation of the Virgin; in the centre is the Virgin crowned by the
first person of the Trinity, who is represented as having a long white
beard; another with the Virgin and child upon the moon, surrounded
with rays; on page 23, the Virgin surrounded by the pope, bishops, and
others, and on page 27, the birth of the Virgin. The office of the
Virgin was confirmed by Pope Urban II, at the Council of Clermont
There are several of these offices extant. In an office of the Virgin
and prayers   [Footnote 97] of the date 1420, we find pictures of John
the Baptist, St. James of Compostello enthroned, St. Thomas Aquinas,
also enthroned, and St. Francis of Assisi receiving the stigmata or
wounds of Christ.

  [Footnote 97: Bib. Regia 2 A xviii.]

On page 11, the Virgin and child seated on a bench with St. Anna; on
page 13 St. Catherine, page 15 St. Margaret, and page 21 the
annunciation. In another office of the Virgin,  [Footnote 98] we find
the evangelists, the annunciation and visitation of the Virgin, the
murder of Thomas à Becket, St. Catherine, St. Margaret, the scourging
of Christ, adoration of kings, and in the most prominent picture the
coronation of the Virgin, in which she is represented as being
supported by an angel while the Almighty is pointing with his right
hand to a cherub who, accompanied by two angels is about to place the
crown on her head.

  [Footnote 98:  Harleian MSS., 2900.]

{317}

At the conclusion there is a picture of the Virgin on a throne with
the child Christ. There are several offices of the Virgin in the
Harleian collection,  [Footnote 99] but we shall only notice one more,
which bears date from 1490 to 1500.  [Footnote 100]

  [Footnote 99:  Harleian MSS., 2646, 2884, 2858, etc.]

  [Footnote 100: MSS. Addit., 17012.]

On pages 20 and 21 are autographs of Henry VII. and Henry  VIII.,
which will justify the supposition that it belonged to both. Its
illustrations include, among other things, the murder of Thomas à
Becket, St. George and the Dragon, St. Christopher, the Virgin and
child, with St. Anna, St. Catherine, St. Barbara, and St. Margaret.
There is a religious poem, illustrated with miniatures, and bearing
date from 1420 to 1430,  [Footnote 101] which elaborately delineates
the intercessorial attributed to the Virgin.

  [Footnote 101: Cotton MSS.--Faustina, B vi.]

The picture in which this is set forth is a remarkable one. In the
lower part of it is a man dying on a bed, at the foot of which stands
death, in the usual form of a skeleton, making ready to pierce the
heart of the dying man with a spear, and there is a black demon, with
a hook reaching toward him; at the head of the bed is an angel
receiving his soul, which is represented as a naked infant; about is
the Virgin, with a crown upon her head, baring her bosom to Christ,
and imploring him, by the breasts which nourished him, to take pity
upon the soul of the dying man. They are both kneeling before the
Almighty, and Christ is represented in a red mantle as showing his
wounds, in token of granting his mother's request. The Almighty is
represented as seated upon a throne, robed in a blue mantle, and
having the usual long white beard; he is lifting his hand in
benediction. An idea was set on foot that the Virgin had fainted at
the crucifixion; and in some of these later manuscripts she is
represented in the act. In a Psalter   [Footnote 102] Page 256, there
is a picture of the crucifixion, with the Virgin in the act of
fainting.

  [Footnote 102: MSS. Regia, 2 B vii.]

Mrs. Jamieson in noticing this fact in her History of Our Lord as
exemplified in Art, has remarked that it was condemned by Catholic
writers themselves. Thomas Cajetani wrote of it as "indecens et
improbabile;" and other writers are quoted by Molanus, who inveighed
against it, and stigmatized it as a thing "temerarium, scandalosum et
periculosum."

But it was at the period of the Reformation, and after then, that
these treasures of art suffered, and the natural iconoclasm of human
nature broke out. Men gazed around them upon gorgeous temples,
decorated with splendid paintings, stained glass windows, marvellous
sculpture, and to their zealous minds it was all idolatry; and they
tore down frescoes, destroyed paintings, overturned altars, broke up
statues, and burned sacred books to exterminate error if possible, not
by the powers of truthful preaching and godly lives, but by the
battle-axe and the bonfire; not by uprooting error itself, so much as
by beating down and destroying its mere evidences.

It was in consequence of this iconoclasm that much of the art
productions of Christianity has been lost to us; nay, much of
literature and history also, for in the sack of a monastery little
discrimination was used, save as to precious metals. We frequently
read of valuable books and manuscripts being consigned to the flames,
but the cups, chalices, the contents of the coffers, invariably found
their way to the treasury. We must always remember this, that human
nature was not wholly confined to Roman Catholics, but that there was
a considerable amount of it among the Reformers. Still, in spite of
iconoclasm, in spite of misguided zeal, sufficient has escaped
destruction, and been preserved to our inspection, to convince us of
the beauty of those arts which sprang up in the wake of Christianity,
though they did ultimately become tainted with human error. And we may
see in all this {318} painting and sculpture, poetry and music, the
marvellous adaptability of Christianity as a regenerator and
stimulant, how it takes up what is good in the world--genius, skill,
love, devotion, and starts them into new channels, with increased
vigor and nobler aim. It took up philosophy, purged it of its errors,
and of philosophers made fathers; it took up science, and bid it labor
to alleviate human suffering, and assuage the physical condition of
humanity; it took up art, and not only embellished it, but gave it an
inexhaustible realm of subjects--a realm in which it has been laboring
ever since, and though improving advancing in each age, will never
exhaust its treasures; it has been, as it's Founder declared it should
be, the salt of the earth; it has rescued the world in moments of
darkness and danger, aroused it from apathy and indifference, purged
it, stimulated it, sent it on in the right way, and brought it back
again when it had peevishly wandered; and not the least evidence of
its purifying, elevating effects upon the fine arts is this, which we
have been endeavoring to describe in the rise and development of
missal painting, that beauty of cloistered: holiness.

--------

From The Month.

THE FAIREST FAIR.

(FROM ST. JOHN OF THE CROSS.)



  "My beloved is the mountains,
  The solitary wooded valleys."
     --_St. John of the Cross_.


  I.

  Mountains, that upward to the clouds arise,
    Odorous with thyme, whereon the wild bees linger,
  Jewell'd with flowers of a thousand dyes.
    Their petals tinted by no mortal finger;
  How solemn in their gray-worn age they stand,
    Hills piled on hills in silent majesty!
  Lofty and strong, and beautiful and grand:
    All this and more is my belov'd to me.


  II.

  Come forth into the woods,--in yonder valley.
    Where rippling waters murmur through the glade;
  There, 'neath the rustling boughs of some green alley,
    We'll watch the golden light and quivering shade:
  Or couch'd on mossy banks we'll lie and listen
    To song-birds pouring forth their vernal glee.
  Wave on, ye woods; ye faery fountains, glisten:
    But more, far more is my beloved to me.

{319}

  III.

  Know ye the land where fragrant winds awaken
    In spicy forests hidden from the eye:
  Where richest perfumes from the boughs are shaken,
    And flowers unnotic'd bloom and blush and die?
  Sweet is th' eternal spring that there reposes
    On wondrous isles that gem the sunny sea,
  And sweet the gales that breathe o'er beds of roses:
    But sweeter far is my belov'd to me.

  IV.

  The roaring torrents from the ice-cliffs leaping--
    I see them foaming down the mountain side,
  Through the green dells and valleys onward sweeping,
    They fill the hollows with their mighty tide:
  Their voice is as the voice of many waters;
    Onward they rush, exulting to be free;
  But ah! their thunder fails, their music falters:
    Far more than this is my belov'd to me.

  V.

  A gentler sound wakes in the hush of even.
    The whisper of a light and cooling breeze;
  It stirs when twilight shades are in the heaven,'
    And bows the tufted foliage of the trees;
  It fans my cheek; its music softly stealing
    Speaks to my heart in loving mystery.
  Ah, gentle breeze! full well thou art revealing
    The joy that my beloved is to me.

  VI.

  Night comes at last, in mystic shadows folding
    The nodding forest and the verdant lawn,
  Till the day breaks, and Nature starts, beholding
    The golden chariot of the coming dawn:
  Then on each bough the feathered chanters, waking,
    Pour forth their music over bush and tree.
  Cease, cease your songs, ye birds; my heart-strings breaking
    Lack words to say what Jesus is to me.

  VII.

  Yea, all the fairest forms that Nature scatters.
    And all melodious sounds that greet the ear;
  The murmuring music of the running waters.
    The golden harvest-fields that crown the year,
  The crimson morn, the calm and dewy even,
     The tranquil moonlight on the slumbering' sea,--
  All are but shadows, forms of beauty given
    To tell what my beloved is to me.

--------

{320}


THE GODFREY FAMILY; OR, QUESTIONS OF THE DAY.



