XII.

THE CATHOLIC CHURCH, AS THE INSTRUMENT OF
THE SANCTIFICATION OF THE HUMAN RACE.


The next articles of the creed are: "Et in Spiritum Sanctum, Dominum
et Vivificantem, qui ex Patre Filioque procedit, qui cum Patre et
Filio simul adoratur et conglorificatur, qui locutus est per
prophetas; et in unam sanctam, Catholicam et apostolicam ecclesiam;
confiteor unum baptisma in remissionem peccatorum." "And in the Holy
Ghost, the Lord and Lifegiver, who proceedeth from the Father and the
Son, {655} who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and
glorified, who spake by the prophets; I confess one baptism for the
remission of sins."

The relation of the Holy Spirit to the Father and the Son in the
Trinity has been already considered. The temporal mission of the Holy
Spirit as the consummation of the divine work _ad extra_ is exercised
through the Catholic Church; and, therefore, the article concerning
the church follows immediately in the creed the one concerning the
Holy Spirit.   [Footnote 180]

  [Footnote 180: Vid. Archbishop Manning's Mission of the Holy Ghost.]

The organic unity of the Catholic Church follows necessarily from the
principles laid down in the foregoing essays. It is an immediate
consequence of the unity of the race, and of the incarnation, which
are two distinct facts, but which have one principle. The order of
regeneration must follow the order of generation. Mankind exist
essentially as a race; as a race they received the original gift of
supernatural grace; as a race they lost it. All human life and
development is generic. The redemption of mankind must, therefore,
re-establish the generic relations which were disturbed by the fall.
Jesus Christ, the second Adam, must become the head of a redeemed and
regenerated race of men, organized in a supernatural society.
Continuity and perpetuity of life are, therefore, the essential notes
of the divine society, or human race regenerated, in which true
spiritual life is communicated to the individual. The sole possession
of these notes demonstrates the divine authority of the Catholic
Church.  [Footnote 181] The continuity of life, embracing integrity of
doctrine and law and the faculty of conferring grace, descended from
the patriarchal church through the Jewish, with the increment added by
the immediate intervention of the divine Lord of the world in person,
to the Catholic Church.

  [Footnote 181: Vid. Leo, Univ. Hist., vol. I. Lacordaire's
  Conferences, and the Works of Dr. Brownson, passim.]

The Catholic Church is, therefore, the human race, in the highest
sense. In early times, one nation after another broke away from the
unity of the race, carrying a fragment of the integral, ideal humanity
with it. Integrity, continuity, and perpetuity of life were,
therefore, rendered for them impossible. The same phenomena are
exhibited at the present time in all nations and societies outside of
the Catholic Church. Partial and temporary developments only can be
made of that integral, universal, perpetual life, whose seat is in the
bosom of the church, and which is sufficient to vivify the whole human
race, if the impediments were removed. The proof, _à posteriori_, or
by induction, of the Catholic Church, must be sought for in those
works which treat professedly of the subject. Our object is merely to
show the conformity of the idea of the Catholic Church with the idea
of reason, by deduction from primary, ontological principles. The
attributes of the church follow so immediately from its primary note,
as the human race restored to unity in the fellowship of God in
Christ, that they require no special elucidation; especially as this
particular branch of theology has been so repeatedly and so amply
treated by authors.

In regard to special dogmas of the church, most of those which present
any great difficulty to the understanding have already been discussed
in the former part of this essay; and the remainder find an easy
explication from the same principles.

The doctrine of the sacraments is explicated from the principle that
the church is the instrument of sanctification. The sacraments are the
particular acts by which the church communicates the spiritual
vitality which resides in her to individuals. They have an outward,
sensible form, because the nature of man is corporeal, and all human
acts are composed of a synthesis of the sensible and the spiritual.
They contain an inward, spiritual grace, because the nature of {656}
man is spiritual, and receives life only from a spiritual principle.
The only one of  the sacraments which presents any special difficulty
to the understanding is the holy eucharist; on account of  the mystery
of transubstantiation which is included in it's essence. The ground of
this difficulty, which lies in crude, philosophical notions, and is,
therefore, purely a spectre of the imagination, has been already
removed by the doctrine we Have laid down respecting the nature of
substance and the proper conception of space and extension. The senses
transmit to the soul nothing more than the impressions of the
phenomena, which the soul, by an intellectual judgment, refers to a
real, intelligible substance, or active force, as their productive
cause. The substance itself is not sensible, but intelligible; is not
seen as an essence by the eye, but concluded by a judgment of the
mind. By divine revelation it is disclosed to us, that the substance
of bread and wine is the eucharist is succeeded by the substance of
the body and blood of Jesus Christ; the phenomena or sensible effects
of the former substance still continuing to be produced in an
extraordinary manner. There is a mystery here it is true; but it is
only the mystery which belongs to the inscrutable nature of the
essence of matter as active force, and the mode in which this active
force produces various sensible phenomena. The definitions of the
church do not furnish a complete explanation of the Catholic dogma,
which is left to theologians; and even theologians do not precisely
coincide in their conceptions or expressions. All we can do then,
after stating the Catholic dogma, is to give the explanation which
appears to be the most probable, according to the judgment of the best
authors and the most weighty intrinsic reasons. This is enough,
however, for our purpose; for all that is required is to furnish a
conception which is, on the one band, theologically tenable, and, on
the other, rationally intelligible.

We may separate the synthetic judgment pronounced by the church, in
the definition of the dogma, into four analytic judgments. First, the
absence of the substance of bread and wine after the consecration.
Second, the presence of the substance of the body of Christ. Third,
the absence of the natural phenomenon of the body of Christ. Fourth,
the presence of the natural phenomenon of bread and wine. In order to
reconstruct these elements of the church's dogmatic judgment into a
more perfect synthesis, it it is necessary to analyze further these
separate propositions. There are three principle, distinct conceptions
contained in them: the conception of substance; the conception of
presence, or relation in space; and the conception of phenomena, or,
to use the precise term employed by the schoolmen, of _accidents_.
There is, also, the conception of the mode in which the phenomena of
bread and wine subsists out of relation to their proper productive
substances, or, the conception of the immediate, efficient cause to
which they must be referred. These first three conceptions have been
sufficiently analyzed in a former part of this treatise. The absence
of the substance of bread and wine after consecration may be
explained, in accordance with the conception of substance, by
annihilation, removal, or identification with the substance of the
body of Christ. The senses cannot take cognizance of its presence
before consecration, it being there office merely to report phenomena;
they cannot, consequently, take cognizance of its absence. They are
not, therefore, deceived in reporting the phenomena as unchanged after
the consecration, since they really remain unchanged; nor is the mind
qualified to pronounce on the report of the senses, that the substance
is unchanged, by an intellectual judgment; since the judgment which
would otherwise be validly made is superseded by a divine judgment,
made known through revelation, that in this instance the substance has
been {657} changed for another by the creative power of God. The
simplest mode of conceiving the effect of consecration on the
substances of the bread and wine is to suppose their annihilation. St.
Thomas, however, denies that they are annihilated, because the
terminus of annihilation is nothing, whereas the terminus of the act
of transubstantiation is the body of Christ. In plain words, the
argument is: if the substances were annihilated, the effect of
consecration would be properly expressed by saying that they are
reduced to nothing, whereas the language of the church is, that they
are converted into the body and blood of Christ. The same argument
applies to the notion of their removal elsewhere. Nevertheless, since
they are not supposed to be annihilated or removed simply for the sake
of getting rid of them, and their destruction or removal is not the
end or final term of the act of divine power, but only its proximate
term, in order to the substitution of the body of Christ, this
argument is not decisive. It is proper to say that the substance of
bread is changed into the body of Christ, if the body of Christ is
substituted for it; The natural phenomena which formerly indicated the
presence of the one substance remaining the same, and indicating the
presence of the other substance instead of that of the former
substance.

Another explanation is based on the notion of one generic substance
individualized in all distinct, material existences. According to this
explanation, the bread and wine, being deprived of their individual
existence, are not thereby destroyed; but, as it were, withdrawn into
the generic substance, which is identical with the substance
individualized in the body of Christ; and therefore properly said to
be converted into the substance of his body. We are unable to
understand how the notion on which this explanation is based, which
appears to require us to accept the realism of William de Champeaux
and the schoolmen, can be made intelligible; and, therefore, prefer
the former, which, we believe, is the one more commonly adopted.

The presence of the body of Christ, without its natural phenomena, and
under the phenomena of bread and wine; which presents usually much the
greatest difficulty to the understanding, is really capable of a much
more easy and certain explanation. It is present not by its extension,
but by its pure substance, or _vis activa_, that is, as Perrone says,
_per modum spiritâs_, after the manner of spirit. Spirit, as all
Catholic philosophers teach, is related to objects in space, by the
application of its intrinsic force to them. The presence of the body
of Christ in the eucharist is, therefore, the application of its _vis
activa_; which is, indeed, finite, but, by virtue of its supreme
excellence in the created order, through the hypostatic union,
commensurate with the whole created universe and all its particular
parts. The body of Christ, therefore, while it is circumscribed as to
its extension; and, according to the ordinary sense of the word, is
present only in one place; is, in a different but real sense, present
everywhere where the species of the eucharist are present. These
species or phenomena of bread and wine in the eucharist, are the signs
indicating its presence by its substantial force or _vis activa_. They
may be produced, as every one will admit they can be, by the immediate
act of God; or, by the _vis activa_ of the body of Christ; which, as a
perfect body containing eminently all the perfection of inferior
material substances, can produce their proper effects. The body and
blood of Christ contain substantially and essentially the virtue of
bread and wine, and, being in hypostatic union with the divine nature,
may be capable of producing the phenomena and effects proceeding
naturally from this virtue in many places at once. It appears to us
more in accordance with the language of Scripture and the church to
make this latter supposition. We sum up, there fore, the explanation
of the mystery {658} which appears to us the most probable and
rational, in this short formula. By the effect of the divine power,
exercised through the act of consecrating the eucharist; the sensible
phenomena, indicating before the act the presence of the _vis activa_,
of bread and wine, cease to indicate it; and indicate instead of it,
the presence of the _vis activa_ of the body and blood of Christ, The
language of the definition pronounced by the church is thus exactly
verified. There is a change of substance, without any change of
phenomena. There is a transition of the substance of the bread and
wine; which ceases either altogether as a distinct existence, or, at
least, as the cause of the phenomena; in order to give way to the
substance of the body of Christ; which is properly called a
transubstantiation.

The mystery still remains, and must remain, incomprehensible by the
human understanding, however clear the explanation of the difficulties
which beset it may be made. Neither the senses nor the intellect can
perceive the presence of Jesus Christ in the eucharist. It is believed
by an act of faith in the word of Jesus Christ. The mode of this
substantial presence and of its action on the soul is, moreover, but
dimly apprehended; because substance itself, as a _vis activa_, and
the mode of its activity, are impenetrable to reason. The rational
argument respecting the dogma of faith, therefore, merely proves that
it is not contrary to reason; and that it is partially intelligible by
analogy with other known truths and facts. We thus understand that the
presence f Jesus Christ in the species of the eucharist is _possible_.
And, the revelation of its reality once made, we see also its fitness.
It is most fitting and congruous that Jesus Christ should unite
himself in the most perfect manner which is consistent with the
condition of man in this life, with his human brethren; and that this
union should be manifested to the senses. This is accomplished in the
eucharist in such a way that the intellect, the imagination, or the
heart of man, cannot conceive or desire anything more perfect and
admirable.   [Footnote 182]

  [Footnote 182:  _Vide_ F. Dalgairn's on the Holy Communion for a
  more complete elucidation of the philosophy of substance and accidents.]

We shall simply note with the greatest brevity the remaining doctrines
whose consideration falls under the present head.

The absolute necessity of grace for works worthy of eternal life, and
the inability of man to perform them by his natural strength, is
explained by the supernatural principle of which we have already given
exposition.

The merit of good works is explained by the doctrine of probation; and
the distinction between this kind of merit and the merits of Christ,
as well as their natural relation and harmony, is obvious from the
exposition which has been made of the latter.

The Catholic doctrine respecting the Blessed Virgin and the Saints is
explained by the doctrine already laid down of the glorification and
deification of human nature through the incarnation.

The whole exterior and visible _cultus_ of Catholic worship is
explained by the doctrine, of sensible things as signs and
representations of the invisible, and of the essentially corporeal
constitution of man. These, and all other particulars of Catholic
doctrine, are contained in the universal or Catholic idea, which
shines by its own light, and proves itself by its sublimity,
integrity, symmetry, and correspondence with all the analogies of the
natural world.


