PART IV. THE COROLLARY

FOR the rest (says Plutarch, closing up the story of Lycurgus) when he
saw that his government had taken root, and was in the very plantation
strong enough to stand by itself, he conceived such a delight within
him, as God is described by Plato to have done when he had finished the
creation of the world, and saw his own orbs move below him: for in the
art of man (being the imitation of nature, which is the art of God)
there is nothing so like the first call of beautiful order out of chaos
and confusion, as the architecture of a well-ordered commonwealth.
Wherefore Lycurgus, seeing in effect that his orders were good, fell
into deep contemplation how he might render them, so far as could be
effected by human providence, unalterable and immortal. To which end he
assembled the people, and remonstrated to them: That for aught he could
perceive, their policy was already such, and so well established, as was
sufficient to entail upon them and theirs all that virtue and felicity
whereof human life is capable: nevertheless that there being another
thing of greater concern than all the rest, whereof he was not yet
provided to give them a perfect account, nor could till he had consulted
the oracle of Apollo, he desired that they would observe his laws
without any change or alteration whatsoever till his return from
Delphos; to which all the people cheerfully and unanimously engaged
themselves by promise, desiring him that he would make as much haste
as he could. But Lycurgus, before he went, began with the kings and the
senators, and thence taking the whole people in order, made them all
swear to that which they had promised, and then took his journey. Being
arrived at Delphos, he sacrificed to Apollo, and afterward inquired
if the policy which he had established was good and sufficient for a
virtuous and happy life?

By the way, it has been a maxim with legislators not to give checks to
the present superstition, but to make the best use of it, as that which
is always the most powerful with the people; otherwise, though Plutarch,
being a priest, was interested in the cause, there is nothing plainer
than Cicero, in his book “De Divinatione” has made it, that there was
never any such thing as an oracle, except in the cunning of the priests.
But to be civil to the author, the god answered to Lycurgus that
his policy was exquisite, and that his city, holding to the strict
observation of his form of government, should attain to the height of
fame and glory. Which oracle Lycurgus causing to be written, failed not
of transmitting to his Lacedaemon. This done, that his citizens might
be forever inviolably bound by their oath, that they would alter nothing
till his return, he took so firm a resolution to die in the place, that
from thenceforward, receiving no manner of food, he soon after performed
it accordingly. Nor was he deceived in the consequence; for his city
became the first in glory and excellency of government in the whole
world. And so much for Lycurgus, according to Plutarch.

My Lord Archon, when he beheld not only the rapture of motion, but
of joy and harmony, into which his spheres (without any manner of
obstruction or interfering, but as if it had been naturally) were
cast, conceived not less of exultation in his spirit; but saw no more
necessity or reason why he should administer an oath to the Senate and
the people that they would observe his institutions, than to a man
in perfect health and felicity of constitution that he would not kill
himself. Nevertheless whereas Christianity, though it forbids violent
hands, consists no less in self-denial than any other religion, he
resolved that all unreasonable desires should die upon the spot; to
which end that no manner of food might be left to ambition, he entered
into the Senate with a unanimous applause, and having spoken of his
government as Lycurgus did when he assembled the people, he abdicated
the magistracy of Archon. The Senate, as struck with astonishment,
continued silent, men upon so sudden an accident being altogether
unprovided of what to say; till the Archon withdrawing, and being almost
at the door, divers of the knights flew from their places, offering as
it were to lay violent hands on him, while he escaping, left the Senate
with the tears in their eyes, of children that had lost their father and
to rid himself of all further importunity, retired to a country house of
his, being remote, and very private, insomuch that no man could tell for
some time what was become of him.

Thus the law-maker happened to be the first object and reflection of the
law made; for as liberty of all things is the most welcome to a people,
so is there nothing more abhorrent from their nature than ingratitude.
We, accusing the Roman people of this crime against some of their
greatest benefactors, as Camillus, heap mistake upon mistake; for being
not so competent judges of what belongs to liberty as they were, we take
upon us to be more competent judges of virtue. And whereas virtue, for
being a vulgar thing among them, was of no less rate than jewels are
with such as wear the most, we are selling this precious stone, which
we have ignorantly raked out of the Roman ruins, at such a rate as the
Switzers did that which they took in the baggage of Charles of Burgundy.
For that Camillus had stood more firm against the ruin of Rome than her
capitol, was acknowledged; but on the other side, that he stood as firm
for the patricians against the liberty of the people, was as plain;
wherefore he never wanted those of the people that would die at his foot
in the field, nor that would withstand him to his beard in the city.
An example in which they that think Camillus had wrong, neither do
themselves right, nor the people of Rome; who in this signify no less
than that they had a scorn of slavery beyond the fear of ruin, which is
the height of magnanimity.

The like might be shown by other examples objected against this and
other popular governments, as in the banishment of Aristides the Just
from Athens, by the ostracism, which, first, was no punishment, nor
ever understood for so much as a disparagement; but tended only to the
security of the commonwealth, through the removal of a citizen (whose
riches or power with a party was suspected) out of harm’s way for the
space of ten years, neither to the diminution of his estate or
honor. And next, though the virtue of Aristides might in itself be
unquestioned, yet for him under the name of the Just to become universal
umpire of the people in all cases, even to the neglect of the legal ways
and orders of the commonwealth, approached so much to the prince, that
the Athenians, doing Aristides no wrong, did their government no more
than right in removing him; which therefore is not so probable to have
come to pass, as Plutarch presumes, through the envy of Themistocles,
seeing Aristides was far more popular than Themistocles, who soon after
took the same walk upon a worse occasion. Wherefore as Machiavel,
for anything since alleged, has irrefragably proved that popular
governments are of all others the least ungrateful, so the obscurity,
I say, into which my Lord Archon had now withdrawn himself caused a
universal sadness and clouds in the minds of men upon the glory of his
rising commonwealth.

Much had been ventilated in private discourse, and the people (for
the nation was yet divided into parties that had not lost their
animosities), being troubled, bent their eyes upon the Senate,
when after some time spent in devotion, and the solemn action of
thanksgiving, his Excellency Navarchus de Paralo in the tribe of Dorean,
lord strategus of Oceana (though in a new commonwealth a very prudent
magistrate) proposed his part or opinion in such a manner to the Council
of State, that, passing the ballot of the same with great unanimity
and applause, it was introduced into the Senate, where it passed with
greater. Wherefore the decree being forthwith printed and published,
copies were returned by the secretaries to the phylarchs (which is the
manner of promulgation) and the commissioners of the seal, that is
to say, the Right Honorable Phosphorus de Auge in the tribe of Eudia,
Dolabella d’Enyo in the tribe of Turmae, and Linceus de Stella in the
tribe of Nubia, being elected proposers pro tempore, bespoke of the
tribunes a muster of the people to be held that day six weeks, which was
the time allowed for promulgation at the halo.

The satisfaction which the people throughout the tribes received upon
promulgation of the decree, loaded the carriers with weekly letters
between friend and friend, whether magistrates or private persons. But
the day for proposition being come, and the prerogative upon the place
appointed in discipline, Sanguine de Ringwood in the tribe of Saltum,
captain of the Phoenix, marched by order of the tribunes with his troop
to the piazza of the Pantheon, where his trumpets, entering into the
great hall, by their blazon gave notice of his arrival; at which the
sergeant of the house came down, and returning, in formed the proposers,
who descending, were received at the foot of the stairs by the captain,
and attended to the coaches of state, with which Calcar de Gilvo in
the tribe of Phalera, master of the horse, and the ballotins upon their
great horses, stood waiting at the gate.

The proposers being in their coaches, the train for the pomp, the same
that is used at the reception of ambassadors, proceeded in this order.
In the front marched the troop with the cornet in the van and the
captain in the rear; next the troop came the twenty messengers or
trumpets, the ballotins upon the curvet with their usher in the van,
and the master of the horse in the rear; next the ballotins, Bronchus de
Rauco, in the tribe of Bestia, king of the heralds, with his fraternity
in their coats-of-arms, and next to Sir Bronchus, Boristhenes de
Holiwater in the tribe of Ave, master of the ceremonies; the mace and
the seal of the chancery went immediately before the coaches, and
on either side, the doorkeepers or guard of the Senate, with their
pole-axes, accompanied with some 300 or 400 footmen belonging to the
knights or senators, the trumpeters, ballotins, guards, postilions,
coachmen and footmen, being very gallant in the liveries of the
commonwealth, but all, except the ballotins, without hats, in lieu
whereof they wore black velvet calots, being pointed with a little peak
at the forehead. After the proposers came a long file of coaches full of
such gentlemen as use to grace the commonwealth upon the like occasions.
In this posture they moved slowly through the streets (affording, in the
gravity of the pomp and the welcomeness of the end, a most reverend and
acceptable prospect to the people all the way from the Pantheon,
being about half a mile) and arrived at the halo, where they found the
prerogative in a close body environed with scaffolds that were covered
with spectators. The tribunes received the proposers, and conducted them
into a seat placed in the front of the tribe, like a pulpit, but that it
was of some length, and well adorned by the heralds with all manner of
birds and beasts, except that they were ill-painted, and never a one of
his natural color. The tribunes were placed at a table that stood below
the long seat, those of the horse in the middle, and those of the foot
at either end, with each of them a bowl or basin before him, that on the
right hand being white, and the other green: in the middle of the table
stood a third, which was red. And the housekeepers of the pavilion, who
had already delivered a proportion of linen balls or pellets to
every one of the tribe, now presented boxes to the ballotins. But the
proposers as they entered the gallery, or long seat, having put off
their hats by way of salutation, were answered by the people with a
shout; whereupon the younger commissioners seated themselves at either
end; and the first, standing in the middle, spoke after this manner:

“MY LORDS, THE PEOPLE OF OCEANA:

“While I find in myself what a felicity it is to salute you by this
name, and in every face, anointed as it were with the oil of gladness,
a full and sufficient testimony of the like sense, to go about to feast
you with words, who are already filled with that food of the mind which,
being of pleasing and wholesome digestion, takes in the definition of
true joy, were a needless enterprise. I shall rather put you in mind
of that thankfulness which is due, than puff you up with anything that
might seem vain. Is it from the arms of flesh that we derive these
blessings? Behold the Commonwealth of Rome falling upon her own
victorious sword. Or is it from our own wisdom, whose counsels had
brought it even to that pass, that we began to repent ourselves of
victory? Far be it from us, my lords, to sacrifice to our own nets,
which we ourselves have so narrowly escaped! Let us rather lay our
mouths in the dust, and look up (as was taught the other day when we
were better instructed in this lesson) to the hills with our gratitude.
Nevertheless, seeing we read how God upon the neglect of his prophets
has been provoked to wrath, it must needs follow that he expects
honor should be given to them by whom he has chosen to work as his
instruments. For which cause, nothing doubting of my warrant, I shall
proceed to that which more particularly concerns the present occasion,
the discovery of my Lord Archon’s virtues and merit, to be ever placed
by this nation in their true meridian.

“My lords, I am not upon a subject which persuades me to balk, but
necessitates me to seek out the greatest examples. To begin with
Alexander, erecting trophies common to his sword and the pestilence: to
what good of mankind did he infect the air with his heap of carcasses?
The sword of war, if it be any otherwise used than as the sword of
magistracy, for the fear and punishment of those that do evil, is as
guilty in the sight of God as the sword of a murderer; nay more, for if
the blood of Abel, of one innocent man, cried in the ears of the Lord
for vengeance, what shall the blood of an innocent nation? Of this kind
of empire, the throne of ambition, and the quarry of a mighty hunter, it
has been truly said that it is but a great robbery. But if Alexander
had restored the liberty of Greece, and propagated it to mankind, he had
done like my Lord Archon, and might have been truly called the Great.
Alexander cared not to steal a victory that would be given; but my Lord
Archon has torn away a victory which had been stolen, while we went
tamely yielding up obedience to a nation reaping in our fields,
whose fields he has subjected to our empire, and nailed them with his
victorious sword to their native Caucasus.

“Machiavel gives a handsome caution: ‘Let no man,’ says he, ‘be
circumvented with the glory of Caesar, from the false reflection of
their pens, who through the longer continuance of his empire in the name
than in the family, changed their freedom for flattery. But if a man
would know truly what the Romans thought of Caesar, let them observe
what they said of Catiline.’” And yet by how much he who has perpetrated
some heinous crime is more execrable than he who did but attempt it, by
so much is Caesar more execrable than Catiline. On the contrary, let
him that would know what ancient and heroic times, what the Greeks and
Romans would both have thought and said of my Lord Archon, observe what
they thought and said of Solon, Lycurgus, Brutus, and Publicola. And yet
by how much his virtue, that is crowned with the perfection of his work,
is beyond theirs, who were either inferior in their aim, or in their
performance; by so much is my Lord Archon to be preferred before Solon,
Lycurgus, Brutus, and Publicola.

“Nor will we shun the most illustrious example of Scipio: this
hero, though never so little less, yet was he not the founder of a
commonwealth; and for the rest, allowing his virtue to have been of the
most untainted ray in what did it outshine this of my Lord Archon? But
if dazzling the eyes of the magistrates it overawed liberty, Rome might
be allowed some excuse that she did not like it, and I, if I admit not
of this comparison: for where is my Lord Archon? Is there a genius, how
free soever, which in his presence would not find itself to be under
power? He is shrunk into clouds, he seeks obscurity in a nation that
sees by his light. He is impatient of his own glory, lest it should
stand between you and your liberty.”

Liberty! What is even that, if we may not be grateful? And if we may, we
have none: for who has anything that he does not owe? My lords, there be
some hard conditions of virtue: if this debt were exacted, it were not
due; whereas being cancelled, we are all entered into bonds. On the
other side, if we make such a payment as will not stand with a free
people, we do not enrich my Lord Archon, but rob him of his whole estate
immense glory.

“These particulars had in due deliberation and mature debate, according
to the order of this commonwealth, it is proposed by authority of the
Senate, to you my lords the people of Oceana:

“I. That the dignity and office of Archon, or protector of the
commonwealth of Oceana, be and are hereby conferred, by the Senate
and the people of Oceana, upon the most illustrious Prince and sole
legislator of this commonwealth, Olphaus Megaletor, pater patrioe, whom
God preserve, for the term of his natural life, yet remaining of the
ancient.

“II. That £350,000 per annum revenue, be estated upon the said
illustrious Prince, or Lord Archon, for the said term, and to the proper
and peculiar use of his Highness.

“III. That the Lord Archon have the reception of all foreign ambassadors,
by and with the Council of State, according to the orders of this
commonwealth.

“IV. That the Lord Archon have a standing army of 12,000 defrayed upon a
monthly tax, during the term of three years, for the protection of this
commonwealth against dissenting parties, to be governed, directed, and
commanded by and with the advice of the Council of War, according to the
orders of this commonwealth.

“V. That this commonwealth make no distinction of persons or parties,
but every man being elected and sworn, according to the orders of the
same, be equally capable of magistracy, or not elected, be equally
capable of liberty, and the enjoyment of his estate free from all other
than common taxes.

“VI. That a man putting a distinction upon himself, refusing oath upon
election, or declaring himself of a party not conformable to the civil
government, may within any time of his the three years’ standing of
the army transport himself and his estate, without molestation or
impediment, into any other nation.

“VII. That in case there remains any distinction of parties not
conforming to the civil government of this commonwealth, after the
three years of the standing army being expired, and the commonwealth
be thereby forced to prolong the term of the said army, the pay from
henceforth of the said army be levied upon the estates of such parties
so remaining unconformable to the civil government.”

The proposer having ended his oration, the trumpets sounded; and the
tribunes of the horse being mounted to view the ballot, caused the tribe
(which thronging up to the speech, came almost round the gallery)
to retreat about twenty paces, when Linceus de Stella, receiving the
propositions, repaired with Bronchus de Rauco the herald, to a little
scaffold erected in the middle of the tribe, where he seated himself,
the herald standing bare upon his right hand. The ballotins, having
their boxes ready, stood before the gallery, and at the command of the
tribunes marched, one to every troop on horseback, and one to every
company on foot, each of them being followed by other children that bore
red boxes: now this is putting the question whether the question should
be put. And the suffrage being very suddenly returned to the tribunes at
the table, and numbered in the view of the proposers, the votes were all
in the affirmative, whereupon the red or doubtful boxes were laid aside,
it appearing that the tribe, whether for the negative or affirmative,
Was clear in the matter. Wherefore the herald began from the scaffold
in the middle of the tribe, to pronounce the first proposition, and the
ballotins marching with the negative or affirmative only, Bronchus, with
his voice like thunder, continued to repeat the proposition over and
over again, so long as it was in balloting. The like was done for every
clause, till the ballot was finished, and the tribunes assembling, had
signed the points, that is to say, the number of every suffrage, as it
was taken by the secretary upon the tale of the tribunes, and in the
sight of the proposers; for this may not be omitted: it is the pulse
of the people. Now whereas it appertains to the tribunes to report the
suffrage of the people to the Senate, they cast the lot for this office
with three silver balls and one gold one; and it fell upon the Right
Worshipful Argus de Crookhorn, in the tribe of Pascua, first tribune of
the foot. Argus, being a good sufficient man in his own country, was
yet of the mind that he should make but a bad spokesman, and therefore
became something blank at his luck, till his colleagues persuaded him
that it was no such great matter, if he could but read, having his paper
before him. The proposers, taking coach, received a volley upon the
field, and returned in the same order, save that, being accompanied with
the tribunes, they were also attended by the whole prerogative to the
piazza of the Pantheon, where, with another volley, they took their
leaves. Argus, who had not thought upon his wife and children all the
way, went very gravely up: and everyone being seated, the Senate by
their silence seemed to call for the report, which Argus, standing up,
delivered in this wise:

“RIGHT HONORABLE LORDS AND FATHERS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT:

“So it is, that it has fallen to my lot to report to your excellencies
in the votes of the people, taken upon the 3d instant, in the first year
of this commonwealth, at the halo; the Right Honorable Phosphorus de
Auge in the tribe of Eudia, Dolabella d’Enyo in the tribe of Turmae,
and Linceus de Stella in the tribe of Nubia, lords commissioners of the
great seal of Oceana, and proposers pro temporibus, together with my
brethren the tribunes, and myself being present. Wherefore these are to
certify to your fatherhoods, that the said votes of the people were as
follows, that is to say:

To the first proposition, nemine contradicente;

To the second, nemine contradicente;

To the third, the like;

To the fourth, 211, above half;

To the fifth, 201, above half;

To the sixth, 150, above half, in the affirmative;

To the seventh, nemine contradicente again, and so forth.

“My Lords, it is a language that is out of my prayers, and if I be out
at it, no harm--

“But as concerning my Lord Archon (as I was saying) these are to signify
to you the true-heartedness and goodwill which are in the people, seeing
by joining with you, as one man, they confess that all they have to give
is too little for his highness. For truly fathers, if he who is able to
do harm, and does none, may well be called honest; what shall we say to
my Lord Archon’s highness, who having had it in his power to have done
us the greatest mischief that ever befell a poor nation, so willing
to trust such as they thought well of, has done us so much good, as
we should never have known how to do ourselves? Which was so sweetly
delivered by my Lord Chancellor Phosphorus to the people, that I dare
say there was never a one of them could forbear to do as I do-and, it
please your fatherhoods, they be tears of joy. Aye, my Lord Archon shall
walk the streets (if it be for his ease I mean) with a switch, while the
people run after him and pray for him; he shall not wet his foot; they
will strew flowers in his way; he shall sit higher in their hearts,
and in the judgment of all good men, than the kings that go upstairs
to their seats; and one of these had as good pull two or three of his
fellows out of their great chairs as wrong him or meddle with him; he
has two or three hundred thousand men, that when you say the word, shall
sell themselves to their shirts for him, and die at his foot. His pillow
is of down, and his grave shall be as soft, over which they that are
alive shall wring their hands. And to come to your fatherhoods, most
truly so called, as being the loving parents of the people, truly you
do not know what a feeling they have of your kindness, seeing you are so
bound up, that if there comes any harm, they may thank themselves. And,
alas! poor souls, they see that they are given to be of so many minds,
that though they always mean well, yet if there comes any good, they
may thank them that teach them better. Wherefore there was never such a
thing as this invented, they do verily believe that it is no other than
the same which they always had in their very heads, if they could
have but told how to bring it out. As now for a sample: my lords the
proposers had no sooner said your minds, than they found it to be that
which heart could wish. And your fatherhoods may comfort yourselves,
that there is not a people in the world more willing to learn what is
for their own good, nor more apt to see it, when you have showed it
them. Wherefore they do love you as they do their own selves; honor you
as fathers; resolve to give you as it were obedience forever, and so
thanking you for your most good and excellent laws, they do pray for
you as the very worthies of the land, right honorable lords and fathers
assembled in Parliament.”

Argus came off beyond his own expectation; for thinking right, and
speaking as he thought, it was apparent by the house and the thanks they
gave him, that they esteemed him to be absolutely of the best sort of
orators; upon which having a mind that till then misgave him, he became
very crounse, and much delighted with that which might go down the next
week in print to his wife and neighbors. Livy makes the Roman tribunes
to speak in the same style with the consuls, which could not be, and
therefore for aught in him to the contrary, Volero and Canuleius might
have spoken in no better style than Argus. However, they were not
created the first year of the commonwealth; and the tribunes of Oceana
are since become better orators than were needful. But the laws being
enacted, had the preamble annexed, and were delivered to Bronchus, who
loved nothing in the earth so much as to go staring and bellowing up
and down the town, like a stag in a forest, as he now did, with his
fraternity in their coats-of-arms, and I know not how many trumpets,
proclaiming the act of parliament; when, meeting my Lord Archon, whom
from a retreat that was without affectation, as being for devotion only
and to implore a blessing by prayer and fasting upon his labors, now
newly arrived in town, the herald of the tribe of Bestia set up his
throat, and having chanted out his lesson, passed as haughtily by him as
if his own had been the better office, which in this place was very well
taken, though Bronchus for his high mind happened afterward upon some
disasters, too long to tell, that spoiled much of his embroidery.

My Lord Archon’s arrival being known, the signory, accompanied by the
tribunes, repaired to him, with the news he had already heard by the
herald, to which my lord strategus added that his highness could not
doubt upon the demonstrations given, but the minds of men were firm in
the opinion that he could be no seeker of himself in the way of earthly
pomp and glory, and that the gratitude of the Senate and the people
could not therefore be understood to have any such reflection upon him.
But so it was, that in regard of dangers abroad, and parties at home,
they durst not trust themselves without a standing army, nor a standing
army in any man’s hands but those of his highness.

The Archon made answer, that he ever expected this would be the sense
of the Senate and the people; and this being their sense, he should have
been sorry they had made choice of any other than himself for a standing
general; first, because it could not have been more to their own safety,
and secondly because so long as they should have need of a standing
army, ‘his work was, not done, that he would not dispute against
the judgment of the Senate and the people, nor ought that to be.
Nevertheless, he made little doubt but experience would show every party
their own interest in this government, and that better improved
than they could expect from any other; that men’s animosities should
overbalance their interest for any time was impossible, that humor could
never be lasting, nor through the constitution of the government of any
effect at the first charge. For supposing the worst, and that the people
had chosen no other into the Senate and the prerogative than royalists,
a matter of 1,400 men must have taken their oaths at their election,
with an intention to go quite contrary not only to their oaths so taken,
but to their own interest; for being estated in the sovereign power,
they must have decreed it from themselves (such an example for which
there was never any experience, nor can there be any reason), or holding
it, it must have done in their hands as well every wit as in any other.
Furthermore, they must have removed the government from a foundation
that apparently would hold, to set it upon another which apparently
would not hold; which things if they could not come to pass, the Senate
and the people consisting wholly of royalists, much less by a parcel of
them elected. But if the fear of the Senate and of the people derived
from a party without, such a one as would not be elected, nor engage
themselves to the commonwealth by an oath; this again must be so large,
as would go quite contrary to their own interest, they being as free and
as fully estated in their liberty as any other, or so narrow that they
could do no hurt, while the people being in arms, and at the beck of the
strategus, every tribe would at any time make a better army than such
a party; and there being no parties at home, fears from abroad would
vanish. But seeing it was otherwise determined by the Senate and the
people, the best course was to take that which they held the safest, in
which, with his humble thanks for their great bounty, he was resolved to
serve them with all duty and obedience.

A very short time after the royalists, now equal citizens, made good
the Archon’s judgment, there being no other that found anything near so
great a sweet in the government. For he who has not been acquainted with
affliction, says Seneca, knows but half the things of this world.

Moreover they saw plainly, that to restore the ancient government they
must cast up their estates into the hands of 300 men; wherefore in case
the Senate and the prerogative, consisting of 1,300 men, had been all
royalists, there must of necessity have been, and be forever, 1,000
against this or any such vote. But the Senate, being informed by the
signory that the Archon had accepted of his dignity and office, caused
a third chair to be set for his Highness, between those of the strategus
and the orator in the house, the like at every council; to which he
repaired, not of necessity, but at his pleasure, being the best, and as
Argus not vainly said, the greatest prince in the world; for in the
pomp of his court he was not inferior to any, and in the field he was
followed with a force that was formidable to all. Nor was there a cause
in the nature of this constitution to put him to the charge of guards,
to spoil his stomach or his sleep: insomuch, as being handsomely
disputed by the wits of the academy, whether my Lord Archon, if he had
been ambitious, could have made himself so great, it was carried
clear in the negative; not only for the reasons drawn from the present
balance, which was popular, but putting the case the balance had been
monarchical. For there be some nations, whereof this is one, that will
bear a prince in a commonwealth far higher than it is possible for them
to bear a monarch. Spain looked upon the Prince of Orange as her most
formidable enemy; but if ever there be a monarch in Holland, he will
be the Spaniard’s best friend. For whereas a prince in a commonwealth
derives his greatness from the root of the people, a monarch derives his
from one of those balances which nip them in the root; by which means
the Low Countries under a monarch were poor and inconsiderable, but in
bearing a prince could grow to a miraculous height, and give the
glory of his actions by far the upper hand of the greatest king in
Christendom. There are kings in Europe, to whom a king of Oceana would
be put a petit companion. But the Prince of this commonwealth is the
terror and judge of them all.

That which my Lord Archon now minded most was the agrarian, upon which
debate he incessantly thrust the Senate and the Council of State, to the
end it might be planted upon some firm root, as the main point and basis
of perpetuity to the commonwealth.

And these are some of the most remarkable passages that happened in the
first year of this government. About the latter end of the second, the
army was disbanded, but the taxes continued at £30,000 a month, for
three years and a half. By which means a piece of artillery was planted,
and a portion of land to the value of £50 a year purchased for the
maintenance of the games, and of the prize arms forever, in each
hundred.

With the eleventh year of the commonwealth, the term of the excise,
allotted for the maintenance of the Senate and the people and for the
raising of a public revenue, expired. By which time the Exchequer, over
and above the annual salaries, amounting to £300,000 accumulating every
year out of £1,000,000 income, £700,000 in banco, brought it with a
product of the sum, rising to about £8,000,000 in the whole: whereby at
several times they had purchased to the Senate and the people £400,000
per annum solid revenue; which, besides the lands held in Panopea,
together with the perquisites of either province, was held sufficient
for a public revenue. Nevertheless, taxes being now wholly taken off,
the excise, of no great burden (and many specious advantages not vainly
proposed in the heightening of the public revenue), was very cheerfully
established by the Senate and the people, for the term of ten years
longer, and the same course being taken, the public revenue was found in
the one-and-twentieth year of the commonwealth to be worth £1,000,000
in good land. Whereupon the excise was so abolished for the present,
as withal resolved to be the best, the most fruitful and easy way of
raising taxes, according to future exigencies.

But the revenue being now such as was able to be a yearly purchaser,
gave a jealousy that by this means the balance of the commonwealth,
consisting in private fortunes, might be eaten out, whence this year is
famous for that law whereby the Senate and the people, forbidding any
further purchase of lands to the public within the dominions of Oceana
and the adjacent provinces, put the agrarian upon the commonwealth
herself. These increases are things which men addicted to monarchy
deride as impossible, whereby they unwarily urge a strong argument
against that which they would defend. For having their eyes fixed upon
the pomp and expense, by which not only every child of a king, being
a prince, exhausts his father’s coffers, but favorites and servile
spirits, devoted to the flattery of those princes, grow insolent and
profuse, returning a fit gratitude to their masters, whom, while they
hold it honorable to deceive, they suck and keep eternally poor:
it follows that they do not see how it should be possible for a
commonwealth to clothe herself in purple, and thrive so strangely upon
that which would make a prince’s hair grow through his hood, and not
afford him bread. As if it were a miracle that a careless and prodigal
man should bring £10,000 a year to nothing, or that an industrious and
frugal man brings a little to £10,000 a year. But the fruit of one man’s
industry and frugality can never be like that of a commonwealth; first,
because the greatness of the increase follows the greatness of the stock
or principal; and, secondly, because a frugal father is for the most
part succeeded by a lavish son; whereas a commonwealth is her own heir.

This year a part was proposed by the Right Honorable Aureus de Woolsack
in the tribe of Pecus, first commissioner of the Treasury, to the
Council of State, which soon after passed the ballot of the Senate
and the people, by which the lands of the public revenue, amounting
to £1,000,000, were equally divided into £5,000 lots, entered by their
names and parcels into a lot-book preserved in the Exchequer. And if
any orphan, being a maid, should cast her estate into the Exchequer for
£1,400, the Treasury was bound by the law to pay her quarterly £200 a
year, free from taxes, for her life, and to assign her a lot for her
security; if she married, her husband was neither to take out the
principal without her consent (acknowledged by herself to one of the
commissioners of the Treasury, who, according as he found it to be free,
or forced, was to allow or disallow of it), nor any other way engage
it than to her proper use. But if the principal were taken out, the
Treasury was not bound to repay any more of it than £1,000, nor might
that be repaid at any time, save within the first year of her marriage:
the like was to be done by a half or quarter lot respectively.

This was found to be a great charity to the weaker sex, and as some say,
who are more skilful in the like affairs than myself, of good profit to
the commonwealth.

Now began the native spleen of Oceana to be much purged, and men not to
affect sullenness and pedantism. The elders could remember that they had
been youths. Wit and gallantry were so far from being thought crimes in
themselves, that care was taken to preserve their innocence. For which
cause it was proposed to the Council for Religion by the Right Honorable
Cadiscus de Clero, in the tribe of Stamnum, first censor, that such
women as, living in gallantry and view about the town, were of evil
fame, and could not show that they were maintained by their own estates
or industry, or such as, having estates of their own, were yet wasteful
in ‘their way of life, and of ill-example to others, should be obnoxious
to the animadversion of the Council of Religion, or of the censors: in
which the proceeding should be after this manner. Notice should be first
given of the scandal to the party offending, in private: if there were
no amendment within the space of six months, she should be summoned
and rebuked before the said Council or censors; and, if after other six
months it were found that neither this availed, she should be censored
not to appear at any public meetings, games, or recreations, upon
penalty of being taken up by the doorkeepers or guards of the Senate,
and by them to be detained, till for every such offence £5 were duly
paid for her enlargement.

Furthermore, if any common strumpet should be found or any scurrility
or profaneness represented at either of the theatres, the prelates for
every such offence should be fined £20 by the said Council, and the
poet, for every such offence on his part, should be whipped. This law
relates to another, which was also enacted the same year upon this
occasion.

The youth and wits of the Academy having put the business so home in the
defence of comedies that the provosts had nothing but the consequences
provided against by the foregoing law to object, prevailed so far that
two of the provosts of the Council of State joined in a proposition,
which after much ado came to a law, whereby £100,000 was allotted for
the building of two theatres on each side of the piazza of the halo: and
two annual magistrates called prelates, chosen out of the knights,
were added to the tropic, the one called the prelate of the buskin,
for inspection of the tragic scene called Melpomene; and the other the
prelate of the sock, for the comic called Thalia, which magistrates had
each £500 a year allowed out of the profits of the theatres; the rest,
except £800 a year to four poets, payable into the Exchequer. A poet
laureate created in one of these theatres by the strategus, receives
a wreath of £500 in gold, paid out of the said profits. But no man
is capable of this creation that had not two parts in three of the
suffrages at the Academy, assembled after six weeks’ warning and upon
that occasion.

These things among us are sure enough to be censured, but not know the
nature of a commonwealth; that they are free, and yet to curb the genius
in a lawful recreation to which they are naturally is to tell a tale of
a tub. I have heard the Protestant ministers in France, by men that
were wise and of their own profession, much blamed in that they forbade
dancing, a recreation to which the genius of that air is so inclining
that they lost many who would not lose that: nor do they less than blame
the former determination of rashness, who now gently connive at that
which they had so roughly forbidden. These sports in Oceana are so
governed, that they are pleasing for private diversion, and profitable
to the public: for the theatres soon defrayed their own charge, and
now bring in a good revenue. All this is so far from the detriment
of virtue, that it is to the improvement of it, seeing women that
heretofore made havoc of their honor that they might have their
pleasures are now incapable of their pleasures if they lose their honor.

About the one-and-fortieth year of the commonwealth, the censors,
according to their annual custom, reported the pillar of Nilus, by
which it was found that the people were increased very near one-third.
Whereupon the Council of War was appointed by the Senate to bring in a
state of war, and the treasurers the state of the Treasury. The state of
war, or the pay and charge of an army, was soon after exhibited by the
Council in this account:

     THE FIELD PAY OF A PARLIAMENTARY ARMY

     The lord strategus, marching                £10,000
     Polemarches--

     General of the horse...                   2,000

     Lieutenant-general...                     2,000

     General of the artillery....              1,000

     Commissary-general...                     1,000

     Major-general....                         1,000

     Quartermaster-general...                  1,000
     Two adjutants to the major-general...         1,000
     Forty colonels.....                          40,000
     100 captains of horse, at £500 a man...      50,000
     300 captains of foot, at £300 a man...       90,000
     100 cornets, at £100 a man....               10,000
     300 ensigns, at £50 a man....                15,000
     800 Quartermasters, Sergeants, Trumpeters,

     Drummers,                                20,000
     10,000 horse, at 2s 6d per day each...      470,000
     30,000 foot, at 1s per day each....         500,000
     Chirurgeons...                                  400
     40,000 auxiliaries, amounting to within a

     little as much...                     1,100,000
     The charge of mounting 20,000 horse..       300,000
     The train of artillery, holding a 3d to

     the whole                               900,000

         Sum total                        £3,514,400

     Arms and ammunition are not reckoned, as those which are
     furnished out of the store or arsenal of Emporium: nor wastage,
     as that which goes upon the account of the fleet, maintained by
     the customs; which customs, through the care of the Council for
     Trade and growth of traffic, were long since improved to about
     £1,000,000 revenue. The house being thus informed of a state of
     war, the commissioners brought in--

     THE STATE OF THE TREASURY THIS PRESENT YEAR, BEING THE
     ONE-AND-FORTIETH OF THE COMMONWEALTH

     Received from the one-and-twentieth of the commonwealth:

     By £700,000 a year in bank, with the product of the sum

         rising..............
     £16,000,000

     Expended from the one-and-twentieth of this commonwealth:

      Imprimis, for the addition of arms for 100,000 men to

     the arsenal, or tower of Emporium.........
     £1,000,000
      For the storing of the same with artillery...
     300,000
      For the storing of the same with ammunition...
     200,000
      For beautifying the cities, parks, gardens, public walks,

     and places for recreation of Emporium and Hiera, with

     public buildings, aqueducts, statues,

     and fountains, etc......
     1,500,000
      Extraordinary embassies...
     150,000

     Sum........
     £3,150,000

      Remaining in the Treasury, the salaries of the

     Exchequer being defalked.......
     £12,000,000

By comparison of which accounts if a war with an army of 80,000 men were
to be made by the penny, yet was the commonwealth able to maintain such
a one above three years without levying a tax. But it is against all
experience, sense, and reason that such an army should not be soon
broken, or make a great progress; in either of which cases, the charge
ceases; or rather if a right course be taken in the latter, profit comes
in: for the Romans had no other considerable way but victory whereby to
fill their treasury, which nevertheless was seldom empty. Alexander
did not consult his purse upon his design for Persia: it is observed by
Machiavel, that Livy, arguing what the event in reason must have been
had that King invaded Rome, and diligently measuring what on each
side was necessary to such a war, never speaks a word of money. No
man imagines that the Gauls, Goths, Vandals, Huns, Lombards, Saxons,
Normans, made their inroads or conquests by the strength of the purse;
and if it be thought enough, according to the dialect of our age, to say
in answer to these things that those times are past and gone: what money
did the late Gustavus, the most victorious of modern princes, bring out
of Sweden with him into Germany? An army that goes upon a golden leg
will be as lame as if it were a wooden one; but proper forces have
nerves and muscles in them, such for which, having £4,000,000 or
£5,000,000, a sum easy enough, with a revenue like this of Oceana, to be
had at any time in readiness, you need never, or very rarely, charge the
people with taxes. What influence the commonwealth by such arms has had
upon the world, I leave to historians, whose custom it has been of old
to be as diligent observers of foreign actions as careless of those
domestic revolutions which (less pleasant it may be, as not partaking
so much of the romance) are to statesmen of far greater profit; and this
fault, if it be not mine, is so much more frequent with modern writers,
as has caused me to undertake this work; on which to give my own
judgment, it is performed as much above the time I have been about it,
as below the dignity of the matter.

But I cannot depart out of this country till I have taken leave of my
Lord Archon, a prince of immense felicity who having built as high with
his counsels as he digged deep with his sword, had now seen fifty years
measured with his own unerring orbs.

Timoleon (such a hater of tyrants that, not able to persuade his brother
Timophanes to relinquish the tyranny of Corinth, he slew him) was
afterward elected by the people (the Sicilians groaning to them from
under the like burden) to be sent to their relief: whereupon Teleclides,
the man at that time of most authority in the Commonwealth of Corinth,
stood up, and giving an exhortation to Timoleon, how he should behave
himself in this expedition, told him that if he restored the Sicilians
to liberty, it would be acknowledged that he destroyed a tyrant; if
otherwise, he must expect to hear he had murdered a king. Timoleon,
taking his leave with a very small provision for so great a design,
pursued it with a courage not inferior to, and a felicity beyond, any
that had been known to that day in mortal flesh, having in the space
of eight years utterly rooted out of all Sicily those weeds of tyranny,
through the detestation whereof men fled in such abundance from their
native country that whole cities were left desolate, and brought it
to such a pass that others, through the fame of his virtues and the
excellency of the soil, flocked as fast from all quarters to it as to
the garden of the world: while he, being presented by the people of
Syracuse with his town-house and his country retreat, the sweetest
places in either, lived with his wife and children a most quiet, happy,
and holy life; for he attributed no part of his success to himself, but
all to the blessing and providence of the gods. As he passed his time
in this manner, admired and honored by mankind, Laphistius, an envious
demagogue, going to summon him upon some pretence or other to answer for
himself before the assembly, the people fell into such a mutiny as could
not be appeased but by Timoleon, who, understanding the matter, reproved
them, by repeating the pains and travel which he had gone through, to
no other end than that every man might have the free use of the laws.
Wherefore when Daemenetus, another demagogue, had brought the same
design about again, and blamed him impertinently to the people for
things which he did when he was general, Timoleon answered nothing,
but raising up his hands, gave the gods thanks for their return to his
frequent prayers, that he might but live to see the Syracusans so free,
that they could question whom they pleased.

Not long after, being old, through some natural imperfection, he fell
blind; but the Syracusans by their perpetual visits held him, though he
could not see, their greatest object: if there arrived strangers, they
brought him to see this sight. Whatever came in debate at the assembly,
if it were of small consequence, they determined it themselves; but if
of importance, they always sent for Timoleon, who, being brought by his
servants in a chair, and set in the middle of the theatre, there ever
followed a great shout, after which some time was allowed for the
benedictions of the people; and then the matter proposed, when Timoleon
had spoken to it, was put to the suffrage; which given, his servants
bore him back in his chair, accompanied by the people clapping their
hands, and making all expressions of joy and applause, till, leaving him
at his house, they returned to the despatch of their business. And this
was the life of Timoleon, till he died of age, and dropped like a mature
fruit, while the eyes of the people were as the showers of autumn.

The life and death of my Lord Archon (but that he had his senses to the
last, and that his character, as not the restorer, but the founder of a
commonwealth, was greater) are so exactly the same, that (seeing by men
wholly ignorant of antiquity I am accused of writing romance) I shall
repeat nothing: but tell you that this year the whole nation of Oceana,
even to the women and children, were in mourning, where so great or
sad a funeral pomp had never been seen or known. Some time after the
performance of the obsequies a Colossus, mounted on a brazen horse of
excellent fabric, was erected in the piazza of the Pantheon, engraved
with this inscription on the eastern side of the pedestal:

             HIS NAME

               IS AS

          PRECIOUS OINTMENT

     And on the wester with the following:

             GRATA PATRIA

     Piae et Perpetuae Memorie

                  D.D.

         OLPHAUS MEGALETOR

     LORD ARCHON, AND SOLE LEGISLATOR

      OF

      OCEANA

      PATER PATRIAE

      Invincible in the Field     The Greatest of Captains
      Inviolable in his Faith     The Best of Princes
      Unfeigned in his Zeal       The Happiest of Legislators
      Immortal in his Fame        The Most Sincere of Christians

      Who setting the Kingdoms of Earth at Liberty,
      Took the Kingdom of the Heavens by Violence.

      Anno AEtat. suoe 116

       Hujus Reipub. 50




DESCRIPTION OF OCEANA

OCEANA is saluted by the panegyrist after this manner: “O the most
blessed and fortunate of all countries, Oceana! how deservedly has
nature with the bounties of heaven and earth endued thee! Thy ever
fruitful womb not closed with ice nor dissolved by the raging star;
where Ceres and Bacchus are perpetual twins: thy woods are not the
harbor of devouring beasts, nor thy continual verdure the ambush of
serpents, but the food of innumerable herds and flocks presenting thee,
their shepherdess, with distended dugs or golden fleeces. The wings of
thy night involve thee not in the horror of darkness, but have still
some white feather; and thy day is (that for which we esteem life) the
longest.” But this ecstasy of Pliny, as is observed by Bertius, seems
to allude as well to Marpesia and Panopea, now provinces of this
commonwealth, as to Oceana itself.

To speak of the people in each of these countries. This of Oceana, for
so soft a one, is the most martial in the whole world. “Let States that
aim at greatness,” says Verulamius, “take heed how their nobility and
gentlemen multiply too fast, for that makes the common subject grow to
be a peasant and base swain driven out of heart, and in effect but a
gentleman’s laborer; just as you may see in coppice woods, if you leave
the staddels too thick, you shall never have clean underwood, but shrubs
and bushes; so in countries, if the gentlemen be too many, the commons
will be base; and you will bring it to that at last, that not the
hundreth poll will be fit for a helmet, specially as to the infantry,
which is the nerve of an army, and so there will be great population and
little strength. This of which I speak has been nowhere better seen than
by comparing of Oceana and France, whereof Oceana, though far less in
territory and population, has been nevertheless an overmatch, in regard
the middle people of Oceana make good solders, which the peasants in
France do not.” In which words Verulamius, as Machiavel has done before
him, harps much upon a string which he has not perfectly tuned, and that
is, the balance of dominion or property, as it follows more plainly, in
his praise “of the profound and admirable device of Panurgus, King of
Oceana, in making farms and houses of husbandry of a standard; that is,
maintained with such a proportion of land to them as may breed a subject
to live in convenient plenty, and no servile condition, and to keep the
plough in the hands of the owners, and not mere hirelings. And thus,
indeed,” says he, “you shall attain to Virgil’s character which he gives
of ancient Italy.” But the tillage, bringing up a good soldiery, brings
up a good commonwealth; which the author in the praise of Panurgus did
not mind, nor Panurgus in deserving that praise; for where the owner of
the plough comes to have the sword, too, he will use it in defence of
his own; whence it has happened that the people of Oceana, in proportion
to their property, have been always free. And the genius of this nation
has ever had some resemblance with that of ancient Italy, which was
wholly addicted to commonwealths, and where Rome came to make the
greatest account of her rustic tribes, and to call her consuls from the
plough; for in the way of parliaments, which was the government of this
realm, men of country lives have been still intrusted with the greatest
affairs, and the people have constantly had an aversion to the ways of
the court. Ambition, loving to be gay and to fawn, has been a gallantry
looked upon as having something in it of the livery; and husbandry, or
the country way of life, though of a grosser spinning, as the best stuff
of a commonwealth, according to Aristotle, such a one being the most
obstinate assertress of her liberty and the least subject to innovation
or turbulency. Wherefore till the foundations, as will be hereafter
shown, were removed, this people was observed to be the least subject
to shakings and turbulency of any; whereas commonwealths, upon which
the city life has had the stronger influence, as Athens, have seldom or
never been quiet, but at the best are found to have injured their own
business by overdoing it. Whence the urban tribes of Rome, consisting
of the Turba forensis, and libertines that had received their freedom by
manumission, were of no reputation in comparison of the rustics. It
is true that with Venice it may seem to be otherwise, in regard
the gentlemen (for so are all such called as have a right to that
government) are wholly addicted to the city life; but then the Turba
forensis, the secretaries, Cittadini, with the rest of the populace,
are wholly excluded. Otherwise a commonwealth consisting but of one city
would doubtless be stormy, in regard that ambition would be every man’s
trade; but where it consists of a country, the plough in the hands of
the owner finds him a better calling, and produces the most innocent and
steady genius of a commonwealth, such as is that of Oceana.

Marpesia, being the northern part of the same island, is the dry-nurse
of a populous and hardy nation, but where the staddels have been
formerly too thick, whence their courage answered not their hardiness,
except in the nobility, who govern much after the manner of Poland, but
that the King was not elective till the people received their liberty;
the yoke of the nobility being broken by the commonwealth of Oceana,
which in grateful return is thereby provided with an inexhaustible
magazine of auxiliaries.

Panopea, the soft mother of a slothful and pusillanimous people, is a
neighbor island, anciently subjected by the arms of Oceana; since almost
depopulated for shaking the yoke, and at length replanted with a new
race. But, through what virtues of the soil or vice of the air soever it
be, they come still to degenerate. Wherefore seeing it is neither likely
to yield men fit for arms, nor necessary it should, it had been the
interest of Oceana so to have disposed of this province, being both rich
in the nature of the soil, and full of commodious ports for trade, that
it might have been ordered for the best in relation to her purse, which
in my opinion, if it had been thought upon in time, might have been best
done by planting it with Jews, allowing them their own rites and laws;
for that would have brought them suddenly from all parts of the world,
and in sufficient numbers. And though the Jews be now altogether for
merchandise, yet in the land of Canaan (except since their exile
from whence they have not been landlords) they were altogether for
agriculture; and there is no cause why a man should doubt, but having a
fruitful country and excellent ports, too, they would be good at both.
Panopea, well peopled, would be worth a matter of £4,000,000 dry-rents;
that is, besides the advantage of the agriculture and trade, which,
with a nation of that industry, come at least to as much more. Wherefore
Panopea, being farmed out to the Jews and their heirs forever, for the
pay of a provincial army to protect them during the term of seven years,
and for £2,000,000 annual revenue from that time forward, besides the
customs, which would pay the provincial army, would have been a bargain
of such advantage, both to them and this commonwealth, as is not to be
found otherwise by either. To receive the Jews after any other manner
into a commonwealth were to maim it; for they of all nations never
incorporate, but taking up the room of a limb, are of no use office to
the body, while they suck the nourishment which would sustain a natural
and useful member.

If Panopea had been so disposed of, that knapsack, with the Marpesian
auxiliary, had been an inestimable treasure; the situation of these
countries being islands (as appears by Venice how advantageous such a
one is to the like government) seems to have been designed by God for
a commonwealth. And yet that, through the straitness of the place
and defect of proper arms, can be no more than a commonwealth for
preservation; whereas this, reduced to the like government, is a
commonwealth for increase, and upon the mightiest foundation that any
has been laid from the beginning of the world to this day.

     “Illam arcta capiens Neptunus compede stringit:
      Hanc autem glaucis captus complectitur ulnis.”

The sea gives law to the growth of Venice, but the growth of Oceana
gives law to the sea.

These countries, having been anciently distinct and hostile kingdoms,
came by Morpheus the Marpesian, who succeeded by hereditary right to the
crown of Oceana, not only to be joined under one head, but to be cast,
as it were by a charm, into that profound sleep, which, broken at length
by the trumpet of civil war, has produced those effects that have given
occasion to the preceding discourse, divided into four parts.





End of Project Gutenberg’s The Commonwealth of Oceana, by James Harrington

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMMONWEALTH OF OCEANA ***

***** This file should be named 2801-0.txt or 2801-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/0/2801/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

