VI

COURSING


Coursing, the practice of chasing a hare with two greyhounds,
slipped simultaneously from the leash, is one of the most ancient of
blood-sports; but the spirit of those who take part in it does not seem
to have improved with time. It may be doubted whether modern patrons
of the sport are as chivalrous as those referred to by the old writer
Arrian, whose work on Coursing dates from the second century:

    “For coursers, such at least as are true sportsmen, do not take
    out their dogs for the sake of catching a hare, but for the
    contest and sport of coursing, and are glad if the hare escape;
    if she fly to any thin brake for concealment, though they may
    see her trembling and in the utmost distress, they will call
    off their dogs.”

What is the attraction of coursing? The author of “The Encyclopædia of
Rural Sports” (1852) is forced to admit that coursing has been found
dull:

    “We may be asked,” he says, “what pleasure there can be for
    people marshalled in a line, at certain distances from each
    other, monotonously to walk or ride at a foot pace over a
    ploughed field or across a wide heath on a bleak November day,
    the eye anxiously directed hither and thither to catch the clod
    or the sidelong furrow that half conceals poor puss, or to espy
    the tuft she has parted to make her form in.”

But even so stupid a pastime as this has its charms for many people,
when to the zest of seeing a timid animal’s life at stake there is
added the more modern excitement of betting on the prowess of the dogs.

Of the cruelty of coursing, as practised in the chief contests, from
the Waterloo Cup down, there can be no question. “What more aggravated
form of torture is to be found,” says Lady Florence Dixie, “than
coursing with greyhounds--the awful terror of the hare depicting itself
in the laid-back ears, convulsive doubles, and wild starting eyes which
seem almost to burst from their sockets in the agony of tension which
that piteous struggle for life entails?”

Open coursing is bad enough, on the score of inhumanity; but when
the coursing is enclosed, or the hares are bagged ones turned out for
the occasion, the case is still worse. The use of enclosed grounds
dates from about 1876, and we learn from the volume on “Coursing” in
the Badminton Library of Sports and Pastimes (1892), that “many of
the old school opposed it strongly, and with the best reason, for it
utterly lacked the elements of real sport.” At the present time it is
by a strict system of “preserving” hares rather than by keeping them
in enclosures, that a sufficient supply is maintained for the great
coursing matches. What an object-lesson in cruelty these meetings
afford may be judged from the fact that at some of them, such as the
competition for the Waterloo Cup, there is an attendance of several
thousand spectators.

Here is an “Impression of the Waterloo Meeting,” by Mr. John Gulland,
which appeared in the _Morning Leader_ in 1911:

    “Stretching away into the far country (if you use your eyes)
    may be seen two long, thin black lines, representing quite a
    little army of beaters. In a short while dozens of hares may
    be seen gaily sporting between these lines, in delightful
    ignorance of the terrible enemy which is lying in wait for
    them in front. It is the business of the beater to divert a
    good hare from his playful companions; and if you keep your
    eye well directed on the black lines, you will soon detect the
    white flutter of a handkerchief passing along the lines, and a
    brown shape leaping swiftly along the ground, nervously anxious
    to turn to one side or the other, but kept to an inexorable
    straight course by the living wall of beaters. A shout from the
    crowd, growing every moment more excited as the short drama
    is about to begin, proclaims the fact that the hare is in the
    battle-ground, and is about to meet his Waterloo. And, higher
    still, and louder than all, the raucous cry of the bookmaker,
    ‘Take 7 to 2,’ ‘Take 2 to 1,’ rises shrill in the air.

    “All this time a couple of greyhounds are held tight by a
    slipper in a box, open on two sides, in the middle of the
    field. As soon as the hare is beaten past the slipper’s box
    the greyhounds tug and strain at the leash, almost dragging
    the slipper with them. When the hare has had about fifty
    yards’ start the hounds are released, and off they dash
    together, looking at first like one. This is the most thrilling
    part of the game, and is watched in a few seconds of almost
    breathless silence. Pussy hasn’t, however, much chance against
    a greyhound, and is soon overtaken; but he still has a few arts
    at his command. For, just as the dog is about to hurl himself
    on pussy’s unoffending body, the little creature makes a deft
    turn aside, his pursuer flying harmlessly past. Then follow a
    series of turns, feints, dodges, and bounds. Puss may, indeed,
    lead his enemies a sorry dance for a little while, but it is an
    unequal contest. These greyhounds at Altcar are the best and
    fastest of their kind, and it is seldom that a hare escapes
    their teeth on Waterloo Cup day. In half a minute--at the
    outside two minutes--all is over.”

The writer states that he thinks he has never seen “so many bookmakers
and bookmakers’ clerks per head of the population” as at the Waterloo
coursing. “It was the merriest gambling I have seen for many a long
day,” for coursing lends itself particularly well to betting.”




