VII

THE GENTLE CRAFT


    “It has been gravely said that a good angler must also be a
    good Christian. Without literalising the assertion, it may well
    be admitted that there is much in the contemplative character
    of his pursuit, and in the quiet scenes of beauty with which it
    brings him face to face, to soften and elevate as well as to
    humanise.”

Thus writes Mr. H. Cholmondeley-Pennell, a distinguished authority
on angling. We fear, however, that an examination of the “gentle
craft” will scarcely justify the assertion; for the fact cannot be
gainsaid that to kill fish for mere _amusement_ is to gratify one’s
own pleasure at the cost of another being’s pain, and that, regarded
from a moral standpoint, it will not materially affect the case to
plead that the fisherman is “contemplative,” or that in the pursuit
of his pastime he is brought into touch with the softening influences
of nature. Unfortunately, as far as his sport (which is the only
point in question) is concerned, there is no sign of this softening
tendency on _him_. Contemplative he may be (in the intervals between
“rises” or “bites”), but his contemplation has apparently not taken
that introspective turn which would seem to be most needed. He may be
gentle--in _some_ relations of life; but in the matter of impaling
live-bait and hooking fishes his gentleness is of a worse than
dubious quality. One would have thought that a sense of humour would
withhold fishermen from making these ludicrous claims to virtues in
which, _qua_ fishermen, they are very signally deficient. “There are
unquestionably,” says Leigh Hunt, “many amiable men among sportsmen,
who, as the phrase is, would not hurt a fly, that is to say, on a
window; at the end of a string the case is altered.”

The stories told by anglers of the alleged “insensibility” of fish--how
a hooked salmon that has just broken away will sometimes return to the
bait--do not prove very much; for that fish are less intelligent and
less sensitive than warm-blooded animals is no excuse for torturing
them to the extent of their feeling. And it is evident, on the showing
of the fishermen themselves, that the process of “playing” a large fish
is a very cruel one, since it means gradually and mercilessly wearing
down the strength of the victim during a desperate struggle prolonged
sometimes for hours. Reading, for example, such a passage as the
following, taken from Dr. Hamilton’s book on “Fly-Fishing,” one marvels
at the mood which can find enjoyment in so barbarous a sport:

    “I know of no greater excitement when, after casting the fly,
    a sudden swirl of the water tells you that a salmon has risen,
    and the tightening of your line that he is hooked. Then the
    mighty rush of a fresh-run fish; the rapid whirl (sweet music!)
    of the reel, as the line is carried out; the tremendous leaps
    and tugs and efforts as the fish tries to free himself. Good
    fisherman as you may be, the chances are against you. You at
    one end of the line doing all you can, and putting all your
    experience to the test, to keep and bring to bank the prize you
    covet. The fish at the other end, with all his knowledge of the
    rocks and bad places at the bottom of the river, doing all he
    can to circumvent you.… And then, after a slight pause, with
    skilful management the strain is put on. An anxious moment; he
    gives, but oh! how slowly, how reluctantly. The question is,
    who is to conquer. You feel your power as you wind up; you see
    his silver side; you know there will be yet one or two terrific
    struggles for life as he gets a glimpse of you and the gaff;
    then comes the final rush, the line paying out inch by inch. It
    is over! Another roll or two, and he is on the bank--and then
    the soothing pipe while you study his fine proportions.”

Under some conditions the sport consists in practically _drowning_ the
fish in its own element. “The most killing place,” says Dr. Hamilton,
“when the hook is well fast, is in the lower jaw. The strain of the
line prevents in a great measure the free current of water through the
gills, and the fish becomes suffocated.”

To what extravagance the angling mania can run may be seen from
certain forms of sea-fishing. The tarpon, an inhabitant of the Gulf of
Mexico, is a great fish of the herring kind, weighing from 50 to 180
pounds, and measuring from 5 to 7 feet in length. It is not used as
food by any but the negroes and “lower classes,” and its chief value,
we are told, is for “sporting” purposes. In _The Queen_ of December 7,
1895, an account was given of “an angling feat” performed by a lady
who caught a monster of this kind. “The lady’s grip,” we were told,
“was firm,” and defeated the endeavours of the fish “to shake the cruel
hook from its throat.” In this, and in all angling records, it will be
observed that the cruelty is purely wanton--the killing being done not
because it is necessary or useful, but because the sportsman _enjoys_
it.

Again, one of the most nauseous features of the “gentle craft” is the
use of “live bait”--that is, of worms, maggots, flies, grasshoppers,
frogs, and small fish. Here is one of the directions given by Mr.
Cholmondeley-Pennell:

    “In using the lob-worm-tail only, the worm must be broken about
    the middle, longer or shorter according to circumstances, and
    the hook inserted at the point of the breakage, the worm being
    then run up the hook until the shank is somewhat more than
    covered and only the end of the tail remains at liberty.”

It is pointed out by Mr. Alexander Mackie in “The Art of Worm Fishing,”
that a “particularly beautiful” blue-nosed lob will account for as many
as four trout, if cut in two parts and used successively, and that no
worm of this class should be thrown away when only “slightly shattered.”

The impaling of a worm or maggot is disgusting enough; but when live
fish are used as bait the cruelty is still worse. It will be observed
that it is the angler’s object to _prolong_ the misery of the living
bait to the utmost extent. Thus Mr. Cholmondeley-Pennell, with
reference to pike fishing:

    “With regard to live-baits, a good deal must of course depend
    upon the state of the water. Should it be very bright and
    clear, a gudgeon, which is also a very tough fish, will
    generally be found the best, and in extreme cases even a
    minnow used with a small float and a single gimp hook passed
    through its upper lip or back.… Probably the best live-bait
    of all for thick or clouded water is a medium-sized dace, as
    its scales are peculiarly brilliant, and the fish itself by no
    means easily killed. In case of waters in which the pike are
    over-fed, I should recommend my readers to try them with live
    gold-fish.… If gold-fish are not forthcoming, small carp form a
    very killing and _long-lived_ bait. The bait should not be left
    too long in one place, but be kept gently moving. It should
    also be held as little as possible out of water, on to which,
    when cast, its fall should be as light as possible, to avoid
    injury and premature decease.”

A very cruel way of taking freshwater fish is by night-lines. The
victims are often left for hours with large hooks in their mouths;
and when at last taken from the water are exhausted or dead. This
perhaps is a poacher’s method rather than a sportsman’s; but it is to
be observed that as a rule the despised poaching methods--such as the
netting, wiring, or “tickling” of fish--are far less barbarous than
those which are honoured as “sportsmanlike.”

It is clear, then, that the title of “the gentle craft” is an absurd
misnomer when applied to angling, and that, if humaneness had been
reckoned among the virtues, we should not have seen the canonisation of
Izaak Walton, the patron saint of fishermen. For as Byron says of him:

    “The quaint old cruel coxcomb in his gullet
    Should have a hook, and a small trout to pull it.”

“It would have taught him humanity at least,” adds the poet in a
footnote. “They may talk about the beauties of nature, but the angler
merely thinks of his dish of fish; he has no leisure to take his eyes
from off the streams, and a single ‘bite’ is worth to him more than all
the scenery around. The whale, the shark, and the tunny fishery have
somewhat of noble and perilous in them; even net-fishing, trawling,
etc., are more humane and useful. But angling!”




