V

CLAY-PIGEON _VERSUS_ LIVE PIGEON

BY THE REV. J. STRATTON


Pigeon-shooting is one of those practices which generous minds must
regard with aversion. There is not a single element in it which
cultivates any good quality in mankind.

The late Lord Randolph Churchill, in the House of Commons, 1883,
alluding to Monte Carlo doings, gave an effective description of a
pigeon-shooting scene:

    “He had had the opportunity, he said, of watching the sight
    at Monte Carlo, though he had never had the satisfaction of
    killing a pigeon himself. The pigeon-shooting at Monte Carlo
    was conducted on the same principles as that at Hurlingham, and
    under similar rules. He saw the birds taken out of the basket,
    and before being put into the trap a man cut their tails with
    a large pair of scissors. That probably was not very cruel,
    because he only cut the quill, though at times he seemed to cut
    very close. But worse followed. After cutting the tail, he saw
    the man take the bird in one hand, and with the other tear a
    great bunch of feathers from the breast and stomach of every
    pigeon. On asking the man what he did that for, he replied
    that it was to stimulate the birds, in order that, maddened by
    excitement and pain, they might take a more eccentric leap in
    the air, and increase the chance of the pigeon gamblers.

    “He saw another very curious thing, too. One of the pigeons was
    struck and fell to the ground; but when the dog went to pick
    it up, the wretched bird fluttered again in the air, and for
    an appreciable time it remained so fluttering, just a little
    higher than the dog could jump. While the bird’s fate was thus
    trembling in the balance, the betting was fast and furious, and
    when at last the pigeon tumbled into the dog’s jaws, he would
    never forget the shout of triumph and yell of execration that
    rose from the ring-men and gentlemen.”

Now, what honest-minded man can approve of such a performance as this?
Yet the so-called sport is in much favour still, from aristocratic
gatherings down to those promoted by low public-houses.

It is surely of the nature of anything claiming to be legitimate sport,
that the quarry should be in its natural, wild condition, and should
have a chance of saving its life from its would-be destroyer. What
chance of this kind has a dazed pigeon, fluttering from a box in the
presence of guns ready to fire the moment it appears? The whole thing
is cowardly and contemptible, and should be suppressed by law. This
fate it would have met in 1883 had the House of Lords done its duty as
well as the House of Commons; for a Bill which aimed at its abolition
was rejected in the former House after it had passed in the latter.

More lately, however, there has occurred an event which proves that
the views we hold respecting pigeon-shooting are beginning to find
acceptance with the public. As everybody is aware, the Hurlingham Club
used to lend its patronage to this sport, but recently a change in its
policy took place. A meeting of members was held, and the question was
put to the vote, whether the shooting of pigeons from traps should be
any longer permitted in the grounds. A two-thirds majority decided that
it should be abolished. The minority endeavoured to get this settlement
reversed by law, but they were unsuccessful.

It was instructive, as well as cheering, to observe the favour with
which the Press as a whole received the judgment delivered by Mr.
Justice Joyce on the case submitted to him.

As an example of newspaper utterances I may quote the comments of the
_Daily News_ of February 26, 1906:

    “All those who believe that 1906 is better as regards
    blood-sports than 1868 will rejoice that Hurlingham is not to
    be bound fast to the older date, and its defective morality.
    Pigeon-shooting is emphatically not now--as Mr. Justice
    Joyce said it was considered in 1868--a manly sport, fit for
    gentlemen. It may seem a hard saying to those who, having
    acquired proficiency in the practice, have lost their sense
    of moral truth. The fashion at Hurlingham has slowly changed
    in deference to surrounding opinion. Pigeon-shooting has not
    only its negative side of unmanliness, but the positive side of
    cruelty, and we are glad that the Club is not so indissolubly
    built on this base sport but that a two-thirds majority may
    decide when the time has come to abolish it.”


CLAY-PIGEON.

Supposing all shooting of birds from traps were prohibited by law,
is there any kindred diversion which might take its place? Yes; there
is the clay-pigeon shoot, which affords good practice in gunnery and
amuses its patrons by enabling them to meet and settle contests for
prizes and so forth. It ought to satisfy all who have not got into the
vicious habit of thinking that sport is poor work unless it inflicts
agony or death on animals.

The clay-pigeon, so-called, does not bear any resemblance to a living
bird. It is like a small saucer, brown in colour, and brittle.

One of the ways in which the artificial shoot is carried on is this.
A pit is formed, deep enough to allow a man to stand in it and remain
unseen. In the pit is placed machinery which a person can employ for
projecting a “pigeon” to a considerable distance, at a quick speed, and
at any angle. The pigeon may be shot up in the air, or sent skimming
along the ground, and fly to right or left. The shooter stands some
yards behind the pit, gun in hand, waiting for the appearance of the
object. And, not knowing what course the pigeon will take, he is kept
on the _qui vive_. From the sporting point of view, this is so much to
the good, as uncertainty is an element of enjoyment in the matter.

At shooting grounds such as those of Messrs. Holland and Holland, of
New Bond Street, situated at Kensal Rise, there are many diversities
attached to the recreation. Birds are thrown, in many cases, from high
structures, or go flying over trees, and move in a mode similar to that
of pheasants or driven grouse or partridges. Then, further, at this
establishment, the figures of birds with outstretched wings appear for
a few seconds on a whitened screen, and form interesting objects to
fire at. Across this screen, again, metal representations of rabbits
are made to run on an iron rod. From this it will be understood what a
deal of variety may be introduced into this form of amusement.

What humanitarians desire to see is the substitution everywhere of this
kind of shooting for that of firing at pigeons and starlings and other
living birds liberated from traps.

I ought to say that at Messrs. Holland and Holland’s establishment live
pigeons are kept for those who wish to fire at them, but I was pleased
to learn that, for every living bird killed, a hundred clay birds are
shot at.




