III

THE HUNTING OF GRAVID ANIMALS


Whatever differences of opinion may exist as to the morality of
“blood-sports” in general, there is one recurring feature of such
sports which, whether regarded from the humanitarian’s or from the
sportsman’s point of view, is almost equally repulsive. We refer
to the hunting, in some cases accidental, in others deliberate, of
gravid animals. That such hunting--of the hare, of the otter, of the
hind--takes place, there is no question whatever, as is proved by the
following facts.

It is quite a common practice to continue the hunting of hares with
beagles until the middle, or even to the end of March, by which time
many of the doe hares are heavy with young. Owing to the remonstrances
addressed to the headmaster of Eton by the Humanitarian League, the
Eton hunting season has now been curtailed, but it is still prolonged
beyond the date which has been suggested by the better class of
sportsmen. The experience recorded in the _County Gentleman_ (1906) by
the writer of the following letter, Mr. John A. Doyle, of Pendarren,
Crickhowell, seems conclusive:

    “The question you raise is one in which I feel a good deal
    of interest. I have not only been for some years master of a
    pack of harriers (foot), but I am also an Old Etonian, and
    have always felt much interested in the doings of the school
    beagles, and sympathy with them. Indeed, before I got your
    letter I had thought of writing to the headmaster, with whom
    I am--perhaps I should say was, a long time back--slightly
    acquainted.

    “My own practice has always been to have one meet the first
    week in March, and then end the season. I was once or twice
    tempted to go on later, and once killed a doe in kindle.
    Since then I have kept to my rule. She gave us a sharp run of
    twenty minutes or half an hour. This, I think, disposes of the
    theory that a pregnant hare has no scent. Possibly she has
    less than she would have normally. But _per contra_ she must
    be handicapped by her condition. Then there is the risk of a
    chop. And it cannot be good for an animal big with young to be
    bustled and frightened.

    “There is yet a worse danger. In some forward seasons there
    may be leverets by the second week in March. The dam might be
    killed, and the leverets left to die. I would almost sooner
    never hunt again than run such a risk. Of course, one might
    hunt through March for several seasons and none of these things
    happen; but there must be a risk, and I do not myself think
    that one is justified in running it.”

What is true of the Eton beagles is true of every hare-hunt throughout
the country. The sport ought to be brought to a close on the last day
of February, as, indeed, used to be the custom. “Coursing still goes on
among a few,” wrote the author of the “Sporting Almanack” for March,
1843, “but in our opinion the fair sportsman will _hold hard_ as soon
as March sets in.”[32] Much, then, of the hare-hunting of the present
time is _not_ fair.

Still worse is the case of otter-hunting, which is carried on from
springtime till autumn, with the result that females heavy with young
must occasionally be worried, though sportsmen plead that this is never
intentional. An instance that has often been quoted is recorded in the
Hon. Grantley F. Berkeley’s “Life and Recollections,” where the story
is told of a female otter disturbed by the hounds “in the act of making
a couch for her young.”

    “At her we went for seven hours, with constant views, and
    during that time, on a stump overhanging the river, she
    miscarried and gave birth to two cubs, born only a few days
    before their time. A hound found them, and when I took one in
    my hand it was scarcely cold. She beat us for want of light,
    and well she deserved to escape.”

Similar instances are recorded from time to time, as by a correspondent
of the _Morning Leader_, who told how in Devonshire, in 1891, a female
otter, after being worried for nearly four hours, had given birth to
two dead whelps.

But of all such malpractices the chasing of in-calf hinds is the most
deliberate and the worst. If it be true, as we are informed, that
tenant-farmers in the Devon and Somerset district complain bitterly of
the damage done by deer, what possible reason can be given against the
_shooting_ (when necessary) of the hinds, in place of the disgusting
and barbarous custom of hunting them? A few years ago the Rev. J.
Stratton, after personally investigating the matter, described some of
the inevitable results of hind-hunting till the end of March, instead
of stopping the “sport,” as ought to be done, at the beginning of
March at the latest, and gave specific cases in which, when the dead
hinds were “broken up” to feed the hounds, calves as large as hares
were seen to be taken from the bodies. Since that time there is reason
to believe that, owing in part to the Humanitarian League’s protests,
there is a growing local feeling against this especially cruel feature
of the sport, and it is hoped that those landowners and residents who
have humane scruples in the matter will use their influence to bring
about the discontinuance of this disgraceful practice. The whole system
of hunting these West Country deer is cruel enough--involving, as it
does, the death of many of them by leaping from the cliffs on to the
rocks, or being drowned in the sea, or being hung up on wire-fences
and mangled by the hounds. But the hunting of the hinds, at a time
when even savages might compassionate them, is one of the very worst
abominations for which even “sport” is responsible.

FOOTNOTES:

[32] Quoted in _Fry’s Magazine_, June, 1911, in an admirable article
entitled “Shabby Blood-Sports Worth Ending.”




