IV

DRAG-HUNT _VERSUS_ STAG-HUNT


The fact is too often overlooked that a ready substitute for the savage
chase of animals may be found in the drag-hunt, a form of sport which
preserves all that is valuable in the way of exercise, while getting
rid of one thing only--the cruelty to the tortured stag or fox or hare.
As has been pointed out in the _Sheffield Daily Telegraph_, a paper
favourable to sport:

    “There is little doubt that in time the drag-hunt will become
    the popular hunting pastime. For years it has been supported by
    the officers of the Guards, and, besides having the merit of
    disarming criticism on the part of the Humanitarian League, it
    can be enjoyed by thousands of sightseers, as it defines the
    tract of country over which the drag leads the hounds.”

The attempts of some sporting writers to belittle the value of
the drag have been very infelicitous. If they personally prefer a
blood-sport to a bloodless pastime, let them say so--it is a matter on
which we will take their word--but when they assert that a drag-hunt
is not suitable for pedestrians, or for schoolboys, they only convict
themselves of knowing as little about the practical as about the moral
side of the controversy. The following statement was made by the late
Lady Florence Dixie, who spoke with unquestionable authority:--

    “Drags can be fast run or slow run, according to the way they
    are laid. My husband owned a pack of harriers and a pack of
    beagles, and I was able to get him often to hunt them on
    drags, and have often ridden with the harriers and run with
    the beagles. When a very fast, non-hunting run was wanted with
    the harriers, the drag was laid straight and continuously, and
    hounds ran fast, and riding was like a steeplechase, without a
    pause, except when any of us came a cropper! When a hunting run
    was required, we laid a catchy drag, twisting here and there,
    lifting the scent, and copying as near as possible the wily
    ways of Reynard. With the beagles we imitated the hare, who
    is a ringing, not straight-running animal, lifting the scent,
    doubling back, and so on, and, in fact, we brought thus two
    competitors into the sport--_i.e._, the drag-layer _versus_ the
    huntsman, and pitted their wiles and their cunning against each
    other. I may be accepted as an authority, as few have perhaps
    ridden in harder-fought hunting runs of all kinds than I--fox,
    stag, harrier, guanaco, ostrich, and suchlike--and I have had
    considerable experience with beagles as well, on foot.”[33]

In face of this testimony, and of the fact recorded by Brinsley
Richards, in his “Seven Years at Eton,” that a drag was successfully
used at Eton half a century ago, it is absurd to pretend that it
could not be used there again; but if further proof be needed, it is,
fortunately, available in the following letter from Mr. A. G. Grenfell,
Headmaster of Mostyn House School, Parkgate, Cheshire. It will be seen
that the idea, very commonly held, that the drag-hunt is suitable only
for those following on horseback, and that it would too severely tax
the energies of boys running on foot, is absolutely erroneous.

                                              “_December 16, 1903._

    “On the subject of Beagle Drag-Hunting at Schools, I think you
    will be pleased to know that we have owned and run a pack of
    beagles at this school for the last ten years on the lines that
    you suggest, and with the greatest success. The drag affords
    any amount of healthy and interesting exercise without cruelty.
    Ours is just an ordinary preparatory school, with ten masters
    and ninety boys. Our hounds are twenty-three or twenty-four in
    number. The sport of following them is very popular with all
    of us, and it would be hard to devise an easier or better form
    of school variant to the everlasting football. Not only does
    drag-hunting keep boys from tiring of the regulation game, but
    it is to the wind and endurance these runs give us that we owe
    the fact that we seldom, if ever, lose a match against boys of
    our own size and weight. The beauty of the drag-hunt is that
    you can pick your course, you can choose your jumps, you can
    regulate your checks and keep your field all together, and you
    can insure the maximum of sport and exercise.”

Here, too, is the testimony of another headmaster of a preparatory
school, Mr. F. H. Gresson, of The Grange, Crowborough.

                                                 “_March 23, 1909._

    “I can fully endorse all that Mr. Grenfell says with regard to
    the pleasure and amusement to be derived from a drag-hunt. I
    have kept a small pack of beagles and hunted a drag with them
    for the last five years with very successful results. In my
    opinion, it is a very suitable form of amusement for boys of
    the preparatory school age, as you can regulate the distance
    and the checks, and there is no fear of their getting overdone.

    “As one who is very keen upon both fox-hunting and
    hare-hunting, I cannot pretend to say that a drag compares
    in any way with either. At the same time, however, I get a
    great amount of enjoyment out of it myself, in addition to the
    exercise, and I do not find it at all a dull sport.”

We do not, of course, _compare_ the drag-hunt with the stag-hunt,
the hare-hunt, or any other blood-sport, in the sense of saying that
it yields equal excitement; it lacks, no doubt, the thrill of the
life-and-death struggle that is going on in front of the hounds. But
for those who are aware that such excitement is cruel and morbid,
the drag-hunt may be made to provide an excellent _substitute_ for
blood-sport, with plenty of skill as well as plenty of exercise; and
sportsmen who refuse such substitute merely give proof that their
addiction to a barbarous practice is very strong.

FOOTNOTES:

[33] In like manner, Mr. W. H. Crofton, president of the Beagle Club,
has admitted in _The Times_ that the drag-hunt, “run with skill by one
who understands the art,” can be made to yield “excellent exercise” for
schoolboys.




