II.

THE INTRODUCTION OF THE NOTION OF FOUR-DIMENSIONAL POINT-AGGREGATES,
PERMISSIBLE.

In the preceding section it was shown that we can conceive not only
of manifoldnesses of one, two, and three dimensions, but also of
manifoldnesses of _any_ number of dimensions. But it was at the same time
indicated that our world-space, that is, the totality of all conceivable
_points_ that differ only in respect of position, cannot in agreement
with our notions of things possess more than three dimensions. But the
question now arises, whether, if the progress of science tends in such
a direction, it is permissible to extend the notion of space by the
introduction of point-aggregates of more than three dimensions, and to
engage in the study of the properties of such creations, although we know
that notwithstanding the fact that we may conceptually establish and
explore such aggregates of points, yet we cannot picture to ourselves
these creations as we do the spatial magnitudes which surround us, that
is, the regular three-dimensional aggregates of points.

To show the reader clearly that this question must be answered in the
affirmative, that the extension of our notion of space is permissible,
although it leads to things which we cannot perceive by our senses,
I may call the reader’s attention to the fact that in arithmetic
we are accustomed from our youth upwards to extensions of ideas,
which, accurately viewed, as little admit of graphic conception as a
four-dimensional space, that is, a point-aggregate of four dimensions. By
his senses man first reaches only the idea of whole numbers—the results
of counting. The observation of primitive peoples[79] and of children
clearly proves that the essential decisive factors of counting are these
three: First, we abstract, in the counting of things, completely from
the individual and characteristic attributes of these things, that is,
we consider them as homogeneous. Second, we associate individually with
the things which we count other homogeneous things. These other things
are even now, among uncivilised peoples, the ten fingers of the two
hands. They may, however, be simple strokes, or, as in the case of dice
and dominoes, black points on a white background. Third, we substitute
for the result of this association some concise symbol or word; for
example, the Romans substituted for three things counted, three strokes
placed side by side, namely: III; but for greater numbers of things
they employed abbreviated signs. The Aztecs, the original inhabitants
of Mexico, had time enough, it seems, to express all the numbers up to
nineteen by equal circles placed side by side. They had abbreviated signs
only for the numbers 20, 400, 8000, and so forth. In speaking, some one
same sound might be associated with the things counted; but this method
of counting is nowadays employed only by clocks: the languages of men
since prehistoric times have fashioned concise words for the results of
the association in question. From the notion of number, thus fixed as
the result of counting, man reached the notion of the addition of two
numbers, and thence the notion that is the inverse of the last process,
the notion of subtraction. But at this point it clearly appears that
not every problem which may be propounded is soluble; for there is no
number which can express the result of the subtraction of a number from
one which is equally large or from one which is smaller than itself. The
primary school pupil who says that 8 from 5 “won’t go” is perfectly right
from his point of view. For there really does not exist any result of
counting which added to eight will give five.

If humanity had abided by this point of view and had rested content with
the opinion that the problem “5 minus 8” is not solvable, the science of
arithmetic would never have received its full development, and humanity
would not have advanced as far in civilisation as it has. Fortunately,
men said to themselves at this crisis: “If 5 minus 8 won’t go, we’ll
_make it go_; if 5 minus 8 does not possess an intelligible meaning, we
will simply give it one.” As a fact, things which have not a meaning
always afford men a pleasing opportunity of investing them with one. The
question is, then, what significance is the problem “5 minus 8” to be
invested with?

The most natural and, therefore, the most advantageous solution
undoubtedly is to abide by the original notion of subtraction as the
inverse of addition, and to make the significance of 5 minus 8 such,
that for 5 minus 8 plus 8 we shall get our original minuend 5. By such a
method all the rules of computation which apply to real differences will
also hold good for unreal differences, such as 5 minus 8. But it then
clearly appears that all forms expressive of differences in which the
number that stands before the minus direction is less by an equal amount
than that which follows it may be regarded as equal; so that the simplest
course seems to be to introduce as the common characteristic of all equal
differential forms of this description a common sign, which will indicate
at the same time the difference of the two numbers thus associated. Thus
it came about, that for 5 minus 8, as well as for every differential form
which can be regarded as equal thereto the sign “-3” was introduced. But
in calling differential forms of this description numbers, the notion of
number was extended and a new domain was opened up, namely, the domain of
negative numbers.

In the further development of the science of arithmetic, through the
operation of division viewed as the inverse of multiplication, a second
extension of the idea of number was reached, namely, the notion of
fractional numbers as the outcome of divisions that had led to numbers
hitherto undefined. We find, thus, that the science of arithmetic
throughout its whole development has strictly adhered to the principle
of conformity and consistency and has invested every association of
two numbers, which before had no significance, by the introduction of
new numbers, with a real significance, such that similar operations in
conformity with exactly the same rules could be performed with the new
numbers, viewed as the results of this association, as with the numbers
which were before known and perfectly defined. Thus the science proceeded
further on its way and reached the notions of irrational, imaginary, and
complex numbers.

The point in all this, which the reader must carefully note, is, that
all the numbers of arithmetic, with the exception of the positive whole
numbers, are artificial products of human thought, invented to make the
language of arithmetic more flexible, and to accelerate the progress of
science. All these numbers lack the attributes of representability.

No man in the world can picture to himself “minus three trees.” It is
possible, of course, to know that when three trees of a garden have been
cut down and carried away, that three are missing, and by substituting
for “missing” the inverse notion of “added,” we may say, perhaps, that
“minus three trees” are added. But this is quite different from the feat
of imagining a negative number of trees. We can only picture to ourselves
a number of trees that results from actual counting, that is, a positive
whole number. Yet, notwithstanding all this, people had not the slightest
hesitation in extending the notion of number. Exactly so must it be
permitted us in geometry to extend the notion of space, even though such
an extension can only be mentally defined and can never be brought within
the range of human powers of representation.

In mathematics, in fact, the extension of any notion is admissible,
provided such extension does not lead to contradictions with itself or
with results which are well established. Whether such extensions are
necessary, justifiable, or important for the advancement of science
is a different question. It must be admitted, therefore, that the
mathematician is justified in the extension of the notion of space as a
point-aggregate of three dimensions, and in the introduction of space or
point-aggregates of more than three dimensions, and in the employment
of them as means of research. Other sciences also operate with things
which they do not know exist, and which, though they are sufficiently
defined, cannot be perceived by our senses. For example, the physicist
employs the ether as a means of investigation, though he can have no
sensory knowledge of it. The ether is nothing more than a means which
enables us to comprehend mechanically the effects known as action at a
distance and to bring them within the range of a common point of view.
Without the assumption of a material which penetrates everything, and
by means of whose undulations impulses are transmitted to the remotest
parts of space, the phenomena of light, of heat, of gravitation, and of
electricity would be a jumble of isolated and unconnected mysteries. The
assumption of an ether, however, comprises in a systematic scheme all
these isolated events, facilitates our mental control of the phenomena
of nature, and enables us to produce these phenomena at will. But it
must not be forgotten in such reflections that the ether itself is
even a greater problem for man, and that the ether-hypothesis does not
solve the difficulties of phenomena, but only puts them in a unitary
conceptual shape. Notwithstanding all this, physicists have never had
the least hesitation in employing the ether as a means of investigation.
And as little do reasons exist why the mathematicians should hesitate to
investigate the properties of a four-dimensioned point-aggregate, with
the view of acquiring thus a convenient means of research.


