I.

FRANCE.


Dr. Paul Sollier has just published, in the Bibliothéque
Charcot-Debove,[46] a new and excellent work, _Les troubles de la
memoire_. This work is not identical in its purpose with that of
M. Ribot; it corrects the latter in certain points, completes and
corroborates it in others. M. Sollier set out to discuss this question
solely from a medical standpoint, which was intentionally passed over
by M. Ribot, but he has also necessarily touched upon its psychological
aspects, and, as he informs us himself, he was obliged on the whole to
make a medico-psychological study of the question.

The subject is a vast one; one could include in it aphasia and all the
weaknesses resulting from the destruction of the brain-centres, whether
those of motion or of sensation. M. Sollier has taken the pains to reduce
it, however, to definite limits. He studies especially the subject of
acquired amnesia (diminutive changes and disaggregations of the memory).
He does not consider the subject of congenital amnesia, which is an
absence and not a loss of memory. Strictly considered, the only cases
of true amnesia, or _organic_ amnesia, are those which result from the
destruction of the nerve-centres, since in this case there is an absolute
loss of the power of forming mental images, and not simply an enfeebling
or forgetting of them, which is characteristic of _functional_ amnesia.
From a clinical standpoint amnesia exists only in the last case. Though
the effect may be the same in both cases, the causes are not identical.

Clinical investigation cannot, however, overlook the diminutive changes
which take place in the memory and which, as early as 1817, were called
by Louyer-Villermay dysmnesia, and which are always closely allied
to organic modifications of the brain. As regards amnesia itself, it
is important to distinguish simple amnesia from retrogressive and
progressive amnesia. M. Sollier explains the motive causes of these
different conditions with great lucidity, and renders them easy of
comprehension by means of ingenious illustrations.

I call attention to the information he gives us as to the conditions
under which a revival of mental images takes place, p. 30; to his
criticism of Ribot’s opinion, according to which the power of correctly
locating events in the scale of time is the true characteristic of
psychical memory: it is quite enough if it reproduces events as in
the past, that is to say if there exists a conscious knowledge which
shows that the mental conception belongs to the past, or is, simply, a
remembrance, p. 35 and 40; to his remarks on the strengthening of mental
images due to the repetition of remembrances, the necessary sequence of
which is that a weakening of old memories follows the destruction of
accumulated mental images, p. 48; to his explanation of the processes
of retrogressive amnesia (coming suddenly after an attack of vertigo,
a blow, etc.) which he bases upon a supposition of a group of mental
conceptions in touch with one another, in such a way that the loss of
one leading conception in a group deprives this group of sufficient
consistency to form a conscious synthesis, p. 70.

As regards the classifications of amnesia M. Sollier censures that of M.
Ribot as being neither openly psychological nor openly clinical, and of
taking successively as bases the extent of an observed phenomenon, its
evolution, its location in time. Moreover, from a clinical standpoint
it has led to a joining together of totally incongruous disorders. M.
Sollier therefore rejects it, and contents himself with adopting first of
all, with M. Falret, the natural classification of general amnesia and of
partial amnesia. Moreover, in taking account of the systematising of lost
remembrances, he proposes to make a distinction as to the two varieties
of systematised (functional) and of non-systematised (organic) amnesia,
considered from the purely psychological standpoint, p. 59. We should
thus have, firstly, the classification of general amnesia, including
(A) true organic amnesia (destruction of the centre of mental images),
and, under the classification of the systematised, (B) functional,
or apparent, amnesia (imperfect performance of the functions of the
centres): this latter subdividing into two groups, (_a_) amnesia with its
varieties (_a´_) simple, (_b´_) retrogressive, (_c´_) progressive, and
(_b_) paramnesia: (_a´_) that of locality, (_b´_) that of exactness; to
which it is proper to add (_c_) dysmnesia, which is organic-functional.
Secondly, the classification of partial amnesia whether systematised or
not, which may be either organic or functional. M. Sollier abandons,
moreover, every pathological or etiological classification as being
exceedingly unsatisfactory. In the presence of a patient, he justly
remarks, the physician can only employ semiology.—I will not enter
here into the details of the inquisitor-like investigation entered
upon by the author. I must even proceed without stopping through the
observations intended for medical men, which form the second part of the
work, but I judge that every reader will also find therein many facts
which may prove of interest. After having read it, one is more impressed
than ever with the importance and delicacy of the motive forces of the
memory, in noting the frequency and the varieties even of its sources of
weakness. M. Sollier has the credit of pointing them out—in the shape
of “defects in synthetical power” and in “will power”—in the sources of
weakness where one had not been accustomed to look for them. It would be
interesting, he thinks, to find out what part amnesia may perhaps take in
the pathogeny of certain nervous disorders, and the influence which it
has on their evolution. Specialists for the insane might find therein a
new subject of study, and psychology will profit, on the other hand, by
that which clinical experience offers it. Is not its main object to learn
to understand life as a unit at the same time that it analyses it as a
diversity?

       *       *       *       *       *

When one passes from a book like that of M. Sollier to the work of M.
l’Abbé MAURICE DE BAETS, _Les bases de la morale et du droit_,[47]
one is impressed by the change of method. It has become impossible
for us to consider pathology as unallied to questions of morality; and
we have accomplished this great object of studying matters pertaining
to the moral world, the evolution of law, without seeking our base of
support in a religious faith or in a metaphysical affirmation. Even M.
l’Abbé de Baets himself declares emphatically that he desires to adopt
only one starting point from among those we are acquainted with,—the
verification of facts,—and truly he shows a good will and knowledge;
nevertheless the ground which he considers so firm has, as we believe,
no stability. All seems strange to us, if I may so speak, in books of
this description. The tone which is peculiar to them, the nature of the
facts cited, the progress of the reasoning, impeach them just as surely
as the blue color of his costume reveals afar off an inhabitant of the
Celestial Empire. I am not an impassioned adversary of the clergy; far
from it. I appreciate their intentions and esteem their persons as one
should, but I am unable to share their opinions, and I consider indeed
that they deceive themselves when they think that faith has ever given to
the world an absolute assurance. It has not given it because it has not
proved sufficient. Mankind, variable and vacillating though it may be,
does not change its beliefs because of fickleness of heart: its mental
evolution takes place too slowly for that, and is also too painful. The
Catholic church of to-day has adopted as its watch-word the return to
St. Thomas of Aquinas; it will gain by this unity of effort, without
succeeding however in leading back the minds of men to its point of view.
The diverse ways we follow tend doubtless as a matter of fact toward the
same objective point, and run more or less in the same direction; but
humanity scarcely ever passes back again over the paths which it has once
traversed.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have another little volume by M. LOMBROSO, _Les applications de
l’anthropologie criminelle_; a sequel to _Nouvelles recherches_, which
I have mentioned before. We find here interesting pages in regard to
transportation and reform schools, and a criticism of the new theories
of the penal code (Garofalo, Tarde, Sighele, Onanoff and Blorg, Ferri)—a
part of the question considered in the Congress. A chapter indeed is
devoted to the subject of criminal anthropology in modern literature,
in regard to which it seems to me M. Lombroso always makes more of
a question than is desirable, but which he well understands how to
criticise. Then follow several pages on the criminal type in art, after
a work of Dr. Edward Lefort; then comes a description of anthropological
instruments and methods. I will not affirm that this last work brings us
much of novelty; it is chiefly a new and energetic presentation of his
views, and M. Lombroso has no doubt whatever that by dint of striking the
nail upon the head he will succeed in driving it into the wall of his
adversaries.

       *       *       *       *       *

The work of M. B. BOURDON, _L’expression des emotions et des tendances
dans le langage_, is certainly one of the most curious books one can
read. He treats in an original manner of phonetical questions, which
are less rife in France than in England and Germany, as to what sounds
signify, or speech; what is their worth in intensity, elevation, form or
quality, duration; what phenomena are shown by successions of intensity,
of elevation, of elementary articulation, of syllables, of words, etc.,
of duration; what are the relations of these phenomena to versification
and what comparison one can make between writing and speech: such are the
problems particularly studied, at times with the aid of very simple but
instructive facts culled from experience.

These studies—I need scarcely add that they are comparative ones—are
of interest for various reasons. They lead up to new ideas of grammar
and of language, and furnish arguments for a reform in orthography of
which M. Bourdon is a very warm partisan. His readers will not be slow
to notice for the matter of that, that he is in regard to this frankly
revolutionary; and it may seem paradoxical to say to them, for example,
that “the distinction between analytical and synthetical languages is
absolutely artificial, and could only be produced through our bad systems
of writing.” Writing, M. Bourdon indeed remarks, introduces separations
in places where spoken language makes no pause. The English write _I
will go_, they pronounce it _Iwillgo_. The analysis which pertains to
writing masks the true cohesion of the spoken language, and “if in the
past all series of articulations had been written as a single word which
were in fact pronounced as a single word, we should not have known the
error which consists in opposing certain languages classed as synthetical
to others which we class as analytical.” The argument is perhaps not
a decisive one, and in the neo-Latin languages, for example, one can
scarcely deny that the analysis of the written language has conformed to
the work of decomposition of the antique forms, so as to adapt itself to
the new groupings of their essential elements, groupings wherein these
elements remain variable because speech separates them effectively, in
many cases by interpolating governing words or others.

But it is not my intention to enter into these detailed discussions.
I leave M. Bourdon in further calling attention to his last chapter,
_Ecriture_. Persons curious as to graphology will find in it some good
ideas concerning this method of “character reading.” The author does not
tell everything, and I have a suspicion that he greatly despises certain
signs valued by the graphologists, and arrived at empirically, but we
should note what he has actually said.

       *       *       *       *       *

Under the title, _Le monde physique, Essai de conception expérimentale_,
M. Dr. JULIEN PIOGER offers to the public a sketch of a world-system.
This system is summed up in the expression of “Universal Solidarity,”
and is based on the idea of infinitely minute matter-particles, or
“infinitesimals,” the mutual relations of which, and their equilibrium,
constitute the machinery of the universe. The atomic-mechanical
hypothesis, says M. Pioger, is wrong in resolving matter into perfected
differential particles and in assigning to its atoms qualities which
make of them either true material corpuscules or a real entity, “a thing
in itself.” On the contrary, far from intending to assign a limit to
materiality, the hypothesis of infinitesimals confines itself to limiting
the conception which we may have of it. The infinitesimal corresponds
to the infinitely small, that is to say to the non-perfected, to the
non-differentiable, beyond our cognisance and our perceptivity; it
expresses the most reduced condition of the affinities which constitute
matter; it is the expression of the infinitesimal existence of that
which we call motion, extension, ponderability, under the general name
of matter. Now the most simple thing which can be conceived of in the
physical world, is the _couple_ formed by the essential equipoise of two
infinitesimals. In developing the couple it becomes possible to form the
universe in all its great variety. The solidarity of the parts in the
whole appears as the essential condition of existence of all that which
Is—the necessary condition of all individuality.

In conclusion I call attention to two new editions, one the well-known
work of M. BERNARD PÉREZ, _Les trois premières années de l’enfant_, fifth
edition, revised and supplied with an introduction by Mr. James Sully;
the other _Les functions du cerveau_, by M. JULES SOURY, a work highly
esteemed, embodying the most recent researches.

                                                            LUCIEN ARRÉAT.


FOOTNOTES:

[46] Rueff, publisher.

[47] This book and the following ones are published by F. Alcan.




