II.

NEW FRENCH BOOKS.


I am happy to have the opportunity in my present letter to speak
of a book of real importance, _La pathologie des emotions, Études
physiologiques et cliniques_, by M. CH. FÉRÉ. The name of this learned
physician of the Bicêtre is sufficiently well known to dispense me from
the necessity of speaking of his personality, so that I can devote all
that I have to say to his work. Its great merit is not so much the
novelty of the psychological theory which is laid at its foundation, as
the wealth of facts presented and the sureness of the methods pursued.
M. Féré’s mind is of a distinctly positive cast, and he possesses in a
high degree the ability to draw from the thesis which he illustrates and
confirms, the various consequences which from a medical and social point
of view this thesis involves.

States of intellectual consciousness, he writes, citing Spencer, cannot
be dissociated from emotional states. The emotions are the products
of our mental representations of agreeable states or painful states,
and are the stronger according as they contain a greater number of
present or nascent sensations competent to recall these states. The
emotions, accordingly, being simply representations of states of
consciousness provoked by external excitations, it is to be presumed
that the physiological conditions of emotions (of central or cerebral
origin) present a striking analogy, if not an absolute resemblance,
to the physiological conditions of sensations (of peripheral origin,
either internal or external); and this relation should be as prominently
marked in pathological as in normal states. The upshot of all this is,
continues M. Féré, that physical agents capable of modifying a state of
consciousness of peripheral origin (sensations), are also capable of
modifying states of consciousness of central origin (emotions). “The
external signs of these different states of consciousness can be studied
by the same methods. Psychology is only specialised physiology; mental
medicine only a specialisation of general medicine, from which it must
borrow its methods of research and action—all purely physical. The
demonstration of these relations is the object of the present work.”

The work, which contains almost six hundred pages, presents no divisions
but that of chapters. But it would not be difficult to group its contents
under the four general titles: (1) physiological and pathological effects
of physical agents on man; (2) physiological conditions and pathological
and curative effects of emotions; (3) psychopathy and morbid emotivity;
(4) the consequences to individuals and society of morbid emotivity, its
medical treatment, prophylaxis and legislation. The entire demonstration
of M. Féré, I might add, is essentially aimed at the two following
propositions: the first, that all the symptoms of emotions possess a
certain resemblance to those of fatigue or physical pain; the other, that
the original source of morbid emotivities and their resultant disorders
is a state of depression congenital or acquired.

M. Féré reverts constantly to these fundamental ideas. After having
exhibited, for example, the reciprocal influences of the emotions, or
disorders of the imagination, and of disorders which are of physical
origin, he concludes that “physical disease and moral disease have the
same basis.” It is thus only in appearance, he writes, that the mind has
any influence on the functions of the body; the phenomena of mind are,
quite the reverse, the necessary effect of certain modifications of the
body, and it is by the intermediary action of the manifestations of the
body that the representations of the mind act. It is found convenient to
regard the gray matter of the brain as the central organ of the emotions,
and the great sympathetic as the peripheral organ that presides over
their “exteriorisation”; but we have no right to think of the emotions
without their external signs, and we are thus led to the conclusion that
“emotion is essentially a generalised reflex phenomenon the centrifugal
path of which is principally the great sympathetic system.”

A psychological question much debated since M. Ribot took it up, the
question of _attention_, is also treated here, in an incidental yet
very interesting manner (Chapter III). M. Féré connects attention with
the study of the physiological conditions of physical action, and thus
takes sides, it will be seen, with the motory theory of attention.
James Sully, and others, have denied the existence of muscular phenomena
accompanying attention. But physiology is in a position to disclose
the existence of these movements; it can study their qualities, their
energy, their form, their precision, and their rapidity. We will find
in M. Féré’s book a number of new experimental facts establishing the
thesis that “muscular tension constitutes the physiological condition of
attention.” “The mistake of many psychologists (M. Hirth, for example)
has been, that they have confounded rest with willed immobility, which
from a mechanical point of view is very far removed from the former;
for immobility of will is precisely the result of very intense muscular
activities, and can only be produced by a general tension of the muscular
system, which throws the subject in a state such that it can react the
most quickly and most energetically on any excitation, whencesoever it
may proceed.” Willed, or voluntary, immobility is attention itself;
to produce this state, well-enervated and well-nourished muscles are
necessary. “We may say,” declares M. Féré, “that the practice of
immobility is the most favorable exercise for the development of the
mind: a system of education which should neglect this exercise would
suppress attention, it would be a regressive education.”

“It is lack of attention,” he tells us further on, “that is the cause
of the insensibility of hysterical patients, and it is instability of
attention that is the cause of the variability of their sensory and
motory disorders.” It is all due to the want of sufficient energy to
bring simultaneously into a state of tension the muscular settings of all
of the sensory organs. Hysterical anæsthesia according to him—and how
perfectly right he is!—is nothing but a mental and psychical disease,
which may be cured by _suggestion_; it is an organic malady, which cannot
be cured without the restoration of the proper organic state.

Worthy of notice are a few pages on the existence of electrical
phenomena, “which are exaggerated in certain subjects, but which appear
to exist in a more feeble degree in the normal states.” The facts here
involved might furnish us with a key to the phenomena of transmission,
polarisation, elective sensibility, and certain actions at a distance,
whose solution still presents great difficulties. Also to be noted are
a number of corrections of inductions made by Darwin, whom ignorance
of physiology often involved in mistakes concerning the true nature
of phenomena: thus Darwin was often led to attribute an intentional
character to actions which are throughout reflex.

Basing his views on the inevitable correlation of these two orders of
phenomena, the physical and the psychical, M. Féré stands in a position
of direct hostility to the metaphysics (of course, unconscious) of the
great body of alienists. He selects the characteristic disorder of
insanity, namely hallucination, and sets about to show the existence of
physical phenomena concomitant with hallucination. Chapter XIII is one of
the most instructive of his work and well worth thoughtful perusal. Let
us add on this point that M. Féré stoutly combats the doctrine, held by
Magnan in particular, that all forms of phobia, that is to say, of morbid
emotive states, are the brands of degeneration. He admits, however,
that a great number are connected with permanent constitutional states,
congenital or acquired.

M. Féré accepts the pathological and degenerative theory of crime.
But he rejects in a measure Lombroso’s thesis of the assimilation of
genius to insanity. Genius and talent, he says, are by no means devoid
of intellectual and emotional anomalies, but it is not true that
neuropathic states are the indispensable concomitants of genius, although
susceptibility to impressions is, when not developed to excess, one of
the physiological conditions of genius.

With respect to the social consequences involved, I will simply quote
his concise statement that “physiology is quite in accord with political
economy in condemning the intemperate generosity which favors the
development and multiplication of emotive personalities.” With regard,
finally, to the question of responsibility, M. Féré’s position differs,
so far as I can see, in no respect from my own, which I have expounded at
sufficient length in a former number of _The Monist_, to dispense me from
the necessity of reverting to it here.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our next book is also a remarkable one—_Les transformations du droit_,
by M. G. TARDE, a small volume of some two hundred and twelve pages.
M. Tarde has again and again declared himself the avowed adversary of
Spencerianism, and of evolution generally, at least in so far as the idea
of evolution is indiscriminately and unreflectingly employed, as is the
case, he maintains, in a great class of social questions which make up
the criminal and civil law. Everywhere in these domains, despite apparent
uniformity, which is the simple effect of a perspective that effaces the
differences of remote times, is found diversity. The serial stages of
development professedly disclosed, he rejects as absolutely incompetent
in the explanation of criminal law, procedure, the status of persons and
things, and obligations.

In criminal law, for example, we ordinarily regard the system of
pecuniary composition as the origin of penal justice, and the idea
of vengeance as necessarily antecedent to the idea of culpability. A
mistake, says M. Tarde. And he offers on this subject a distinction which
is quite curious. He sees the defensive reaction made against criminal
acts originally splitting up into two distinct forms of quite unequal
scope: the one moral, the joint product of indignation and compassion;
the other vindictive, malevolent, and ruthless. The first, according
to him, is exercised within the family and between members of the same
social group; the second is displayed towards the foreigner and the
enemy. Of these two sources of penality, the domestic moral punishment
is the most important; the blow-for-blow policy, or vengeance, although
more apparent, is a secondary source. I fully admit that the instinct
of sympathy, the primitive condition of all social aggregation, has
never been wholly absent from human relations, and it might be that
the distinction perceived by M. Tarde is well founded, although the
two sources appear to have become so confounded in the justice of the
tribunals that it is difficult to trace them to that point. But M.
Tarde seems to me to be too much disposed to flatter the portrait of
the primitive man and to make as “mild as lambs” these prehistoric
creatures whom we have pictured as “cruel as tigers,” and to be too much
preoccupied with the ideas of penality and moral responsibility, which he
thinks the new theories have compromised.

With respect to the status of persons, he denies the existence of the
well-known order of development by which promiscuity, matriarchy, and
patriarchy are said to succeed each other. The tribe could only have
arisen, he tells us, from the federation of families, and the strong
family, the one capable of development, could only have been patriarchal.
It is wrong, he adds, to regard uterine filiation, that is, the custom
of considering a child the son of its mother and not the son of its
father, as a vestige of a pre-existent matriarchy. “In a patriarchal
society, polygamy—which is the very reverse of matriarchy—ought in the
very necessity of things to give predominance to the custom referred to,
so that children born of the same mother could be distinguished from one
another.” This, indeed, was the idea of the Greek tragedians. The maxim,
which occurs so often in Euripides, that it is not good that a man should
have several wives, is always disclosed as the anxiety of assuring the
legitimacy of children; Æschylus charges Minerva to defend the “cause of
her father”; it is one of the aspects of the reaction against the customs
of Asia. The primitive family, says M. Tarde, in summing up, was quite
different in its original forms; it was here monogamic, there polygamic,
and in other places polyandrous, at one time exogamic and at another
endogamic, and so forth. “Marriage, therefore, did not spring from a
single typical form, nor does it, in its various forms, make towards
such.”

His criticisms are of equal strength with regard to the status of
things and the presumed priority of collective property. Contrary to
the views of M. de Laveleye, he is of opinion that the community of the
village could only have arisen on an enlarged model of the community of
the family, “just as the vestal fire of the city could only have been
lighted in imitation of the fire of the domestic hearth”: The certain
effect of the first must in its origin have been to encroach upon, not to
produce, the second. Excessively preoccupied in finding in the present
the vestiges of a state of things that is past, the evolutionists involve
themselves, regardless of consequences, in many naïve and wonderful
theories, which M. Tarde, in his keen and pointed style, has not
hesitated to expose. There is much point and a profusion of the _granum
salis_ in these instructive pages.

With respect to obligations, he makes a distinction, as in criminal law,
between internal and external relations. Also, after having asserted
with Sir Henry Sumner Maine, the non-fusion of the law of nature and
the law of nations, he remarks that here also there exists two sources
whose waters have not subsequently flowed together: the _jus naturæ_ is
conceived to be the generalisation of a type of relations abstracted from
the internal relations of the members of the primitive social group; the
_jus gentium_ to be the outcome of relations between men that belong to
different groups.

Is, then, this disordered succession of the social data mere chance? The
reader will bethink himself of a number of facts which go to disprove
this conclusion, and it is a difficulty moreover which M. Tarde has
also felt. He replies by making a distinction of “two kinds of laws,
the laws of causation and the supposed laws of evolution.” The first,
which in his theory are analogous to the laws of celestial mechanics,
whose formulæ remain constant no matter what the history of the solar
systems distributed throughout the heavens may be, are the psychological
laws; the second are merely arbitrary formulæ, which, when we come to
define them accurately, do not admit of adaptation even to the majority
of cases. The psychological laws of which M. Tarde here speaks are
reducible to _imitation_[82]—consequently to _invention_—and to _logic_.
I certainly do not propose to question the importance of these factors.
In a short tract published several years ago I pointed out myself that
the influences of contact are more efficient than the influences of race
or even of climate, and this implicitly involves the idea of imitation.
Yet the character of the psychological factor does not, it seems to me,
exclude a tendency towards a certain arrangement of the data of society,
despite their possible and actual diversity. “With respect to the facts
of society,” I wrote, “we point out their changes but do not succeed
in disclosing the laws of their evolution; the most we have done is to
note amid the totality certain features which appear to predominate.”
To extricate these features is a task not unworthy of the historian. M.
Tarde himself admits that results of this character have already been
reached, and he especially points to “the splendid and commendable
movement in advance, which though not generally noticed[83] has,
nevertheless, accompanied all juridical evolutions”—namely, the constant
enlargement of the relations of law as the result of a growing sympathy
and sociability.

To sum up, the point of view which M. Tarde has taken does not exclude
a class of researches different from his. Nothing can be better than to
formulate the laws of the psychological agent, and M. Tarde, original
mind that he is, has done this with a superiority and penetration to
which I yield my unqualified admiration. At bottom, does not the view
of Auguste Comte, despite his contempt for psychology, involve the
preliminary study of the biological individual and the social agent?
Psychological laws and physical laws undoubtedly meet in the same group
of “laws of causation”; still, it should not be forgotten that in the
social order of things man is the creator of the facts and that his
creations react upon him in the proportion in which they are realised. At
any rate, a tangible relation exists between the creations of the agent
and the variations of the results, and it is not forbidden to inquire if
there does not also exist a certain order in these creations, the effect
of which would be to produce a recognisable serial succession in the
results, a medial line about which the events of our life oscillate. A
difficult investigation—and one in which M. Tarde has shown himself to be
too speedily satisfied, and in which we should strenuously guard against
hasty generalisations. It is unpleasant, we admit, to turn topsy-turvy a
house in which we have long lived in comfort; but our contentment returns
in an increased measure when we have replaced our things in their proper
places, and swept out the dusty corners.

       *       *       *       *       *

M. M. AGUILÉRA has just published a work entitled, _L’idée du Droit en
Allemagne_. His book is a history of the different schools of law which
have arisen in Germany and lays especial emphasis on the fact that no
nation has advanced as far as this in seeking in philosophical ideas the
motives and the justification of its acts, and he sets about showing how
the existence of Germany’s special conception of law may be explained.
Germany, he writes in his conclusion, everywhere starts from the idea of
force. Its peculiar characteristic is to bow before victorious force. And
to this must be added, if we wish to comprehend its aggressive character,
the sentiment of vanity, which has led it to proclaim “that incredible
formula: the ideal of Germany is the ideal of humanity.”

M. GEORGE LYON gives us a learned historical study, _La philosophie
de Hobbes_. He points out how everything is interrelated in the work
of this philosopher—his conception of the state to his theories of
ethics, his ethical doctrines to his psychological theories, and the
latter to general principles concerning nature, thought, and their laws.
But he also presents with much force the objections to Hobbism. He
condemns its final consequence, which is submission to force. He points
out finally the inevitable ambiguity which permeates this system in
consequence of the struggle “between individual inspiration, which is
purely ontological, and the action of an intellectual environment which
is eminently empirical. Hobbes was the metaphysician of empiricism as
Bacon was its poet.” I dismiss for the present all discussion of these
subjects; an occasion will present itself later of dealing with them.

In _Les races et les langues_ M. ANDRÉ LEFÈVRE sums up the state of
the science of language. The distinguishing characteristic of his work
is the non-separation of language from the organism which has produced
it, and the simultaneous presentation of languages with the ethnical
groups which speak them. M. Lefèvre accepts, let us note at once, the
well-known stages of the linguistic school—monosyllabism, agglutination,
inflection, and analysis, which M. Tarde, if he should unexpectedly
become a philologist would stigmatise as gratuitous. Of the races, of the
places of origin, and of the migrations of the ancient peoples he tells
a great many stories which are somewhat of the fairy-tale order, but
this reservation does not affect in the least the value of his special
linguistic researches.

In conclusion I shall mention _Le problème de la mort, ses solutions
imaginaires et la science positive_, by M. L. BOURDEAU, and _Platon,
sa philosophie, précédé d’un aperçu de sa vie et de ses écrits_, by M.
CH. BÉNARD, a new volume in the series of historical studies by this
venerable professor.[84]

                                                            LUCIEN ARRÉAT.


FOOTNOTES:

[82] See his work _Les lois de l’imitation_ (Alcan, Paris).

[83] I have called attention to this in a less definite manner in
several passages of my book _La morale dans le drame, l’épopée et le
roman_, in which I shall have to incorporate the corrections which the
splendid studies of M. Tarde have suggested. For the citation given a
few lines above I ask permission to refer the reader to my _Journal d’un
philosophe_ (Alcan, Paris).

[84] All the works mentioned are published by F. Alcan.




BOOK REVIEWS.


EINLEITUNG IN DIE PHILOSOPHIE. By _Prof. Friedrich Paulsen_. Berlin:
Wilhelm Hertz. 1892.

Friedrich Paulsen, professor at the University of Berlin, writes this
“Introduction” not so much for connoisseurs as for students, whom it
may serve as a guide. He discusses in general outlines the various
fundamental problems of philosophy, at the same time indicating his
own position, which, in more than one respect, is very similar to the
philosophy presented in the columns of _The Monist_.

His own view, which, as he trusts, is the general tendency of modern
philosophical thought, he calls “idealistic monism.” It is opposed, on
the one hand, to supernatural dualism, and on the other hand to atomistic
materialism; the former being the traditional doctrine of the schoolmen
and of ecclesiasticism, separating body and soul, nature and God, etc.,
each into two distinct realities, which are accidentally combined,
the latter being an attempt, having its beginning in the eighteenth
century, to explain all natural phenomena in a purely mechanical way.
Paulsen adds: “The whole history of modern philosophy can be said to
be a continuous attempt to overcome this opposition.... The principle
of natural science is the _Natur-Gesetzmässigkeit_ of all events....
Modern materialism derives from this a kind of metaphysics, represents
all reality as a system of blindly operating physical forces....
Philosophy undertakes to dispel the opposition of these two doctrines;
its proposition is—and we may say that this is the main-spring of the
entire evolution of modern philosophy—_to reconcile the religious
world-conception with that of natural science_. There are many who regard
this aspiration as a sort of squaring of the circle, and we grant that
some similitude between the two may exist, for here as well as there we
can attain only to approximations, here as well as there we can never
solve the problem finally and forever. At any rate, we must recognise the
fact that the whole philosophical thought of the last three centuries has
been directed towards this goal.”

Professor Paulsen classes the various philosophies of the present time
as follows: (1) The phenomenalistic-positivistic philosophy which denies
any absolute cognition of reality, least of all in physics; the world of
objects is a world of phenomena. (2) The idealistic monistic philosophy.
To define the nature of reality as it is in itself, we must rely upon
the data of our inner experience. The intellectual-historical world is
to us the most comprehensible dénouement of reality—in fact, the only
comprehensible one. The ultimate idea to which we are led in tracing
out facts, is this: Reality, which presents itself to our senses in the
objective world as a unitary system of motions, is the appearance of a
spiritual all-being, which must be conceived as the evolution of some
unitary idea. In this respect idealistic monism agrees upon the whole
with speculative philosophy, or rather with all idealism since Plato.

The philosophy of the present time is, further on, characterised (3) as
passing from intellectualism to voluntaryism; namely, it allows the will
to have its legitimate influence in the construction of a world-view. It
is (4) evolutionistic-theological, which latter tendency meets half way
the above-mentioned idealistic monism. Both are beginning to permeate
ethics, sociology, jurisprudence, and politics. The old formalistic
methods are dropped and teleological considerations prevail. Purpose
is recognised to rule in life. Lastly (5) the philosophy of to-day
is historical. The older philosophy is mathematical-naturalistic or
abstract-rationalistic. Speculative philosophy precedes the construction
of an intellectual-historical world; it then attempts also to construct
nature historically, at least in a logico-genetic schematism. Natural
science has already pursued this course in its cosmical and biological
theories of evolution. It is apparent how these tendencies follow the old
tradition of harmonising the physical and the intellectual-historical
worlds into one unitary conception of the whole.

The book is divided into two parts, with an introduction and conclusion.
The introduction defines the relation of philosophy to mythology and to
the sciences. Philosophy cannot be separated from the sciences. Says
Paulsen: “Figuratively speaking, reality is a great riddle proposed to
man; all the various sciences determine some parts of it, and the attempt
to solve the _whole_, to find the key to the _mysterium magnum_ of being,
is called philosophy.”

The first book treats, in two chapters, of the problems of metaphysics,
viz.: the ontological problem and the cosmo-theological problem. In
the former chapter materialism, panpsychism, and the nature of the
soul are discussed, while the second chapter is devoted to atomism and
teleological theism, implying such subjects as the theory of evolution,
causality, pantheism. The second part reviews, in the first chapter, the
problems of the theory of cognition, viz.: the idealistic arguments, the
realistic views, and our knowledge of the outer world. The second chapter
presents an exposé of the problems regarding the origin of cognition as
viewed by rationalism and empiricism, paying special attention to Kant’s
formalistic realism. The conclusion is a brief treatment of some ethical
problems.

It is impossible to discuss all the details of the 444 pages of Paulsen’s
book, but a few specimen quotations from the chapter “Pantheism and
World-soul” may be welcome to our readers. Our author asks: Considering
all the tendencies of yearning and willing that appear in the innumerable
forms of reality, is there a unity of inner life corresponding to the
unity of the physical world in its universal interaction? The affirmation
of this question constitutes the idealistic pantheism.

Idealistic pantheism is to Professor Paulsen the simplest and most
obvious construction of the world possible. To other world-views, the
existence of the soul is a problem; it has even been called an “absolute
problem.” “I believe,” he adds, with great truth, “that there can be
no stronger argument against any world-view than that it regards the
existence of soul as something absolutely mysterious.” There is a power
of conviction in idealistic pantheism verified by the astonishing
agreement of the testimonies of many various thinkers in the Orient as
well as in the Occident, in antiquity no less than in modern times. (P.
243.)

Says Professor Paulsen: “The dayfly may imagine when the sun sinks that
all is at an end; light vanishes forever and the whole world is swallowed
up in darkness and death. But man who sees so many suns sink and rise
should have learned that in the infinite there are many possibilities
which he cannot see at present [p. 241]. The conception of a world-soul,
of a spiritual all-being, of a _mundus intelligibilis_ appears to our
physicists and physiologists in the same light as the conception of
anthropomorphic deities—as a childish dream. They have no need of this
hypothesis [pp. 243-244]. Du Bois-Reymond declares that a naturalist
before admitting the assumption of a world-soul should demand, ‘that
we ought to find somewhere in the world neuroglia embedded in warm
arterial blood under the proper pressure and provided with appropriate
sense-organs, ganglions, and fibres, corresponding to the intellectual
capacities of such a soul.’ An animal,” says Paulsen, “needs as a matter
of course legs to stand upon and to move with, a stomach, teeth, eyes,
and a central nervous system, but the All is not in need of this; it
needs no legs to stand upon and to move with, no stomach for alimentary
purposes, no eyes, no ears, for there is nothing to be seen or heard
outside of it, and so it can also dispense with a nervous system and a
brain.”

Quoting two passages, one from Fechner, the other from Nägeli, to the
effect that the system of fixed stars might be regarded as a group of
molecules in an infinitely larger whole which we should have to conceive
of as a unitary organism, Paulsen says: “Indeed, there is no objection to
regarding a planet as a ganglion of the world-brain. Is it too large? No.
Why should not the world-brain have bigger cells than an animal brain. Or
is its composition inappropriate? Why? We find in it the same materials,
carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, iron, phosphorus, and so forth, and also
innumerable interactions similar for all we know to those that take place
in a ganglion. Who knows how striking would be the resemblance of their
structures, if we could but see a ganglion under a sufficiently powerful
magnifying glass.”

These ideas are mere possibilities and are presented as such, but we
cannot attribute to them any philosophical, scientific, or religious
importance. Our idea of “a world-soul” or, better, of God, is different
and we avoid purposely anything that can be constructed upon the basis of
a vague hypothesis.

We ourselves reject pantheism, the view which identifies God and the
All for reasons which we need not repeat here. We call our view of
God entheism, and in forming our idea of God we purposely avoid such
fantastical assumptions as considering the possibility of solar systems
being molecules in the organism of a huge world-animal. Granted the
truth of this view, the mere possibility of which we cannot deny,
this extraordinary creature or world-animal would not be God, its
will would not be our moral authority; it would not be the eternal,
the immutable, the ground of all being, the ultimate rule of action,
and the omnipotent universal law of existence: it would merely be a
creature like ourselves, only immeasurably bigger, evolving like other
animals and subject to the same or analogous or perhaps similar wants,
disappointments, sufferings, and joys as ourselves. What a miserable God
such a world-being would be; we know nothing of him and he knows nothing
of us. His will and aspirations would have even less influence upon our
aspirations, than, for instance, the hopes of a man upon the molecular
groupings in his tissues, we being only the parasites upon the crust
of an atom of his tissues. We have presented our view of the subject
in Vol. III, No. 2, pp. 249-257, of _The Monist_, in the third part of
the article “Panpsychism and Panbiotism,” with reference to a similar
hypothesis incidentally touched upon as a possibility of monistic theism
by Professor Romanes.

We simply state the difference between our position and that of Professor
Paulsen concerning the nature of a world-soul without intending to make
more of it than he does himself; for, if we are not mistaken, it is with
him a mere suggestion.

We conclude our review with a passage which shows Professor Paulsen’s
attitude toward Christianity, which more than anything else proves the
general agreement of his work with ours. He says:

“The Christian faith is not a philosophical system, not a theological
dogma and still less the residue of an old superstition, but the
immediate and living certainty of the heart concerning the nature of the
good and its importance in real life. This faith can be to-day the same
as it was in Luther’s, or St. Augustine’s, or the apostles’ time who saw
Jesus with their own eyes bodily. If Christianity, did indeed consist of
a number of doctrines and opinions, it would certainly be true, as some
claim, that it has been dead a long time, for doctrines and opinions are
not long-lived. If Christianity really did consist of the belief in the
creation of the world five thousand years ago out of nothing, the rib
story of Eve, the story of Eden and the fall, etc., etc., ... then indeed
it would be impossible for a thinking man of to-day to be a Christian.
But all that is not the faith of Christianity, it is not the religion of
Jesus. And if all the leaders of all the confessions declare that this
is the Christian faith and that he who does not believe all these things
can have no part in Christ, their proposition must be rejected as untrue.
No one can be saved by believing these things; while the request of the
church to believe in certain opinions set forth by men has expelled
many an honest man.... In the life and death of Jesus I have learned to
understand the meaning of life and I call God and the revelation of God
that which makes my life possible and explains to me the significance of
my life.... Is such a faith compatible with the above-mentioned monistic
world-conception? My answer is, By all means.”

This is Professor Paulsen’s solution of the problem of a reconciliation
of science and religion—and we add that it is ours too.

                                                                     P. C.


FIRST STEPS IN PHILOSOPHY. By _William Mackintire Salter_. Chicago: C. H.
Kerr & Co. 1892. Price, $1.00. Pages, 155.

This little book is divided into two parts: (1) Physical, (2) Ethical.
In the first, Mr. Salter discusses the conception of matter; in the
second, that of duty. Mr. Salter’s philosophical position is epitomised
in a sentence which he quotes from Herbert Spencer. This sentence states,
that, “what we are conscious of as properties of matter, even down to
its weight and resistance, are but subjective affections produced by
objective agencies which are unknown and unknowable.” Mr. Salter’s
philosophical position, accordingly, is, first, Idealism, and, second,
Agnosticism.

In ethics, Mr. Salter’s view embraces Utilitarianism, or Hedonism, and
Intuitionism, both of which, he says, are incomplete in themselves, and
must be supplemented by other elements. Utilitarianism makes happiness
the ultimate end; Intuitionism, virtue; and Mr. Salter adds, such an end
must embrace the “realisation of _all_ our capacities.” Mr. Salter’s
ethical position has been before discussed in our journals.

If we study Mr. Salter’s philosophical views, we shall find that his
theory is a reproduction of Berkeley’s analysis of the data of knowledge,
embellished by the results of modern physiological psychology. Yet Mr.
Salter’s theory, although it everywhere shows the traces of a close study
of Berkeley’s views, presents the strange historical anomaly of undoing
Berkeley’s work. Berkeley’s undoubted aim was to place knowledge on a
basis of fact and refute, in a philosophical manner, the agnosticism,
metaphysicism, and transcendentalism prevalent in his day. But Mr. Salter
adds to Berkeley’s results the very things that Berkeley sought to
overthrow, and thus renders the latter’s analysis (and consequently his
own) in need of an equivalent analysis.

Take, for instance, the above-quoted sentence from Herbert Spencer, to
which Mr. Salter assents. “Objective agencies,” “unknown and unknowable”!
Is this consistent? All knowledge is a knowledge of sensations, a
knowledge _of_ and _in_ the mind, says the idealist, and we cannot, by
any process of ratiocination, arrive at things “outside” the mind. Yet he
himself, it seems, arrives at a knowledge of “objective agencies” outside
the mind (pp. 65, 69), and, what is more wonderful, at agencies that are
“unknown” and “unknowable.” Surely, this is not abiding by an analysis
of the facts of sensation (Berkeley). It is as unrational a procedure to
infer metaphysical objective agencies, as it is to infer a metaphysical
substratum “matter,” which last is the error of the realist.

Again, take the notion of cause. Here, also, the same unwarrantable
abandonment of the facts of sensation, i. e. of _all that is_, is evident.

At the end of an analysis, in which he shows that “all the choir of
Heaven and the furniture of the earth,” and “all which it inhabit,”
retreat and vanish in mind, Mr. Salter asks: “But is there absolutely
nothing real and objective left? So far as sensible phenomena are
concerned, we must answer, No, absolutely nothing is left; the whole
sensible (material) world is but an effect upon ourselves. But,” he adds,
“it would be a hasty inference,” on these grounds, “to say that nothing
whatever is left.” And when asked “what is left,” he answers, “all that
causes sensation.” We can never know scientifically what these causes
are, but “we have an inextinguishable faith” _that_ they are, “there
being no particular thing we are more sure of than that for every event
(and every sensible phenomenon is an event, viz., in ourselves) there is
some kind of explanation or cause.” To sum up: The theory of “sensible or
physical idealism”[85] implies a “supersensible or metaphysical realism.”
In the theory of sensible idealism things only exist as sensations;
“only exist, that is, _save in their supersensible or transcendental
causes_”—which, says the author, we must always add.

What is a cause? Cause is an abstraction. An abstraction from what? from
a real, physical world, or from a metaphysical, transcendental world?
Plainly, from our real world, from Mr. Salter’s world of “sensible
reality.” By what philosophical warrant, then, is this concept applied to
a world from which it has not been derived and to which it surely cannot
apply! It is wrong to speak of a cause of the All. The All has no cause,
just as it has no weight.

All these difficulties arise from the notion that there are two kinds
of knowledge and two kinds of existences. Idealism, to be consistent,
must be absolute; Mr. Salter’s idealism is not absolute. This is exactly
the criticism that the reading of his book at once forces on one. All
knowledge is knowledge of sensations, i. e. of reality; things not
accessible to sensation are not real, they do not exist; consequently,
all entities transcendental, metaphysical, and supersensible do not
exist. This is the conclusion to which any philosophy, idealism, realism,
or what not _must_ lead.

Nowadays, few people dispute the fundamental thesis of idealism (of
course, expressed in different terms from those of Mr. Spencer’s
sentence). In a sense, it is established. Its only drawback is, that its
“establishment” accomplishes nothing. It leaves the problem of philosophy
where it found it.[86] Reality is still reality. The same difficulties
and perplexities exist. The universe still mocks us. And foremost among
the riddles that the world opposes to man, stands that eternal query:
“What is mind?” Mr. Salter’s views of this question will show us what
contributions his theory is likely to make to philosophy.

Mr. Salter defines mind as “that which experiences sensations and
thoughts, or, more simply, that which feels and thinks.” It is not
feeling, not thinking, but _that which_ feels and thinks. It is thus an
agent, a subject. It is difficult to understand how this notion of mind
is come at, without self-contradiction. In their origin, all notions
of mind-subjects, mind-essences, mind-agencies, and so forth, are
materialistic. They must be volatilised and stripped of their substantial
attributes, if they are to take a place in an idealistic philosophy, and
then, as they “cannot be ranged along with the sensible phenomena of
which the mind takes cognisance,” there is but one realm left to exist
in, which is the transcendentalistic.

All this comes from carrying the abstraction by which “mind” is reached,
to mathematically infinite limits. In this abstraction the world retreats
and fades away into nothingness. And what is left? Not a single idea
or fact by which we can fix our abstraction. Mind is all, and mind is
nothing. It is not matter, not time, not space—not even a mathematical
point, which we expect it to become in its infinitely contracting
perspective. It has no attributes, no qualities; it is nothing and
nowhere. This conception of mind, Mr. Salter says, is only mysterious as
we _make_ it so, by careless and inaccurate thinking. And Mr. Salter is
right. It would require much careless thinking to make such a conception
mysterious. A thing or notion that cannot be defined, placed, or brought
into connection with any other thing or notion in the world, is not
_mysterious_, but simply does not exist. In that respect, it is as plain
as day.

The same confusion exists in the discussion which disposes of the query,
“_Where_ is mind?” The idealist, in Mr. Salter’s sense, does not admit
that the mind is in, or in anywise spatially connected with, the brain.
The question, _where_ is mind? he says, has no meaning, any more than
the question, what is the color of a pleasure? This is true. Mind is an
abstraction. In this sense it has no spatial existence. But the phenomena
from which this abstraction has produced itself, _are_ linked with
phenomena which have spatial existence, and in this sense the mental
processes are not mysterious nothings and nowheres. When I lose that
group of sensations called my leg, I know that, generally, I have lost
the feeling of my leg. So, also, when a certain part of that group of
sensations called my brain is destroyed, I know that I shall then have
lost my power of memory or of speech or of motion. I may also experiment
with other groups of sensations called dogs and cats, which I know have
mental powers. In the light of these facts it is not correct, either in
philosophy or common sense, to say that mental processes are absolutely
independent of locality. I know that my thoughts are not connected
with the group of sensations I call the moon, and I know they are not
connected with that group of sensations that I call Mr. Smith. I am
always aware of them as connected with that group of sensations which I
call “myself.”

Mr. Salter, in fact, half recognises this. He says, “The mind _is_
dependent on the body in the sense that our general power of sensation
and thought is connected with those sensations we call our body.” Yet,
“why this should be so is mysterious.” Indeed! One is inclined to ask
Mr. Salter here, what species of explanation or knowledge he wishes
of this phenomenon. Is explanation, or knowledge, something more than
the recognition and seeing of a plain connection between the groups of
sensations that constitute reality? In Mr. Salter’s analysis, all the
facts of the world are mysterious. Why a thing is as it is and is not
other than it is, is mysterious. He utterly fails to understand why
the power of perceiving colors is linked with the particular group of
sensations he calls his eye, and why it should not just as well be linked
with some other group or no group at all.

Why do I see with my eye? Why do I not see with my hand or with the hairs
of my head, or why do I not eat with my elbow, instead of my mouth?
Why do not stones fall upwards? Why do not magnets point towards the
East? Why do not the planets move about Jupiter or Saturn? Mr. Salter’s
question makes a jumble of the whole universe.

It is not the object of science or philosophy to find out why things are
not what they are, but to find out what they are. In this inquiry the why
and wherefore, properly understood, will evolve themselves.

Science simply concerns itself with the connection of the groups of
sensations which the idealist, and for that matter every one else, calls
reality. It cannot concern itself with anything else. All other things
are artificial and self-made existences. Nothing exists but reality
and the connections of reality. To seek for any other connections than
those that exist is absurd and futile. And to seek for any other causes
or cause of relations than such as really are is also futile. Before we
speak of the knowledge of a thing we must analyse and define our notion
of knowledge, and before we speak of the cause of a thing we must analyse
and define our notion of cause. In our view, the relation which Mr.
Salter doubts, is so intimately and inextricably one, that the causal
relation disappears. Neither is the cause of the other. We may, for the
purposes of inquiry, start from either as our general concept, but we
should never go so far as utterly to expel from reality the other. True
science and philosophy are neither idealistic nor materialistic, but
_real_. The two positions are extreme positions, and each is useful only
as a safeguard against the errors of the others. Reality is reality;
that is the main thing. Whether it is idealistic or materialistic is of
minor consequence. Besides reality there is nothing; its negation is
non-existence.

We do not wish in these criticisms to repudiate all that is in Mr.
Salter’s book. A great many of its reflections are helpful and
suggestive. We may refer, for example, to the passages in which the body
is regarded as a gradually decreasing wall of separation between that
part of reality which is known subjectively and that part which is known
objectively. This is really a unitary view. We believe, however, that if
Mr. Salter would carefully analyse the notions of knowledge, explanation,
cause, effect, and, therefore, the notion of reality, he would not
push his philosophy to the mysterious extreme at which it finally
arrives, and he would absolutely reject such unscientific conceptions
as supersensible realism, metaphysical realism, and supersensible
or transcendental causes. These render the reading of his book as a
philosophical help unsatisfactory, and leave the mind even more confused
and perplexed than it was before. However, all discussions of this sort
have their value, and Mr. Salter’s book possesses a virtue which few
other philosophical productions can boast of: it is very short. The
author’s pleasant style will also add to the pleasure of its perusal, and
if read critically the book will evoke much helpful thought.

                                                          T. J. MCCORMACK.


A REVIEW OF THE SYSTEMS OF ETHICS FOUNDED ON THE THEORY OF EVOLUTION. By
_C. M. Williams_. New York and London: Macmillan & Co. 1893.

This is a book, the perusal of which will leave the earnest student of
moral science full of disappointment. Not at all that it manifests any
lack of ability or information. On the contrary, it is at once clearly
and entertainingly written, and at the same time packed with notes and
comments that are full of interest and instruction.

The course of the book may be briefly stated. The first part, comprising
nearly half of its six hundred pages, is devoted to the statement of
the ethical doctrines maintained by thirteen prominent writers, whose
views have been formed more or less under the influence of the theory of
evolution, viz.: Darwin, Wallace, Haeckel, Spencer, Fiske, Rolph, Baratt,
Stephen, Carneri, Höffding, Gizycki, Alexander, and Paul Ree. The rest
of the book is the review of our author. This review is conducted under
the topical heads: The Concepts of Evolution; Intelligence and End;
The Will; Thought, Feeling, and Will in Evolution; Egoism and Altruism
in Evolution; Conscience; Moral Progress in History; The Results of
Ethical Inquiry on an Evolutional Basis; and The Ideal and the Way of Its
Attainment.

These are all topics of great interest and importance, and the author
has brought to the consideration of them a mind fully stored and
entirely competent. But we look in vain for that discourse and criticism
which above all other matters relating to moral science those who are
interested in human welfare crave from those who tender their reflections
upon ethical topics.

The great need of moral science is the discovery and certification of its
basis. It is a need that far transcends the scope of mere moral science,
for upon its right determination depends the right determination of a
multitude of questions that deeply involve the welfare of humanity. It
is a need that is not merely crying to be supplied. It is absolutely
wailing. Could it only be rightly determined, mankind would fast enough
orient itself in the course of evolution and with undissipated energy
work out its best possible development. But undiscovered or uncertified
it balks all process, save only that mechanical, halting, stumbling
process that has hitherto obtained; a process that is, as all may
observe, one that has little if any inward coördination, but is full of
inability and cross-purposes. Since it was the professed purpose of
our author to review a number of the more prominent systems of ethics,
which he esteems to be founded on the theory of evolution, his failure
to notice and to comment upon so conspicuous a feature of moral science
would naturally lead a reader, unversed in the works noticed, to suppose
that those works had altogether slighted this topic. Such is, however,
not the case. With the exception of perhaps Darwin and Wallace, all
the writers reviewed by our author have given more or less attention
to this matter, and they have left us in no doubt as to the positions
which they severally hold. Most of them are Hedonists of one sort or
another. Haeckel, Carneri, Rolph, and Alexander are, we believe, the only
exceptions.

But a more serious criticism upon the work under notice is suggested by
its very title. That title as much as says that the various works which
are reviewed by our author are “founded” upon the theory of evolution, at
least in so far as their ethical doctrines are concerned.

Now, what is the theory of evolution? What is its essential nature?
Does not its very form consist in the affirmation of an eternal secular
mutation, in which there is no discontinuity whatever? It says that
existence in sum and in every detail is eternal and continuous process.
It uncompromisingly forbids all suppositions of any absolute beginning,
or of any absolute end, or of any absolutely final adjustment. Hence, no
system of ethics can with truth be said to be “founded” upon the theory
of evolution that ignores or forgets this essential character of it.
Now, when we turn to the consideration of the various “systems” which
our author supposes to be “founded” upon the theory of evolution, we
find them, one and all, occupied more or less with suppositions of ends.
All are forecasting some “ideal” condition, which, being attained, all
chances of retrogression will be foreclosed and all possibilities of
betterment will be exhausted. In other words, they suppose an attainment
of death, or rather an attainment of a death-in-life more utterly
horrible than any actual death can possibly be. The very first condition
for an ethics that will be truly evolutional must be the fit and full
recognition of a boundless horizon to evolution in morals as well as in
all else. Emerson perceived the truth when he said in “The Sphynx”:

    “Profounder, profounder
    Man’s spirit must dive;
    To his aye rolling orb
    No goal will arrive.
    The heavens that now draw him
    With sweetness untold,
    Once found; for _new_ heavens
    He spurneth the old.”

And at present, the most serious efforts to establish a truly
clear-sighted ethics of evolution, with an unequivocal disavowal of any
and all Hedonism, is made by the editors of _The Monist_. It, indeed,
is the key-note of the missionary work that characterises all the
publications of The Open Court Publishing Co.

Any truly evolutional ethics must show itself a doctrine that applies
just as well to regress as to progress. Evolution is too often confounded
with progress, but degeneration is just as truly evolutional as is the
contrary movement, and, looking the facts of existence in the face,
mankind has no assurance of any unchangeable course of betterment. The
principles of morals are, however, not dependent upon the benign action
of nature. When the earth’s stock of fuel shall become exhausted, or
when the ice age returns, or when the sun grows cold, there will be no
alteration thereby in the moral law. Good and evil must and will be
the same under all circumstances, and no system of ethics is nor can
be anything but a temporary makeshift, that does not as well fit the
_diastoles_ as it does the _systoles_ of existence. We must look for
a doctrine that shall inform the conduct of men not only for the fore
part of the day, when all is jubilant and bounding and man asks only
for some good task to do, but also for the evening and night, when man
grows weary and craves for rest; for not only youth and maturity, but for
waning strength, old age, and death; for not only the progressive era of
cosmic history, but for the periods when natural conditions may disfavor
mankind, when, say, man may gradually be so reduced in resources that
the same will barely suffice for simple life-preservation; when under
the stress of natural conditions the human intellect, in the course of
generations, becomes step by step eliminated; when indeed humanity itself
tends perhaps slowly, but with certainty, towards permanent extinction.

They who complacently protest that the theory of evolution leaves the
domain of moral science substantially unaffected are surely in great
default either in their comprehension of the nature and implications
of that theory, or in their powers of circumspection, while those who
suppose that moral science becomes evolutional simply because of a little
application of that theory to some of the subordinate questions that are
involved, show themselves in a plight as bad as the others if not worse.

Our author notices without dissent, and even with seeming concurrence,
the various remarks made by many of the writers reviewed by him in
discredit of teleology.

Since as we have before protested the theory of evolution forbids all
suppositions of any ends that are absolutely final, it of course follows
that teleology is in the strictness of its meaning inadmissible, even
in ethics. But in dismissing teleology, let us not pour out the child
with the bath. However it ought to be with the interpretation of the
order of nature as a speculative exercise, something that is analogous
to teleology is an absolute necessity if ethics is to be anything more
than a curious study of human practise. The universe may manifest no
purpose, design or secular tendency, but man is and can be nothing but a
miserable estray on the ocean of existence unless he sails on a course,
instead of merely drifting. To do this he must take something by which to
steer, and any plausible stability is better than no bearings whatever.
At any rate man is insuperably drawn to thus mark out his course. If the
theory of evolution forbids him to suppose any ends that are absolutely
final, it does not prevent him from ascertaining directions. Indeed
evolution affords him data of the very first importance for that behoof.
Instead of ends we have aims and if ethics is to become that counsel and
guide to humanity, which we yearn for so anxiously, it must ascertain
and certify that single paramount aim to which all other tendencies are
naturally subsidiary. Teleology, or rather the determination of the aim
of evolution, must prepare the foundation before any evolutional ethics
that is worthy the name can be established.

Again our author with considerable debate notices the remarks of
the writers reviewed by him on the old question of free will and
necessity,—but like the positing of some end or aim to be subserved,
free will is one of the presuppositions of ethics. When man begins to
debate the possibility of rightly ascertaining the true end or aim for
his pursuit, or when he begins to moot the question of free will, he
is debating not any question of ethics proper, but only whether such a
science is possible. Unless conditions and events are functions, as well
of man’s personality as of his environment; unless persons count for
something in the variations of the course of nature, it is altogether
vain and idle to be troubled with questions of morality.

Free will and somewhat to be achieved are principles which whether well
or ill founded, ethics proper must take for granted before it has or can
have any _raison d’être_. As for free will, however the metaphysicians
may have stumbled over their own feet, the common sense of mankind has
never wavered. As a practical question (and ethics is pre-eminently a
matter of practice) this question is not an open one.

But on the question of what is the true paramount aim for man to pursue,
the decision that shall finally satisfy man is yet to be made. The best
proof that no satisfactory answer has yet been made is the fact that
we are still seeking an answer. As with regard to the needful prime
condition for a truly evolutional ethics we found wisdom in the poetical
insight, so again in this exigency we personally find the most profound
ethical philosophy in that same insight.

    “’Tis Life of which our nerves are scant.
    ’Tis Life, not death for which we pant,
    More Life, and fuller that we want.”

                                                       FRANCIS C. RUSSELL.


DER PESSIMISMUS IM LICHTE EINER HÖHEREN WELTAUFFASSUNG. By _Dr. J.
Friedländer_ and _Dr. M. Berendt_. Berlin W.: S. Gerstmann. 1893.

The authors’ aim is the refutation of pessimism and the foundation of
a higher world-conception. This latter is a pantheism spiritualised
by moral ideals and contrasted to Darwinism and materialism. Natural
science is said to be the surrounding walls of the new view, furnishing
(1) negative truths of criticism and (2) a knowledge of the positive
features of nature. The negative truths are: the impossibility of the
existence of a personal God, of the efficiency of prayer, of miracles,
of the immortality of the soul, of the separate existence of souls
without bodies. The positive results of natural science are the unity
of nature, the indestructibility of nature, the harmony of the All,
the indivisibility of nature, the irrefragable necessity of natural
processes according to immutable laws, and the freedom or independence of
nature, as having its cause in itself, uncreated and uninfluenced by any
extramundane being.

Natural science alone, according to the authors, is not sufficient to
constitute the new world-conception. A one-sided view of natural science
together with the obsolete conceptions of theism are exactly what has
brought forth the philosophical pessimism of our time. Natural science,
accordingly, is not to be regarded as the sole source of truth; it is
to be corrected by pantheism. The former teaches us “to regard matter
and its motion, so to say, as a dead inert substance to which motion is
attached; it treats matter as an immediate reality. Pantheism, however,
teaches that matter is to be conceived as the interrelation of the
innumerable live acts of will appearing successively in time and side
by side in space,” etc. The authors point out that the necessity of law
which regulates the mechanical processes of nature does not exclude
freedom; for “freedom is not arbitrariness but is controlled by an
immanent _Gesetzmässigkeit_.”

This summary is sufficient to characterise the ideas of the Drs.
Friedländer and Berendt. We cannot say that they admit of no criticism,
(e. g. their conception of natural science must be pronounced as too
narrow if not actually erroneous, nor should the law of the survival
of the fittest be interpreted in the sense that strength means brutal
force,) but we can, nevertheless, express our sympathy with the aim of
the authors as well as with the spirit in which they pursue it.

                                                                      κρς.


DIE PHILOSOPHIE UND DIE SOCIALE FRAGE. By _Gustav Engel_. Leipsic: C. E.
M. Pfeffer. 1892.

ACHT ABHANDLUNGEN, HERRN PROFESSOR DR. KARL LUDWIG MICHELET ZUM 90.
GEBURTSTAG ALS FESTGRUSS DARGEREICHT VON MITGLIEDERN DER PHILOSOPHISCHEN
GESELLSCHAFT. Leipsic: C. E. M. Pfeffer. 1892.

WIE STEHT ES JETZT MIT DER PHILOSOPHIE, UND WAS HABEN WIR VON IHR ZU
HOFFEN? By _Dr. Wilhelm Paszkowski_. Halle a. S.: F. Beyer, 1892.

This lecture by the well-known writer on the science of statistics
and its related subjects was read before the Philosophical Society of
Berlin on the 31st of May, 1890. It discusses the problem of socialism,
or rather the aspirations of the German social democracy from the
philosophical point of view of the lecturer, which is a modernised
Hegelianism. This lecture drew forth on the evening of its delivery
considerable discussion, which was participated in by Herr Kahle, a
socialist, and Herr Runze. The discussions of these gentlemen, together
with Mr. Engel’s reply, are embodied in the pamphlet.

The second of these two pamphlets is also a publication of the
Philosophical Society of Berlin. It consists of eight treatises, essays,
or lectures, which were presented by the members of the society to Prof.
Karl Ludwig Michelet as a festival gift on his ninetieth natal day. The
authors of these eight essays are: Adolf Lasson, August Cieszkowski,
Gustav Engel, Friedrich Kirchner, Wilhelm Paszkowski, Max Runze, Georg
Ulrich, and F. Zelle. They deal with philosophical subjects, chiefly such
as pertain to the Hegelian philosophy. Appended to the pamphlet is a
bibliography of the writings of this Nestor of the Philosophical Society
by F. Ascherson.

The author of the third pamphlet complains about the decay of philosophy:
“Metaphysics, the inner fane in the temple of science, stands desolate,”
and the last disciples of Hegel can no longer prevent the deluge which
sweeps away the idealism of their grand old master.

                                                                      κρς.


DER MATERIALISMUS, EINE VERIRRUNG DES MENSCHLICHEN GEISTES, WIDERLEGT
DURCH EINE ZEITGEMÄSSE WELTANSCHAUUNG. By _Dr. Eugen Dreher_. Berlin: S.
Gerstmann. 1892.

The author of this pamphlet, at present a docent at the University of
Halle, feels somewhat oppressed by the materialistic tendencies of our
times. His desire is to establish in the world a province of the ideal,
and this domain of idealistic aspirations and hopes, he says, must and
can be based upon a scientific foundation. To reach this goal, the author
propounds a philosophy which is confessedly dualistic, and which must be
made a kind of religion. Descartes’s _Cogito, ergo sum_, is to him the
beginning of all philosophy. The existence of the All is devoid of sense,
unless there is an ego to think it. This dualism, if made a religion,
will throw light upon the problems of the labyrinth of life.

The aspirations of the author are serious and noble. We cannot, however,
agree with the results of his reasonings. He does not seem to have
considered Kant’s objections to the fallacy of the _cogito, ergo “ego”
sum_. Nor is he familiar with Lichtenberg’s famous remark, that “we
should say by rights ‘it thinks,’ exactly as we say ‘it rains.’” The
same moral conclusions at which the author arrives may be reached, the
same province for ideal aspirations in the world may be gained, the same
religious comfort may be found, without any surrender of the monistic
view of the world. Materialism is an error of human thought. But the
error cannot be cured by dualism.

                                                                      κρς.


UEBER DIE GRUNDFORMEN DER VORSTELLUNGSVERBINDUNG. Psychologische Studie.
By _Max Offner_. Marburg: R. Friedrich. 1892.

This little brochure is a carefully worked out study of the phenomena of
association. The author’s view is summed up in the following statement:
“The attempt to reduce the phenomena of association, in conformity with
their real nature, to one single ultimate process cannot be regarded as
successful, and we shall have to control our aspirations after a unitary
conception and rest satisfied with reducing the various phenomena of
association to two processes which are closely related, namely: (1) to
an association of simultaneity; and (2) to an association of immediate
succession.” There is much that is suggestive in the sixty-seven pages of
this pamphlet.

                                                                      κρς.


FINITE HOMOGENEOUS STRAIN, FLOW, AND RUPTURE OF ROCKS. Bulletin of
the Geological Society of America. By _George F. Becker_. Rochester:
Published by the Society. 1893.

This is a purely technical research, concerning the causes and form of
the discontinuity of rock masses. The studies presented are the outgrowth
of field-work in the Sierra Nevada of California. This range is so
intersected by false joints, schistose and slaty cleavages, that on a
scale of one mile to the inch their average separation would be for the
most part microscopic. The dynamic manifestations in these regions are
very systematic. Some of the strains which have produced this phenomenon
have been infinitesimal, and others have been finite. Only the latter
are here treated. Finite strain, the relations of stress to strain,
the nature of finite shear, viscosity, flow, plasticity, ductility,
and rupture, the relation of plastic solids to fluids, the spacing of
fissures formed by inclined pressures, jointing, and slaty cleavage,
are the chief subjects discussed. The most important result of the
investigation is that jointing, schistosity, and slaty cleavage all imply
relative movement and are thus as truly orogenic as falls of notable
throw. “In the light of this conclusion,” says the author, “it appears
that if one could reproduce the orogeny of the Sierra in a moderate
interval of time on a model made to a scale of one mile to the inch, it
would seem to yield to external and bodily forces much like a mass of
lard of the same dimensions.”

This pamphlet is neatly got up, and reflects credit upon the author and
publisher.

                                                                     μκρκ.


DER ECHTE UND DER XENOPHONTISCHE SOKRATES. By _Karl Joël_. Volume I.
Berlin: R. Gaertner. 1893.

There are two sources from which we have derived the main bulk of
our knowledge concerning Socrates; namely, the writings of Plato and
Xenophon. The former is generally regarded as an idealiser, and the
latter as an historical biographer; for Plato simply uses the impressive
figure of Socrates to expound his own philosophy, while Xenophon, the
general, the politician, the historian, is supposed to give in the
“Memorabilia” a simple and faithful account of what appeared to him
worthy of being preserved. As Xenophon was not a philosopher himself, it
is tacitly assumed that he had no reason to alter, to suppress, or to add
his own personal views to the historical account of the great master whom
he bore in grateful remembrance as a faithful disciple. There are some
other sources; but they are less rich than those of Plato and Xenophon.
Among them must be mentioned several passages in Aristotle, especially in
“Magna Moralia” I, p. 1182, a 15. Our author urges with good reason that
the Xenophontic Socrates is radically different from and even opposed
to the real Socrates, and that we ought to rely more on Aristotle than
on Xenophon. Xenophon’s “Memorabilia,” Karl Joël declares, is not an
historical writing but a _Tendenzschrift_, and we have to be on our guard
wherever Xenophon’s special tendency comes in.

Socrates is the representative of the philosophical spirit of Attica,
and the character of his teachings may in a word be described as a noble
and sublimated subjectivism. Socrates is a rationalist and as such he
opposes the mysticism of the soothsayer and mantic. He goes so far in his
rationalism as to identify knowledge and virtue. He cannot understand,
from his point of view, (which regards the soul as a rational being
only and leaves out of sight the existence of impulses,) that a man can
knowingly neglect to choose the better thing and choose the worse. Plato,
in order to avoid the error of Socrates, invented the distinction between
the rational and irrational part of the soul and Aristotle criticises
Socrates saying τὰς γὰρ ἀρετὰς ἐπιστήμας ἐποίει.

The subjectivism of Socrates appears in his trust in the δαιμόνιον, the
divine voice within his soul, his rationalism in his constant request
to gather information before beginning to act. He exhibits in his talks
great irony; for instance, when telling a politician that as a shoemaker
must know his trade before making shoes, so he, the politician, ought to
know _his_ business before undertaking to manage affairs of state. Again
and again he satirises the bungling levity of men who imagine that in the
greatest and gravest things of life they can act without any information.
Both the subjectivism and rationalism of Socrates appear in his constant
inculcation of the Delphian motto “know thyself.”

What a different character is Xenophon! He was a convinced believer in
manticism. There are more than a hundred passages in his writings in
which not rational forethought but the art of the soothsayer is left
to decide the most important questions of practical life. When the
courageous ten thousand offered him the leadership in their dangerous
retreat, his ambition urged him to accept, but he first asks the God,
and the omens being unfavorable, he refuses. He did not accept the offer
until he had received another more auspicious omen. In the same way
Xenophon acts throughout. All important decisions which prudence would
urge, are made dependent upon sacrifices, dreams, or the flight of birds,
and more than once the safety of the army is greatly endangered by a
fatal passivity caused through unfavorable omens which prevent Xenophon’s
acting with decision at the right moment. It is no exaggeration to
say that these ten thousand Greek soldiers escaped only by good luck
the fate of the Athenian army in Sicily under Nikias. And this man,
a zealous believer in manticism, should be an impartial and reliable
historian of the doctrines of Socrates? The δαιμόνιον of Socrates is
changed into a mystic power, a kind of _spiritus familiaris_. It has
ceased to be the divinity of man’s inner self as which it appears in
Plato’s account, and is represented by Xenophon as some peculiarity of
Socrates which was given him as a special favor by the gods. Socrates
dethroned the old fate that was supposed to rule the affairs of men
and pointed out the importance of knowledge, for through knowledge we
can learn to regulate our fate ourselves. The philosopher who thought
little of well-being, of εὐτυχία, and demanded above all a well-doing,
an εὐ πράττειν (“Memorabilia,” III, 9, 14, 15,) did not recommend asking
soothsayers questions where we should better ask ourselves, although it
is probable that he recommended the Athenians to apply to the Delphic
oracle instead of relying upon omens not so much because he believed in
prophesies, but because he thought that they would be influenced by the
authority of this venerable institution whose wisdom and conservative
spirit were beyond question, so that good advice could be expected from
it. Karl Joël, accordingly, advises us to read the “Memorabilia” with
an inversion of the points, viz., to convert the sentences qualified by
“although” and “to be sure” into the main sentences and _vice versa_. In
this way we shall be able to distinguish between the pagan orthodoxy of
Xenophon and the rationalism of Socrates. Why does Xenophon not state
directly and simply (1) Socrates advised his friend to ask the oracles in
all cases of uncertainty, (2) manticism is indispensable in the economy
of a household as well as of a state, and (3) the gods have not granted
us any real knowledge as to a final success and reveal it through special
revelations. Why must he add long sentences introduced by “although”?
He adds to (1) that everybody ought to act solely according to his own
conviction, to (2) that all the trades up to the highest professions had
to be learned before practiced, and to (3) that those who inquired at the
oracles for things which could be learned and studied in the usual way
are crazy and even blasphemers.

This sketch may suffice to characterise the book which is much better
than could be anticipated after a perusal of the preface, which almost
induced us to lay it aside unread. It is not the modesty of the author
which produces a prejudice but the random talk concerning things which
neither a reader nor a reviewer will care to know. The author has
apparently no talent for writing prefaces, and he would be wise to omit
them in the future entirely. The book might be very much condensed,
repetitions avoided, and an alphabetical index certainly should have been
added.

It contains _five hundred and fifty-four_ pages; and the author says he
is preparing a _second_ volume. We think it would have been better for
his views if he had expressed them in a pamphlet.

                                                                      κρς.


A PERPLEXED PHILOSOPHER. Being an examination of Mr. Herbert Spencer’s
various utterances on the land question, with some incidental reference
to his synthetic philosophy. By _Henry George_. New York: Charles L.
Webster & Company. 320 pp.

The “Perplexed Philosopher” herein described is Mr. Herbert Spencer,
and persons who like ginger in their ale will enjoy this book; for its
eloquent invective, hot from the heart, cheers us like that stimulating
drink. Because of this fiery and revengeful attack on Herbert Spencer
much dignified reproof has been aimed at Mr. George by those excellent
people who religiously forgive the injuries done to others, and allow
only to themselves the luxury of retaliation; but when we consider the
provocation given by Mr. Spencer, this counter-blow of Mr. George is
mild. Mr. Spencer had a critic’s right severely or tenderly to condemn
the doctrines of Mr. George; and had he kept himself within his privilege
Mr. George in reply would not have had any right to assail the personal
character and motives of Mr. Spencer; but the older philosopher chose
to treat the younger with supercilious disdain, and this was a personal
affront that fully justified a retort personal. Scorn is an ignoble
argument, lawful only in return for scorn.

Apart from the truth or error they contain, the writings of Mr. George
have achieved a phenomenal popularity; their influence on social opinion
has been in some directions almost revolutionary; they are to-day
the political creed of many men in different parts of the world, and
especially of many thousands in America, Great Britain, and Australia.
They are bold in theories, attractive in illustration, and admirable
in their literary form. Their approval of “Social Statics” was an
advertisement that multiplied by hundreds the readers of that book, and
there is no philosopher great enough to affect ignorance of Mr. George’s
writings, or to dismiss them with a sneer. More copies of “Progress and
Poverty” have been sold than of any other book on social economics that
ever has been written, and when Mr. Spencer spoke of that book as “a
work which I closed after a few minutes on finding how visionary were
its ideas,” he put on airs of aggravating superiority which naturally
provoked the resentment of Mr. George.

After not reading the book Mr. Spencer condemned its heresies and said:

“There is the movement for land nationalisation pressed by Mr. George
and his friends with avowed disregard for the just claims of existing
owners....

“And now this doctrine (that society as a whole has an absolute right
over the possessions of each member) is being openly proclaimed. Mr.
George and his friends, Mr. Hyndman and his friends, are putting their
theory to its logical issue.”

To that Mr. George replies as follows:

“In nothing I have ever written or spoken is there any justification for
such a characterisation. I am not even a land nationalisationist as the
English and German and American nationalisationists well know.... I have
been a staunch denier of the assumption of the right of society to the
possessions of each member, and a clearer and more resolute upholder of
the rights of property than Mr. Spencer has been.”

Without waiting to inquire whether Mr. George includes within the “rights
of property” the right to property in land, it is enough to say that
here at least Mr. Spencer is at a disadvantage. He disarmed himself
before going into battle by refusing to read Mr. George’s writings, and
scorning to examine them he accused them of communism, confiscation,
and land-nationalisation. Mr. Spencer cannot now strike back for he
has thrown his weapons away. He is a prisoner in the hands of Mr.
George, who couples him with Parson Wilbur denouncing a print called the
_Liberator_, “whose heresies,” he said, “I take every opportunity of
combating, and of which, I thank God, I have never read a single line.”
The parallel is well drawn; and the lesson of it is this, never challenge
a man and then treat him with contempt; if you think he is not a foeman
worthy of your steel, let him alone.

Had Mr. Spencer studied the works of Mr. Henry George, he would have
found in them some doctrines having a manifest family likeness to
communism, confiscation, and land-nationalisation; but they avail Mr.
Spencer nothing, because he would not condescend to read the chapters
where those revolutionary principles are. If he would bend his brow a
moment and examine them he might find that in this controversy there are
two perplexed philosophers instead of one. In the book before us Mr.
George remarks:

“It is this confusion of Mr. Spencer as to rent and value that has led
him into confusion as to the right of property; and that, at first, at
least prevented him from seeing that to secure the equal rights of men
to land, _it is not necessary that society should take formal possession
of land, and let it out_, and consequently, that the difficulties he
anticipated in taking possession of improved land were imaginary.”

But, in “Progress and Poverty,” Chapter II, he said:

“We should satisfy the law of justice, we should meet all economic
requirements, by at one stroke abolishing all private titles, declaring
all land public property, and _letting it out to the highest bidders in
lots to suit_, under such conditions as would safely guard the right to
improvements.”

The italics are ours, directing the attention to apparent contradictions
which it is for Mr. George to reconcile. And, if English words have
any meaning, “abolishing all private titles” means confiscation; and
“declaring all land public property and letting it out to the highest
bidders,” is land-nationalisation; at least, the ordinary reader
may innocently think so, yet Mr. George declares that he is not a
land-nationalisationist.

As a personal defense and explanation Mr. George has a right to say that
he is not a land-nationalisationist, or a communist, or an “ist” of any
other kind, and we are bound to take his word for it, but in this dispute
that matter is wholly immaterial. The question before the meeting is
this, Is Mr. George’s book a land-nationalisationist or is it not? Is it
a confiscationist or not? In “Progress and Poverty” Mr. George explains
his meaning thus:

“I do not propose either to purchase or to confiscate property in land.
The first would be unjust, the second needless. Let the individuals who
now hold it still retain, if they want to, possession of what they are
pleased to call _their_ land. Let them continue to call it _their_ land.
Let them buy and sell and bequeath and devise it. We may safely leave
them the shell if we take the kernel. _It is not necessary to confiscate
land; it is only necessary to confiscate rent._”

The italics are by Mr. George; and a little farther on, he says;

“That is the first step upon which the practical struggle must be made.
When the hare is once caught and killed, cooking him will follow as a
matter of course.”

And several years afterwards, in “Protection or Free Trade,” page 302,
Mr. George describes the artful mechanism of the snare by which the hare
is to be caught and killed:

“Now it is evident that, in order to take for the use of the government
the whole income arising from land just as effectively as it could be
taken by formally appropriating and letting out the land, it is only
necessary to abolish, one after another, all taxes now levied, and to
increase the tax on land values till it reaches as near as may be the
full annual value of the land.”

In that paragraph “government” is merely another word for “nation,” and
the taking away from private owners all the lands of the country “for the
use of the government” is land-nationalisation, whether the taking be
done boldly by imperial decree, or furtively by taxing it up to its “full
value” and out of the hands of its owners.

The discrimination above made must apply to Herbert Spencer as well as
to Henry George. Mr. Spencer has a right to qualify and explain as much
as he pleases; he may properly say what he thinks now about the right of
land-ownership, but the question at issue is this, What are the opinions
of “Social Statics” upon the land question? Are they not in principle,
and very nearly in expression the opinions of “Progress and Poverty”?

It is not to be denied that “Progress and Poverty” found moral support
in “Social Statics.” In fact, the disciples of Henry George, whenever
their doctrines were assailed, brought Herbert Spencer into the field as
a reinforcement. This, at last, gave Mr. Spencer great annoyance, and
in a moment of irritation he determined even by a qualified recantation
to withdraw the reserve brigade on which “Progress and Poverty” had so
long depended for assistance. Hence, his letters to the _Times_ and the
_St. James’s Gazette_, and the modification of his views which appears
in “Justice.” He tried to do this by dropping Mr. George to the ground,
while endeavoring to stand on consistent feet himself; and this it is
that inspires the vehement criticism of Mr. George.

With a scalpel most logically keen Mr. George has dissected Mr. Spencer’s
philosophy of land, and with almost Indian exultation he exposes its
eccentricities and contradictions. As was inevitable, for we cannot
get along without it, the old familiar Galileo moral is brought in by
Mr. George to prove that “still it moves.” He is right; for if it is
ethically and politically true, as declared by Mr. Spencer in 1850, “that
equity does not permit property in land,” it will be true forever, and no
extremity of recantation can make it false. The attempt of Mr. Spencer
to show by duplicate metaphysics that his later opinions concerning land
are not inconsistent with the occult meaning of “Social Statics,” is
a failure. It cannot stand a moment before the searching analysis and
legible comparisons of Mr. George.

The attempt to resolve a concrete subject, such as government ownership
of land, into abstract terms of justice limited or expanded by the right
of some private person to the house on the land, and the barn, and the
well, and the fences, and the apple-trees, and other appurtenances,
corporeal and incorporeal, has involved Mr. George himself, as well as
Mr. Spencer, in some confusion of thought, and has entangled both of
them in varieties of statement not easy to reconcile. This might be due
to obscure definitions and multiplied explanations, or to changes of
opinion, but Mr. George asserts that Mr. Spencer’s inconsistencies are
the result of moral and intellectual dishonesty, prompting him to explain
away his principles to propitiate the landlords and other aristocratic
persons who admitted him into their high society after he became eminent,
and before they knew that his philosophy denied the right of private
property in land.

In his letter to the _Times_, apologising for “Social Statics,” Mr.
Spencer said:

“The work referred to—“Social Statics”—was intended to be a system of
Political Ethics—absolute political ethics, or that which ought to be, as
distinguished from relative political ethics, or that which is at present
the nearest practical approach to it.”

And then the philosopher becomes a politician and frames for the landed
and the landless a moral code, ambidextrous and elastic as a party
platform. Duty, justice, right, and truth, lose all their absolute
qualities, and become relative to expediency and our own convenience.
He teaches us to oppose wrongs until they become vested rights and then
defend them. He makes ethics changeable as our coats, and the man who can
afford two suits of clothes may have two suits of ethics, an “absolute”
suit for Sundays and a “relative” suit for every day; an “abstract”
suit for wearing about the house, and a “practical” suit for business
purposes. He may wear a suit of “pure” ethics when buying, and a suit
of “applied” ethics when selling; and so, at last, by those harlequin
morals, it happens that what we ought to do has no relation at all to
“that which ought to be.” Those pure subtleties and applied subterfuges
make Mr. Spencer an easy mark for the indignant sarcasm of Mr. George,
who shows what Mr. Spencer thought of absolute and relative ethics when
he said in “Social Statics”:

“When a man admits that an act is ‘theoretically just,’ he admits it to
be that which, in strict duty, should be done. By ‘true to principle’ he
means in harmony with the conduct decreed for us. The course which he
calls ‘abstractedly right,’ he believes to be the appointed way to human
happiness. There is no escape. The expressions mean this or they mean
nothing.”

The book is written in an angry vein, and the nicknames “traitor,”
“juggler,” “apostate,” and the like, add nothing to the value of its
argument; they only give bitterness to the censure. They are not to be
commended, although they ought to be excused, for they sprang out of “a
tempest of provocation.” Mr. George has been fighting under the banner of
Herbert Spencer, and he feels like a soldier whose general deserts him in
the battle and then disowns him altogether.

The only rational explanation of Mr. Spencer’s letters to the _Times_ and
the _St. James’s Gazette_ is that he has radically changed his opinions
about the private ownership of land: and his timid, uncertain, and
equivocal way of saying so makes him look very much like the “perplexed
philosopher” that Mr. George describes. At the same time it must be
noticed that Mr. George himself is not so radical in this last book
as he was in “Progress and Poverty.” His principles appear to be the
same, but in the application of remedies he is milder than he was about
fourteen years ago. When he reaches Mr. Spencer’s age he may be just as
conservative and “perplexed” as that philosopher is now.

                                                           M. M. TRUMBULL.


FOOTNOTES:

[85] Mr. Salter’s name for his theory.

[86] Says Mr. Salter: “Idealism (as here stated) is not, however, itself
a solution, being only a clear statement of what the problem is; and for
all that such idealism can say, the problem may be insoluble.”




PERIODICALS.


ZEITSCHRIFT FÜR PSYCHOLOGIE UND PHYSIOLOGIE DER SINNESORGANE.

CONTENTS: Vol. IV. Nos. 4 and 5.

    DIE GRUNDEMPFINDUNGEN IN NORMALEN UND ANOMALEN FARBENSYSTEMEN
    UND IHRE ITENSITÄTSVERTEILUNG IM SPEKTRUM. By _Arthur König and
    Conrad Dieterici_.

    IST EINE CEREBRALE ENTSTEHUNG VON SCHWEBUNGEN MÖGLICH? By _Karl
    L. Schaefer_.

    UEBER EINIGE NEUERE FORTSCHRITTE IN DER ANATOMIE UND
    PHYSIOLOGIE DER ARTHROPODENAUGEN. By _Sigmund Fuchs_.

    LITTERATURBERICHT.

CONTENTS: Vol. IV. No. 6.

    DAS TAPETUM LUCIDUM BEI DURCHLEUCHTUNG DES AUGES. By _Ziem_.

    BERICHTIGUNG ZU PROFESSOR MÜNSTERBERGS BEITRÄGEN ZUR
    EXPERIMENTELLEN PSYCHOLOGIE, HEFT 4. By _G. E. Müller_.

    LITTERATURBERICHT. (Hamburg and Leipsic: Leopold Voss.)


PHILOSOPHISCHE MONATSHEFTE.

CONTENTS: Vol. XXIX. No. 3 and 4.

    DIE ÄLTESTE FASSUNG VON MELANCHTHONS ETHIK. By _H. Heineck_.

    DIE MODERNE ENERGETIK IN IHRER BEDEUTUNG FÜR DIE
    ERKENNTNISSKRITIK, II. By _K. Lasswitz_.

    DIE SITTLICHE FRAGE EINE SOCIALE FRAGE, II. By _F. Staudinger_.

    JOHANN EDUARD ERDMANN. By _B. Erdmann_.

    LITTERATURBERICHT. (Berlin: Dr. R. Salinger.)


VIERTELJAHRSSCHRIFT FÜR WISSENSCHAFTLICHE PHILOSOPHIE.

CONTENTS: Vol. XVI. No. 4.

    DIE STATISCHEN FUNCTIONEN DES OHRLABYRINTHES UND IHRE
    BEZIEHUNGEN ZU DEN RAUMEMPFINDUNGEN. (Part I.) By _R. Wlassak_.

    UEBER VERSCHMELZUNG UND ANALYSE. Eine psychologische Studie.
    (Part I.) By _H. Cornelius_.

    DIE WICHTIGKEIT DER REPRODUCTIONSGEFÜHLE FÜR DIE ENTWICKLUNG
    UND BILDUNG DES MENSCHEN. By _J. Zahlfleisch_.

CONTENTS: Vol. XVII. No. 1.

    UEBER DEN BEGRIFF DER WISSENSCHAFT BEI GALILEI. By _A. Riehl_.

    DIE STATISCHEN FUNCTIONEN DES OHRLABYRINTHES UND IHRE
    BEZIEHUNGEN ZU DEN RAUMEMPFINDUNGEN. (Concluded.) By _R.
    Wlassak_.

    UEBER VERSCHMELZUNG UND ANALYSE. Eine psychologische Studie.
    (Concluded.) By _H. Cornelius_.

    WERTHTHEORIE UND ETHIK. (Part I.) By _Chr. Ehrenfels_.

    A. VOIGT’S “ELEMENTARE LOGIK” UND MEINE DARLEGUNGEN ZUR LOGIK
    DES LOGISCHEN CALCULS. By _E. G. Husserl_. (Leipsic: O. R.
    Reisland.)


ZEITSCHRIFT FÜR PHILOSOPHIE UND PHILOSOPHISCHE KRITIK.

CONTENTS: Vol. CI. No. 2.

    DOXOGRAPHISCHES ZUR LEHRE VOM ΤΈΛΟΣ. By _A. Döring_.

    ERNST PLATNER’S UND KANT’S ERKENNTNISSTHEORIE MIT BESONDERER
    BERÜCKSICHTIGUNG VON TETENS UND AENESIDEMUS. By _Dr. Arthur
    Wreschner_.

    JAHRESBERICHT ÜBER ERSCHEINUNGEN DER PHILOSOPHISCHEN LITTERATUR
    IN FRANZÖSISCHER SPRACHE AUS DEN JAHREN 1889 UND 1890. By
    _Adolph Lasson_.

    RECENSIONEN. (Leipsic: C. E. M. Pfeffer.)


THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGY.

CONTENTS: Vol. V. No. 2.

    ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF VOLUNTARY MOTOR ABILITY. By _Wm. L.
    Bryan_.

    THE TRAINING OF ANIMALS. By _James E. LeRossignol_, Ph. D.

    ON THE JUDGMENT OF ANGLES AND POSITIONS OF LINES. By _Joseph
    Jastrow_, Ph. D.

    STATISTICS OF “UNCONSCIOUS CEREBRATION.” By _Charles M. Child_.

    EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY AT WELLESLEY COLLEGE. By _Mary Whiton
    Calkins_. (Worcester: J. H. Orpha.)


INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF ETHICS.

CONTENTS: Vol. III. No. 2.

    THE ETHICS OF SOCIAL PROGRESS. _Prof. Franklin H. Giddings._

    DID THE ROMANS DEGENERATE? By _Mary Emily Case_.

    POLITICAL ECONOMY AND PRACTICAL LIFE. By _Prof. William
    Cunningham_.

    GERMAN CHARACTER AS REFLECTED IN THE NATIONAL LIFE AND
    LITERATURE. By _Richard M. Meyer_, Ph. D.

    BOOK REVIEWS. (Philadelphia: _International Journal of Ethics_,
    118 South Twelfth Street.)


THE PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW.

CONTENTS: Vol. II. No. 1.

    THE PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION. By _Prof. Otto Pfleiderer_.

    AN ANCIENT PESSIMIST. By _Prof. J. Clark Murray_.

    THE CONCEPT OF LAW IN ETHICS. By _Prof. F. C. French_.

    J. H. LAMBERT. By _Harold Griffing_.

CONTENTS: Vol. II. No. 2.

    KANT’S CRITICAL PROBLEM. By _J. G. Schurman_.

    EPISTEMOLOGY IN LOCKE AND KANT. By _Prof. Andrew Seth_.

    ANTHROPOMETRY AND EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY. By _Prof. E. B.
    Titchener_.

    DISCUSSIONS: Reality and Idealism. By _David G. Ritchie_ and
    _F. C. S. Schiller_.

    BOOK REVIEWS. (Boston, New York, Chicago: Ginn & Company.)


THE NEW WORLD.

CONTENTS: Vol. II. No. 5.

    THE PLACE OF THE FOURTH GOSPEL IN THE NEW TESTAMENT LITERATURE.
    By _Orello Cone_.

    THE FOLK-SONG OF ISRAEL IN THE MOUTH OF THE PROPHETS. By _Karl
    Budde_.

    COSMOPOLITAN RELIGION. By _C. A. Bartol_.

    THE ALLEGED SOCIALISM OF THE PROPHETS. By _A. W. Benn_.

    WHITTIER’S SPIRITUAL CAREER. By _John W. Chadwick_.

    THE PERSONAL FACTOR IN BIBLICAL INSPIRATION. By _Marvin R.
    Vincent_.

    ISRAEL IN EGYPT. By _C. H. Toy_.

    THE BRIGGS HERESY TRIAL. By _C. R. Gillett_. (Boston: Houghton,
    Mifflin & Co.)


REVUE PHILOSOPHIQUE.

CONTENTS: Vol. XVII. No. 12.

    LE MOUVEMENT PHILOSOPHIQUE EN RUSSIE: II. LA PHILOSOPHIE DE
    HEGEL ET LES CERCLES PHILOSOPHIQUES. By _E. Lannes_.

    LA COMPOSITION MUSICALE ET LES LOIS GÉNÉRALES DE LA
    PSYCHOLOGIE. By _M. Paulhan_.

    LA PSYCHOLOGIE DE W. JAMES (2nd article). By _L. Marillier_.

    ANALYSES ET COMPTES RENDUS.

CONTENTS: Vol. XVIII. No. 1.

    LA PSYCHOLOGIE DE W. JAMES (3d article). By _L. Marillier_.

    LA CROYANCE MÉTAPHYSIQUE. By _J. Gourd_.

    LA BEAUTÉ PLASTIQUE. By _L. Couturat_.

    ANALYSES ET COMPTES RENDUS.

CONTENTS: Vol. XVIII. No. 2.

    L’UNITÉ DE LA PHILOSOPHIE. By _P. Janet_.

    L’EXPRESSION OBJECTIVE EN MUSIQUE D’APRÈS LE LANGAGE
    INSTINCTIF. By _J. Combarieu_.

    LA PSYCHOLOGIE DE W. JAMES. (Concluded.) By _L. Marillier_.

    REVUE DES PÉRIODIQUES ÉTRANGERS. (Paris: Félix Alcan.)

CONTENTS: Vol. XVIII. No. 3.

    RECHERCHES SUR LA SUCCESSION DES PHÉNOMÈNES PSYCHOLOGIQUES. By
    _B. Bourdon_.

    L’AMOUR EST-IL UN ÉTAT PATHOLOGIQUE? By _G. Danville_.

    SUR UN EFFET PARTICULIER DE L’ATTENTION APPLIQUÉE AUX IMAGES.
    By _André Lalande_.

    BEAUTÉ ORGANIQUE ET BEAUTÉ PLASTIQUE. By _A. Naville_.


REVUE DE MÉTAPHYSIQUE ET DE MORALE.

CONTENTS: Vol. I. No. 1.

    MÉTAPHYSIQUE ET MORALE. By _Félix Ravaisson_.

    LE CONTINU MATHÉMATIQUE. By _H. Poincaré_.

    ESSAI SUR QUELQUES PROBLÈMES DE PHILOSOPHIE PREMIÈRE. By _F.
    Rauh_. (Paris: Librairie Hachette et Cie.)


VOPROSUI FILOSOFII I PSICHOLOGII.[87]

CONTENTS: Vol. III. No. 15.

    THE AIM OF HUMAN LIFE. By _W. Rosanoff_.

    THE PROBLEM OF JUDGMENT. By _F. Charitonoff_.

    THE POSITIVISM OF KANT. By _A. Kozloff_.

    THE BASIS OF THE MORAL DUTY. By _N. Grote_.

    A CRITICISM OF MORAL ALTRUISM. By _W. Preobrajensky_.

    THE SENSE OF LOVE. By _W. Solowoff_.

    THE FOUNDER OF TRANSCENDENTAL MONISM. By _A. Wedensky_.

    THE SECOND INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF EXPERIMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY IN
    LONDON. By _W. Chige_.

    THE QUESTION OF ZOÖPSYCHOLOGY. By _W. Wagner_.

    THE LAW OF PERCEPTION. By _N. Lange_. (Moscow, 1892.)


PHILOSOPHISCHES JAHRBUCH.

CONTENTS: Vol. VI. No. 1.

    UEBER DIE ACTUALE BESTIMMTHEIT DES UNENDLICH KLEINEN. By
    _Pohle_.

    GASSENDI’S SKEPTICISMUS UND SEINE STELLUNG ZUM MATERIALISMUS.
    By _Kiefl_.

    DER BEGRIFF DES “WAHREN.” By _Franz Schmid_.

    DER BEGRIFF DES UNBEWUSSTEN IN PSYCHOLOGISCHER UND
    ERKENNTNISSTHEORETISCHER HINSICHT BEI ED. V. HARTMANN. By
    _Achelis_.

    DER SUBSTANZBEGRIFF BEI CARTESIUS IM ZUSAMMENHANG MIT DER
    SCHOLASTISCHEN UND NEUEREN PHILOSOPHIE. (Continued.) By _Carl
    Ludewig_, S. J. (Fulda, 1893.)


SPHINX.

CONTENTS: Vol. XV. No. 84.

    NIRWANA. By _Menetos_.—DIE WIEDERVERKÖRPERUNGSLEHRE IM DRAMA.
    By _Ludwig Deinhard_.—DIE GNADE. By _Maria Janitschek_.—DAS
    FERNSEHEN ALS FUNKTION DES TRANSSCENDENTALEN SUBJEKTS.
    By _Carl du Prel_, Ph. D. (Concluded.)—AN CARL DU PREL.
    By _Martin Greif_.—SEHEN UND WAHRTRÄUMEN. By _Hermann
    Haug_.—UEBER DIE SPIRITISTISCHEN PHÄNOMENE VOM PHYSIKALISCHEN
    STANDPUNKT. By _Dr. Anton Lampa_.—SCHULD UND SÜHNE. Ein
    Beitrag zur Frage der Telepathie. By _M. Const. Hoch_.
    (Concluded.)—DIE GÖTTIN DES GENUSSES. Eine Traumphantasie.
    By _Karl Friedr. Jordan_.—FEGFEUER. Nach François Coppée.
    By _Rudolf Geering_.—GERETTET! By _Raphael von Koeber_, Ph.
    D.—MELANCHOLIE. By _Carl Vanselow_.—DIE SECHS SCHWÄNE. Ein
    Beitrag zum Nachweis des Esoterismus im Volksbewusstsein.
    By _Gottschalk Thorsten_.—GEHEIMNISS. By _Adolf K. W.
    Hochenegg_.—EINE GEISTERSTIMME. By _Hugo Gozdawa_.—DER BEGRIFF
    DES ABSOLUTEN. By _O. Plümacher_.

CONTENTS: Vol. XVI, No. 85.

    LEBE DEINEM HÖCHSTEN IDEAL GETREU!—A-U-M. By
    _Menetos_.—PSALMEN. By _Franz Evers_.—MEISTER DER MYSTIK.
    By _Wilhelm von Saintgeorge_.—AEGYPTENS GROSSE PYRAMIDE.
    Ein Tempel der Einweihung in die Mysterien. By _Eduard
    Maitland_.—DIE DEUTSCHE GESELLSCHAFT FÜR ETHISCHE KULTUR UND
    HERR VON EGIDY. By _Hugo von Gizycki_.—DIE MYSTIK DES ISLAM. By
    _Adolf Engelbach_.—EIN ECHTER DIENER GOTTES. By _Dr. Raphael
    von Koeber_.—EIN GEGNER DES SPIRITISMUS. By _Carl du Prel_.—DIE
    WISSENSCHAFT DER MAGIER. By _Ludwig Deinhard_.—HEBE DICH
    WEG VON MIR, SATAN! By _H. v. M._—ANNA HENLE. Ein Erlebnis.
    By _Hübbe-Schleiden_.—DER STERN DER SINTFLUT. By _Arthur
    Stentzel_.—SELIGE GEGENWART. By _Maria Janitschek_.—SEHNSUCHT.
    By _Carl Vanselow_.—DAS ELFLEIN, DAS AUSGING, DEN KÖNIG ZU
    SUCHEN. By _Bernhard Fabler_.—DER BLINDE PASSAGIER. By _Ludwig
    Ganghofer_.—FRÜHLINGS ERWACHEN. Für Väter und Erzieher. By _O.
    Plümacher_.—DREI KNOSPEN. By _Hans von Mosch_. (Brunswick: C.
    A. Schwetschke & Son.)

We cannot be accused of having any penchant for Theosophy or Spiritualism
and find little occasion to praise their productions, which are usually
crude and illiterate. But we must confess that Hübbe-Schleiden’s review,
the _Sphinx_, is greatly superior to anything in this field we have
ever seen. There is artistic taste about it; there is, so far as its
position admits of, a certain contact with positive science; there is an
attractive popularity without shallowness. All these means are skilfully
employed by the editor to impress his ideas, erroneous though they may
be, upon his public. If the magazine appeared in English, instead of
German, it would at once become the recognised leader in its field.


FOOTNOTES:

[87] _Questions of Philosophy and Psychology._




                VOL. III.       JULY, 1893.         NO. 4.

                                THE MONIST.




NATIONALISATION OF EDUCATION AND THE UNIVERSITIES.[88]


A little more than a century ago it was universally believed that, in the
nature of things, the vitality of a republic and its size stand in an
inverse ratio. The inadaptability of a republican system of government to
a state of vast territorial expanse and with a very numerous population
was considered an almost axiomatic, i. e. self-evident, truth. When the
thirteen English colonies in North America had taken the bold resolution
to transform themselves into the United States of America, many an ardent
patriot often asked himself, not free from anxious foreboding, whether
the Union was within the limits laid down by irreversible political laws,
as the utmost extent of republics fit to endure. If it had not been
for the size of the country, the doubts as to whether the republican
experiment was likely to prove a success, would never have assumed a
character, which gave sufficient color to the charge of monarchical
tendencies, to make them appear well-founded in the eyes of so many
people. When afterwards a new empire was to be added to the Union by the
Louisiana purchase, the doubt, as to whether the republican system of
government would be equal to the strain put upon it by such an immense
enlargement of the area of the United States, played a not unimportant
part among the objections of the opposition. That experience has
definitively disposed of these ideas, by proving the apprehensions to
be unfounded, is no reason to think meanly of the political discernment
of those who entertained them. It will not be universally admitted, that
experience has thus far proved them to be wholly unfounded also as to
consolidated republics. And how can it be wondered at, that at that time
the essential difference was not fully realised and understood, which
exists between a federal and a consolidated republic with regard to the
peculiar dangers and evils apt to arise from this specific cause. Though
republican federations had been known to the world for two thousand
years, no instruction was to be derived from their history on this head.
As to the extent of territory, the consolidated Roman republic, which
had consumed its vitality with its growth, could alone be compared with
the United States; and as to many of the essential features of their
political structure, neither modern nor ancient history furnished an
analogy. In the soil of the New World, the germs of European institutions
had—adapting themselves to the new conditions—developed into a new type
of commonwealth.

It is conceded on all sides that, next to the capacity of the American
people for self-government, the United States owe it primarily to the
happy blending of the principles of National Union and State Independence
that, taking all in all, hitherto their history has been the most
striking and convincing vindication of republican institutions; and
it is hardly questioned that, but for the happy blending of these two
principles, a republic comprising half the North American continent and
possessed of all the requisites of vitality never would nor could have
existed. Upon their being “an indestructible Union of indestructible
States,” the vitality of the United States absolutely depends. That,
with this principle as the foundation, the domain of a republic _can_
be almost indefinitely extended, without thereby destroying its vital
energies, has been irrefutably demonstrated. But does that mean, that
the United States have definitively solved the problem of keeping the
vital forces of a republic covering a vast area unimpaired? By no means.
Only the preliminary question has been settled by them for all time to
come, what the indispensable prerequisite of its solution is, and they
have thus far succeeded in preserving their vitality. But even as to
themselves, the solution of the problem itself has to be repeated over
and over again, not only by generation after generation, but every year
and every day. The hour never will, never can come, when the American
people can, with impunity, say: the task is accomplished; let us rest
and enjoy the fruits. It never can come, because the problem itself is
in a continuous state of transformation. Though the changes be so slow,
that they are imperceptible to the keenest eye trying to follow them up
from year to year, they are none the less real, and if they are not duly
heeded, the penalty will have to be paid some time in one way or another.
While the fundamental principle, the blending of National Union and
State Independence, is irreversible, the attempt to make its application
immutable, would be fatal. I say the attempt, for actually to do it, is,
in the nature of things, impossible. The American people are not only
constitutionally a nation. The civil war did not result in the permanent
disruption of the Union, but in welding it more indissolubly together,
because, with the single exception of slavery, the facts coincided with
the law. In spite of the tremendous sectionalising influence exercised
by slavery, the nationalisation in feeling, thinking, and interests had
made such progress under the operation and protection of the law of the
land, that it could stand as severe a test, as any consolidated State can
boast of having stood. The causes, to which it was due, that the facts
were in conformity with the law, have been ever since unremittingly at
work,—the counter-tendencies have disappeared with the abolishment of
slavery,—and, independent of that, those causes are every year acquiring
a greater force. The actual nationalisation, therefore, goes steadily on,
whether we like it or not, and though the constitutional nationalisation
be allowed to remain unchanged. While the legal status under the
Constitution may not be altered for ever so long, we are confronted by
constantly changing conditions. If we do not conform in what we do and
leave undone to the irrepressible changes of this evolutionary process,
the maintenance of the principle of blending National Union and State
Independence will avail us but little. The vital energies will dry up
and ebb away, for while we have kept the form, we have become strangers
to the spirit which renders it a magic force. Nor ought the dividing
line between political parties to run, as in days of yore, on the
question of State rights and consolidation. All discriminating patriots
must be as well State rights men as consolidationists, respectively
conscious supporters and promoters of further nationalisation. Where and
how ought State independence to be strengthened, so as to prevent an
over-consolidation by the silent working of those nationalising causes,
which it is impossible to stem? and: Where and how ought consolidation,
respectively nationalisation, to be promoted, in order to make the
working of those nationalising causes conducive to the true interests
of the people and to the invigorating of republican institutions? These
are the two questions which the American people have constantly to ask
themselves. On the discretion and discernment displayed in trying to find
the correct answers must it depend, whether the federative principle will
work as well in the future, as it has done in the past.

If these propositions must be admitted, it can be proved that in no
respect is conscious and systematic nationalisation more imperatively
needed than in regard to education. At first sight this assertion may
seem worse than extravagant. I am, however, not afraid to submit my case
to the jury of the American people, if I am but conceded the legal right
of every criminal, to be heard ere I am judged.

Education is the bed-rock on which this republic rests. However
excellent its political institutions be, its decay and ultimate
downfall is inevitable, if the people fail to do their full duty by
themselves in this respect. For, in a democratic republic, political
institutions are live forces only so far as the people have the mental
and moral requirements for working them well, and these mental and moral
requirements can be attained only by education. It is, therefore, in the
strictest sense of the word, a _vital_ question for the republic that
every one of its sons and daughters receive not only some schooling, but
that the education of all be proper and adequate. That is a tremendous
task. It constantly grows in scope and intricacy, and at the same time,
it becomes of more and more import that it be well accomplished. With
the people rests the ultimate decision in everything, and the problems
confronting the commonwealth are assuming more and more a character,
taxing the highest statesmanship to the utmost. Thus the claims upon
the intelligence and the moral soundness of the people are fast being
strained far beyond anything ever known by any former generation in this
or any other country. And lack of the required intelligence and moral
soundness in any one State necessarily affects the whole Union. A State
that is derelict to its duty in the education of its people, wrongs not
only itself, but also the nation. By its share in the federal government,
every State is directly instrumental in laying down the law for the whole
country. All the States are thereby made to participate in the payment
of the penalty for its intellectual and moral deficiencies. This is,
however, by no means the only way in which they are made to suffer by
them. What the law does with regard to everything rendered federal by the
Constitution; commerce, travel, and interchange of population do in other
respects. They are unremittingly and with ever increasing intensity at
work, multiplying and rendering more close the organic relations between
all the parts of the vast domain, every water-way, railroad-track, and
telegraph line performing the functions of the veins in the animal
organism. If the blood be poisoned in one limb, the virus cannot be
prevented from working its way into the whole system.

To admit that education is in the highest degree a national
_interest_, and to deny its being a national _concern_, is, however, a
self-contradiction. To contest either the right or the duty of a nation
to acknowledge every national interest a national concern, and to deal
with it accordingly, is a palpable absurdity. Not as to the Whether, but
only as to the How, can the people be restricted by the Constitution. A
constitution imposing upon the people an injunction to minister to the
needs of the commonwealth, would be as great a political monstrosity as a
constitution providing for the dissolution of the state.

This doctrine will not be allowed to pass unchallenged. I shall be
asked whether I set myself against the universally accepted fundamental
principle of American constitutional law, that the federal government
has no powers but those granted to it by the Constitution. I do not.
“Where, then,” my interlocutor will go on, “do you find the express grant
or the implied power?” Nowhere. “Then you advocate a constitutional
amendment to the effect indicated by you?” I do not. I know that such an
amendment could not get the vote of a single state, and if there were a
possibility of its being adopted by the constitutional number of states,
I should be found, to the last, among those fighting it tooth and nail.
I can hardly conceive of a more suicidal measure than the adoption of
such an amendment. Just because education is the bed-rock on which the
republic rests, is it of vital importance that it does not become a
federal affair. Self-reliance and responsibility are the main pillars
supporting a democratic commonwealth. Kill, in the people of a state
and the population of its subdivisions, the habit of self-reliance and
the sense of responsibility in regard to the substratum of the whole
political and social structure, and they will wither and shrivel up in
regard to everything else. The compulsion to tax themselves directly for
the establishment and maintenance of schools and the being in close touch
with those entrusted with the direction of the educational work are an
inestimable boon to the people.

Even if it were economically possible to do without direct taxes,
political reasons would peremptorily forbid their abolishment. On
account of their moral effect, no state could dispense with them, and
least of all a democracy. All indirect taxes are paid more or less
unconsciously; the people, however, must be kept conscious that the
public purse means their own pockets. The more they lose sight of
this, the wider the door is opened to paternalism, and paternalism is
a more deadly enemy of liberty than despotism and tyranny. These, if
any vitality be left in the people, ultimately kindle the desire for
liberty, while paternalism acts upon it as an opiate and ends by killing
it through the systematic enervation of self-government. If this is
to be kept alive not only in form, but also in essence and in spirit,
the people must constantly be held to teach themselves in illustrating
by their own acts the irrefutable truth, that not the rights, but the
self-imposed duties are the vital principle of true democracy. Nothing,
however, is more apt to drive this all-important fact irresistibly
home, implanting it ineradicably in their whole feeling and in their
conscious thinking, than the necessity to vote, as directly as possible,
out of their own pockets the money required for preserving intact and
in vigor the prerequisite of _all_ that is needed for the preservation
of the nation’s vitality. If it be not deemed irreverent, I should
say that every dollar a man voluntarily votes out of his pocket to
provide for the educational needs of the community, preaches to him a
political “Sermon on the Mount.” “Liberty and self-government,” it says,
“must be paid for;—state and society are in their very essence ethical
conceptions;—they must totter, fall, and crumble to pieces, unless
they rest on an ethical foundation;—to preserve, broaden, and deepen
this foundation, by providing for the required intellectual and moral
equipment of the generations in whose hands the future destinies of the
commonwealth will lie, is the paramount duty of the people;—no one has
the right to exempt himself from doing his share in the fulfilment of
this duty, for the heirloom of the past, enjoyed by the present, is but a
trust to be left, with accrued interest, to the future;—the fulfilment of
this duty ought to be considered rather a privilege than a sacrifice, for
every farthing paid for the maintenance of the humblest village school is
an integral part of the nation’s life-insurance premium;—glory in this
responsibility to the whole country, for it constitutes you, with the
wealthiest and mightiest, a joint builder of its greatness;—glory in thus
bearing witness by the fruit of the sweat of your brow, that you, too,
are sworn in on the creed that man does not live by bread alone;—glory in
and render thanks for being thus held to keep ablaze in your own bosom
and help kindle in the bosom of the lowliest child of the community, the
sacred fire of idealism.”

That by many, perhaps by most people, this appeal is not heard in
distinct words, I do not contest. But that is no reason to make light of
it. Utterly lost it never is. Something of it sinks into the mind even
of the dullest and most hard-hearted, though it be but in the form of
a faint and vague feeling. To make them lose this, is to deprive them
of the best they have. Democracy is not a mill-pond, on which a fragile
boat can outride the wildest tempest. It is the open sea, on which the
proudest and stoutest craft is sure to be swamped, sooner or later,
if it be not properly ballasted. True idealism, however, never was a
more essential part of the ballast, than in these times and in this
country. It stands more in need of it than any other state, because its
unparalleled opportunities are appallingly powerful incentives to plunge
headlong into the materialistic tendencies of the age. Therefore, it is
ruthless to lay hands on anything tending to keep alive and foster true
idealism in the people. For this reason it would be, in my opinion,—not
in intention, but in effect,—a dastardly crime, under any plea whatever,
to release the people from the obligation to provide in their local
organisations for the education of their youths.

Therefore, I even deem it upon the whole more beneficial than detrimental
that many of the higher and most of the highest educational institutions
of the country are the free gift of high-minded men and women to the
people. I have never agreed with those who have contended in this country
that the duty of the commonwealth does not extend beyond providing for
primary and, at the most, to some extent for secondary education, and
that it would not be fair and proper to tax all for the establishment
and maintenance of colleges and universities, which, in the nature of
the case, only a small minority can frequent. It would be hard to name
a more promising sign of the times, than that this doctrine has of late
lost so much of its former hold upon public opinion, that one would
have to search long for an advocate of it in its original rigor. It
is eminently in the interest of all, that there be an ample number of
men and women who have received the highest education. Therefore, it
is evidently not only justified, but imperative, that the commonwealth
furnish the means for supplying its want. But if the views held in this
respect on the continent of Europe had prevailed in the United States,
the American people would have been the poorer of one of the vastest and
most grateful fields for manifesting idealistic public-spiritedness. An
inestimable loss, for idealistic public-spiritedness is not the least of
the causes to which it is due that American democracy has stood the test;
and idealistic public-spiritedness, like every virtue, grows stronger and
more fruitful by being practised. Every donation for educational purposes
prompts others to follow suit, and is, apart from its direct beneficent
effects, a most valuable object-lesson to the whole nation. With equal
impressiveness, the rich and the poor are reminded of the treasures which
“neither moth nor rust doth corrupt.” On every educational institution
brought into existence in such a way are indelibly inscribed the two
magic words to which this country owes it greatness: Help yourself,
and Public Spirit; every one of them is a living protest, as well
against paternalism—whether it present itself in the socialistic or
in any other garb—as against the setting up of the golden calf as the
idol of the republic. Therefore, everything tending to seriously check
these manifestations of idealism and public spirit in regard to higher
education would be deplorable, even if it were in itself commendable, for
paternalism and materialism are too rampant to leave anything undone that
is calculated to keep them down.

To contend that the existing decentralisation in regard to education must
be done away with, would, for these reasons, be a truly Quixotic charge
upon windmills: the venture must result in broken bones. It cannot, and,
if it could, ought not to be done, for this decentralisation is the
natural outgrowth of the whole historical development of the commonwealth
and in perfect accordance with the underlying principle of its political
and social structure. But it would be strange logic to conclude from
this that it can have worked no harm, or that the evil consequences it
may have had cannot be remedied. Can it be denied that, apart from the
primary schools, it sounds almost like mockery to speak of an American
system of education? If we look at the schools of a higher grade, we are
confronted by a bewildering chaos, and the nearer the top, the worse the
confusion becomes. That the effects of this are not altogether good, will
be universally admitted, though opinions will differ as to the weight
that ought to be attached to the bad consequences in the aggregate and
severally. To me, some of them seem to be of a very serious character,
and I hold that they must from year to year become of more consequence.
To say that somebody has been through a “high school,” does not convey
sufficiently definite information as to either the kind or the amount of
instruction he has received. To know that somebody is a graduate of an
“academy,” a “college,” a “university,” means to know next to nothing as
to his mental equipment. To gauge our man, we must inquire, What academy,
what college, what university? Having learned that, we are in hundreds
of cases not a whit wiser than before. We have to ask for the calendar
of the institution, and, after having read that, we shall often be still
pretty much at sea, for, as the Germans say, “paper is patient,” and the
printing of a first-class programme implies by no means of necessity
first-class instruction. This may be considered by some of little or no
moment, because the degrees confer no rights whatever. But they are,
nevertheless, not senseless gewgaws. If they be deemed such, their
abolishment must be insisted upon, for then they are as much out of place
in this country as orders or other meaningless titles. They are intended
to be certificates of knowledge and mental training. If they lose this
character, they are nothing, or worse than nothing. It is, however,
self-evident that they must be deprived of this character, exactly to
the extent that the educational institutions bearing the same name and
conferring the same degrees differ from each other. Do you not think it
more than likely that, if a law were passed making it obligatory to add
to the letters indicating a degree the name of the institution by which
it was conferred, an astounding number of ornamental tails to names would
be cut off forever?

This would not be done, if the degrees merely failed to be definite and
reliable certificates of knowledge and mental training. They do positive
harm, because the institutions conferring them have little more in common
than the name, their educational standard differing in the extremes,
as much as the crippled shrub and the sturdy oak. While the public do
not know what value to attach to the degree, a large percentage of the
recipients are betrayed into offensive and pernicious self-deception.
Upon the official averment of their _alma mater_, they lay the flattering
unction to their soul that they have received a much better intellectual
outfit than they really possess. These institutions practically reverse
the precept of the Greek sage: not “know thyself,” but “deceive thyself”
is the maxim imprinted on their diplomas. And this self-deception is a
subtle, contagious virus. It is at least doubtful, whether more will
take warning by looking through the false pretense, or be lured by it
into the same mistaken notions as to the requirements of genuine higher
education. To have practically no fixed standards for the different
grades of higher education must as inevitably have mischievous effects
upon the intellectual life of a people, as its economic life must be
demoralised by allowing everybody to coin money of the same outward
appearance, but of any alloy he pleases. Not that harm has been done by
the almost unlimited freedom enjoyed by the educational institutions
owing their existence to private munificence, is to be wondered at; it
is astonishing that the deleterious effects have not been much worse.
A premium is offered for sailing under a false flag. If a college may
be called a university, and an academy a college, it would be more
than surprising if the grander name were not frequently preferred, for
it flatters alike the vanity of the donors, the instructors, and the
pupils, and will—with more or less reason—be expected to work as a bait.
With the name goes the right to confer degrees, and the exercising of
this privilege is to serve the same purposes. But the name renders it
necessary to keep up appearances, and that is an expensive pleasure. The
masquerading in a pretentious guise cuts down the allowance of wholesome
food. Worthless universities instead of good colleges, inferior colleges
instead of satisfactory academies and fitting schools, are but too often
the result. No name will deprive the rose of its sweet scent; but the
buttercup cannot, with impunity, call itself a rose.

The worst, however, is, that even the best institutions of the higher
order are made to pay a heavy penalty for the shortcomings of those of
the lower rank. Not getting the proper material, they do not turn out
as good work as they in themselves might do. Much valuable time, which
ought to be devoted to going on with the building, must be spent in
mending and strengthening the deficient foundation, which, after all,
does not acquire the requisite solidity, because mending is necessarily
patchwork. Nor is the damage confined to the pupils that have been sent
up from inefficient schools. These act as a drag upon those who have
come adequately prepared. To render matters worse, the deficiencies are
neither the same with all, nor is it known beforehand where they will be
found and how far they will extend. Neither are the curricula the same,
nor is there any guaranty that the same curriculum means the same work
done. Here so many things have been taught, that everything has suffered
in regard to thoroughness. There, specialisation has commenced so early,
that the basis is too narrow and too shallow. Training for a special
purpose has encroached upon education. All these difficulties greatly
hamper the institution. But they do more. They exercise a strong pressure
upon it to stray from the right path, for they are powerful incentives to
yield to the evil tendency, more to measure, than to weigh the work done.
This is, in my opinion, the most deplorable of all the bad consequences
which the lack of a uniform system, resulting from the decentralisation
of education, has thus far had; and it is all the more dangerous, because
the measuring principle is so well fitted to be clad in the seductive
garb of a lucid and clear-cut system.

I do not expect that every one of my propositions will be universally
assented to. But can any unprejudiced observer dispute that there is
enough truth in what I have said to prompt the people seriously to
ponder the question, where this is going to end? If no conscious,
energetic, and concerted effort be made to counteract the evil effects
of decentralisation, the very fact of higher education having assumed
such a kaleidoscopic character renders inevitable its becoming more
and more kaleidoscopic. The founders, boards of trustees, presidents,
and faculties of new institutions are almost compelled to give their
individual notions on higher education, to a dangerous extent,
free scope. Having a hundred different patterns presented to their
consideration, the temptation is well-nigh irresistible not to adopt any
one of them, but to devise a new one. A new experimenting laboratory is
set up. That its experiments will be, positively or negatively, of some
value, is to be supposed. In most cases, however, the public interest
would have been better served by a good factory, renouncing the risky
ambition of dabbling with new inventions.

A European is struck with wonderment that, considering the extent to
which decentralisation in higher education has been carried, not
infinitely more harm has been done, and that the harm it does, seems to
impress the Americans comparatively so little. Neither can be understood,
unless one fully realises to what a degree the American commonwealth
is still in its formative period, and what an astounding educational
power there is in American life. To the former it is principally due,
that the deleterious effects mentioned are here in fact of much less
consequence, than they would be, where the advantages of an historical
development, counting by more than centuries, are paid for by the
rigidity of age; and the latter supplements and corrects the work of the
schools so effectively, that it is not surprising to find even many a
keen-sighted and highly accomplished American more or less blindfolded
as to this. Because the ultimate results are satisfactory, it is taken
for granted, that the educational conditions of the country must be
all right, while a searching critical examination irresistibly forces
upon one the question, whether a good deal is not achieved in spite of
them. If this be so, failure to promptly attend to what is defective
in them will surely be punished, for thanks to the rapidity with which
the United States are being filled up, their formative period is fast
drawing to a close, and with its close, the educational power of American
life will be, in some important respects, very sensibly diminished. The
peculiar advantages, they have thus far enjoyed, are steadily growing
weaker, while intellectually and morally, the difficulties confronting
the whole civilised world, and difficulties peculiar to them, are as
steadily making greater demands upon the people. Growth of population and
development of economical life, with all its attending circumstances,
constantly working at the further nationalisation of the American people,
and the problems to be solved growing more and more intricate, disaster
must become inevitable, if education does not keep abreast of this
double movement; and this it cannot do, if we do not energetically and
systematically go to work to nationalise education without consolidating
it. Nor have we any time to lose, for the task is by no means easy. Every
inch of ground gained will be the price of an arduous and protracted
struggle.

From the Federal Government no direct assistance is to be derived, for
the question is not within the province of its constitutional powers,
and if it were, we ought not to ask its interference, because, as I said,
to nationalise education without consolidating it, is to be the aim.
Public opinion, unaided by law, must effect the reform. Public opinion,
however, is in this country even more powerful than the law. It is sure
finally to overcome not only all active, but even all passive resistance,
which is always much harder to overcome. But is there any possibility of
ever inducing public opinion to take the question up in full earnest? I
am confident there is, and at all events it must be tried. The difficulty
of the task is no excuse for not undertaking it. It only admonishes us,
not to waste time, strength, and enthusiasm in vain attempts to carry
the fortress by assault. The works are so extended and so strong that
only a methodical siege requiring a great deal of skill, patience, and
determination, offers any chance of success. Two preliminary questions
must, therefore, be answered, ere operations can be commenced: who is to
conduct the campaign, and by what tactics can the approaches be pushed on
the fastest?

The answer to be given to the first question is plain. The instructors
are to be considered the experts, if anybody can claim the title. Upon
them, therefore, devolves the duty to take the lead. This they have
already commenced to do. The very existence of a National Educational
(Teacher’s) Association is in itself irrefutable proof that the opinions
advanced by me, have, in some way and to some extent, asserted themselves
for some time. How this has been done and what has been effected, I do
not feel called upon to discuss. I merely state that while I appreciate
what it has done and expect from it still more in the future, I am
firmly convinced that the goal can never be reached if we are to content
ourselves with what this organisation is capable of achieving. This
will be deemed the less disparaging, if I furthermore state that, in my
opinion, the end could no more be attained by any other organisation
acting singlehanded. Hunting for any one device which will as certainly
effect a cure as patent medicines claim to cure bodily ailments, is but
to waste time. The evil has to be attacked from many points and in many
ways, if sanitation is to set in.

While I am fully persuaded of this, I am, however, on the other hand as
firmly convinced that nothing will be of avail if the Universities do
not step forward, heading the column of attack and adding compulsion to
suasion. The reform has to be worked from the top downward. At present
the law is, to a great extent, dictated by the schools of the lower
grade to those of the higher. This must be reversed. The Universities
must insist upon getting the proper material for doing what in their
judgment is the proper work. They must cease fitting themselves to what
the schools are pleased to send them. By closing their doors against
all applicants whom they do not really deem adequately prepared, they
must compel the schools, either to take down from their portals the
inscription “fitting school,” or to mend their ways and furnish their
pupils the kind and the amount of instruction they ought. A University
that meekly submits to travel on whatever roads some hundreds of schools,
which all more or less follow their own notions, happen to think good
enough, never can be a University except in name. No institution has a
moral right to the proud name of University that does not, consciously
and determinately, do all that is in its power to direct its educational
policy solely by what the civilisation of the age and the true interests
of the nation require.

I wish the old maxim _ultra posse nemo obligatur_ did not compel me to
say “to do all that is in its power,” for I am but too well aware how
deplorably little that is in many cases. State Universities are subject
to another will, and this other will is apt to have very much its own
notions as to how much a University may be allowed to cost, and to
determine the standard of the University entirely by the local standard
of schools. Other Universities, though legally their own masters, are
practically restrained as much or even more by implacable facts. No
University can entirely dispense with students, and the endowment of more
than one University forbids its making light of the number of students it
can secure. Being to some extent dependent upon the students for their
maintenance, they cannot afford to be very fastidious in regard to the
standard of schools they try to enlist into their constituency. But there
is also a goodly number of Universities whose position is in absolutely
every respect so strong that they can enter the lists without any risk
whatever to themselves. Whether they stop growing for a while or even
decline in numbers for some years does not affect their future in the
least. They are so much in quest by students that the fitting schools
are sure to make haste to meet their requirements, if these rise above
their curriculum. To move on in wild leaps would, of course, be foolish.
But so long as these Universities do not do that they never need to look
backward in their onward march; their whole constituency of schools must
follow close upon their heels, because they cannot afford to bolt and
drop out. The more the leading Universities proceed upon a concerted
plan, the larger the circle would grow, within which their joint pressure
would be irresistible: the strength of each would be doubled by pressing
on, shoulder to shoulder with the others, on the same lines. At the same
time it will make it correspondingly easier for the weaker ones to follow
in their wake. How could it fail to make an impression upon those on
whom they depend, if they can back their pleas by urging the practical
unanimity of all the foremost institutions of the country as to the right
course to take? The more the leading Universities are united, not only
as to the scope and method of their own work, but also as to what is
to be considered the proper preparation for University work, the more
will deviations from the rules laid down by them come to imply to public
opinion inferiority of standard; and if there is a whip under which
American communities smart, it is this. As to this would be added the
missionary influences of the alumni sent from the leading Universities
into all parts of the republic, it would be strange indeed, if the idea
were not constantly to spread and to cast deeper root, that to adequately
provide for the educational needs of the country, it is necessary
consciously to create and systematically to foster a tendency, by the
free action of public opinion, more and more to harmonise education, in
developing it everywhere and in all its ramifications into a thoroughly
organic structure.

I am prepared to hear the opinions I have ventured to advance strenuously
contested and, perhaps, even mercilessly ridiculed by many. The open
antagonists, however, cause me but little uneasiness. I fear only one
thing, i. e. that those who more or less endorse my criticisms and agree
with me as to what is desirable, will be induced by the arduousness of
the work to persuade themselves that it is impossible to bring about such
a reform. To them I should say: Where there is a will, there is a way,
and the American people _must_ be brought to will this reform, because
every year a portentous word is becoming more true and of greater import:
“the age of perils is past, but the age of difficulties has set it.”

                                                             H. VON HOLST.


FOOTNOTES:

[88] Commencement address at the Nebraska State University, June 7, 1893.




MEANING AND METAPHOR.


Professor Huxley supposes[89] “that so long as the human mind exists, it
will not escape its deep-seated instinct to personify its intellectual
conceptions.” He finds that “the science of the present day is as full of
this particular form of intellectual shadow-worship as is the nescience
of ignorant ages.” The difference he sees is “that the philosopher who is
worthy of the name knows that his personified hypotheses, such as law,
and force, and ether, and the like, are merely useful symbols, while the
ignorant and the careless take them for adequate expressions of reality.”
He then goes on to warn us against dealing with symbols as though they
were “real existences.”

Few indeed are free from reproach in this matter, so far as reproach is
deserved at all in the general unconsciousness of what constitutes the
danger. Few see the question to be vital or the danger to be urgent;
and even those who do are apt to deny that the search for a remedy can
be a crusade worth attempting; the very idea seems Utopian or pedantic.
On the one hand, teachers as a rule do not take their own analogies and
metaphors seriously. Both the literary and scientific, as well as the
philosophic and historical instinct tell against their doing so. In their
eyes figures have either faded into indifferent abstractions, or they are
obviously pictorial and merely rhetorical. But the average reader is apt
to take them at the foot of the letter. He is usually unaware both of the
extent to which he literalises and of the curious inconsistencies which
his literalising involves. So he makes his inferences with alight heart,
and wonders, perhaps, at the resulting confusion without suspecting its
true cause.

Would that the real state of the case and its practical consequences
could be pressed home to all with such force, that whatever be our line
of work or thought or expression we should strive in earnest to mend
matters. At least, we might begin by learning better what part symbolism
plays in the rituals of expression, and ask ourselves what else is
language itself but symbolism, and what it symbolises. We should then
examine anew the relations of the “symbolic” to the “real”; of image,
figure, metaphor, to what we call literal or actual. For this concerns
us all. Imagery runs in and out, so to speak, from the symbolic to the
real world and back again. As matters stand, we never know where we are
because we know so little where our phrases or our words are; indeed,
perhaps they and we are “neither here nor there.” Or, if we do know
where we are, we cannot be sure that our hearer or reader knows where
he is. He, too, is probably “neither here nor there.” He often praises
or agrees with us in the wrong place or the wrong manner. That is worse
than being complained of or differed from; it is difficult to repudiate
approval. Nor can we take refuge in lucidity and fancy that the clear
must be the true. In the long run and in the cases which _signify_ most,
there is no escape through merely lucid style or method. The “luminous”
speaker or writer, the “forcible” orator or essayist, the moment he tries
to convey to the public mind a thought which is really new, will find
himself hampered by his very clearness itself. His ideas are controverted
on assumptions not really his; or he himself is misled in subtle ways by
what he assumes in others.

Thus, by an instructive paradox, the clearest writer is often the most
controversial; and he wonders at our perverseness as, while we admire
his power and his “style,” we wonder at the perverseness in him. We
possibly agree with him in ways we do not suspect; he possibly agrees
with us in senses he ignores. Such a writer may pride himself on a chary
use of metaphor, or on a carefully sharp distinction between “image”
and “thing” or “object.” But he is liable to forget the danger dogging
him even here. One is tempted to say that there is only one term more
figurative as well as more ambiguous than “metaphorical,” and that is
“literal.” Most certainly much that is called “literal” is tinged with
the figurative in varying degrees, not always easy to distinguish, even
with the help of context. The word “literal” itself is indeed a case in
point. It has rarely, if ever, any reference to writing.

The question is, whether this state of things is quite so inevitable
as most of us seem to think. Certainly, so long as we are content to
live in the fool’s paradise of supposing that only the perverse, the
prejudiced, the stupid, or the ignorant can possibly mistake our meaning,
and that our misreadings of others are simply due to their “obscurity,”
or “quibbling,” or literary incapacity, we shall ourselves contribute to
the hopelessness of the situation. But this is a subject which cannot be
dealt with in an incidental way; it is rather a hope for the future, that
one of the most practically serviceable of subjects—that of Meaning, its
conditions and its changes—shall be seriously taken up. Then, indeed,
we may get back to the first of all questions, and that which is most
pregnant of helpful answers; that which needs asking more than any other
if good work is to be done in this day of universal “unsettlement”:—What
do we really mean? On all sides dead calms are stirred and ruffled,
dead levels upheaved or depressed; nothing (happily) can hope to escape
the wave of quickening force. So before long we may well be asking this
question in good earnest; and when we do we can but be the better, even
if we must needs submit in some cases where we may have been prematurely
positive, to be content (for the moment) with the answer: We do not
really know.

The fact is, that we have been postulating an absolute Plain Meaning to
be thought of, as it were, in capital letters. We have been virtually
assuming that our hearers and readers all share the same mental
background and atmosphere. We have practically supposed that they all
look through the same inferential eyes, that their attention waxes and
wanes at the same points, that their associations, their halos of memory
and circumstance, their congenital tendencies to symbolise or picture,
are all on one pattern. Verily, we need a “Critique of Plain Meaning”!

Again we _quote_ on the same assumption. Unless the language of our
author is obviously archaic; unless his allusions unmistakably betray
a different life-context, a different social “milieu,” in short, a
different mental world, we claim him or we repudiate him on the same
principle. We take his words, we take his phrases, we fill them out with
the same content as our own, we make him mean precisely what we ourselves
mean. And be it noted that it is always what we mean _now_. That this in
any way varies from what we meant at some time when, e. g., our attention
was differently focussed, rarely enters our heads.

We shall, I suppose, admit that until lately there was one very good
reason for this state of things. Only the exceptional mind (if any);
only the mind which could not make itself fully understood by its
contemporaries, and would risk being reckoned crazy or criminal if it
spoke “plainly,” had any suspicion that this way of looking at things
was being gradually invalidated by the general extension of the critical
domain. The history of language, its relation to thought; the scope
of expression and representation, the function of the figurative and
symbolic; the growth of all means of mental communion from the simplest
rudiments of gesture or cry to the highest point of intellectual
complexity,—all this was either ignored or taken for granted on radically
insecure bases.

Again, while the underlying conditions of language must be looked for
in the domain of psycho-physics, that science had not yet come into
existence. Even now it is but feeling its way and putting forth tentative
hypotheses, warning us, as it does, so that they are liable to be
constantly modified and occasionally revolutionised. And what does it
realise, first and foremost? That our difficulties on the very threshold
of the inquiry are, as usual, largely those of language. On all sides we
have to use, as best we may, modes of expression that inevitably convey
ambiguous meanings even to the thoughtful, even to the trained mind,
which cannot but carry with them a background of outgrown or disproved
premises, vitiating more or less every conclusion that we draw from them.
The very phrases which are our only shorthand for the vast oratory of
nature and experience betray us in the using. We have taken them as
though they were like numerals invariable in meaning, thus supposing them
subject to a permanent uniformity. We have taken them as though they
were without a history, merely fortuitous labels or symbols of unanimous
consent; the accepted sense, we think, being easily ascertainable, always
persistent, and wholly sufficient for practical purposes. In any case we
strangely assume that we may safely play upon all the chords of imagery,
reserving without difficulty for serious use a body of terms which are
direct expressions of “fact.”

But the suggestion now made is that this is precisely one of the most
dangerous of presuppositions. It is not the man who has mystified
himself, or who wishes to mystify others; it is not the man who confounds
the reality of the logical with that of the actual; it is not the man who
takes emotion for proof and notion for fact; it is none of these, but
the man who is clear on such points and sees that they must be drawn out
into clues and followed up to the uttermost, if we would know where we
are—who is beginning to see that the paramount need of the moment is the
“torpedo-shock” of the question, What do we really mean? He knows that
the off-hand vagueness and ready-made confusion, which too often from
sheer ignorance usurp the name of common-sense, are in the long run its
most deadly enemies.

We may look forward then with a new hope to the rise of a systematic
inquiry on the subject of meaning and its changes. This would entail
the much-needed work of classifying metaphor, and might even be found
to point to the existence of a third value, neither wholly literal, nor
wholly figurative, as that of a large proportion of ordinary expression.
From this and like causes, in this age of rapid changes due mainly to
scientific conquest, we can all readily put to each other questions to
which either a “yes” or a “no” must be equally misleading. And men of
science have specially realised this, since many a time they have been
unjustly credited with evasion, or with untenable or immoral views,
because they either answered to a “plain question”: “In one sense, yes;
in another, no,” or else gave an answer which could not fail to be
misunderstood by a mind which was governed by unconscious survivals. So
far as we are in touch with modern culture, we no longer mean what we
must have meant in the days before Copernicus, when we say, for instance,
“the sun rises.” When we speak of infection, we no longer mean what we
used to mean before microbes had been heard of. When we talk of “heat,”
we no longer mean what we used to mean even fifty years ago. And when a
man says that he believes in the sun, the planets, the cosmos, in the
heavens and the earth, in mind and matter, in soul and body, in spirit
and flesh, he cannot, if he would, mean just what his forefathers meant,
or indeed anything at all absolutely and finally. Whether we will or
no, the meaning of such terms is changing on our very tongues, and ever
swaying between the extremes which we call literal and metaphorical;
“heaven,” e. g., ranging in value from sky to human destiny; “earth,”
from soil to the visible Home of Man. We may appeal, and are right
to appeal to “hard, dry” facts; but we perforce put something out of
ourselves even into these. They become “facts” under the quickening
touch of “mind,” while that emerges from a dim world of prepossession,
bequeathing us many a primitive legacy from pre-intelligent sentience,
and perhaps from little-suspected sources lying yet further back. For
instance, primitive terror in its “superstitious” forms tended to
represent man as inferior to and dependent on powers of some sort;—and
this was true to natural order in the fact that his very world was not
self-centred and was dependent for its best boons upon a greater than
itself. As language advanced, he began quite naturally to express his
meaning in “appropriate metaphors”; to use, e. g., the figures of light
and then of sight to describe what he had, as we now say, “in his mind,”
or what sense-messages, as we now say, had “put into his head.” For
“something told him” that light, as it had been the first pleasure, was
also the great means of life.[90] And he “saw,” in however grotesque a
guise, the unbroken continuity of the organic and the inorganic, and
perhaps even more clearly than most of us yet do, that of so-called
“matter” and so-called “mind.” Perhaps in some cases, therefore, he
chose his imagery better than (after long ages of dualism carried to the
splitting-point) we generally do now.

He knew again that the senses after all, stern masters though they were
while life was so hard to live, had very narrow limits; and that the
world was in some sense fuller and richer of life than it had seemed to
be as known directly through them.[91] And then he wondered,—and began
to ask. He was the first Questioner. As Prof. Max Müller says,[92] “the
greater the savagery, the dullness, the stupidity with which _Homo
sapiens_ began, the greater the marvel at what must have been from the
first, though undeveloped, in him, and made him in the end what we find
him to be in the men of light and leading of our own age.” The mere fact
of the question is the riddle to be solved. For certainly the beasts had
not taught him either to wonder or to ask. And not merely insatiable
questioning but something more here rises to challenge our attention and
to demand reflection. Man is the first critic because he is the first
idealist; the first to be discontented, to protest, to see life as a
“ravelled end,” as something which is incomplete and speaks of something
more. Surely in any case the step of all steps, the deepest yet the
narrowest line to cross is the step from something noticed or found, from
something which happens or appears, from something which somehow affects
us, excites us, to its significance.

Of course in one sense it is impossible to fix any definite moment
as that of the advent of this “significance.” Animals interpret each
other’s aspect and gestures, often indeed with a subtle precision which
to some extent we have lost. But interpretation in the intellectual
sense becomes, from our present point of view, that which makes us
really human. Our progress, our ascent, is mainly marked in this. The
root-question to ask in gauging levels of humanity is, how much can a
given man interpret or translate, of a world that teems with meaning? How
much can he truly classify and relate, how much can he rightly infer and
conclude, how much can he account for, explain, and fruitfully apply? For
after all, results must be our tests. Claims and credentials are nothing,
unless they can show this warrant; whereas truth which can use all facts
alike is the very means of survival. Man begins by doing, by acting
out impulse; then he learns to “think” little by little, observing,
questioning, pondering, testing his way onward and upward. And throughout
his patient, often painful journey, he is himself perpetually challenged.
Nature’s stimulating appeals rain upon him ceaselessly from every side;
she orders him to master all her meanings. He responds:—at first again,
“blindly,” but ever rising to higher grades of answer. Both deficiency
and error are no doubt more or less present in all mental response to
actual fact—that is, in all experience. But the essence of sanity from
the first lies in corrective power. Everywhere there is either absence of
notice, absence of response, or there is experimental activity (broadly
speaking) corrected at once; automatically or by the combined effect of
the related organic activities. For instance, in health, if in using
the hand, one finger accidentally goes astray, the coördinating muscles
promptly recall it to a “sense of duty.” We know how the same rule works
in speech and writing. Therefore, unless “voluntary” and “capricious”
(or “willing” and “wilful”) are synonyms, the advent of volition ought
not to mean the abrogation of this rule.

It is, however, obvious that “natural selection” can only operate
in cases where death or sterility is the consequence of failure in
adaptation and appropriate reaction, or segregation the consequence of
excessive variation. But the point here is, why does not a tendency
to correction, thus established, survive automatically in incipient
imagination and therefore in language? It seems almost a burlesque
of popular notions of “free will” to suppose that the moment the
death-penalty is taken off, the new-born intelligence, unique in adapting
power, should go astray persistently without let or hindrance. Many now
merely formal or even jocular customs still prevailing[93] testify, as
legacies from a remote time of danger needing to be averted, to the
strength of tendencies organised during myriads of generations under the
pressure of the struggle for life. Why does not this apply to language?

But sight gives us here perhaps the most suggestive lesson; for therein
the ascending series seems especially gradual and unbroken. The eye,
unlike the other organs of sense is an outgrowth of the very brain
itself; “the retina ... is in reality a part of the brain.”[94] We
may well therefore connect its functions specially with the thought
of significance; it is the main out-post of our central means of
interpretation.

Taking the stages in the evolution of the eye, and using a short summary
of these as a convenient means of testing the value of a conspicuous
group of metaphors, we find (1) a mere dint; (2) this dint deepening
into a pit which (3) gradually narrows. Hitherto we have had only light
and darkness; now we have an image, though but a dim one. (4) The pit is
closed by a transparent membrane; this is protection, not obstacle. (5)
The lens is formed by deposit of cuticle. Gain; increased distinctness
and increased brightness. The lens can focus a larger pencil of rays
from each part of the object to each part of the retina (corresponding
point). Finally, iris and eyelid protect the perfected eye more
completely, and enable it both to bear more light and to discern more
detail.

If mental development were in any way comparable to this physiological
development, we should expect to find (1) something which would
naturally be described as a vague or dim “impression”; gradually
deepening, becoming more distinctly localised as the stimulus became
more definitely “impressive.” (2) We should begin to find “reality” and
the “unreal”; “fact” and “fancy”; “truth” and “falsehood”; knowledge and
ignorance,—contrasted as “light” and “darkness.”[95] And this is what
actually happens.[96]

(3) Still our mental “impression” would not as yet afford us an image;
“imagination” only now comes upon the scene and begins to work (though as
yet “dimly”) upon the objects which more and more “incisively” “impress”
us. (4) Our deep “impression” is closed in one sense from direct contact
with the outward; mental vision becomes more delicately differentiated
from the emotional “touch,” however this may be specialised and
intensified. But what secludes this is transparent; it is protection, not
obstacle. We rightly speak of mental penetration; of “seeing through”
a superficial limit. The mental “lens” is formed from that “continuum”
on which the original “impression” was made. The gain now is increased
distinctness and brightness. More rays of “light,” of reality, of fact,
of truth, of knowledge, can now be focussed from each part of a given
object (or group of objects) of mental attention and interest; to each
part of the responsive “sensitive plate” of the mind. Finally we have,
so to speak, increased protective growth. The function of what are called
academic culture and scientific method, with their fastidious standards
of fitness and accuracy, may perhaps represent something not unlike that
of iris and eyelid, enabling the developing mind safely to bear intenser
illumination and also to discern more subtle detail.

It must be admitted that so far as it goes this is a significant
psychological parable. However slender its right to the position even
of a working clue to early stages of mind, it has at least better
credentials than many accepted analogies can claim. And throughout
its course what most “impresses” itself upon one’s mind is the steady
maintenance of invariable reaction to excitation, and of protection from
unfavorable stimulus.

“Mind,” as Mr. Shadworth Hodgson tells us,[97] “is a fiction of the
fancy.” Of course this is open to the retort that so is fancy a fiction
of the mind, or fiction a fancy of the mind.

Psychology is full of these see-saws of paradox, depending on
vicissitudes of linguistic usage or context. But mind is indeed a fiction
of the fancy when we endow it with a fanciful freedom from all ties with
what we call physical reality. For this, however plainly we may recognise
its genesis in our own sequences of sense-impression, does practically
through them rule us with an undeviating severity which neither fiction
nor fancy can tamper with. Therefore, if we think it absurd to suppose
that there may possibly be an undiscovered vein of authentic and really
indicative symbol or metaphor running through the arbitrary meshes of
fanciful custom or mythical term, we are in fact implying that all clues
from the original interactions of physical energy were entirely lost when
what we call “mind” issued first in language. But at all events we may be
sure that links between the “physical” and the “psychical” are everywhere
drawing closer and emerging clearer, however buried as yet in a mass of
the fantastic or the arbitrary.

It will probably be objected that we can never hope to find these. No
doubt such an attempt must mean the patient work of many lifetimes, and
at best we could not hope to lay bare the ultimate point of “origin.”
But yet it seems worth trying. For after all, even the results which
may appear so scanty in the tracing back of language, are already rich
far beyond what could have been hoped for a few generations back. And
if it were once realised that such a line of work might have practical
and far-reaching issues; if we really saw that thus some barren disputes
and speculations might cease to bar the way or to waste some precious
energies, we should be more than rewarded. In his “Dialogues of
Plato”[98] Professor Jowett warned us twenty years ago of our linguistic
dangers, repeating his warning with greater emphasis and in fresh forms
in the admirable essays added in the edition just published. He urges
that the “greatest lesson which the philosophical analysis of language
teaches us is, that we should be above language, making words our
servants and not allowing them to be our masters.” “Words,” he tells
us, “appear to be isolated but they are really the parts of an organism
which is always being reproduced. They are refined by civilisation,
harmonised by poetry, emphasised by literature, technically applied in
philosophy and art; they are used as symbols on the border-ground of
human knowledge; they receive a fresh impress from individual genius,
and come with a new force and association to every lively-minded person.
They are fixed by the simultaneous utterance of millions and yet are
always imperceptibly changing:—not the inventors of language, but writing
and speaking, and particularly great writers, or works which pass into
the hearts of nations, Homer, Shakespeare, Dante, the German or English
Bible, Kant and Hegel, are the makers of them in later ages. They carry
with them the faded recollection of their own past history; the use of
a word in a striking and familiar passage, gives a complexion to its
use everywhere else, and the new use of an old and familiar phrase has
also a peculiar power over us.” Then he reminds us of what we too often
forget; that “language is an aspect of man, of nature, and of nations,
the transfiguration of the world in thought, the meeting-point of the
physical and mental sciences, and also the mirror in which they are
reflected, an effect and partly a cause of our common humanity, present
at every moment to the individual and yet having a sort of eternal or
universal nature.”[99]

Nowadays, when we feel most scathingly superior, we often announce that
we fail to see and have yet to learn something which, bringing us, it
may be, a really fresh idea, unpleasantly stirs misgiving. Let us go
on with our greeting, meaning it in good earnest. For when we honestly
and without reservation consent to learn and succeed in seeing some
things now waiting for our study we may find more than we look for,
within reach. After all it may be that we have really failed to see
and have really yet to learn the part that meaning—whether of language
or of conduct—and its change or variations (successive or simultaneous)
have had throughout the mental history of man. It may be that while
the ordinary modern metaphor like the ordinary modern analogy is a
mere rhetorical device, some few images may be found to hail from an
altogether deeper and more authentic source. Many, however ancient, are
not of course any the more valid for their antiquity. On the contrary it
is obvious that such a figure for instance as “foundation” or “basis” to
express an ultimate necessity, is a survival from days in which the earth
was supposed to require and to possess such fixed and immutable base,
while the analogies, e. g. between the human and the inorganic orders are
now reversed. We import the idea of mechanism and invariable sequence
into the former instead of exporting conscious intention into the latter;
we level down where our forefathers levelled up. And we have to beware of
the subtle atmosphere of fallacy thus introduced.

But on the other hand it is conceivable that some may be found to belong
to that as yet mysterious energy on which natural selection plays and of
which variation is the outcome or the sign. What we find in language may
thus be, as it were, not merely the “scarred and weather-worn” remnant
of geogenic strata but sometimes the meteorite, the calcined fragment of
earlier worlds of correspondence, ultra-earthly, cosmical. We have no
right to do more than ask and seek and knock at the gates of fact in such
a matter as this. But until that has been done; until at least we have
tried the experiment; have looked for grades of validity in metaphor and
analogy in the light of modern science, and still more, have recognised
clearly the powerful though hidden effects upon us of organised mental
picture brought in surreptitiously with verbal imagery, or by comparison;
we cannot know whether such an effort is worth while or no, or what
harvest it may yield. For after all, whether we like it or no, we _are_
heliocentric; the world and all that is in it is cosmically generated.
As far as science—and experience—are concerned, anything which says “I
don’t admit that origin; I claim to have produced myself or to have
been originated by and on the earth in a final sense,” must make good
its geocentric or self-creating pretensions with overwhelming cogency
and rigorous proof. We appeal to the “light” of science, of reason, of
experience, against the “darkness” of superstition, myth, and mysticism.
And we are thus appealing not to the supersensuous or supernatural
but to the ultra-satellitic. Not only beyond the earth and touch but
beyond the atmosphere and hearing is the home of the light that lightens
our small world, calling forth in us the answer of sight. And the
manifold revelations through this sense—in its mental as well as bodily
character—press upon us, with greater and greater insistence, the wealth
of our relations with the universe.

In any case, _meaning_—in the widest sense of the word—is the only value
of whatever “fact” presents itself to us. Without this, to observe and
record appearances or occurrences would become a worse than wasteful
task. Significance is the one value of all that consciousness brings, or
that intelligence deals with; the one value of life itself. But perhaps
for this very reason we have taken it too much for granted. It may need a
more definite place in psychological inquiries. It may have unsuspected
bearings.

When we have realised better what manner of gift this is, we may find
answers of which we have prematurely despaired; answers coming not from
the “mystical” point of the horizon of experience, but rather from the
neural. And let us beware here of repeating the pre-scientific error of
postulating, for figurative purposes, a flat earth on which whatever lies
beyond “horizons” never meets! But, it may be said, why not? Why should
it signify? Why, but because Man is the one not merely who thinks, or
speaks, or writes, or looks upwards, but the one who _means_, the one
who _is_ the meaning of much, and makes the meaning of all; the one who
will not tolerate the unmeaning anywhere in experience. Nothing remains
but that he should interpret rightly; that he should apprehend nature and
experience in their true sense. It is the glory of science that she puts
this aim in the forefront of her labors. She tells us that nothing can
be done without assumption and hypothesis as to the meaning of things.
But that significance belongs to the very spring to which we owe her
dauntless energy and her accumulating triumphs.

Why should it signify? The very term answers us. To “signify” is the one
test of the important. The significant is alone worth notice. We inherit
a mode of thinking which we are at last becoming able to criticise in
the light of knowledge gained by observation and experiment. But if we
persist in using, without warning to hearer or reader, imagery which has
no longer either sense or relevance, or which tends to call up a false
mental picture or to perpetuate an else decaying error, we shall to that
extent forfeit the very gifts which science brings us, and must not
complain of the obstinate persistence of ideas which needlessly divide
us. At least, let us try to realise more clearly what we are losing in
this way. The danger even thus must needs be lessened; detected bogies
become powerless for mischief; but we need not leave their ancient home
empty, swept, and garnished; stores of verified analogy are waiting to
replace them. The figurative must not indeed be pressed, still less
literalised. But we may see that it conveys a true, rather than a false
impression; and harmonises with, instead of contradicting that which we
most surely know.[100]

It may be said in a true sense that the function of the hero, the saint,
the poet, is to bring the world to _life_. But the function of the
devoted servant of science, the critical scholar, the true philosopher,
is to bring the world to _truth_, in a sense only now becoming possible.
Through the last discipline alone, in its most thorough applications, can
we hope fully to master the scope of all significance and the laws of all
its workings. Then, indeed, we may further hope to read with a fresh eye
the Significance of Life.

                                                           VICTORIA WELBY.


FOOTNOTES:

[89] _The Nineteenth Century_, April, 1886. (Reprinted in _Essays on
Controverted Questions_.)

[90] “Light affects the new-born infant at an early stage, although in
this as in other respects individual differences immediately assert
themselves. The child seems to take pleasure in an excitation of light
and tries (even on the second day after birth) to turn towards it in
order to retain it.” (_Outlines of Psychology_, H. Höffding, p. 4.)

“Under the influence of light the conversion of inorganic matter into
more complex organic matter takes place, more particularly in the green
cells of plants.” (_Ibid._, p. 315.)

“It is certainly necessary to look further back than the visual
sensations to understand the great influence of light on all creatures
that have sensuous perception.... Light is thus one of the most
elementary conditions of life.” (_Ibid._, p. 229.)

[91] It must be borne in mind that I am using psychological terms in
a merely general sense. Among many examples of such use I may quote
Sachs (_Physiology of Plants_, p. 200) and F. Darwin (_Address to
Biological Section_, Brit. Assoc, August 1891), who speaks of the plant
as “perceiving” external change, as “recognising” the vertical line,
“knowing” where the centre of the earth is, “translating” stimulus, etc.
See also Darwin’s _Forms of Flowers_, p. 90.

Again Prof. M. Foster uses the word “will” in the same general (rather
than metaphorical) sense. (_Text Book of Phys._, Part 3, pp. 1059, 1062,
1063.) Modes of reaction are thus verbally linked with consciousness, and
we must remember that all our terms for the “mental” belong first to the
“physical,” and that many are reciprocally used in the two spheres.

[92] _Natural Religion_, p. 243.

[93] See Dr. Tylor’s _Primitive Culture_, Vol. I, pp. 74-121; _Ibid._,
Vol. II, pp. 297-298, 404-428.

[94] Dr. M. Foster’s _Text-Book of Physiology_, Part 4, p. 1142.

[95] I am of course merely directing attention to the relative aptness
of metaphors of mental process familiarly in use in our own language. It
is obvious that before any inference could be made from them as to the
value of unconscious analogies of imagery, we should have to make appeal
to comparative philology and embark on a wide inquiry, for which the
English-speaking races must wait for Dr. Murray’s epoch-making Dictionary.

[96] It must be borne in mind that the whole process presupposes the
other senses or at least the temperature-sense, the “muscular sense”
and that of touch; that is, we should have “felt” simple stimuli
“emotionally” before we “saw” things intellectually. And hearing is
not now in question, though in that, too, we should find the same
character of development, i. e. the same prominence of the protective and
discriminative factors.

[97] _Brain_, June, 1891. P. 13.

[98] Vol. I, pp. 285-286, 293.

[99] The following, among many pregnant passages between which it is
difficult to choose, may be further quoted:

“The famous dispute between Nominalists and Realists would never have
been heard of, if, instead of transferring the Platonic ideas into a
crude Latin phraseology, the spirit of Plato had been truly understood
and appreciated. Upon the term substance at least two celebrated
theological controversies appear to hinge, which would not have existed,
or at least not in their present form, if we had ‘interrogated’ the word
substance, as Plato has the notions of Unity and Being. Those weeds of
philosophy have struck their roots deep into the soil, and are always
tending to reappear, sometimes in new-fangled forms; while similar words,
such as development, evolution, law, and the like, are constantly put in
the place of facts, even by writers who profess to base truth entirely
upon fact. In an unmetaphysical age there is probably more metaphysics in
the common sense (i. e. more _a priori_ assumption) than in any other,
because there is more complete unconsciousness that we are resting on
our own ideas, while we please ourselves with the conviction that we are
resting on facts. We do not consider how much metaphysics are required to
place us above metaphysics, or how difficult it is to prevent the forms
of expression which are ready made for our use from outrunning actual
observation and experiment.” (Vol. IV, p. 39-40.)

“To have the true use of words we must compare them with things; in using
them we acknowledge that they seldom give a perfect representation of our
meaning. In like manner when we interrogate our ideas we find that we are
not using them always in the sense which we supposed. (_Ibid._, p. 41.)

“Many erroneous conceptions of the mind derived from former philosophies
have found their way into language, and we with difficulty disengage
ourselves from them. Mere figures of speech have unconsciously influenced
the minds of great thinkers. Also there are some distinctions, as,
for example, that of the will and of reason, and of the moral and
intellectual faculties, which are carried further than is justified by
experience. Any separation of things which we cannot see or exactly
define, though it may be necessary, is a fertile source of error. The
division of the mind into faculties or powers or virtues is too deeply
rooted in language to be got rid of, but it gives a false impression. For
if we reflect on ourselves we see that all our faculties easily pass into
one another, and are bound together in a single mind or consciousness;
but this mental unity is apt to be concealed from us by the distinctions
of language.” (_Ibid._, p. 155.)

[100] I would gladly forward to any reader interested in a question of
such practical bearings, a small collection of _Witnesses to Ambiguity_
gathered from representative sources, and a pamphlet which was circulated
at the International Congress of Experimental Psychology, held in London,
August, 1892, giving examples of the mischievous confusions suggested
by the use, even among writers of the first rank, of the metaphor,
_Inner and Outer_. Prof. H. Sidgwick, the president, in his opening
address, expressed the opinion that very important work of this kind
remained to be done, and added, “I have much sympathy with the view
urged in a pamphlet that I have received for distribution among members
of the Congress, which illustrates forcibly the confusion caused by
one established antithesis of terms.” Professor Sully and others have
expressed themselves strongly in the same sense.




REPLY TO THE NECESSITARIANS.

REJOINDER TO DR. CARUS.


§ 1. In _The Monist_ for January, 1891, and in the number for April,
1892, I attacked the doctrine that every event is precisely determined by
law. Like everybody else, I admit that there is regularity: I go further;
I maintain the existence of law as something _real and general_. But I
hold there is no reason to think that there are general formulæ to which
the phenomena of nature _always_ conform, or to which they _precisely_
conform. At the end of my second paper, the partisans of the doctrine of
necessity were courteously challenged and besought to attempt to answer
my arguments. This, so far as I can learn, Dr. Carus alone, in _The
Monist_ of July and October, 1892, has publicly vouchsafed to do. For
this I owe him my particular thanks and a careful rejoinder.

§ 2. I number the paragraphs of his papers consecutively. The following
index shows the pages on which those paragraphs commence, and the
numbered sections of this rejoinder in which they are noticed.

        DR. CARUS     REJOINDER
    Vol. II, p. 560   ¶ 1
         ”       ”      2  §28
         ”       ”      3   29
         ”      561     4   23.27
         ”       ”      5   21
         ”       ”      6   18
         ”       ”      7   18
         ”      562     8   18 _bis._
         ”       ”      9   21
         ”       ”     10
         ”      563    11   12.21.22
         ”       ”     12   19
         ”       ”     13   19
         ”      564    14    3.12 _bis._ 22
         ”       ”     15    8 _ter_, 16
         ”      565    16   21
         ”       ”     17    3
         ”       ”     18    3
         ”       ”     19   13 note
         ”      566    20   14
         ”       ”     21   13, 14
         ”       ”     22   3.12.22
         ”       ”     23   12
         ”       ”     24    3.13.14
         ”      567    25    8
         ”       ”     26    8
         ”       ”     27    8.22
         ”       ”     28   20.22
         ”       ”     29   12
         ”      568    30   22
         ”       ”     31   22 _bis_
         ”       ”     32   22
         ”      569    33   22
         ”       ”     34   22
         ”       ”     35    8
         ”       ”     36   29
         ”       ”     37
         ”      570    38
         ”       ”     39
         ”       ”     40
         ”      571    41
         ”       ”     42
         ”       ”     43
         ”      572    44   23
         ”       ”     45
         ”       ”     46    5.23
         ”      573    47
         ”       ”     48    7
         ”       ”     49    7
         ”       ”     50    7
         ”      574    51    7.25
         ”       ”     52
         ”       ”     53   25
         ”       ”     54
         ”       ”     55   25 _bis_
         ”      575    56   17
         ”       ”     57   17 _bis_
         ”       ”     58   17.25
         ”       ”     59   17
         ”       ”     60   17
         ”      576    61   7.17.25 _bis_
         ”       ”     62   17.21
         ”       ”     63   17
         ”      577    64   17 _bis_
         ”       ”     65   26
         ”       ”     66   25
         ”       ”     67   25 _bis_
         ”      578    68    6.7
         ”       ”     69    17
         ”      579    70    6
         ”       ”     71    3
         ”      580    72    3
         ”       ”     73    3
         ”       ”     74    3
         ”       ”     75    3
         ”      581    76    3
         ”       ”     77    3.11
         ”       ”     78
         ”       ”     79   21
         ”      582    80
         ”       ”     81   29
         ”       ”     82   29
         ”       ”     83   29
    Vol. III,    68    84    5
         ”       ”     85   27
         ”       ”     86
         ”       69    87   12
         ”       ”     88    5.15 _bis_
         ”       ”     89
         ”       ”     90
         ”       ”     91    5
         ”       ”     92    5
         ”       70    93    5
         ”       ”     94    5
         ”       ”     95    3
         ”       ”     96    4.11
         ”       71    97
         ”       ”     98
         ”       ”     99
         ”       ”    100
         ”       72   101
         ”       ”    102   11
         ”       ”    103    6
         ”       ”    104
         ”       ”    105
         ”       73   106   11
         ”       ”    107    6
         ”       ”    108    6
         ”       ”    109    6
         ”       ”    110    6
         ”       ”    111    6
         ”       74   112    6
         ”       ”    113    6.11
         ”       ”    114    6
         ”       ”    115    6
         ”       75   116    6.7
         ”       ”    117    6
         ”       76   118
         ”       ”    119    9
         ”       ”    120    6.16
         ”       ”    121   14
         ”       ”    122   11
         ”       77   123    3
         ”       ”    124   10
         ”       ”    125    7
         ”       78   126    8
         ”       ”    127    8
         ”       ”    128   29
         ”       79   129
         ”       ”    130
         ”       ”    131
         ”       ”    132
         ”       ”    133   27
         ”       ”    134
         ”       80   135
         ”       ”    136
         ”       ”    137   15
         ”       ”    138   15
         ”       ”    139    5.15
         ”       81   140   15
         ”       ”    141   15
         ”       ”    142   15.25
         ”       ”    143   15.24
         ”       ”    144   15 _bis_
         ”       ”    145   15 _bis_
         ”       ”    146   15 _bis_
         ”       ”    147   15 _ter_
         ”       82   148   15
         ”       ”    149   12.15
         ”       ”    150   15 _bis._ 25
         ”       83   151   15.24
         ”       ”    152   15.24
         ”       ”    153   15.24
         ”       ”    154   15.24
         ”       ”    155   15.24
         ”       84   156   15 _bis_
         ”       ”    157   15
         ”       ”    158   15.24
         ”       85   159   15.24
         ”       ”    160   15.24
         ”       86   161   15 _bis_
         ”       ”    162   15
         ”       ”    163    5.14
         ”       ”    164   14
         ”       87   165    4.14
         ”       ”    166   14
         ”       ”    167   14
         ”       ”    168   27
         ”       ”    169   27
         ”       88   170   27
         ”       ”    171   27
         ”       ”    172   27
         ”       ”    173
         ”       ”    174
         ”       89   175   27
         ”       ”    176   27 _bis_
         ”       ”    177   27
         ”       ”    178   27
         ”       ”    179
         ”       ”    180   30
         ”       ”    181
         ”       ”    182
         ”       90   183   30
         ”       ”    184
         ”       ”    185   27
         ”       ”    186   27
         ”       91   187   27
         ”       ”    188
         ”       ”    189
         ”       ”    190
         ”       92   191    4
         ”       ”    192   27 _bis_
         ”       ”    193   20.27 _bis_
         ”       93   194
         ”       ”    195    8
         ”       ”    196    8
         ”       94   197
         ”       ”    198    6
         ”       ”    199   30
         ”       ”    200
         ”       ”    201
         ”       95   202
         ”       ”    203   20.29
         ”       ”    204   29
         ”       96   205   20
         ”       ”    206
         ”       ”    207

§ 3. Dr. Carus’s philosophy is hard to understand. Some phrases which
he frequently uses lead the reader to imagine that he is listening to
an old-fashioned Königsberg Kantian. What, then, is our surprise when
we find (¶ 14) that he sneers at the Kantian, Sir William Hamilton
(whom he calls Mr. Hamilton) as having “no adequate conception of the
_a priori_.” In his “Ursache, Grund und Zweck” (1883), an admirably
clear and systematic exposition of much of his thought, he takes a
Schleiermacherian view of the _a priori_. He admits it to be founded in
the universal conditions of cognition; but he thinks it is among the
objective rather than the subjective conditions. This is an opinion
to which Hamilton is also at times inclined. It is a weak conception,
unless the whole distinction between the inward and the outward world be
reformed in the light of agapastic and synechistic ontology. For to deny
that the _a priori_ is subjective is to remove its essential character;
and to make it both subjective and objective (otherwise than in the sense
in which Kant himself makes it objective) is uncalled for, and is cut off
by Ockham’s razor. But when synechism has united the two worlds, this
view gains new life.

Another thing which has astonished me is Dr. Carus’s extravagant
laudation (¶ 17) of Venn’s highly enlightened and remarkably
bright-thinking, yet blundering little book, “The Logic of Chance.”[101]
This is the way he speaks of it: “This admirable work, we will make
bold to say, marks a new epoch in the study of logic.” He adds that it
“paves the way which Mr. Peirce has actually followed.” But the question
of the nature of probability had long before that publication engaged
the attention of some of the most powerful intellects in England; and
my opinion concerning it was fully made up before I saw the book. I do
not think I learned anything from that except a classification of the
philosophies of probability. However, after all his eulogy, Dr. Carus
only uses the book to quote from it Mill’s rewording of Kant’s definition
of causation, which he would better have quoted direct.

Let me say, not to Dr. Carus, but to the younger generation of readers,
that if they imagine that Hamilton, because he is antiquated, is not
worth reading, they are much mistaken. The Scotistic elements of his
philosophy, and his method in the notes on Reid are especially worthy of
attention. As for Mill, though his philosophy was not profound, it is,
at least in his “Examination of Hamilton,” admirably set forth. Whoever
wishes to appeal to the American philosophical mind needs to be quite
familiar with the writings of these two men.

Dr. Carus himself accepts all that I hold for erroneous in Kant’s
definition of causation as universal and necessary sequence. Mill
merely substitutes the exacter words _invariable_ for “universal,”
and _unconditional_ for “necessary.”[102] In giving his form of the
definition, Mill shows why it is not applicable to the sequence of day
and night, namely, that that is not necessary. Yet Dr. Carus writes (¶
18) of this very same sequence as if it came under Mill’s definition![103]

Again, why should he make it “the immortal merit of the great Scotchman”
(¶ 22), that is, of Hume, that he admitted the truth of Leibniz’s
principle?

The famed puzzle of causation is peculiarly understood by Dr. Carus.
The difficulties which the perusal of Hume suggested to the mind
of Kant,[104] were such as belonged to all categories, or general
conceptions of the understanding. The precritical Kant inherited a very
decided nominalism from Leibniz and Wolf; and the puzzle for him was
simply the usual difficulty that plagues nominalism when it finds itself
confronted with a reality which has an element of generality. Necessity
is, I need hardly say, but a particular variety of universality. But
Dr. Carus (¶ 24) passes over this, to dwell upon an entirely different
objection to causation, namely, that it seems to be a creation out of
nothing, and a miracle.

I find myself equally at cross-purposes with him, when in ¶¶ 71-77, he
speaks of the prevalent views of logicians concerning _comprehension_.
This word, in logic, measures the amount of predicates or marks attached
to a conception; but Dr. Carus’s criticisms seem to be based upon the
idea that by comprehension is meant logical breadth, or the amount of
subjects to which the conception is applicable.

I am simply gravelled by his remarks (¶ 95) concerning sundry English
words.

No more do I know what to make of his praise (¶ 123) of the German
translation of a French phrase used in the theory of functions, meaning
_univocally determined_.

§ 4. One habit which goes far to obscure Dr. Carus’s meaning is that
whenever he finds his opinion at variance with a familiar saying, instead
of rejecting that formula, he retains it and changes the meaning. This is
calculated to throw the whole discussion into confusion. Thus, nothing is
more certain than that the so-called “law of identity,” or _A_ is _A_,
was intended to express the fact that every term is predicable of itself.
But Dr. Carus, simply because he finds that “meaningless and useless” (¶
96), thinks himself authorised to confuse the terminology of logic by
making this formula, _A_ = _A_, under the same old name, mean that things
to which the same name is applicable are for some purpose equivalent.

In like manner, he changes the meaning of the word _freedom_ (¶ 165),
so that the distinction between those who maintain and those who oppose
the freedom of the will may, in words, disappear. It seems scarcely
defensible for a thoroughgoing necessitarian, such as he is, to fly the
flag of Free Will.

He, also, changes the meaning of _spontaneity_ so far that, according to
him, “masses gravitate spontaneously” (¶ 191), and so pretends that his
doctrine does not suppress the spontaneity of nature!

§ 5. There are other questions of terminology in which I am unable to
agree with Dr. Carus. Thus, when I define necessitarianism as “the theory
that the will is subject to the general mechanical law of cause and
effect,” Dr. Carus (¶ 139) wishes to delete “mechanical.” But the result
would be to define a doctrine to which the advocates of free will would
generally subscribe, as readily as their opponents. In order properly to
limit the definition, it is quite requisite to exclude “free causation.”
By “mechanical” causation, I mean a causation entirely determinative,
like that of dynamics, but not necessarily operating upon matter.

Dr. Carus mentions (¶ 84) that there are several different ideas to
which the term necessity is applied. It seems to me that what lies at
the bottom of all of them is the experience of reaction against one’s
will. In the simplest form, this gives the sense of reality. Dr. Carus
himself admits (¶ 46) that reality involves the idea of inevitable fate.
Yet philosophical necessity is a special case of universality. But the
universality, or better, the generality, of a pure form involves no
necessity. It is only when the form is materialised that the distinction
between necessity and freedom makes itself plain. These ideas are,
therefore, as it seems to me, of a mixed nature. Dr. Carus (¶¶ 91-94)
insists that by the necessary, he wishes to be understood to mean in
all cases the _inevitable_. This is the idea of _fate_, and is not the
conception which determinists usually attach to the term necessity.
Yet he does not appear to be quite consistent. At one time (¶ 88), he
carefully distinguishes necessity from fate. At another time (¶ 163),
every element of compulsion is to be excluded from the conception of
necessity.

§ 6. One important key to Dr. Carus’s opinions is the recognition of the
fact that, like many other philosophers, he is a nominalist tinctured
with realistic opinions.

He says (¶ 103), that “there is no need of discussing the truism that,
properly speaking, there is no absolute sameness.” Now, upon the
nominalistic theory, there is not only no absolute or numerical identity,
but there are not even any real agreements or likenesses between
individuals; for likeness consists merely in the calling of several
individuals by one name, or (in some systems) in their exciting one idea.
On the other hand, upon the realistic theory, the fact that identity is
a relation of reason does not in the least prevent it from being real.
On that theory, it is real unless it is _false_ that anything is itself.
Thus, upon either theory, identity is just as real as similarity. But
Dr. Carus, being a nominalist leaning toward realism, is inclined to
make dynamical relations real, and second-intentional ones unreal. This
opinion, I think, is a transitional one.

The declaration (¶ 198) that “natural laws are simply a description
of nature as nature is,” and that “the facts of nature express the
character of nature,” are nominalistic. But in another place (¶¶
107-116), he says distinctly that uniformities are real.

He says (¶ 70), “Mr. Peirce attempts to explain natural laws as if they
were concrete and _single facts_.” This is eminently nominalistic. The
nominalist alone makes this sharp distinction between the abstract and
the concrete,[105] which must not be confounded with Hegel’s distinction
for which the same words are used. The nominalist alone falls into the
absurdity of talking of “single facts,” or _individual generals_. Yet
Dr. Carus says (¶ 68) that natural laws describe the facts of nature
_sub specie aeternitatis_. Now I understand Spinoza to be a realist.
In ¶117 he considers it “settled” “that there are samenesses.” This is
realistic. But in ¶ 120, he holds “the whole business of science to be to
systematise the samenesses of experience,” which is nominalistic.

§ 7. Dr. Carus seems to be in some doubt as to how far evolutionism ought
to be carried. In ¶¶ 48-51, he seems to side with my contention that it
should be thoroughgoing. In ¶116, he makes intellect an evolution from
feeling. Yet he is sometimes (¶ 125) “inclined” to say the world never
was a chaos; he sometimes (¶ 61) thinks it weak to suppose that real
chance begets order; and he sometimes (¶ 68) goes so far as to pronounce
eternity to be the _conditio sine qua non_ of natural law.

§ 8. Every reader of _The Monist_ knows that our good editor’s great word
is “formal law.” The clearest statement he has ever made of this doctrine
I find in the following two sentences (¶ 127):

    “The _a priori_ systems of thought are ... constructions
    raised out of the recognition of the formal, i. e. relational
    samenesses that appear in experience. All possibilities of a
    certain class of relations can be exhausted and formulated in
    theorems.”[106]

This is perspicuous. For example, of pairs, we can easily show that
there are but two forms _A_:_A_ and _A_:_B_. This proposition,—theorem
if you will,—exhausts the possibilities. If we make believe there is no
danger of falling into error in mathematical reasoning,—and one danger,
though not, perhaps, a very serious one, _is_ eliminated,—then this
proposition is absolutely certain. But I will say, at once, that such a
proposition is not, in a proper sense, synthetic. It is a mere corollary
from the definition of a pair. Moreover, its application to experience,
or to possible experience, opens the door to probability, and shuts out
absolute necessity and certainty, _in toto_.

Concerning points like this, Dr. Carus, in company with the general
body of thinkers, is laboring under a great disadvantage from not
understanding the logic of relatives. It is a subject I have been
studying for a great many years, and I feel and know that I have an
important report that I ought to make upon it. This branch of logic is,
however, so abstruse, that I have never been able to find the leisure to
translate my conclusions into a form in which their significance would
be manifest even to a powerful thinker whose thoughts had not long been
turned in that direction. I shall succeed in doing so, whenever I can
find myself in a situation where I need think of nothing else for months,
and not before. That may not be for thirty years; but I believe it is the
intention of providence that it should be. Meantime, I will testify, and
the reader can take my testimony for what he thinks it is worth, that
all deductive reasoning, except that kind which is so childishly simple
that acute minds have doubted whether there was any reasoning there,—I
mean non-relative syllogism,—requires an act of choice; because from a
given premise, several conclusions,—in some cases an infinite number,—can
be drawn. Hence, Dr. Carus is altogether too hasty in his confidence
(¶¶ 195, 196) that general thinking machines “are not impossibilities.”
An act of original and arbitrary determination would be required; and
it seems almost evident that no machine could perform such an act
except within narrow limits, thought out beforehand and embodied in
its construction. Moreover, positive observation is called for in all
inference, even the simplest,—though in deduction it is only observation
of an object of imagination. Moreover, a peculiar act which may properly
be called _abstraction_[107] is usually required, consisting in seizing
evanescent elements of thought and holding them before the mind as
“substantive” objects, to borrow a phrase from William James. At the
same time, the process I am describing, that is, relative deduction, is
perfectly general and demonstrative, and depends upon the truth of the
assumed premises, and not, like inductive reasoning, upon the manner in
which those premises present themselves.

But the application of the logic of relatives shows that the propositions
of arithmetic, which Dr. Carus usually adduces as examples of formal law
(¶ 15), are, in fact, only corollaries from definitions. They are certain
only as applied to ideal constructions, and in such application, they are
merely analytical.

The truth is our ideas about the distinction between analytical and
synthetical judgments is much modified by the logic of relatives, and
by the logic of probable inference. An analytical proposition is a
definition or a proposition _deducible_ from definitions; a synthetical
proposition is a proposition not analytical. Deduction, or analytical
reasoning, is, as I have shown in my “Theory of Probable Reasoning,” a
reasoning in which the conclusion follows (necessarily, or probably) from
the state of things expressed in the premises, in contradistinction to
scientific, or synthetical, reasoning, which is a reasoning in which the
conclusion follows probably and approximately from the premises, owing to
the conditions under which the latter have been observed, or otherwise
ascertained. The two classes of reasoning present, besides, some other
contrasts that need not be insisted upon in this place. They also present
some significant resemblances. Deduction is really a matter of perception
and of experimentation, just as induction and hypothetic inference are;
only, the perception and experimentation are concerned with imaginary
objects instead of with real ones. The operations of perception and of
experimentation are subject to error, and therefore it is only in a
Pickwickian sense that mathematical reasoning can be said to be perfectly
certain. It is so, only under the condition that no error creeps into
it: yet, after all, it is susceptible of attaining a practical certainty.
So, for that matter, is scientific reasoning; but not so readily. Again,
mathematics brings to light results as truly occult[108] and unexpected
as those of chemistry; only they are results dependent upon the action
of reason in the depths of our own consciousness, instead of being
dependent, like those of chemistry, upon the action of Cosmical Reason,
or Law. Or, stating the matter under another aspect, analytical reasoning
depends upon associations of similarity, synthetical reasoning upon
associations of contiguity. The logic of relatives, which justifies these
assertions, shows accordingly that deductive reasoning is really quite
different from what it was supposed by Kant to be; and this explains how
it is that he and others have taken various mathematical propositions
to be synthetical which in their ideal sense, as propositions of pure
mathematics, are in truth only analytical.

Descending from things I can demonstrate to things of which various
facts, in the light of those demonstrations, fully persuade me, I
will say that in my opinion there are many synthetical propositions
which, if not _a priori_ in Dr. Carus’s sense, are, at least, innate
(notwithstanding his frequent denials of this, as in ¶ 15) though he
is quite right in saying that their abstract and distinct formulation
comes very late (¶ 126). But turn the facts as I will, I cannot see that
they afford the slightest reason for thinking that such propositions are
ever absolutely universal, exact, or necessary in their truth. On the
contrary, the principles of probable inference show this to be impossible.

Dr. Carus adduces the instance of a geometrical proposition, namely,
“that two congruent regular tetrahedrons, when put together, will form a
hexahedron.” (¶ 25.) This, he says, seems to be “a very wonderful thing”;
for why should not a larger tetrahedron be formed, just as two heaps of
flour make a large heap of flour? Yet, he continues, the probability
that the two tetrahedrons do always make a hexahedron is 1, “which
means certainty” (¶ 27). But as it happens, the proposition, in the
form stated is quite erroneous. What is true is this. If two tetrahedra
are so placed that one face of each is coincident with one face of the
other, while all the other faces are inclined to one another, and if of
the 8 faces, the 2 that are coincident are not counted, there remain to
be counted 8-2=6 faces. But there is nothing more wonderful about this
than that 8-2=6, which is an easy corollary from definitions. Very few
propositions in mathematics that appear “marvellous” will hold water; and
those few excite our astonishment only because the real complexity of the
conditions are masked in an intuitional presentation of them.

Dr. Carus holds (¶ 15) that formal knowledge is absolutely universal,
exact, and necessary. In some cases, as where he says that, given the
number of dimensions of space, the entire geometry could be deduced (¶
35), the boasted infallibility will prove on examination to be downright
error. In all other cases, the propositions only relate to ideal
constructions, and their applicability to the real world is at the best
doubtful, and, as I think, false; while in their ideal purity, they are
not synthetical.

Thus, my good friend and antagonist holds that the combination of oxygen
and hydrogen to produce water is not “different in principle” from that
of the tetrahedra to produce a hexahedron (¶ 26). There is all the
difference between the ideal and the real; which to my Scotistic mind is
very important. But this is not the only passage in which he speaks as if
form were the principle of individuation.

§ 9. Dr. Carus’s position is even weaker than that of Kant, who makes
space, for example, a necessary form of thought (in a broad sense of that
term). But Dr. Carus appears to consider space as an absolute reality.
For he says (¶ 119) that “every single point of space has its special
and individual qualities.” Here again form is made the principle of
individuation; whence the queer phrase, “individual qualities.”

§ 10. Dr. Carus argues that whatever is unequivocally determinate is
necessary. (¶ 124.) Were the determination spoken of real dynamic
determination, this would be a mere truism. But the expression used,
_eindeutig bestimmt_, merely expresses a mathematical determination, and
therefore no real necessity ensues. The equation

    (Transcriber’s Note: Italics have been removed from the
    formulæ for readability.)

    x² - 23x + 132¼ = 0

determines _x_ to be either 11·477 or 11·523. In this sense, _x_ has
necessarily one value or the other. The equation

    x² - 12x + 6 = 0

determines _x_ to be either 11·477 or 0·523. Together, the two equations
uniquely determine _x_ to be 11·477. This shows how much that argument
amounts to.

§ 11. By “sameness,” Dr. Carus means equivalence for a given purpose. (¶¶
102, 106.) By the “idea of sameness,” he means (¶¶ 77, 96) the principle
that things having a common character are for some purpose equivalent.
This, he says, “has a solid basis in the facts of experience.” By a
“world of sameness” (¶ 113), he seems to mean one in which any two given
concrete things are in some respect equivalent. He argues (¶ 122) that
a “world of sameness is a world in which necessity rules.” I do not see
this. It seems to me so bald a _non sequitur_, that I cannot but suppose
the thought escapes my apprehension. If there were anything in the
argument, it would seem to be a marvellously expeditious way of settling
the whole dispute; and therefore it would have been worth the trouble of
stating, so as to bring it within the purview of minds like mine.

§ 12. My candid opponent sometimes endorses emphatically the Leibnizian
principle. “Necessitarianism must be founded on something other than
observation. Observation is _a posteriori_; it has reference to single
facts, to particulars; yet the doctrine of necessity ... is of universal
application. The doctrine of necessity ... is of an _a priori_ nature.”
(¶ 11.) “Millions of single experiences ... cannot establish a solid
belief in necessity.” (¶ 14.) “No amount of experience is sufficient to
constitute causation by a mere synthesis of sequences.” (¶ 22.) “Millions
of millions of cases” constitute “no proof” that a proposition “is always
so.” (¶ 29.)

Nevertheless, he holds that the law of “the conservation of matter and
energy” so conclusively proves necessary causation, that the obstinacy
of Hume, himself, could not have withstood the argument. (¶ 23.) One
wonders, then, what is supposed to prove this “law of the conservation of
matter and energy,” if no amount of experience can prove it.

But the _a priori_ itself can “be based on the firm ground of
experience.” (¶ 14.) In that case, it is not prior to experience, after
all! “The idea of necessity is based upon the conception of sameness,
and ... the existence of sameness is a fact of experience.” (¶ 87.)
If absolute necessity can be irrefragably demonstrated from the fact
that two things are alike, it is a pity Dr. Carus should not state
this demonstration in a form, that I, and men like me, can understand.
That would be more to the purpose than merely saying it can be proved.
Absolute chance is rejected as “involving a violation of laws well
established by _positive evidence_.” (¶ 149.)

All these _denials_ that absolute necessity can be established and
absolute chance refuted by experiential evidence, mixed with as clear
_assertions_ of the same things, when taken together, have the appearance
of an attempt, as the politicians say, to “straddle” the question.

§13. But the ingenious Doctor seeks to bolster up necessity by
introducing the confused notion of “causation.”

I do not know where the idea originated that a cause is an instantaneous
state of things, perfectly determinative of every subsequent state. It
seems to be at the bottom of Kant’s discourse on the subject; yet it
accords neither with the original conception of a cause, nor with the
principles of mechanics. The original idea of an efficient cause is
that of an agent, more or less like a man. It is prior to the effect,
in the sense of having come into being before the latter; but it is not
transformed into the effect. In this sense, it may happen that an event
is a cause of a subsequent event; seldom, however, is it the principal
cause. Far less are events the only causes. The modern mechanical
conception, on the other hand, is that the relative positions of
particles determine their accelerations at the instants when they occupy
those positions. In other words, if the positions of all the particles
are given at _two_ instants (together with the law of force), then
the positions at all other instants may be deduced.[109] This doctrine
conflicts with Kant’s second analogy of experience, as interpreted by
him, in no less than four essential particulars. In the first place, far
from involving any principle that could properly be termed generation, or
_Erzeugung_, which is Kant’s word for the sequence of effect from cause,
the modern mechanical doctrine is a doctrine of persistence, and, as I
have repeatedly explained, positively prohibits any real growth. In the
second place, one state of things (i. e. one configuration of the system)
is not sufficient to determine a second, it is two that determine a
third. To whomsoever may think that this is an inconsiderable divergence
of opinions, let me say, study the logic of relatives, and you will think
so no longer. In the third place, the two determining configurations,
according to mechanics, may be taken at almost any two instants, and the
determined configuration be taken at any third instant we like. _There is
no mechanical truth in saying that the past determines the future, rather
than the future the past._ We habitually follow tradition in continuing
to use that form of expression, but every mathematician knows that it is
nothing but a form of expression. We continue, for convenience, to talk
of mechanical phenomena as if they were regulated, in the same manner
in which our intentions regulate our actions (which is essentially a
determination of the future by the past), although we are quite aware
that it is not really so. Remark how Kant reasons:

    “If it is a necessary law of our sensibility, and consequently
    a _formal condition_ of all perceptions, that the preceding
    time determines the following, (since I can only come to
    the following through the preceding,) then is it also an
    indispensable _law of the empirical representation_ of the
    time-series that the appearances of the preceding time
    determine every occurrence in the following.”

What this leads to is a causality like that of mental phenomena, where it
_is_ the past which determines the future, and _not_ (in the same sense)
the reverse; but the doctrine of the conservation of energy consists
precisely in the denial that anything like this occurs in the domain of
physics. Had Kant studied the psychological phenomena more attentively
and generalised them more broadly, he would have seen that in the mind
causation is not absolute, but follows such a curve as is traced in my
essay towards “The Law of Mind” (_The Monist_, Vol. II, 550). Does our
judicious editor deem it ungracious to find fault with Kant for not doing
so much more than he did, considering what that hero-like achievement
was? We must seem to carp, as long as thinkers can hold that achievement
for sufficient. In the fourth place, Kant’s “Analogy” ignores that
continuity which is the life-blood of mathematical thought. He deals
with those awkward chunks of phenomenon, called “events.” He represents
one such “event” as determined by certain others, definitely, while
the rest have nothing to do with it. It is impossible to cement such
thought as this into hermetic continuity with the refined conceptions of
modern dynamics. The statement that every instantaneous state of things
determines precisely all subsequent states, and not at all any previous
states, could, I rather think, be shown to involve a contradiction.

The notion which Dr. Carus holds of a cause seems to be that it is a
state, embracing all the positions and velocities of all the masses at
one instant, the effect being a similar state for any subsequent instant.
(¶¶ 21, 24.) This breaks at once with common parlance, with dynamics,
and with philosophical logic. In common parlance, we do not say that
the position and upward velocity of a missile is the cause of its being
at a subsequent instant lower down and moving with a greater downward
velocity.[110] In dynamics, it is the fixed force, gravitation, or
whatever else, together with those relative positions of the bodies that
determine the intensity and direction of the forces, that is regarded
as the cause. But these causes are not previous to, but simultaneous
with, their effects, which are the instantaneous accelerations. Finally,
logic opposes our calling one of two states which equally determine one
another (as any two states of a system do, if the velocities are taken to
be included in these states) _the_ determinator, or cause, simply because
of the circumstance that it precedes the other in time,—a circumstance
that is upon the principles of dynamics plainly insignificant and
irrelevant.

Everybody will make slips in the use of words that have been on his lips
from before the time when he learned to think; but the practice which
I endeavor to follow in regard to the word _cause_, is to use it in
the Aristotelian sense of an _efficient cause_, in all its crudeness.
In short, I refuse to use it at all as a philosophical word. When my
conception is of a dynamical character, I endeavor to employ the accepted
terminology of dynamics;[111] and when my idea is a more general and
logical one, I prefer to speak of the _explanation_.

§ 14. Dr. Carus thinks the element of necessity in causation can be
demonstrated by considering the process as a transformation. “It is a
sequence of two states which belong together as an initial and final
aspect of one and the same event.” (¶ 21. Compare ¶¶ 20, 24.) He neglects
to explain how he brings under this formula the inward causation of the
will and character, as set forth by him in ¶¶ 163-167.

It is unnecessary for me to reply, at length, to an argument so
manifestly inconclusive. On the one hand, it conflicts with the principle
that absolute necessity cannot be proved from experience; and on the
other hand, it leaves room for an imperfect necessity.

Professor Tait has done an ill office to thought in countenancing the
idea that the conservation of energy is of the same nature as the
“conservation,” or rather perduration, of matter. Dr. Carus says (¶ 121)
that

    “The law of the conservation of matter and energy rests upon
    the experience (corroborated by experiments) that causation
    is transformation. It states that the total amount of matter
    and the total amount of energy remain constant. There is no
    creation out of nothing and no conversion of something into
    nothing.”

The historical part of this statement contains only a small grain of
truth; but that I will not stop to criticise. The point I wish to make
is that the law of the conservation of energy is here represented under
a false aspect. The true substance of the law is that the accelerations,
or rates of change, of the motions of the particles at any instant depend
solely on their relative positions at those instants. The equation which
expresses the law under this form is a differential equation of the
second order; that is, it involves the rates of change of the rates of
change of positions, together with the positions themselves. Now, because
of the purely analytic proposition of the differential calculus that

    Dₜ²s = ½Dₛ(Dₜs)²,

the first integral of the differential equation of the second order, that
is, the differential equation of the first order which expresses the same
state of things, equates half the sum of the masses, each multiplied by
the square of its velocity, to a function of the relative positions of
the particles _plus_ an arbitrary constant.[112] In order to fix our
ideas, let us take a very simple example, that of a single particle
accelerated towards an infinite plane, at a rate proportional to the
_n_ᵗʰ power of its distance from the plane. In this case, if _s_ be the
distance, the second differential equation will be

    Dₜ²s = -asⁿ,

and the first integral of it will be

    (Dₜs)² = -(²ᵃ⁄ₙ₊₁)sⁿ⁺¹ + C.

By the first law of motion, and the Pythagorean proposition, the part
of the velocity-square depending on the horizontal component is also
constant.

The arbitrary constant, _C_, plainly has its genesis in the fact that
forces do not determine velocities, but only accelerations. Its value
will be fixed as soon as the velocity at any instant is known. This
quantity would exist, just the same, and be independent of the time, and
would therefore be “conserved” whether the forces were “conservative,”
that is, simply positional, or not. Now, this constant is the energy;
or rather, the energy is composed of this constant increased by another
which is absolutely indeterminable, being merely supposed large enough to
make the sum positive.

Thus, the law of energy does not prescribe that the total amount of
energy shall remain constant; for this would be so in any case by virtue
of the second law of motion; but what it prescribes is that the total
energy diminished by the living force shall give a remainder which
depends upon the relative positions of the particles and not upon the
time or the velocities. It is also to be noticed that the energy has
no particular magnitude, or quantity. Furthermore, in transformations
of kinetical energy into positional energy, and the reverse, the
different portions of energy do not retain their identity, any more
than, in book-keeping, the identity of the amounts of different items
is preserved. In short, the conservation of energy, (I do not mean the
_law_ of conservation,) is a mere result of algebra. Very different is
it with the “conservation” of matter. For, in the first place, the total
mass is a perfectly definite quantity; and, in the second place, in all
its transformations, not only is the _total_ amount constant, but all the
different parts preserve their identity. To speak, therefore, of “the
conservation of matter and energy,” is to assimilate facts of essentially
contrary natures; and to say that the law of the conservation of energy
makes the total amount of energy constant is to attribute to this law
a phenomenon really due to another law, and to overlook what this law
really does determine, namely, _that the total energy less the kinetic
energy gives a remainder which is exclusively positional_.

§ 15. Dr. Carus does not make it clear what he means by _chance_. He
does, indeed, say (¶¶ 145, 146):

    “What is chance?

    “Chance is any event not especially intended, either not
    calculated, or, with a given and limited stock of knowledge,
    incalculable.”

This defines what he means by a chance event, in the concrete; what he
understands by probability, we are left to conjecture. But from what he
says in ¶ 147, I infer that he regards it as dependent upon the state of
our ignorance, and therefore nothing real.

I am, therefore, much puzzled when I find him expressing a conviction
(¶¶ 88, 156) that chance plays an important part in the real world. He
explains very distinctly that “when we call a throw of the dice pure
chance, we mean that the incidents which condition the turning up of
these or those special faces of the dice have not been, or cannot be,
calculated.” (¶ 147.) This is the commonest, because the shallowest,
philosophy of chance. Even Venn might teach him better than that.
However, according to that view, when he writes of “the important part
that chance plays in the world,—not absolute chance ... but that same
chance of which the throw of the die is a typical instance” (¶ 88), he
can be understood to mean no more than that many things happen which we
are not in condition to calculate or predict. This is not playing a part
_in the world_, one would say—at least, not in the natural world; it is
only playing a part in our ignorance.

Dr. Carus frequently uses phrases which make us suspect he penetrates
deeper. Thus, he says, “we do not believe in absolute chance, but we
believe in chance” (¶ 144); and again, “Every man is the architect of
his own fortune—but not entirely. There are sometimes coincidences
determining the fates of men.” (¶ 161.) But when we remark the
consecution of ¶¶ 137-162, we feel pretty sure he really sees no
further. To do so would have been to perceive that indefinitely varied
specificalness _is_ chance.

For a long time, I myself strove to make chance that diversity in the
universe which laws leave room for, instead of a violation of law, or
lawlessness. That was truly believing in chance that was not absolute
chance. It was recognising that chance does play a part in the real
world, apart from what we may know or be ignorant of. But it was a
transitional belief which I have passed through, while Dr. Carus seems
not to have reached it.

As for absolute chance, Dr. Carus makes the momentous admission that
it is “not unimaginable” (¶ 150). If so, its negation, or absolute
necessity, cannot be a formal principle.

§ 16. But it is time for me to leave the consideration of Dr. Carus’s
system and to take up his strictures upon mine. His philosophy is one
eminently enlightened by modern ideas, which it synthetises to an
unusual extent. It is distinguished for its freedom from the vice of
one-sidedness, and displays every facet of the gem of philosophical
inquiry, except the one on which it rests, the question of absolute
law. Its prominent faults, which I feel sure must have struck every
competent reader, are that it shows little trace of meditation upon the
thoughts of the great idealists, and that there is a certain want of
congruity between different elements of it. How strangely it sounds,
for instance, to find an apriorian, and one who is dinging “formal
laws” so perpetually into our ears, one who holds that “in order to
weave the woof of the _a posteriori_ elements into coherent cloth, we
want the warp of the _a priori_” (¶ 15), to find this man declaring for
a positivism “which accepts no doctrine, theory, or law, unless it be
a formulation of facts,” and proclaiming that “the whole business of
science is to systematise the samenesses of experience, and to present
them in convenient formulas” (¶ 120). Now there is just one way of
bringing such warring elements into harmony, and curing the greatest
defect of the system,—and it is a way which would also bring the whole
into far better concordance with natural science. It is to lop off the
heads of all absolute propositions Whose subject is not the Absolute,
and reduce them to the level of probable and approximate statements.
Were that defalcation performed, Dr. Carus’s philosophy would, in its
general features, offer no violent opposition to my opinions. Moreover,
the Doctor has at heart the conciliation of religion and science. I
confess such serious concern makes me smile; for I think the atonement
he desires is a thing which will come to pass of itself when time is
ripe, and that our efforts to hasten it have just that slight effect
that our efforts to hasten the ripening of apples on a tree may have.
Besides, natural ripening is the best. Let science and religion each have
stout faith in itself, and refuse to compromise with alien and secondary
purposes, but push the development of its own thought on its own line;
and then, when reconcilement comes,—as come it surely will,—it will have
a positive value, and be an unmixed good. But since our accomplished
editor thinks himself called upon to assist in this birth of time, let
me ask him whether of all the conditions of such peace, the first is not
that religious thought should abandon that extravagant absoluteness of
assertion which is proper to the state of intellectual infancy, but which
it has so long been too timid to let go? This pragmatical and unneeded
absoluteness it is which is most deeply contrary to the method, the
results, and the whole spirit of science; and no error can be greater
than to fancy that science, or scientific men, rest upon it or readily
tolerate it.

§ 17. Dr. Carus (¶¶ 56-64) condemns my method of investigation as
contrary to that by which science has been advanced; and holds that a
radically different, and thoroughly positivistic method is requisite,—a
method so intensely positivistic as to exclude all originality. I suppose
he will not object to my forming an opinion concerning the methods of
science. I was brought up in an atmosphere of scientific inquiry, and
have all my life chiefly lived among scientific men. For the last thirty
years, the study which has constantly been before my mind has been upon
the nature, strength, and history of methods of scientific thought. I
have no space here to argue the question. In its logical aspect, I have
partly considered it in various publications; and in its historical
aspect, I have long been engaged upon a treatise about it. My critic says
(¶ 57) that 1 am “very positivistic in my logic of science.” This is a
singular misapprehension. Few of the great scientific minds with whom
I have come into personal contact, and from whom I endeavored to learn
were disposed to contemn originality or the ideal part of the mind’s work
in investigation; and those few, it was easy to see, really breathed an
atmosphere of ideas which were so incessantly present that they were
unconscious of them. Were I to name those of my teachers who were most
positivistic in theory, a smile would be excited. My own historical
studies, which have been somewhat minutely critical, have, on the whole
confirmed the views of Whewell, the only man of philosophical power
conjoined with scientific training who had made a comprehensive survey
of the whole course of science, that progress in science depends upon
the observation of the right facts by minds _furnished with appropriate
ideas_. Finally, my long investigation of the logical process, of
scientific reasoning led me many years ago to the conclusion that science
is nothing but a development of our natural instincts. So much for my
_theory_ of scientific logic. It is as totally opposed as anything can
be to Dr. Carus’s theory (¶ 69, note; and “Ursache, Grund und Zweck,” p.
2) that originality is out of place in science.

But in my _practice_ of scientific reasoning, Dr. Carus accuses me of
being what he calls a “constructionist”; that is, a theoriser unguided by
indications from observation or accepted facts. To a mind upon whom that
celebrated and splendid chapter of Kant upon the architectonical method
failed to make a deep impression, I may appear so; but _travesty_ is in
truth hardly too strong a word to describe the account of my method by
Dr. Carus.

Perhaps exaggeration is not without its value. If so, let me sum up the
method Dr. Carus recommends. Eschew originality, is its pious formula;
do not think for yourself, nor countenance results obtained by original
minds. Distrust them; they are not safe men. Leave originality to
mathematicians and their breed, to poets, and to all those who seek the
sad notoriety of having unsettled belief.[113] Flee all philosophies
which smack of this aberrant nineteenth century.[114] This theory of Dr.
Carus condemns itself; for it is highly original, and soars into the free
ether untrammelled by historic facts.

Keppler comes very close to realising my ideal of the scientific method;
and he is one of the few thinkers who have taken their readers fully into
their confidence as to what their method really has been.[115] I should
not feel justified in inflicting upon mine an autobiographical account
of my own course of thought; but some things Dr. Carus’s accusation
forces me to mention. My method of attacking all problems has ever been
to begin with an historical and rational inquiry into the special method
adapted to the special problem. This is the essence of my architectonical
proceeding upon which Dr. Carus has commented very severely. To look an
inch before one’s nose involves originality: therefore, it is wrong to
have a conscious method. But further, in regard to philosophy, not only
the methods, but the elementary ideas which are to enter into those
methods, should be subjected to careful preliminary examination. This,
especially, Dr. Carus finds very unscientific. (¶ 64, and elsewhere.)
It is, undoubtedly, the most characteristic feature of my procedure.
Certainly it was not a notion hastily or irreflectively caught up; but
is the maturest fruit of a lifetime of reflection upon the methods of
science, including those of philosophy; and if it shall be found that one
contribution to thought on my part has proved of permanent service, that,
I expect, will be the one. This method in no wise teaches that the method
and materials for thought are not to be modified in the course of the
study of the subject-matter. But instead of taking ideas at haphazard, or
being satisfied with those that have been handed down from the good old
times, as a mind keenly alive to the dangers of originality would have
done, I have undertaken to make a systematic survey of human knowledge
(a very slight sketch of which composed the substance of my paper on
the “Architecture of Theories,”) in order to find what ideas have, as a
fact, proved most fruitful, and to observe the special utilities they
have severally fulfilled. A subsidiary object of this survey was to note
what the great obstacles are to-day in the way of the further advance of
the different branches of science. In my “Architecture of Theories,” I
never professed to do more than make a slight sketch of a small portion
of my preliminary studies, devoting thirteen lines to some hints as to
the nature of the results. In the four following papers I have given
a selection of a few of these results. Among those which remain to be
reported are some of much more immediate importance than any of those
hitherto set forth. If anybody has been surprised to find my subsequent
papers developing thoughts which they were unable to foresee from my
first, it is only what I warned people from the outset that they would
find to happen. Nor have the greatest of these surprises yet been
reached.[116]

The next series of facts reviewed was that of the history of philosophy.
I waded right into this fearful slough of “originality,” in order to
gather what seemed to throw a light upon the subject. Finally, I reviewed
the general facts of the universe.

I now found myself forced by a great many different indications to
the conclusion that an evolutionary philosophy of some kind must be
accepted,—including among such philosophies systems like those of
Aristotle and of Hegel. From this point the reasoning was more rapid.
Evolution had been a prominent study for half a generation; and much
light had been thrown upon the conditions for a fruitful evolutionary
philosophy. The first question was, how far shall this evolution go back?
What shall we suppose _not_ to be a product of growth? I fancy it is this
cautious reflectiveness of my procedure which especially displeases Dr.
Carus. It is not positivistic: it is architectonic. But the answer to the
question was not far to seek. If an evolutionary explanation is to be
adopted, philosophy, logic, and the economy of research all dictate that
in the first essay, at least, that style of explanation be carried as far
back as explanation is called for. What elements of the universe require
no explanation? This was a simple question, capable of being decided
by logic with as much facility and certainty as a suitable problem is
solved by differential calculus. Being, and the uniformity in which being
consists, require to be explained. The only thing that does not require
it is non-existent spontaneity. This was soon seen to mean absolute
chance. The conclusion so reached was clinched by a careful reëxamination
of the office of chance in science generally, and especially in the
doctrines of evolution. Arrived at this point, the next question was,
what is the principle by which the development is to proceed? It was a
difficult inquiry, and involved researches from different points of view.

But I will not trouble the reader with further autobiographical details.
I have given enough to show that my method has neither been in theory
purely empirical, nor in practice mere brain-spinning; and that, in
short, my friend Dr. Carus’s account of it has been as incorrect as can
be.

§ 18. The learned doctor (¶¶ 6, 7, 8) pronounces me to be an imitator of
David Hume, or, at least, classes my opinions as closely allied to his.
Yet be it known that never, during the thirty years in which I have been
writing on philosophical questions, have I failed in my allegiance to
realistic opinions and to certain Scotistic ideas; while all that Hume
has to say is said at the instance and in the interest of the extremest
nominalism. Moreover, instead of being a purely negative critic, like
Hume, seeking to annul a fundamental conception generally admitted,
I am a positive critic, pleading for the admission to a place in our
scheme of the universe for an idea generally rejected. In the first
paper of this series, in which I gave a preliminary sketch of such of my
ideas as could be so presented, I carefully recorded my opposition to
all philosophies which deny the reality of the Absolute, and asserted
that “the one intelligible theory of the universe is that of objective
idealism, that matter is effete mind.” This is as much as to say that I
am a Schellingian, of some stripe; so that, on the whole, I do not think
Dr. Carus has made a very happy hit in likening me to Hume, to whose
whole method and style of philosophising I have always been perhaps too
intensely averse. Yet, notwithstanding my present disclaimer, I have
little doubt apriorians will continue to describe me as belonging to the
sceptical school. They have their wonderful ways of arriving at truth,
without stooping to confront their conclusions with facts; and it is
amusing to see how sincerely they are convinced that nobody can have
science at heart, without denying all they uphold.[117]

My opponent has a habit of throwing out surprising opinions without
the least attempt to illuminate them with the effulgence of reason.
Thus he says (¶ 8): “If Kant’s answer to Hume had been satisfactory,
Mr. Peirce would probably not have renewed the attack.” What attack?
All that Hume attacked I defend, namely, law as a reality. How could a
defence of that which I defend as essential to my position, cause me to
surrender that position, namely, that real regularity is imperfect? In
any sense in which Hume could have admitted the possibility of law, it
must be precisely followed; since its existence could consist only in
the conformity of facts unto it. But perhaps Dr. Carus means that if one
question had been completely settled, I should probably have confined
myself to talking about that, instead of broaching a new one.

§ 19. Another misunderstanding of my position on the part of Dr. Carus
(¶¶ 12, 13) is simply due to “boldly” having been twice printed where
the reading should have been “baldly,” in my paper on “The Doctrine of
Necessity.” (_The Monist_, Vol. II, p. 336, lines 20 and 25.) I wish
printers would learn that I never use the word _bold_. I have so little
of the quality, that I don’t know what it means. As I read the “revise,”
as usual, it was presumably my fault that the _erratum_ occurred. At any
rate, had my meaning been clearly expressed, the proof-reader would not
have been misled by my defective chirography. What I was trying to say
was, in substance, this: Absolute chance is a hypothesis; and, like every
hypothesis, can only be defended as explaining certain phenomena.[118]
Yet to suppose that an event is brought about by absolute chance is
utterly illogical, since as a hypothesis it could only be admitted on
the ground of its explaining observed facts; now from mere non-law
nothing necessarily follows, and therefore nothing can be explained; for
to explain a fact is to show that it is a necessary, or, at least, a
probable, result from another fact, known or supposed. Why is not this a
complete refutation of the theory of absolute chance? _Answer_: because
the _existence_ of absolute chance, as well as many of its characters,
are not themselves absolute chances, or sporadic events, unsubject to
general law. On the contrary, these things _are_ general laws. Everybody
is familiar with the fact that chance has laws, and that statistical
results follow therefrom. Very well: I do not propose to explain
anything as due to the action of chance, that is, as being lawless. I
do not countenance the idea that Bible stories, for instance, show that
nature’s laws were violated;—though they may help to show that nature’s
laws are not so mechanical as we are accustomed to think. But I only
propose to explain the regularities of nature as consequences of the only
uniformity, or general fact, there was in the chaos, namely, the general
absence of any, determinate law.[119] In fact, after the first step is
taken, I only use _chance_ to give room for the development of law by
means of the law of habits.

§ 20. In ¶ 28, I read: “Mr. Peirce does not object to necessity in
certain cases; he objects to necessity being a universal feature of
the world.” This is correctly stated, and so it is in ¶ 203. I object
to necessity being universal, as well as to its ever being exact. In
short, I object to absolute universality, absolute exactitude, absolute
necessity, being attributed to any proposition that does not deal with
the Α and the Ω, in the which I do not include any object of ordinary
knowledge. But it is careless to write (¶ 193) that I “describe the
domain of mind as the absence of law.” Is not one of my papers entitled
“The Law of Mind”? It is true that I make the law of mind essentially
different in its mode of action from the law of mechanics, inasmuch as
it requires its own violation; but it is law, not chance uncontrolled.
That it is not “an undetermined and indeterminable sporting” should have
been obvious from my expressly stating that its ultimate result must
be the entire elimination of chance from the universe. That directly
negatives the adjective “indeterminable,” and hence also the adjective
“undetermined.” Still more unwarranted is the statement (¶ 205) that
I deny “that there are samenesses in this world.” If the slightest
excuse for such an accusation can be found in all my writings I shall be
mightily surprised.

§ 21. Dr. Carus fully admits (¶ 9) the justice of my first reply to the
argument that necessity is postulated in all scientific reasoning, which
reply is that to postulate necessity does not make it true. As this
reply, if correct is complete, Dr. Carus was bound after that admission
to drop the postulate-argument in favor of necessity.[120] But he takes
no notice, at all, of my four-page argument to show that scientific
reasoning does _not_ postulate absolute universality, exactitude, or
necessity (_The Monist_, Vol. II, pp. 324-327); but calmly asserts,
four or five times over (¶¶ 5, 11, 16, 62, 79), without one scintilla
of argumentation, that that postulate _is_ made, and uses this as an
argument in favor of necessity.

§ 22. He also fully admits (¶¶ 11, 14, 22) the justice of my argument
that the absoluteness of universality, exactitude, and necessity, cannot
be proved, nor rendered probable, by arguments from observation. That
argument consisted in assuming that all arguments from observation are
probable arguments, and in showing that probable inferences are always
affected with probable errors.

Had I deemed it requisite, I might easily have fortified that argument
by a more profound analysis of scientific reasoning. Such an analysis I
had formerly given in my “Theory of Probable Inference” (in “Studies in
Logic,” Boston: Little and Brown).

But, notwithstanding his admissions, Dr. Carus sets up his _ipse dixit_
against my argumentation. “We deny most positively,” says the editorial
Elohim, “that the calculus of probabilities is applicable to the order of
the world, as to whether it may or may not be universal.” (¶¶ 27, 31.)

To support this, he cites (¶¶ 31-34) four passages from articles written
by me sixteen years ago. I hope my mind has not been stationary during
all these years; yet there is little in those old articles which I now
think positively erroneous, and nothing in the passages cited. My present
views had, at that time, already begun to urge themselves on my mind;
but they were not ripe for public avowal. In the first of the passages
cited, I express the opinion, which I first uttered in my earlier
lectures before the Lowell Institute, in 1866, afterwards in the _Popular
Science Monthly_ in 1877, in still fuller elaboration in my “Theory
of Probable Inference” in 1882, and maintain now as strongly as ever,
that no definite probability can be assigned to any general arrangement
of nature. To speak of an _antecedent_ probability would imply that
there was a statistical science of different universes; and a _deduced_
probability requires an antecedent probability for one of its data.[121]
This consideration only goes to fortify my present position, that we
cannot conclude from observed facts with any degree of probability,
and therefore _a fortiori_ not with certainty, that any proposition is
absolutely universal, exact, or necessary. In the absence of any weight
of probability in favor of any particular exact statement, the formal
presumption is altogether against any one out of innumerable possible
statements of that kind.

The second passage cited is one in which I argue that the universe is
not a chaos, or chance-medley. Now Dr. Carus admits (¶ 28) that I do not
to-day maintain that it is a chance-medley.

The third passage cited is this: “A contradiction is involved in the
very idea of a chance-world.” This is in entire harmony with my present
position that “a chaos ... being without connection or regularity would
properly be without existence.” (“Architecture of Theories,” _The
Monist_, Vol. I, p. 176.)

The fourth passage is to the effect that “the interest which the
uniformities of nature have for an animal measures his place in the scale
of intelligence.” This I still believe.

So much for my supposed contradictions. If I am not mistaken, our
amiable editor, whose admirable editorship springs so largely out of his
amiability, in copying out these passages was really not half so much
intent on showing me to be wrong at present, as on showing me to have
been right formerly. However hard he hits, he contrives to honey his
sockdologers, and sincerely cares more to make the reader admire his
antagonist when he is right than to condemn him when he is wrong. There
is a touch of art in this that proclaims the born editor, and which I can
hardly hope to imitate.

Though Dr. Carus admits over and over again that necessity cannot be
based on observation, he often slips back to the idea that it can be so
based. He says, (¶ 30) that “form is a quality of this world, not of some
samples of it, but throughout, so far as we know of existence in even the
most superficial way.” But does he not see that all we _do_ know, and all
we _shall_ to-morrow, or at any date know, is nothing but a sample of our
possible experience,—nay, is but a sample of what we are in the future
to have already experienced? I have characterised inductive inference as
reasoning from samples; but the most usual way of sampling a class is by
examining _all_ the instances of it that have come under our observation,
or which we can at once collect.

§ 23. Dr. Carus (¶¶ 44, 46) holds that from my social theory of reality,
namely, that the real is the idea in which the community ultimately
settles down, the existence of something inevitable is to be inferred.
I confess I never anticipated that anybody would urge that. I thought
just the reverse might be objected, namely, that all absoluteness was
removed from reality by that theory, and it was many years ago that, in
my “Theory of Probable Inference,” I admitted the obvious justice, as
it seemed to me, of that objection. We cannot be quite sure that the
community ever will settle down to an unalterable conclusion upon any
given question. Even if they do so for the most part, we have no reason
to think the unanimity will be quite complete, nor can we rationally
presume any overwhelming _consensus_ of opinion will be reached upon
every question. All that we are entitled to assume is in the form of a
_hope_ that such conclusion may be substantially reached concerning the
particular questions with which our inquiries are busied.

Such, at least, are the results to which the consideration of the
doctrine of probability brings my mind irresistibly. So that, the social
theory of reality, far from being incompatible with tychism, inevitably
leads up to that form of philosophy. Socialistic, or as I prefer to term
it, agapastic ontology seems to me likely to find favor with many minds
at an early day, because it is a natural path by which the nominalist may
be led into the realistic ways of thought, ways toward which many facts
and inward forces impel him. It is well, therefore, to call attention
to the circumstances that the realism to which it leads is a doctrine
which declares general truths to be real,—independent of the opinions
of any particular collection of minds,—but not to be destined, in a
strictly universal, exact, and sure acceptation, to be so settled, and
established. Now to assert that general truths are objectively real,
but to deny that they are strictly universal, exact, and certain, is to
embrace the doctrine of absolute chance. Thus it is that the agapastic
ontologist who endeavors to escape tychism will find himself “led into”
that “inextricable confusion” which Dr. Carus (¶ 4) has taken a contract
to show that I am led into.

§ 24. Conservatism is wholesome and necessary; the most convinced radical
must admit the wisdom of it, in the abstract; and a conservative will
be in no haste to espouse the doctrine of absolute chance. I, myself,
pondered over it for long years before doing so. But I am persuaded, at
length, that mankind will before very long take up with it; and I do not
believe philosophers will be found tagging on to the tail of the general
procession.

My little dialogue between the tychist and the necessitarian (_The
Monist_, Vol. II, pp. 331-333) seems to have represented pretty fairly
the views of the latter; for Dr. Carus, in ¶¶ 151-155, does little more
than reiterate them, without much, if at all, reinforcing them. His ¶¶
158-160 merely work out, in a form perhaps not quite clear, what is
manifest from the elementary principles of dynamics, and was considered
in my dialogue.

His arguments in this connection, apart from those already noticed, are
that absolute chance is something which if it existed would require
explanation, that the manifold specificalness of nature is explained by
law without any aid from chance, and that absolute chance if it existed,
in the sense in which it is supposed to exist in my chaos, could not
possibly breed law as supposed by me. To the consideration of these
arguments I proceed to apply myself.

§ 25. One of the architectonic—and, therefore, I suppose, by Dr.
Carus considered as highly reprehensible—features of my theory, is
that, instead of saying off-hand what elements strike me as requiring
explanation and what as not doing so, which seems to be his way, I
have devoted a long time to the study of the whole logical doctrine of
explanation, and of the history of explanations, and have based upon the
general principles so ascertained my conclusions as to what things do and
what do not require to be explained.

Dr. Carus (¶ 67) defines _explanation_ as a description of a special
process of nature in such a way that the process is recognised as a
transformation. This I cannot quite grant. First, I cannot admit that
“special processes of nature” are the only things to be explained.
For instance, if I were to meet a gentleman who seemed to conform
scrupulously to all the usages of good society, except that he wore to
an evening party an emerald satin vest, that would be a fact calling for
explanation, although it would not be a “special process of nature.”
Second, I cannot admit that an explanation is a description of the fact
explained. It is true that in the setting forth of some explanations,
it is convenient to restate the fact explained, so as to set it under
another aspect; but even in these cases, the statement of _other_ facts
is essential. In all cases, it is _other facts_, usually hypothetical,
which constitute the explanation; and the process of explaining is a
process by which from those other facts the fact to be explained is
shown to follow as a consequence, by virtue of a general principle, or
otherwise. Thus, a “special process of nature” calling for explanation
is the circumstance that the planet Mars, while moving in a general way
from west to east among the fixed stars, yet retrogrades a part of the
time, so as to describe loops in the heavens. The explanation is that
Mars revolves in one approximate circle and we in another. Again, it has
been stated that a warm spring in Europe is usually followed by a cool
autumn, and the explanation has been offered that so many more icebergs
than usual are liberated during a warm spring, that they subsequently
lower sensibly the temperature of Europe. I care little whether the
fact and the explanation are correct or no. The case illustrates, at
any rate, my point that an explanation is a special fact, supposed or
known, from which the fact to be explained follows as a consequence.
Third, I cannot admit that every description which recognises the fact
described as a transformation is an explanation; far less that “it is
complete and exhaustive” (¶ 67). A magician transforms a watch into a
dove. Recognise it as a transformation and the trick is explained, is
it? This is delightfully facile. Describe the change from a caterpillar
to a butterfly as a transformation, and does that explain it? Fourth, I
cannot admit that every explanation recognises the fact explained as a
transformation. The explanation of the loops in the motion of Mars is not
of that nature. But I willingly recognise in Dr. Carus’s definition an
attempt,—more or less successful,—to formulate one of the great offices
of scientific inquiry, that of bridging over the gap between the familiar
and the unfamiliar.

_Explanation_, however, properly speaking, is the replacement of a
complex predicate, or one which seems improbable or extraordinary, by
a simple predicate from which the complex predicate follows on known
principles. In like manner, a _reason_, in one sense, is the replacement
of a multiple subject of an observational proposition by a general
subject, which by the very conditions of the special experience is
predicable of the multiple subject.[122] Such a reason may be called an
explanation in a loose sense.

Accordingly, that which alone requires an explanation is a coincidence.

Hence, I say that a uniformity, or law, is _par excellence_, the thing
that requires explanation. And Dr. Carus (¶ 51) admits that this “is
perfectly true.”

But I cannot imagine anything further from the truth than his statement
(¶ 66) that “the only thing in the world of which we cannot and need not
give account is the existence of facts itself.” I should say, on the
contrary, that the existence of facts is the only thing of which we need
give account. Forms may indulge in whatever eccentricities they please in
the world of dreams, without responsibility; but when they attempt that
kind of thing in the world of real existence, they must expect to have
their conduct inquired into. But should Dr. Carus reply that I mistake
his meaning, that it is only “being in general” (¶ 66) that he holds
unaccountable, I reply that this is simply expressing scepticism as to
the possibility and need of philosophy. In a certain sense, my theory of
reality, namely that reality is the dynamical reaction of certain forms
upon the mind of the community, is a proposed explanation of being in
general; and be it remarked that the mind of the community, itself, is
the thing the nature of whose being this explanation first of all puts
upon an idealistic footing.

Chance, according to me, or irregularity,—that is, the absence of any
coincidence,—calls for no explanation. If _law_ calls for a particular
explanation, as Dr. Carus admits it does, surely the mere absence of law
calls for no further explanation than is afforded by the mere absence of
any particular circumstance necessitating the result. An explanation is
the conception of a fact as a necessary result, thereby accounting for
the coincidence it presents. It would be highly absurd to say that the
absence of any definite character, must be accounted for, as if it were a
peculiar phenomenon, simply because the imperfection of language leads us
so to talk of it. Quite unfounded, therefore, is Dr. Carus’s opinion that
“chance needs exactly as much explanation as anything else” (¶ 53);—an
opinion which, so far as I can see, rests on no defensible principle.

Equally hasty is his oft repeated objection (¶ 55, 58, 61) that my
absolute chance is something ultimate and inexplicable. I go back to
a chaos so irregular that in strictness the word existence is not
applicable to its merely germinal state of being; and here I reach a
region in which the objection to ultimate causes loses its force. But
I do not stop there. Even this nothingness, though it antecedes the
infinitely distant absolute beginning of time, is traced back to a
nothingness more rudimentary still, in which there is no variety, but
only an indefinite specificability, which is nothing but a tendency to
the diversification of the nothing, while leaving it as nothing as it
was before. What objectionable ultimacy is here? The objection to an
ultimate consists in its raising a barrier across the path of inquiry,
in its specifying a phenomenon at which questions must stop, contrary
to the postulate, or hope, of logic. But what question to which any
meaning can be attached am I forbidding by my absolute chance? If
what is demanded is a theological backing, or rational antecedent,
to the chaos, that my theory fully supplies. The chaos is a state of
intensest feeling, although, memory and habit being totally absent,
it is sheer nothing still. Feeling has existence only so far as it is
welded into feeling. Now the welding of this feeling to the great whole
of feeling is accomplished only by the reflection of a later date. In
itself, therefore, it is nothing; but in its relation to the end, it is
everything.

More unreasonable yet is Dr. Carus’s pretension, that the manifold
specificalness, which is what I mean by chance, is capable of explanation
(¶¶ 142, 143) by his own philosophic method. He may explain one
particularity by another, of course; but to explain specificalness
itself, would be to show that a specific predicate is a necessary
consequence of a generic one, or that a whole is without ambiguity a
part of its part. Remark, reader, at this point, that chance, whether
it be absolute or not, is not the mere creature of our ignorance. It
is that diversity and variety of things and events which law does not
prevent. Such is that real chance upon which the kinetical theory of
gases, and the doctrines of political economy, depend. To say that it is
not absolute is to say that it,—this diversity, this specificalness,—can
be explained as a consequence of law. But this, as we have seen, is
logically absurd.

Dr. Carus admits that absolute chance is “not unimaginable” (¶ 150).
Chance itself pours in at every avenue of sense: it is of all, things
the most obtrusive. That it is absolute, is the most manifest of all
intellectual perceptions. That it is a being, living and conscious, is
what all the dullness that belongs to ratiocination’s self can scarce
muster hardihood to deny.

Almost as unthinking is the objection (¶ 61) that absolute chance could
never beget order. I have noticed elsewhere the historic oblivescence
of this objection. Must I once again repeat that the tendency to take
habits, being itself a habit, has _eo ipso_ a tendency to grow; so that
only a slightest germ is needed? A realist, such as I am, can find
no difficulty in the production of that first infinitesimal germ of
habit-taking by chance, provided he thinks chance could act at all. This
seems, at first blush, to be explaining something as a chance-result. But
exact analysis will show it is not so.

In like manner, when the eminent thinker who does me the honor to notice
my speculation, objects that I do not, after all, escape making law
absolute, since the tendency to take habits which I propose to make
universal is itself a law, I confess I can find only words without ideas
in the objection. Law is a word found convenient, I grant, in describing
that tendency; but is there no difference between a law the essence
of which is to be inviolable (which is the nominalistic conception of
mechanical law, whose being, they say, lies in its action) and that
mental law the violation of which is so included in its essence that
unless it were violated it would cease to exist? In my essay, “The Law
of Mind,” I have so described that law. In so describing it, I make it a
law, but not an absolute law; and thus I clearly escape the contradiction
attributed to me.

§ 26. In my attack on “The Doctrine of Necessity,” I offered four
positive arguments for believing in real chance. They were as follows:

1. The general prevalence of growth, which seems to be opposed to the
conservation of energy.

2. The variety of the universe, which is chance, and is manifestly
inexplicable.

3. Law, which requires to be explained, and like everything which is to
be explained must be explained by something else, that is, by non-law or
real chance.

4. Feeling, for which room cannot be found if the conservation of energy
is maintained.

In a brief conversation I had with him, my friend remarked (and it was an
inconsiderate concession, I certainly do not wish to hold him to it) that
while the theory of tychism had some attractive features, its weakness
consisted in the absence of any positive reasons in its favor. I infer
from this that I did not properly state the above four arguments. I
therefore desire once more to call attention to them, especially in their
relations to one another.

Mathematicians are familiar with the theorem that if a system of
particles is subject only to positional forces, it is such that if at any
instant the velocities were all suddenly reversed, without being altered
in quantity, the whole previous history of the system would be repeated
in inverse succession. Hence, when physicists find themselves confronted
with a phenomenon which takes place only in one order of succession
and never in the reverse order,—of which no better illustration could
be found than the phenomena of growth, for nobody ever heard of an
animal growing back into an egg,—they always take refuge in the laws of
probability as preventive of the velocities ever getting so reversed.
To understand my argument number 1, it is necessary to make this method
of escape from apparent violations of the law of energy quite familiar
to oneself. For example, according to the law of energy, it seems to
follow (and by the aid of the accepted theory of light it does follow)
that if a prism, or a grating, disperses white light into a spectrum,
then the colors of the spectrum falling upon the prism or grating
at the same angles, and in the same proportions, will be recombined
into white light; and, everybody knows that this does in fact happen.
Nevertheless, the usual and prevalent effect of prisms and gratings is to
produce colored spectra. Why? Evidently, because, by the principles of
probability, it will rarely happen that colored lights converging from
different directions will fall at just the right angles and in just the
right proportions to be recombined into white light. So, when physicists
meet with the phenomena of frictional and viscous resistance to a body
in motion, although, according to their doctrine, if the molecules were
to move with the same velocities in opposite directions the moving body
would be accelerated, yet they say that the laws of probability, applied
to the trillions of molecules concerned, render this practically certain
not to occur. I do no more, then, than follow the usual method of the
physicists, in calling in chance to explain the apparent violation of
the law of energy which is presented by the phenomena of growth: only
instead of chance as they understand it, I call in absolute chance. For
many months, I endeavored to satisfy the data of the case with ordinary
_quasi_ chance; but it would not do. I believe that in a broad view of
the universe, a simulation of a given elementary mode of action can
hardly be explained except by supposing the genuine mode of action
somewhere has place. If it is improbable that colored lights should
fall together in just such a way as to give a white ray, is it not an
equally extraordinary thing that they should all be generated in such
a way as to produce a white ray? If it is incredible that trillions of
molecules in a fluid should strike a solid body moving through it so as
to accelerate it, is it not marvellous that trillions of trillions of
molecules all alike should ever have got so segregated as to create a
state of things in which they should be practically certain to retard
the body? It is far from easy to understand how mere positional forces
could ever have brought about those vast congregations of similar atoms
which we suppose to exist in every mass of gas, and by which we account
for the apparent violations of the law of energy in the phenomena of the
viscosity of the gas. There is no difficulty in seeing how sulphuric acid
acting on marble may produce an aggregation of molecules of carbonic
anhydride, because there are similar aggregations in the acid and in
the marble, but how were such aggregations brought about in the first
place? I will not go so far as to say that such a result is manifestly
impossible with positional forces alone; but I do say that we cannot
help suspecting that the simulated violation of the law of energy has a
real violation of the same law as its ultimate explanation. Now, growth
_appears_ to violate the law of energy. To explain it, we must, at least,
suppose a simulated, or _quasi_, chance, such as Darwin calls in to
produce his fortuitous variations from strict heredity. It may be there
is no real violation of the law, and no real chance; but even if there
be nothing of the sort in the immediate phenomenon, can the conditions
upon which the phenomenon depends have been brought about except by real
chance? It is conceivable, again, that the law of the conservation of
forces is not strictly accurate, and that, nevertheless, there is no
absolute chance. But I think so much has been done to put the law of the
conservation of forces upon the level of the other mechanical laws, that
when one is led to entertain a serious doubt of the exactitude of that,
one will be inclined to question the others.

Besides, few psychologists will deny the very intimate connection which
seems to subsist between the law, or _quasi_-law, of growth and the
law of habit, which is the principal, if not (as I hold it to be) the
sole, law of mental action. Now, this law of habit seems to be quite
radically different in its general form from mechanical law, inasmuch as
it would at once cease to operate if it were rigidly obeyed; since in
that case all habits would at once become so fixed as to give room for no
further formation of habits. In this point of view, then, growth seems to
indicate a positive violation of law.

Let us now consider argument number 3: and remark how it fortifies number
1. Physical laws that appear to be radically different yet present some
striking analogies. Electrical force appears to be polar. Its polarity is
explained away by Franklin’s one-fluid theory, but in that view the force
is a repulsion. Now, gravitation is an attraction, and is, therefore,
essentially different from electricity. Yet both vary inversely as the
square of this distance. Radiation, likewise follows the same formula.
In this last case, the formula, in one aspect of it, follows from the
conservation of energy. In another aspect of it, it results from the
principle of probability, and does not hold good, in a certain sense,
when the light is concentrated by a lens free from spherical aberration.
But neither the conservation of energy nor the principle of probability
seems to afford any possible explanation of the application of this
theory to gravitation nor to electricity. How, then, are such analogies
to be explained? The law of the conservation of energy and that of the
perduration of matter present so striking an analogy that it has blinded
some powerful intellects to their radically different nature. The law
of action and reaction, again, has often been stated as the law of the
conservation of momentum. Yet it is not only an independent law, but is
even of a contrary nature, inasmuch as it is only the algebraical sum of
opposite momenta that is “conserved.”[123] How is this striking analogy
between three fundamental laws to be explained? Consider the still more
obvious analogy between space and time. Newton argues that the laws of
mechanics prove space and time to be absolute entities. Leibniz, on
the other hand, takes them as laws of nature. Either view calls for an
explanation of the analogy between them, which no such reflection as
the impossibility of motion without that analogy can supply. Kant’s
theory seems to hint at the possibility of an explanation from both
being derived from the nature of the same mind. Any three orthogonal
directions[124] in space are exactly alike, yet are dynamically
independent.

These things call for explanation; yet no explanation of them can be
given, if the laws are fundamentally original and absolute.

Moreover, law itself calls for explanation. But how is it to be explained
if it is as fundamentally original and absolute as it is commonly
supposed to be? Yet if it is not so absolute, there is such a phenomenon
as absolute chance.

Thus, the chance which growth calls for is now seen to be absolute, not
_quasi_ chance.

Now consider argument number 2. The variety of the universe so far as
it consists of unlikenesses between things calls for no explanation.
But so far as it is a general character, it ought to be explained. The
manifold diversity or specificalness, in general, which we see whenever
and wherever we open our eyes, constitutes its liveliness, or vivacity.
The perception of it is a direct, though darkling, perception of God.
Further explanation in that direction is uncalled for. But the question
is, whether this manifold specificalness was put into the universe at the
outset, whether God created the universe in the infinitely distant past
and has left it to its own machinery ever since, or whether there is an
incessant influx of specificalness. Some of us are evolutionists; that
is, we are so impressed with the pervasiveness of growth, whose course
seems only here and there to be interrupted, that it seems to us that
the universe as a whole, so far as anything can possibly be conceived or
logically opined of the whole, should be conceived as growing. But others
say, though parts of the universe simulate growth at intervals, yet there
really is no growth on the whole,—no passage from a simpler to a more
complex state of things, no increasing diversity.

Now, my argument is that, according to the principles of logic, we
never have a right to conclude that anything is absolutely inexplicable
or unaccountable. For such a conclusion goes beyond what can be
directly observed, and we have no right to conclude what goes beyond
what we observe, except so far as it explains or accounts for what we
observe. But it is no explanation or account of a fact to pronounce it
inexplicable or unaccountable, or to pronounce any other fact so. Now,
to say no process of diversification takes place in nature leaves the
infinite diversity of nature unaccounted for; while to say the diversity
is the result of a general tendency to diversification is a perfectly
logical probable inference. Suppose there be a general tendency to
diversification; what would be the consequence? Evidently, a high degree
of diversity. But this is just what we find in nature. It does not answer
the purpose to say there is diversity because God made it so, for we
cannot tell what God would do, nor penetrate his counsels. We see what
He _does_ do, and nothing more. For the same reason one cannot logically
infer the existence of God; one can only know Him by direct perception.

It is to be noted that a general tendency to diversification does not
explain diversity in its specific characters; nor is this called for.
Neither can such a tendency explain any specific fact. Any attempt to
make use of the principle in that manner would be utterly illogical. But
it can be used to explain universal facts, just as quasi-chance is used
to explain statistical facts. Now, the diversity of nature is a universal
fact.

To explain diversity is to go behind the chaos, to the original
undiversified nothing. Diversificacity was the first germ.

Argument No. 4 was, upon its negative side, sufficiently well presented
in my “Doctrine of Necessity Examined.” Mechanical causation, if
absolute, leaves nothing for consciousness to do in the world of matter;
and if the world of mind is merely a transcript of that of matter, there
is nothing for consciousness to do even in the mental realm. The account
of matters would be better, if it could be left out of account. But the
positive part of the argument, showing what can be done to reinstate
consciousness as a factor of the universe when once tychism is admitted,
is reinforced in the later papers. This ought to commend itself to Dr.
Carus, who shows himself fully alive to the importance of that part of
the task of science which consists in bridging gaps. But consciousness,
for the reason just stated, is not to be so reinstated without tychism;
nor can the work be accomplished by assigning to the mind an occult
power, as in two theories to be considered in the section following
this. As might be anticipated, (and a presumption of this kind is rarely
falsified in metaphysics,) to bridge the gap synechism is required.
Supposing matter to be but mind under the slavery of inveterate habit,
the law of mind still applies to it. According to that law, consciousness
subsides as habit becomes established, and is excited again at the
breaking up of habit. But the highest quality of mind involves a great
readiness to take habits, and a great readiness to lose them; and this
implies a degree of feeling neither very intense nor very feeble.

I have noticed above (§ 7) Dr. Carus’s dubious attitude toward the first
argument. I considered in the last section his attempted reply to the
second. To the third argument, he replies (¶ 65) that law ought to be
accounted for by the principle of sufficient reason. But, of course, that
principle cannot recommend itself to me, a realist; for it is nothing
but the lame attempt of a nominalist to wriggle out of his difficulties.
Reasons explain nothing, except upon some theistic hypothesis which may
be pardoned to the yearning heart of man, but which must appear doubtful
in the eyes of philosophy, since it comes to this, that Tom, Dick, and
Harry are competent to pry into the counsels of the Most High, and can
invite in their cousins and sweethearts and sweethearts’ cousins to look
over the original designs of the Ancient of Days.

§ 27. My fourth argument it is which seems to have made most impression
upon Dr. Carus’s mind (¶ 85), and his reply is rather elaborate.

While embracing unequivocally the necessitarian dogma, equally for
mind and for matter (¶ 193), Dr. Carus wishes utterly to repudiate
materialism and the mechanical philosophy (¶ 133). To facilitate his,
thus, walking the slack-rope, he makes (¶ 168) a division of events into
“(1) mechanical, (2) physical, (3) chemical, (4) physiological, and (5)
psychical events.” The first three (¶¶ 169-171) are merely distinguished
by the magnitude of the moving masses, so that, for philosophical
purposes, they do not differ at all. As for physiological events, though
he devotes a paragraph (¶ 172) to their definition, he utterly fails
to distinguish them from the mechanical (including the physical and
chemical) on the one hand, or from the psychical on the other. Dr. Carus
seems to think (¶ 176) that by this division he has separated himself
entirely from the materialists; but this is an illusion, for nobody
denies the existence of feelings.

The truth is, he distinctly enrolls himself in the mechanical army when
he asserts that mental laws are of the same necessitarian character
as mechanical laws (¶ 193). The only question that remains as to his
position is whether he is a materialist or not. He instances (¶ 185)
the case of a general receiving a written dispatch and being stimulated
into great activity by its perusal, and causing great motions to be
made and missiles to be sped in consequence. Now, the dilemma is this.
Will Dr. Carus, on the one hand, say that the motion of those missiles
was determined by mechanical laws alone, in which case, it would only
be necessary to state all the positions and velocities of particles
concerned, a hundred years before, to determine just how those bullets
would move and, consequently, whether the guns were to be fired or not,
and this would constitute him a materialist, or will he say that the laws
of motion do not suffice to determine motions of matter, in which case,
since they formally certainly do so suffice, they must be _violated_, and
he will be giving to mind a direct dynamical power which is open to every
objection that can be urged against tychism?

Now admire the decision with which he cuts the Gordian knot!

    “THERE ARE NO PURELY MECHANICAL PHENOMENA.” (¶ 175.)

That is,

    “_The laws of motion ARE applicable to and will explain all
    motions_.” (¶ 177.)

But hold!

    “The mechanical philosopher ... feels warranted in the hope
    that ... the actions of man ... can be explained by the laws of
    motion .... We may anticipate that this conclusion will prove
    ERRONEOUS. _And so it is._” (¶ 176.)

At the same time,

    “NO OBJECTION CAN BE MADE _to the possibility of explaining the
    delicate motions in the nervous substance of the brain by the
    laws of molar or molecular mechanics_.” (¶ 178.)

Yet,

    “_The simplest_ psychical reflexes, including those
    _physiological reflexes_ which we must suppose to have
    originated by conscious adaptation ... CANNOT _be explained
    from mechanical_ or physical _laws_ alone.” (¶ 186.)

However,

    “_We do NOT say that there are motions_ ... in the brain ...
    _which form exceptions to the laws of mechanics_.” (¶ 187.)

Nevertheless,

    “The brain-atoms are possessed of the same spontaneity as
    the atoms of a gravitating stone. Yet there is present an
    additional feature; there are present states of awareness....
    Neither states of awareness nor their meanings can be weighed
    on any scales, be they ever so delicate, nor are they
    determinable in foot-pounds.” (¶ 192.)

Clearness is the first merit of a philosopher; and what ¶ 192 comes
to is crystal-clear. Dr. Carus wants to have the three laws of motion
always obeyed; but he wishes the forces between the molecules to be
varied according to the momentary states of awareness. All right: he
is entitled to suppose whatever he likes, so long as the supposition
is self-consistent, as this supposition is. It conflicts with the law
of energy, it is true; for that law is that the forces depend on the
situations of the particles alone, and not on the time. It is liable
to give rise to perpetual motion. It was intended, no doubt, to be an
improvement on my molecular theory of protoplasm, earlier in the same
number. It escapes materialism. It supposes a direct dynamical action
between mind and matter, such as has not been supposed by any eminent
philosopher that I know of for centuries. I am sorry to say that it shows
a dangerous leaning toward originality. The argument for thus rejecting
the law of the conservation of energy, I leave to others to be weighed.
It seems to suppose a much larger falsification of that law than my
doctrine; but it is a pretty clever attempt to escape my conclusions. It
rejects what has to be rejected, the law of the conservation of energy;
and is far more intelligent than the theory of those (like Oliver and
Lodge) who wish to give to mind a power of deflecting atoms, which would
satisfy the conservation of energy while violating the law of action
and reaction. If it can have due consideration, I doubt not it will
accelerate the acceptance of my views. Meantime, I do not see where that
“inextricable confusion” into which I was to be led is to come in. (¶ 4.)

§ 28. Little more requires to be noticed in Dr. Carus’s articles. He
admits (¶ 2) that indeterminism is the more natural belief, which is no
slight argument in its favor.

§ 29. The remarks upon the theological bearings of the theories, if they
are found somewhat wide of the mark, are explained by the haste of the
editor to show just what all the affiliations of my views were, before
I had had time to explain what those views are. The remarks to which I
refer will be found in ¶¶ 3, 36, 81, 82, 83, 128, 203, 204. They are
worth putting together.

§ 30. The doctrine of symbolism, to which Dr. Carus has recourse,
seems to be similar to that of my essay “Some Consequences of Four
Incapacities” (_Journal of Speculative Philosophy_, II.) (¶¶ 180, 183,
199.) On this head, I can only approve of his ideas.

§ 31. It is true that I wrote many definitions for one of the
“encyclopedic lexicons.” But they were necessarily rather vaguely
expressed, in order to include the popular use of terms, and in some
cases were modified by proof-readers or editors; and for reasons not
needful here to explain, they are hardly such as I should give in a
Philosophical Dictionary proper.

                                                             C. S. PEIRCE.


FOOTNOTES:

[101] J. S. Mill had in the first edition of his _Logic_ decisively taken
an objective conception of chance and probability; but in his second
edition he had become puzzled and had retracted, leaving that chapter,
and with it his whole logic, a melancholy wreck, over which the qualified
reader sighs, “And this once seemed intelligible!” Venn in the first
edition of his book set forth the same objective conception with great
clearness, and for that he was entitled to high praise, notwithstanding
his manifest inadequacy to the problems treated. But in his second
edition, he too has fallen away from his first and correct view, and has
adopted a theory which I shall some day show to be untenable. Venn’s
whole method in logic, as well as his system, is in my opinion of the
weakest.

[102] Mill often did good service in substituting precise terms for
ambiguous ones; as when in speaking of mathematical conclusions he
prefers to say they are legitimate deductions rather than that they are
necessary.

[103] In his _Ursache, Grund and Zweck_, Dr. Carus alludes to this
passage. But he prefers the treatment of the question by Reid, whom he
calls Mill’s opponent (_Gegner_).

[104] It is of comparatively little consequence what Hume really meant.
The main interest is in what Kant thought he meant.

[105] Along with the distinction, I would of course do away with this
use of the words _abstract_ and _concrete_ to which no clear idea can be
attached, as far as I can see.

[106] I cannot but disapprove of this use of the word “construction” to
mean a studied theory, because the word is imperatively required in the
theory of cognition to denote a mathematical diagram framed according to
a general precept.

[107] I apply this term because it is essentially like the passage from
the concrete “virtuous” to the abstract “virtue,” or from the concrete
“white” (adjective) to the abstract “whiteness,” or “white” (substantive).

[108] I can never use this word without thinking of the explanation of
it given by Petrus Peregrinus in his _Epistole de Magnete_. He says that
physical properties are occult in the sense that they are only brought
out by experimentation, and are not to be deduced from admixtures of
_hot_ and _cold_, _moist_ and _dry_.

[109] It follows as a corollary from this that if the positions of the
particles at any one instant, together with the velocities at that
instant, and the law of force, are given, the positions at all instants
can be calculated. Of course, to give the positions and velocities at
one instant, is a special case of the giving of the positions at two
instants. The two instants may be such that there will be more than one
solution of the problem; but this is an insignificant detail.

[110] It would seem to follow from his notion that in uniform motion each
minute’s motion is the cause of that of the next. Yet he says (¶ 19)
“there is no cause that is equal to its effect.”

[111] But, as I have elsewhere said, I should like to persuade
mathematicians to speak of “positional energy” as _Kinetic potency_, the
_vis viva_ as _Kinetic energy_, and the total “energy” as the _Kinetic
entelechy_.

[112] The differential equation being an ordinary, not a partial one,
this is an absolute constant, determined by initial (or final, or any
instantaneous) conditions.

[113] Dr. Carus calls attention to the connection between my doctrine of
the fixation of opinion and his anti-originalism.

[114] Dr. Carus passes a sweeping judgment on Post-Kantian philosophy, as
being original.

[115] This was a remark of my father’s.

[116] A person in the last _Monist_, breaks in upon my series of articles
to foretell what the “issues of synechism” will be. Were he able to do
so, it would certainly be the height of ill-manners thus to take the
words out of my mouth.

[117] As I am writing, I am shown a letter, in which the writer says:
“Peirce with all his materialistic ideas, yet,” etc I never promulgated
a materialistic idea in my life. The writer simply assumes that science
is materialistic. As I am correcting the proofs, I notice that Mr. B.
C. Burt, in his new _History of Modern Philosophy_, sets me down as
sceptical, though doubtfully. There are a good many inaccuracies in the
work. This was inevitable in a first edition. But the ingenious plan of
the book admirably adapts it to the wants of just that class of students
who cannot understand that no repertory of facts ever can be trusted
implicitly.

[118] Its being hypothetical will not prevent its being established with
a very high degree of certainty. Thus, all history is of the nature of
hypothesis; since its facts cannot be directly observed, but are only
supposed to be true to account for the characters of the monuments and
other documents.

[119] Somebody may notice that I here admit a proposition as absolutely
true. Undoubtedly; because it relates to the Absolute.

[120] Indeed, to admit that reply is all but to admit the non-absolute
grade of necessity.

[121] I rightly go somewhat further in my _Theory of Probable Inference_;
but that has no bearing on the present discussion.

[122] Dr. Carus, in his _Ursache, Grund und Zweck_, well says that
_reasons_ are discovered by induction, in the strict sense. It is often
admitted that _causes_ can only be inferred by hypothetic reasoning.

[123] The conservation of a vortex, which consists of the preservation of
a certain character of motion by the same particles, though derived from
the coöperation of other laws, is, in form, quite different.

[124] In speaking of directions, we assume the Euclidean hypothesis that
the angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles.




THE FOUNDER OF TYCHISM, HIS METHODS, PHILOSOPHY, AND CRITICISMS.

IN REPLY TO MR. CHARLES S. PEIRCE.


INTRODUCTORY AND PERSONAL.

Soon after I had received Mr. Peirce’s manuscript he wrote me in a
private letter as follows:

    “You have not found, I trust, that in my rejoinder I have
    anywhere overstepped the limit of amiable disputation. If
    anything of that kind did, unconsciously to me, in the heat
    of composition, slip from my pen, I am most anxious to have
    it pointed out to me, so that there may be no feeling in the
    matter of a disagreeable kind. For if you should not mention
    it, I should at some future time discover it, and it would be a
    source of real unhappiness to me.”

This is a very amiable disposition of mind. Mr. Peirce presses me very
hard in the struggle for truth: he does not hesitate to take advantage of
even the smallest weak point which he espies or rather which he believes
he espies. He does not shrink from using plain terms, such as “absurd,”
“unthinking,” “weak,” “hasty,” “irrational.” Yet he preserves in the
heat of the controversy a friendly spirit towards his antagonist, which
I cannot but appreciate and wish publicly to acknowledge. But I would
not have him change a word or soften the language of his article in the
least, _for my sake_. If Mr. Peirce is wrong, I will take care of myself;
if he is right, let the truth come out.

We are both, as it were, by profession champions of truth; so we need not
mind an occasional fling if in the end the cause of truth be promoted.
Especially, in the present case, I need not mind the hard blows which
Mr. Peirce deals with such assurance, for all the points at which he
strikes are well protected. The fiercer the onslaught, the better the
test. I feel satisfied that his severe scrutiny only serves to prove the
strength of the position which I defend.

I shall speak my mind as freely and unreservedly as does Mr. Peirce, and
hope he in his turn will resent plain words as little as I do. As offense
is not intended, so offense should not be taken.

Let me add here in these introductory remarks that I am always open
to conviction. The views which I uphold have been well considered and
thought out in their most important consequences. They are consistent
and well guarded in spite of Mr. Peirce’s thinking the contrary, so that
I feel no need of changing them. But should some unforeseen difficulty
arise which would oblige me to revise the whole system of my ideas, I
shall not hesitate publicly to confess it and allow myself to be lead by
truth whithersoever it be.

       *       *       *       *       *

The issue of our controversy is the problem of chance—not of chance as it
occurs, for instance, in the throw of dice, but of “absolute chance,” or
perfect lawlessness. Mr. Peirce makes absolute chance the corner-stone of
his philosophy; he propounds a radical and sweeping indeterminism, while
I reject the idea, not of chance, but of absolute chance as incompatible
with the philosophy of science.


I. DIFFERENCES OF METHOD.

Mr. Peirce calls himself a Scotist and professes to represent mediæval
Realism, speaking at the same time of me as a Nominalist. We find,
however, that the inverse statement would be nearer the truth.

Before discussing Mr. Peirce’s philosophy itself, we must examine his
methods. Difference of method will produce important divergencies of
opinion.


1. ATTENTION TO DETAIL.

Mr. Peirce takes up in his rejoinder many incidental points, which have
little or no bearing upon the main issues between us. On the one hand,
things of no consequence, such as my granting that “absolute chance”
like the impossibilities of fairy tales, is not unimaginable, and my
saying that tychism is attractive but weak for lack of arguments, are
adduced as “momentous admissions,” and “inconsiderate concessions.”
On the other hand, Mr. Peirce catches at straws to prove a lack of
information on my part. He cannot forbear calling attention to the little
breach of etiquette committed in not giving an English baronet his proper
title.

Mr. Peirce shows on all these and other occasions a love of the
incidental, and if I were to allow myself to follow his example the
battle would soon be broken up into innumerable skirmishes.

It is noteworthy that Mr. Peirce’s procedure appears to be a nominalistic
tradition. Nominalists, regarding universals as mere names of many
particular things, have always showed a great preference for the single,
the incidental, the scattered; while realists viewing universals as
real things were in the habit of laying perhaps too much stress upon
universalities and generalities to the neglect of the particular and
individual.

Indeed, Mr. Peirce’s favorite idea, which is a belief in absolute chance,
is in my opinion the most nominalistic and anti-realistic proposition I
have ever met with. Regularity, or natural law, is to him the product
of evolution. Thus he demolishes the eternity of the universal, and
eternity is only universality in time. Now suppose that eternity (i. e.
universality in time) could be proved an error; then, the universality
of the universal in space also will become illusory. If those abiding
features of nature which we call natural laws have indeed originated from
a general sporting, from chance, from a chaotic lawlessness, by a gradual
habit taking, who can assure us that nature has not taken different
habits in other parts of the universe?

I look upon Mr. Peirce as an extreme nominalist, or, if he prefers it, as
a nominal realist soaked with nominalistic opinions. He professes to be a
realist, but he rescinds the foundation of realism.

Like the bear of the hermit Mr. Peirce throws the stone at the fly of
necessary connection, and in doing so kills the philosophy of realism
itself.


2. ORIGINALITY.

Originality, wherever we find it, is pleasing; but a hankering after
originality is dangerous. Experience teaches us to regard a thinker’s
love of originality as one of the main causes of his going astray. Let
the poet be original, but not the scientist, not the philosopher, not the
searcher for truth. The conceit of being original flatters our vanity,
and original ideas in philosophy are tantamount to original errors.

I do not deny the value of originality, but I do deny that it is a
criterion of truth.

Originality consists in the free exercise of our imagination, and a vivid
imagination is very valuable to the thinker. But it so happens that every
dreamer cherishes with a mother’s love the children of his fancy. And it
is, therefore, necessary to be especially critical with the offspring of
one’s own brain.

Kepler (“who,” Mr. Peirce says, “comes very close to realising my ideal
of the scientific method”) was endowed with an extraordinarily vivid
imagination. He invented an extremely original scheme of explanation for
the solar system, and expounded it with great poetical fervor in his
“Mysterium Cosmographicum.”[125]

Kepler at once became famous by his “Mysterium Cosmographicum” and was
generally admired for his originality. But his bent for hatching original
ideas did not alone make Kepler what he is to us now in the history
of science. A greater quality than his poetical fervor and original
imagination was his rigorous self-criticism. He took notice of every
little fact that did not agree with his theories, and for the sake of
truth, of objectively provable truth, that is, the agreement of his views
with positive facts, he sternly slew all those creatures of his fancy
which he foresaw could not survive.

Having myself a good deal of imagination, and having tried myself
many original ideas, I can appreciate the self-denial and discipline
of Kepler. I have come to the conclusion that originality is only an
important means of attaining truth. Our ways of reaching the truth,
our methods of finding it, may deserve the praise of originality, but
truth itself is never original; for truth is the faithfulness of a copy
which in our representations we make of reality, and to praise ideas as
original is certainly no argument that they are true.

There is no need of showing that Mr. Peirce is not just in his statement
of my view of originality, by maintaining that I have advised people
“think not for yourself.” Confessedly he exaggerates, but in truth he
misrepresents.

Mr. Peirce does not relish what I have to say on the subject, and,
to pacify his mind, he does not tire of praising originality as the
high-water mark of genius.

Mr. Peirce’s love of originality is a nominalistic feature of his mind. A
nominalist who denies the existence of universals cannot understand that
everything in science must be sacrificed to truthfulness. The question,
Does this idea correctly represent its respective reality? has no sense
to a nominalist. The nominalist is only interested in what a thinker
makes of things. The subjective conception, in his opinion, exhausts the
subject. I can understand that a nominalist should be greatly pleased
with originality, but a realist should not allow himself to be seduced by
its charms.

Mr. Peirce’s penchant for, and my distrust of, originality, have a direct
influence upon our respective methods of thought. It naturally makes him
bolder and me more cautious.[126]


3. A MODERN PROCRUSTES.

There was a man in ancient Greece named Procrustes, who had two beds;
one long, the other short. He used to lay his tall guests upon the short
bed, and his short guests upon the long bed, cutting off the limbs of the
former and stretching out the bodies of the latter, until they fitted
the size of their unpleasant resting places. In the same way Mr. Peirce
treats philosophical views.

There is the bed of the materialist and, as all processes to the
materialist are purely mechanical, necessitarianism is stretched in the
materialist’s bed to mechanicalism. I plead, since ideas and feelings
are not motions, that mental processes cannot be explained by the laws
of motion, but can, for that reason, be none the less determined; but I
plead in vain. That view of necessitarianism does not suit the bed upon
which my Procrustes places me. Other views, however, are cut down without
further ado because they are said to be nominalistic. Anything that does
not appeal to Mr. Peirce’s realistic mind is dismissed with a shrug.

I am neither a realist nor a nominalist, or rather, I am both realist
and nominalist. I am convinced that to some extent both sides were right
and both sides were wrong, and regard it as our duty to sift their
propositions and accept the truth whether it be nominalistic or realistic.

We must follow the principle of hearing both sides, and not consider
at all whether a statement agrees or disagrees with certain party
principles.[127]


4. OCCAM’S RAZOR.

The most brilliant disciple of Duns Scotus was William of Occam, whose
fame almost rivalled that of his master. Occam became an adversary of
realism; he became a nominalist, and after him was named a method known
as Occam’s razor, especially useful to nominalists in their warfare
against realists.

Occam’s razor is expressed in the sentence: “_Entia non sunt
multiplicanda præter necessitatem_,” which means: Only in cases
of extremest necessity are we allowed to assume the existence of
hypothetical facts. If assumed facts are not absolutely indispensable,
cut them off!

Occam’s razor was invented for a special purpose, that of cutting off the
realistic hypostatisation of abstract ideas.

I do not know which is more startling, that a realist in name, such as
Mr. Peirce, should use a weapon forged by nominalists against realism,
or that he whom in other respects we found in such a close contact with
nominalistic methods, should not understand how to handle a nominalistic
weapon.

Mr. Peirce censures me for making the statement that the formal is
subjective as well as objective. This, he says, is cut off by Occam’s
razor.

The formal is subjective, for our sensation is possessed of form and our
mind is in possession of formal thought. It is objective, for reality is
not void of form and the things are such as they are by virtue of their
peculiar shape.

The proposition that the formal is objective and subjective at the
same time is as little cut off by Occam’s razor as, for instance, the
proposition that there is air inside and outside of us, viz. in our lungs
and in the surrounding atmosphere.

Mr. Peirce’s usage of the beds of Procrustes is cruel, but his usage of
Occam’s razor is inconsiderate. He should be careful in handling such a
sharp knife, lest he do himself harm.

Mr. Peirce uses Occam’s razor to cut off statements and facts which make
his pet theories dispensable; but he forgets that Occam’s razor cuts off
ideas only, and when it comes in contact with facts its edge is turned.

Occam’s razor is an excellent instrument to dispose of such hypotheses as
absolute chance, for it declares that if their assumption is not quite
indispensable, we must cut them off.

Now it either is or is not a fact that the formal is objective and
subjective at once. It cannot be untrue in my philosophy while it is
true in Mr. Peirce’s system. My proposition of the formal being at once
objective and subjective is, according to Mr. Peirce, “cut off by Occam’s
razor.” “But,” adds he, “when synechism has united the two worlds this
view gains new life.” So long as I say so, it is wrong; but should I
adopt Mr. Peirce’s system, it will pass as right.


5. THE APPLICATION OF LEARNING.

Philosophers should make it a rule not to encumber their thoughts
unnecessarily with learning. The great problems of philosophy are, in my
opinion, much simpler than they are generally supposed to be. The art
mainly consists in stating them in the simplest possible manner.

It is indispensable for a philosopher to be familiar, at least in a
general way, with all the most important sciences, especially with
psychology, physiology, logic, physics, mathematics, and mechanics. But
he should not for that reason introduce any more than he can help their
complicated details into his expositions.

Every specialist is inclined to look at things through the spectacles of
his own speciality. But the philosopher who takes a higher standpoint
should be on his guard. He should always endeavor to simplify matters and
avoid introducing into philosophy issues which belong to a special field,
and derive their peculiarities from special conditions. To confound the
methods of the various sciences, or to generalise without sufficient
discrimination, will throw everything into confusion.

Mr. Peirce, as we well know, has greatly distinguished himself in
logic by valuable discoveries and independent investigations. We have
repeatedly taken occasion to pronounce unreservedly our admiration of his
achievements in this field. But we cannot approve of his application of
certain methods of his speciality to philosophy in general. Mr. Peirce
is inclined to look at the world through the spectacles of that new and
extremely specialised branch of logic which he is at present about to
invent.

One hindrance to properly appreciating his doctrines, says Mr. Peirce,
lies in my “laboring under the great disadvantage of not understanding
the logic of relatives,” which, he adds (p. 533):

    “Is a subject I have been studying for a great many years, and
    I feel and know that I have an important report that I ought
    to make upon it. This branch of logic is, however, so abstruse
    that I have never been able to find the leisure to translate my
    conclusions into a form in which their significance would be
    manifest even to powerful thinkers, whose thoughts had not long
    been turned in that direction.”

I shall be glad to sit at Mr. Peirce’s feet as an attentive student, as
soon as he has worked out his logic of relatives, or any other subject.
But I cannot now accept any of his theories on the credit of some
half-developed science, be it ever so profound or intricate, until I see
plainly its connection with the present issues.

Mr. Peirce trusts that his favorite ideas will find support in his
peculiar conception of the logic of relatives. Judging from the
quiddities which he now so confidently propounds as weighty arguments,
we cannot share his sanguine hopes. His arguments, to be derived from
the logic of relatives, are like promises to pay out of the returns of a
gold-mine, just discovered and boomed by the owners. There may be gold in
the mine, but I do not as yet take any stock in it.

Mr. Peirce promises to prove by the logic of relatives what, if it were
true, he should be able to demonstrate in plain language.

I have an idea that the logic of relatives can be worked out into as
clear a science as is mathematics or algebra. But what shall we say when
told that the logic of relatives is really abstruse, and that he who
labors under the disadvantage of not understanding this abstruse science
is not prepared to grasp Mr. Peirce’s philosophy? The abstrusity, in my
mind, counts against Mr. Peirce’s philosophy, as much as against his
logic of relatives.

In my childhood I was much plagued with Latin, but as soon as I had
acquired a smattering of it, I began to talk Latin to the servants, and
when they did not understand me I thought that they were “laboring under
the great disadvantage” of not speaking Latin. Since then I have learned
to translate my Latin into the language of the people with whom I have to
deal.

Mr. Peirce seems to rely on his learning in proportion to its abstrusity;
he likes to walk on stilts.

Mr. Peirce is scholarly to excess. He has a special talent of rendering
issues involved. Not even his references to my articles in _The Monist_
are made directly by quoting the pages on which they appear. That method
would be too common. He invents a ponderous system, necessitating the
reader to look twice when he wishes to find a passage,—a scheme which
is original and very dignified in appearance, but makes quotation
unnecessarily complicated.

Learning is a virtue, but even virtues should be used with discretion.


6. THE PRINCIPLE OF POSITIVISM.

Says Mr. Peirce in confirmation of Whewell (p. 546):

    “Progress in science depends upon the observation of the right
    facts by minds _furnished with appropriate ideas_.”

To rely on the observation of facts is, in my opinion, a principle
of positivism. That facts must be observed “by minds furnished with
appropriate ideas” is undeniable, but ideas, in order to be appropriate,
must be true; they must be representations of facts.

Because he relies on facts I have characterised Mr. Peirce’s method as
positivistic. But he indignantly repudiates “the charge” as “totally
unfounded.”

Positivism (which I have always carefully distinguished from Comtism,
the latter being a special kind of positivism[128]) is not a peculiar
philosophy, but a most important principle of science.

Mr. Peirce seems to use the term positivism in a different sense from
that in which I use it. Be it so. I shall not nominalistically quarrel
about words so long as there are more urgent subjects under discussion.
Noticing that Mr. Peirce does not state that all ideas should be
ultimately reducible to facts, he is to be acquitted.


7. LOPPING OFF THE ABSOLUTE.

Mr. Peirce thinks that an agreement between us could be arrived at. He
says (p. 545):

    “Dr. Carus’s philosophy would, in its general features, offer
    no violent opposition to my opinions” (§ 16).

But the condition is (p. 545):

    “To lop off the heads of all absolute propositions whose
    subject is not the Absolute.”

As a matter of fact I have lopped off all absolutes. If Mr. Peirce
were more familiar with my views he would have known that. Thus, on
my part, I had done all I could to come to an agreement with him long
before he asked me to do it. But I fear that having also lopped off the
Absolute itself, I did too much of a good thing, for Mr. Peirce carefully
records his opposition to all philosophies which deny the reality of the
Absolute. (See § 18.)

I wish to improve this occasion for conciliation, by turning the tables.
Mr. Peirce’s views would, upon the whole, offer no violent opposition to
my opinions if he would only consent to lop off the absolute-property
of his absolute chance. I would even swallow his Absolute if he would
promise to designate by that name some real quality of the world, or the
world itself as a whole, or something that is thinkable without making
one’s head swim.[129]

Every predication of absolute, changes a real and useful idea into its
caricature. To, say that a complicated calculation is “absolutely true,”
that is, true without stipulating the condition that the methods are
right, and that the execution is made without any mistake, is ridiculous;
and thus the phrase “in a Pickwickian sense” (which we gratefully borrow
from Mr. Peirce) would always form a drastic but adequate substitute
for the term absolute. “Absolutely true” is “true in a Pickwickian
sense” only. There are no absolute truths which are in this sense
unconditionally true. In the same way, “absolute chance” is different
from that real chance known to us in experience and instanced by the
throw of the dice. Absolute chance is “chance in a Pickwickian sense.”

Strange Mr. Peirce speaks of real chance when he means an imaginary
absolute chance. He apparently uses the word “real” in this connection
not to denote something that is a fact of experience but to express the
idea of its being perfect or complete. Thus we may speak of a “real”
perpetual motion, stating at the same time that it is neither real nor
realisable.


8. THE THEORY OF PROBABLE INFERENCE.

Mr. Peirce applies his theory of probable inference to everything; also
to those cases which are unequivocally determined. He granted in a
private conversation that 2 × 2 = 4 admits of no exception. But of other
purely formal statements which are in the same predicament, for instance,
that the sum of the angles of a triangle in a plane measures 180°, he
states as probable that they are either somewhat less or somewhat more
than 180°, adding, “that they are exactly that amount is what nobody
can ever be justified in concluding.” To determine the sum of the
angles of a plane triangle by measuring the parallaxes of stars rests
upon a fundamental misconception of the principles of formal sciences.
It would be consistent for Mr. Peirce to say, that 2 × 2 = 4 is true
only according to the definitions or axioms of arithmetic. But in order
to know whether 2 × 2 = 4 in reality, we ought to apply the theory of
probable inference. Until we had verified the statement 2 × 2 = 4 by
applying this formula to the farthest solar systems, we should not be
justified in concluding that it is exactly true. The theory of probable
inferences is supposed to help us out of this perplexity, “and within
another century our grandchildren will surely know whether the three
angles of a triangle are greater or less than 180°.”[130]

There is always danger in the application of abstract ratiocination; and
the theory of probable inference forms no exception to the rule. On the
contrary, it is especially liable to lead one astray. There is the case
of the doctor who said to his patient: “I am sure you will be cured, for
I had ninety-nine patients who died during the operation, and statistics
prove beyond doubt that one among a hundred will survive it. You are the
hundredth.”

The theory of probable inferences is often misapplied, but can it be
worse misapplied than by introducing it into the province of that which
is certain? There is no sense in applying the theory of probabilities to
what is certain. We may doubt whether the rays of light travel in exactly
straight lines, but we cannot doubt the straightness of lines in plane
geometry. We cannot doubt that all the radii in a circle are equal, or
that the sum of the angles of a Euclidean triangle are 180°.


9. ZWEIDEUTIG BESTIMMT.

Mr. Peirce very kindly informs me that the term _eindeutig bestimmt_ is a
translation of a French phrase. Very well, I do not deny it. I know very
well that the phrase has a long history, but I do not consider myself
bound to present the whole pedigree of every term I use.

Does Mr. Peirce perhaps suppose that the French phrase is the original?
If we have to go back to the original beginning at all, why does he not
tell us that the French _univoque_ is a translation from the mediæval
Latin _univoce_, which was coined and used by the schoolmen in opposition
to _æquivoce_. Neither the term _eindeutig_, as Mr. Peirce asserts,
nor its scholastic original _univoce_, is an exclusively mathematical
expression.

Although the term _eindeutig_ is a translation of the French _univoque_,
there is after all a great difference between the French term and the
German term, and I have a good reason to prefer the German expression.
The French term is nominalistic or even vocalistic, the German one
is realistic. _Univoque_ and _univocal_ mean that there is only one
name or one _vox_, while _eindeutig_ lays no stress on the name but
on the meaning of the name, denoting that which admits of but one
interpretation. This is a sufficient reason for me to prefer it, and it
ought to appeal to Mr. Peirce’s realistic mind.[131]

Mr. Peirce, maintaining that _eindeutig bestimmt_ is only a mathematical
term, adduces two equations, each one of which, taken singly, admits,
he says, of two possible determinations.[132] Mr. Peirce uses these
equations as an argument against my application of the term, adding,
sarcastically: “This shows how much that argument amounts to.” But his
example proves at best only that there are incomplete determinations;
some problems allow of several solutions. In a German township in which
blue hussars are garrisoned, children used to propose to another this
profound problem: “It lies under a plum-tree and is blue; what is it?”
If the child questioned argues, “It is a plum,” he is corrected “No, it
is a hussar.” But if he argues, “It is a hussar,” he is corrected, “No,
it is a plum.” So he has no chance of guessing right. The result of Mr.
Peirce’s first equation, which may be either 11·477 or 11·523, is like
the conundrum of the plum-tree: it amounts to the same, viz. to nothing,
and proves only that there are determinations which are _zweideutig
bestimmt_.


10. EXPLANATION.

The differences of method become very serious when we disagree on the
very meaning of “explanation” itself. How can two debaters accept or
reject one another’s arguments, if their ideas of explanation are
radically different?

Mr. Peirce’s definition of the term “explanation” appears to me very
unsatisfactory. He says (p. 57):

    “I cannot admit that explanation is description of the fact
    explained. It is true that in the setting forth of some
    explanations it is convenient to restate the fact explained so
    as to set it under another aspect, but even in these cases the
    statement of other facts is essential. (!) In all cases it is
    _other facts_, (!) usually hypothetical, which constitute the
    explanation; (!) and the process of explaining is a process by
    which from those other facts the fact to be explained is shown
    to follow as a consequence by virtue of a general principle or
    otherwise.”

    “To explain a fact is to show that it is a necessary or
    at least a probable result from another fact (!) known or
    supposed.”

My definition of “explanation,” as a description in which the process
described is recognised as a transformation is sneered at. Says Mr.
Peirce (p. 558):

    “A magician transforms a watch into a dove. Recognise it as
    a transformation and the trick is explained, is it? This is
    delightfully facile.”

Indeed, the magician’s trick is explained as soon as we know all the
changes that have taken place. Take the whole number of objects handled
by the magician, those which he shows and those which he conceals. Let
us observe how he hides the watch and how he produces the dove, and the
trick is explained. Is it not?

Explanation is, as the word suggests, a making plain, so that we can look
over the whole field before us, and leave nothing hidden from sight. This
whole field, the survey of which is needed for the recognition of the
transformation, is called the system of the explanation. After we have
seen how the changes take place, and after we have described in exact
formulas their modes of action, our desire for explanation is completely
satisfied.

The instances adduced by Mr. Peirce prove plainly that his objections
cannot be maintained. Every one of them is an instance of transformation
(with the exception of the emerald vest, which, however, is not stated
with sufficient completeness). Take, for instance, the following example
adduced by Mr. Peirce (p. 557):

    “A ‘special process of nature,’ calling for explanation, is the
    circumstance that the planet Mars, while moving in a general
    way from west to east among the fixed stars, yet retrogrades a
    part of the time, so as to describe loops in the heavens. The
    explanation is, that Mars revolves in one approximate circle
    and we in another.”

Can any one deny that this explanation is a description? We draw the
two orbits as correctly as possible for the required demonstration
and combine the points representing the earth with those representing
Mars at their successive positions. Considering the fact that we do
not perceive the motion of the earth, we have to construct a diagram
in which the directions of these lines are described as viewed from a
stationary point. This is a description of changes that take place. It is
a portrayal of the transpositions of two bodies, and the appearance which
the change of this relation presents to one of them.

Mr. Peirce has neither the grace nor good-will to, understand my
proposition, that _explanation is always a tracing of form_. He says (p.
558):

    “Forms may indulge in whatever eccentricities they please, in
    the world of dreams, without responsibility.”

In the world of dreams, yes! But not in the world of reality. And even
the irresponsible eccentricities of dreams take place according to law.

Feeling that he mistakes my position, Mr. Peirce adds:

    “Should Dr. Carus reply that I mistake his meaning, that it is
    only ‘being in general’ (§ 66), that he holds unaccountable,
    I reply that this is simply expressing scepticism as to the
    possibility and need of philosophy.” (P. 558.)

Of course, I mean “being in general.” As to the scepticism imputed to me,
I answer, that any attempt at explaining how matter and energy, which I
take to be eternal, came into being, is a wrongly formulated problem.
Mr. Peirce might as well call me a sceptic, because I recognise that we
cannot square the circle. (Compare “Fundamental Problems,” 2d ed., pp.
283-285 and 291.)

Mr. Peirce’s gravest mistake is his belief that

    “In all cases it is _other facts_ which constitute the
    explanation.” (P. 557.)

The practical application of this mistake becomes fatal to his philosophy.

It is by no means necessary to pass beyond that system of facts which
contains the phenomenon to be explained. We must, as a matter of course,
keep completing the facts of a phenomenon until we have acquired a survey
of what we call the whole system of the facts, but we have never to
resort to other facts.

We are confronted every day with hundreds of facts of which we never
see the whole system to which they belong, but we readily supply these
deficiencies from the stock of our experience. We refer the unknown to
the known. The single case under observation is referred to something
with which we are familiar. Those systems of explanation which are known
to us serve as patterns for others that are only partially known, and we
fill out, with their assistance, the gaps of our observation.

The readiness and reliability of our explanation thus depends upon the
stock of knowledge we have. The more we know, the easier shall we conquer
the unknown; the more incomplete our knowledge is, the greater the number
of hypothetical facts that will have to be introduced; and this always
weakens the reliability of our explanations. Hypothetical facts should
be introduced only in cases of urgent necessity. However, if they are
admitted at all, they have to be thought of as parts of the system under
investigation, for they have been invented only because we are compelled
to assume that without them it would be incomplete.

Mr. Peirce adduces the following example to prove that “other facts” are
required in an explanation:

    “It has been stated that a warm spring in Europe is usually
    followed by a cool autumn, and the explanation has been offered
    that so many more icebergs than usual are liberated during
    a warm spring, that they subsequently lower sensibly the
    temperature of Europe. I care little whether the fact and the
    explanation are correct or no. The case illustrates, at any
    rate, my point that an explanation is a special fact, supposed
    or known, from which the fact to be explained follows as a
    consequence.” (P. 557.)

When, as in this instance, we recognise that one fact is the necessary
result of another fact, we view them both as parts of one set or system
of facts in which a transformation is taking place, and, unless we
see the connection of the two facts as constituting one process of
transformation, we cannot say that the problem is explained. When we
observe changes which are the results of transformations taking place
beyond the horizon of our knowledge, we are, as a matter of course,
unable to give an explanation.

Mr. Peirce had perhaps in mind a special and more complex kind of
explanation, which we define as “comprehension.” He says (p. 557):

    “The fact to be explained is shown to follow as a consequence,
    by virtue of a general principle or otherwise.”

Take as an instance the law of gravitation. There are the facts of
falling stones and the motions of celestial bodies. Both sets of
facts are explained, according to Mr. Peirce, “by virtue of a general
principle,” i. e. gravitation, while we say, both sets of facts are
comprehended under a common formula. Mr. Peirce’s conception of
“explanation” rests on the antiquated view that gravitation is a
principle behind the gravitating masses which compels the stone to fall.
Gravitation, however, is not “another fact” foreign to the facts under
consideration. It is not a principle called in from the outside. On the
contrary, it is the essence and extract of the very facts that are to be
explained.

Principles which have not been derived either from the facts to be
explained, or from the additional facts which belong to their system, do
not and cannot explain the phenomena.

       *       *       *       *       *

Comprehension is, as it were, an explanation of a higher degree. The
term means a grasping together, and it actually consists in viewing two
or several facts in such a way as to recognise their common features.
Comprehension is a reduction of our patterns of explanation; it unites
two or several of them in one formula.

For instance, it has been observed that certain objects float in water
while others sink to the bottom. The observations do not seem to agree,
they present two incoherent facts. When we find out that the weight of
a floating body is equal to the weight of water which it displaces,
we understand at once why bodies whose specific gravity is greater
than water sink while those of a lighter specific gravity float.
Comprehension, in this as in every other case, is the description of a
process which comprises all the facts that belong to a special class in
a common formula. The description must be applicable to all single cases
however different they may be.

This conception of comprehension has a great advantage over Mr. Peirce’s
view. While he has to bring in some “other fact” from the outside, we
need not introduce any foreign element. Comprehension, as we understand
it, can rise from the statement of particular facts to more and more
general formulations, until finally we arrive at universal laws. All
the laws thus formulated to satisfy our cravings for comprehension, are
found to belong to one great system of laws, and our scientists are
constantly engaged not only in widening the range of our experience by
new discoveries, but also in revising our statements of the uniformities
of nature and, where they appear to be in collision, in bringing them
into harmony.

This conception of comprehension is monistic, Mr. Peirce’s is dualistic.
We need not, in order to explain the facts of existence, go beyond them
into a supernatural realm. Mr. Peirce must go outside of the world
into non-existence when he attempts to understand the world by the
principles of his philosophy. It is very doubtful whether explanations,
the “essential” nature of which is to consist of “other facts usually
hypothetical,” will be satisfactory to anybody except himself.

Otherness makes any fact unfit to serve as a factor of an explanation and
indeed I cannot think of any instance, real or imaginary, in which the
explanatory facts, be they real or hypothetical, do not form parts of the
system under consideration.

There is only one instance to which Mr. Peirce’s method of explanation
has been applied, and I am under the impression that it has been invented
solely for this purpose. Mr. Peirce’s philosophy is too original to
be explained by the usual methods; it must have an original method of
its own. In order to explain “law” Mr. Peirce calls in “chance.” His
explanation must be an “other fact” and the only fact different from
law is not-law, lawlessness, or absolute chance. According to my idea
of explanation, law can never be explained by chance. According to Mr.
Peirce, it is the only possible thing that can be called in as that
“_other_ fact” which is supposed to be the essential constituent of an
explanation.

If Mr. Peirce’s method of explanation were sound, we should have to
explain order from chaos, possibility from impossibility, and sense from
nonsense.


II. MR. PEIRCE’S PHILOSOPHY.

Mr. Peirce’s constant references to scholastic philosophy remind me of
happy years long past when I was extremely interested in the theories
of such men as Thomas Aquinas, Duns Scotus, Occam, Abelard, Tauler,
and others. Together with my chum, now a sober Professor of physics at
a German University, I freely indulged in the construction of various
world-theories, which, alas! were quickly overthrown one after another by
the slightest puff of wind. I have not lost my interest in the schoolmen,
but it is considerably weakened.

Mr. Peirce’s repeated praise of scholastic realism and his condemnation
of any theory that he brands as nominalistic, seems to me like the method
of some of our politicians who, eager to revive toryism, should censure
all evils of the politics of to-day as whiggish. This comparison is not
exaggerated, for there are a few Hamiltonians who miss the refining
influence of an aristocratic class and regret that the historical
tradition of toryism has been so completely broken. I would not deny that
there is some truth in it, and there is some truth, too, in mediæval
realism, which has been neglected by the, first violently suppressed and
then triumphant, nominalism. But in reviving realism the Scotists should
be very careful to avoid a resurrection of its errors.


1. DUNS SCOTUS AS A PHILOSOPHICAL PATRON SAINT.

Johannes Duns Scotus, a Franciscan, honored since his successful defense
of the Blessed Virgin’s Immaculate Conception by the title Doctor
Subtilis, and the very same man after whom, on account of the narrowness
of his later disciples during the time of the Reformation, a blockhead
is to-day called a dunce, was one of the most characteristic figures of
scholastic philosophy. He lived at the end of the thirteenth Century when
the authority of the philosophy of Thomas Aquinas who had died March 7th,
1274, was all but universally recognised. Scotus appeared as the most
powerful opponent of Thomas. Ingenious, original, bold, and buoyant in
his attacks he had a short but brilliant career and died comparatively
young at Cologne, in November, 1308.

While Thomas, surnamed Dr. Universalis, or Dr. Angelicus, is regarded by
his order, the Dominicans, as the greatest authority in philosophical
matters, Scotus succeeded in impressing his mode of thought upon the
Franciscans; yet Thomas is universally regarded in the Roman church and
also among Protestant theologians as the more orthodox Christian.

Almost all the ideas of Scotus were set forth in opposition to the views
of others and mainly of Thomas. Thomas was a determinist, Scotus an
outspoken indeterminist. Thomas says that man’s action is necessarily
determined by what he thinks is best. Scotus avers that man thinks in a
certain way because he wills in a certain way. Man’s ideas are fashioned
to suit his character. His motto is, “_voluntas superior est intellectu_”
and his idea of will is identified with the indetermined arbitrariness of
a perfect _liberum arbitrium_. According to Thomas, God commands us to do
the good because it is good. Scotus calls good that which God commands
simply because God commands it. The will of God, like the will of man is,
in Scotus’s opinion, undetermined, it is arbitrary. Thus God created the
world not because his will was determined by some motive, but because
it so pleased him; and Christ’s passion and death were not really an
atonement; they simply were accepted as such by God.

Without entering into this controversy of _anno olim_ we might say
that we side neither with Thomas nor with Scotus, but would modify the
statement of the former by the criticism of the latter. Thomas goes
too far when he says that whatever is recognised as the best will of
necessity be done. He overlooks the power of passions. Thomas’s statement
would be right, if every passion were regarded as a will which has its
own and independent but mistaken ideas about good. A soul whose passions
are more powerful than rational considerations will necessarily be
inclined to obey its irrational impulses. There is something in Scotus’s
criticism, but his view is no improvement. In speaking of will as
superior to the intellect, did he ever ask himself the question, What his
own will would be independent of his intellect? Further, when God is said
to command the good because it is good, Thomas separates in a logical
consideration two ideas which are identical. Scotus is right in defining
good as the will of God. From our standpoint we should say, the will of
God, viz., the moral order of the universe, is of a definite kind which
can be ascertained by experience. To speak of the will of God as good is
an anthropomorphic expression. Good is that which agrees with the will of
God; bad, that which opposes it. Suppose the moral order of the universe
were different, goodness and badness would change with it.

We have sketched the views of Scotus only to show the points of
contact between him and Mr. Peirce. Mr. Peirce is also an outspoken
indeterminist. He identifies feeling with chance, and his free will is a
_liberum arbitrium_. Mr. Peirce, like Scotus, also separates theology,
and, with it, religion, from philosophy.[133] Scotus ridicules those
who confound both, clearly indicating that he is aiming at Thomas, to
whose fervent faith their conciliation was a matter of momentous and all
important consequence. Scotus goes so far as to aver that something might
be true in philosophy which is wrong in theology (see Ed. “Wadding” Fol.
4, p. 848)—a statement that to an honest searcher for truth must almost
appear as frivolous.[134]

How much more imbued with true religiosity was his great namesake John
Scotus Erigena the venerable founder of scholasticism when saying: “_Non
est alia philosophia, i. e. sapientiae stadium, et alia religio_.”


2. MR. PEIRCE’S ORIGINAL THEORIES.

Mr. Peirce as a controversalist and critic is like Scotus, brilliant,
versatile, and powerful. But he is more; he is also constructive.

Mr. Peirce’s style of architecture reminds us of neo-Platonism, and this
is quite in harmony with Scotism, for Scotus, through Avicebron, derived
many of his ideas from the Neo-Platonists. Mr. Peirce proposes a modern
view of emanation, which starts the world from that βῦθος of nothingness
which at the same time is the womb of all existence. The primeval state
of being, says Mr. Peirce, “Was mere nothing from a physical aspect,”
but, if it was not really nothing, what, then, was it?

It was chance.

Here lies the essential difference between Mr. Peirce and the
neo-Platonists. The neo-Platonists (whose speculations, if they are
treated not as philosophy, but as poetical effusions, are very profound
and thoughtful) look to the Logos, or world-reason, as the beginning
of the world emanation, while Mr. Peirce shows a certain contempt for
reason. To the neo-Platonist, reasons _are_ explanations, while to our
modern Scotist, reasons explain nothing. He says:

    “Reasons explain nothing, except upon some theistic hypothesis
    which may be pardoned to the yearning heart of man, but must be
    doubtful in the eyes of philosophy....” (P. 567.)

Mr. Peirce goes so far as to speak of “the dullness of ratiocination’s
self.”

Mr. Peirce’s gospel would deviate in the very first verse from that of
St. John, for it would read

    Ἐν ἀρχῇ ἦν ἡ τυχή.—In the Beginning was Chance!

And this chance which was in the beginning actually is, to Mr. Peirce,
God, a personal God, an anthropomorphic deity endowed with consciousness.
He says:

    “That primeval chaos in which there was no regularity was
    mere nothing from a physical aspect. Yet it was not a blank
    zero; for there was an intensity of consciousness there, in
    comparison with which all that we ever feel is but as the
    struggling of a molecule or two to throw off a little of the
    force of law to an endless and innumerable diversity of chance
    utterly unlimited.” (_The Monist_, Vol. III, No. 1, p. 19.)

And in another passage he says of chance:

    “That it is a being living and conscious is what all the
    dullness that belongs to ratiocination’s self can scarce muster
    hardihood to deny.” (P. 560.)

Mr. Peirce’s argument that all the dullness that belongs to
ratiocination’s self can scarcely muster hardihood to deny his
proposition, sounds strange in the mouth of a scientist. But it is not
strange; for I have found that enthusiastic defenders of improbable
theories always fill the holes of their argumentation with abuse of those
who dare to discover these holes. Call a person who doubts the truth
of your statements dull, and you will frighten many a weak mind into a
patient acceptance of your view.

We may rest assured that whenever a philosopher scolds he is at his wit’s
end. For why should he lose patience if he can prove his proposition?
Thus diatribes are always symptoms that there is some flaw in one’s logic
and the louder one chides the sorer is the spot.

Mr. Peirce is serious in the statement that chance is a conscious being.
He actually identifies chance and feeling. He says:

    “Chance is but the outward aspect of that which within itself
    is feeling.”

The primordial chance, the existence of which, according to Mr. Peirce,
“calls for no explanation,” has “a primordial habit-taking tendency.”
Whence this tendency gets into the universe of absolute chance, Mr.
Peirce is unable to disclose. The deviations from the mechanical order
in the present course of things, which, by the by, are by no means
proved, suggest to him and justify, in his opinion, this assumption.
Thus, assumes he, primordial chance ceased to be chance; it changed by
a gradual habit-taking into regularities. Consciousness ceased to be
consciousness and became crystallised into natural laws. Mind ceased to
be an arbitrary sporting, and by becoming effete it begot, through a
summation of minute effects, this material universe of ours. Accordingly,
real existence or thing-ness consists merely in the regularities thus
produced, and “physical events are but the degraded ... forms of
psychical events.”

This is in brief Mr. Peirce’s cosmogony, which, as the prophet of
Tychism, he reveals to us in axiomatic aphorisms.

By gradual habit-taking, Mr. Peirce declares (_The Monist_, Vol. I,
No. 2, p. 176), mind will at last be “crystallised in the infinitely
distant future.” This rather sad outlook is, in another passage, modified
by a counter-oracle, which announces that “an element of pure chance
survives.” Why, he does not say. Irregularities, not being entirely
suppressed, can increase again, and as such they are “undeveloped forms
of psychical events.” Says Mr. Peirce (_The Monist_, Vol. III, No. 1, p.
18):

    “There are almost insensible fortuitous departures from
    regularity; these will produce, in general, equally minute
    effects.... Protoplasm is in an excessively unstable
    condition.... In the protoplasm these habits are to some slight
    extent broken up, so that, according to the law of mind, ...
    feeling becomes intensified.

    “This breaking up of habit and renewed fortuitous spontaneity
    will, according to the law of mind, be accompanied by an
    intensification of feeling.”

This is the gist of Mr. Peirce’s mental philosophy, which proclaims that
“consciousness is not to be reinstated without tychism.” The reappearance
of chance is said to explain the origin of mind!

Our conception of mind is different. We see mind develop out of sentiency
by the recognition of the regularities of the surrounding world. Reason
is almost a synonym of man’s ability to form generalisations, of his
having and operating with concepts, of his thinking ideas. Not the
arbitrariness of a wilful mind is the properly mental of man’s soul,
but his reason; and man’s reason originates under the influence of the
uniformities of the surrounding world, which impress themselves, in what
we call experience, upon his existence. The more a creature recognises
the regularities of existence, and the more its soul becomes an image of
this world-order, which is the prototype of his reason, of the divine
Logos, the higher it rises in the scale of evolution.

If chance, as Mr. Peirce declares, is but the outward aspect of that
which within is feeling, we should henceforth have to look upon the
roulette and dice as sentient beings.


3. THE FOUR POSITIVE ARGUMENTS OF TYCHISM INSUFFICIENT.

Mr. Peirce adduces four positive arguments for believing in absolute
chance. They are: (1) the prevalence of growth; (2) the variety of the
universe; (3) the necessity of explaining law; and (4) the existence of
feeling.

By growth, Mr. Peirce does not understand the growth of crystals, or
trees, or organisms. That kind of growth is a mere transformation.
Mr. Peirce’s idea of “real” growth is “opposed to the conservation
of energy.” It is not an increase of the thing growing through the
assimilation of substances taken from the surrounding world; it is an
actual increase of energy, not a mere change; it is a growth of the
universe itself. Granted the possibility of this so-called “real” growth,
and we can easily explain the evolution of the world out of the tiniest
beginning. But, of course, one thing has to go: either the conservation
of energy or “real growth.” Mr. Peirce lets go the former, I the
latter.[135]

The variety of the universe is, in my world-conception, sufficiently
explained by the variety of forms, for form is indeed the _principium
individuationis_; a doctrine, which, but for Mr. Peirce’s philosophy,
I should regard as almost universally accepted. Among its advocates we
find also Mr. Peirce’s great master, Duns Scotus, and Scotus’s teacher,
Avicebron. In so far as various formations are possible, (exactly as the
die can show six different surfaces,) chance plays an important part in
the diversification of nature, but this chance is not to be thought of as
a violation of the law, but appears to be a special case only, and a true
manifestation of the law under complicated conditions.

Chance and probability are not mere subjective ideas, creatures of our
ignorance, playing a rôle simply in our limited knowledge of the world.
The words signify a certain condition of objective existence.

For instance, the probability of throwing 1 with one die is 1/6.
This means, the die is so constructed that it can show six different
positions, one among them being 1; and these six possibilities are as
real a quality of the die, as its weight or its color.

The die has six possible positions. Now I take a die and throw 3. Are we
not entitled to believe that the throw was sufficiently determined by all
the innumerable conditions which accompany the act? We confidently think
so, and feel no need of assuming any absolute chance. Now I throw again.
What is now the probability of throwing 1? We answer again, 1/6. And, lo!
there it is! It came at the second throw, and we ask, was our statement
of the probabilities wrong? We say, no! it was not wrong, for it remains
true even now. The statement does not mean that we shall throw a 1 at
each sixth throw, but that (supposing the die to be perfect) 1/6 among
all the possible throws will be 1, so that supposing all the possible
throws realised in an infinite series of throws, the average number of
1’s among them will be the one-sixth part of the whole.

The enormous importance of chance (viz., of that real chance which is
no violation of the law) has been recognised since Democritus and has
received a fresh illustration from the investigations of Darwin, which I
need not here recapitulate.

The theory of probabilities teaches, that whatever can happen in the long
course of an infinite number of events, actually will happen, and that
whatever, according to the nature of things, has a greater probability,
will in an infinite number of cases occur with proportionately greater
frequency.

The lesson which we have to draw from this statement is, that that which
we wish not to happen, should be made impossible. And this can be done,
perhaps not perfectly, but approximately. According to Mr. Peirce, the
evolution of mind is due to the reappearance of chance; we say that the
evolution of mind is marked by man’s increasing power in the restriction
of chance.

The identification of chance with feeling, or even with mind, is to me an
idea so grotesque, that I am inclined to regard it as a relic of gnostic
speculations.

Mr. Peirce, instead of attempting to comprehend laws, as we do, seeks to
trace their origin. He tries to explain their existence by growth, as if
they were beings that evolve like the forms of planetary systems or the
organisms of living creatures. Considering the fact that Mr. Peirce is a
realist only in name, and that his philosophy is soaked with nominalistic
traditions, we should say (and Mr. Peirce will pardon me that I quote the
expression from him) that:

    “The puzzle for him is simply the usual difficulty that plagues
    nominalism when it finds itself confronted with a reality which
    has an element of generality.”

The assumption of absolute chance might be used to account for any
otherwise inexplicable event, but Mr. Peirce does not countenance this
idea. He warns us to be cautious in its use, like the druggist who labels
his poisons “handle with care”; “I only use chance,” he says, “to give
room for the development of law.” Having used absolute chance to start
the world with, he dismisses it. So Fiesco discharges his negro after he
has done his work: “_Der Mohr hat seine Schuldigkeit gethan, der Mohr
kann gehen_.”

In my criticism of Mr. Peirce’s theory I said (_The Monist_, II, p. 574):

    “How little, after all, we can escape the determinism of law as
    being a feature of the world, will be seen from the fact that
    the explanation for the evolution of law is presented by Mr.
    Peirce as being itself a law, i. e., a formula describing a
    regularity supposed to obtain in facts.”

Mr. Peirce replies:

    “Is there no difference between a law, the essence of which
    is to be inviolable ... and _that mental law, the violation
    of which is so included in the essence that unless it were
    violated, it would cease to exist_?... Thus I clearly escape
    the contradiction attributed to me.” (P. 561.)

Mr. Peirce’s escape is like the disappearance of a medium from a room
without doors. He must have got out through the fourth dimension. The
argument is so subtle that I cannot see it, and I feel tempted to retort
in a sentence quoted from my profound adversary:

    “I confess, I can find only words without ideas in the
    objection.” (P. 561.)

Mr. Peirce speaks of law as having developed out of chance, but he
himself, in fact, after a fashion, explains the origin of those laws of
nature which represent its present uniformities by a law of habit-taking.

That the conservation of energy should leave no room for feeling is
to me an obscure proposition. The law of the conservation of energy
declares only that the sum of all energy in the world, potential as well
as kinetic, remains constant. If a living and feeling being renews its
waste and stores up new energy in its tissues, it must take it out of the
general storehouse of nature; it must transform it, and cannot produce it
out of nothing. Why should feeling become impossible, if the conservation
of energy is true?

The identification of chance with feeling is, to my mind, a vagary. It is
true that feeling develops mind; mind makes deliberation possible, and
deliberation implies choice. But choice is not chance. The choice which
a man makes is determined by his character. There is more resemblance
between logical identity and a pun, than between feeling and chance.


4. THE NEGATIVE ARGUMENT A LOGICAL FALLACY.

The four positive arguments for believing in absolute chance are
untenable. But Mr. Peirce, knowing that he had to weather a storm of
criticisms, has taken along a sheet-anchor, consisting of a negative
argument, which, if it were true, would make the four positive arguments
redundant.

What shall we say to the statement, that chance need not be explained?
Mr. Peirce says:

    “Chance, according to me, or irregularity—that is, the absence
    of any coincidence,—calls for no explanation. If _law_ calls
    for explanation, as Dr. Carus admits it does, surely the
    mere absence of law calls for no further explanation than is
    afforded by the mere absence of any particular circumstance
    necessitating the result.” (P. 559.)

Mr. Peirce is a great logician, but the logical arguments of his
philosophy are not sound. If the absence of law, of coincidences, of
regularities, did not require explanation, the scientist would (as is
but right) still have to explain the uniformities of nature, but the
miracle monger would have a good time; for he could tell us boldly that,
according to the rules of modern logic he is not bound to give any
explanation.

It is true that while everything must be explained, the absence of
everything (i. e. nothing) need not be explained; but we cannot use
this pattern as a schedule which can be filled out at our pleasure. The
ideas “absence of,” “no,” “no one,” and “nothing” play a part in logic
analogous to that of zero in mathematics. I need hardly remind the
reader of the puzzling demonstration, that since one cat has one tail
more than _no_ cat, and since no cat has eight tails, one cat must have
nine tails. Operations with zero act like death in the realm of human
conventionalities. Death makes the beggar equal to the king. Multiply any
equation that is wrong with zero, and it will be correct. Operations with
zero render the impossible possible.

But let us look closer at Mr. Peirce’s proposition. He avers that “the
mere absence of any particular circumstance necessitating the result
calls for no explanation.”

Should it ever happen that the absence of any particular circumstance
necessitates the result, I do not see why this absence should remain
unexplained. Say for instance, a certain stronghold is taken because the
enemy discovers the absence of guards in a certain part of the walls. If
this absence of guards be counted as an important circumstance helpful
in the conquest of the citadel (and there is no reason why we should not
count it as such) can we say that while the presence of guards on all
other spots of the wall has to be and can be explained as an endeavor to
secure the place against a _coup de main_, the mere absence of guards
calls for no explanation? The absence of guards in a particular spot
of the Capitol during the siege by the Gauls, was accounted for by the
steepness of the place. This particular spot was regarded as safe on
account of its inaccessibility. Similarly, the absence of guards in the
citadel of the Messenians is explained by the idea that the Spartans
would make no attack because in that particularly stormy night a
cloudburst seemed to prevent all approach.

Obviously the necessity of explaining a rule, does not confer the
privilege of neglecting to explain its exceptions.

It goes without saying that Mr. Peirce’s argument (even if it were
formally faultless) can have no force with a necessitarian. Such
a one, after having explained and proved to his satisfaction that
_Gesetzmässigkeit_ (or regularity such as can be formulated in laws) is a
characteristic feature of the universe, is not only asked to believe that
there are after all exceptions to law, but is even told that according to
some paragraph in Mr. Peirce’s unwritten logic of relatives no further
argument is needed to prove the non-existence of law. Only Mr. Peirce’s
extreme love of his pet theories can make him blind to such palpable
fallacies. But such are the foundations of his philosophical architecture.


III. MR. PEIRCE AS A CRITIC.

A good general, who has to mask the weak points of his position, uses
the strategem of making demonstrative sallies upon his enemy. Mr.
Peirce, although apparently quite unconscious of the fact that his basic
doctrines are untenable, instinctively imitates this maxim of warfare.
His defence is mostly aggressive. Instead of replying to my arguments he
endeavors to represent my views as incohesive and contradictory.

The present issue is not whether my views are tenable, but whether Mr.
Peirce’s are. However, I am glad to have the benefit of the searching
criticism of so subtle a thinker as Mr. Peirce. Therefore, I willingly
appear before his tribunal to expurgate myself of his charges.


1. THE A PRIORI AND POSITIVISM.

Mr. Peirce is greatly puzzled with my position. He quotes several
statements of mine which appear to him contradictory. I said: (1) that
millions of _single_ experiences cannot establish a belief in necessity,
(2) that necessitarianism must be founded upon the _a priori_, and (3)
that the _a priori_ must be founded upon experience.[136] To him who
overlooks the here italicised word “single” this may, indeed, seem to be
a vicious circle.

All knowledge begins with experience. We define experience as the effects
of events upon sentient beings, and these effects are sense-impressions
of certain forms and interrelations. At an advanced stage of evolution,
the formal and relational are first unconsciously, as, for instance, in
counting, and then consciously, with scientific deliberation, abstracted
from the sensory. Systems of pure forms are constructed out of the purely
formal elements, thus gained from experience by abstraction, such as
our system of numbers and the logical categories. Now the laws of these
forms of thought are applicable to all formal and relational conditions
of reality. The formal and relational of reality are known to us even
in those regions of the universe and in those provinces of scientific
investigation which have not as yet been explored. The scientist knows
them _a priori_, even before he investigates objects which he never saw
before. He is acquainted with certain of their qualities, viz., with the
laws of their formal and relational conditions.

Thus the _a priori_, or, as I prefer to call it, formal thought, is a
product of experience, and is again applicable to experience.

Single experiences, isolated observations, innumerable particular cases
cannot directly yield or reveal the laws of formal thought. So long as
they remain single and isolated they will never develop into mental
factors; but such is the nature of reality that the single experiences
will be built up and arranged in feeling substance as systematically
as, for instance, the formation of crystals or the harmonious growth of
cells in organisms? When sentient creatures become conscious not only
of the sensory element of their experience, but also of this system of
their soul, of the formal of their psychical existence, they become
rational beings; and the formal which grows with their sentiency is not
an exclusive and peculiar quality of theirs; it is not purely subjective,
but it has been imparted to them, piecemeal, together with the single
data of their experience. It constitutes a part of their _Anschauung_; it
is found in the objective world and is a general feature of reality.

Out of the formal elements of our _Anschauungen_, of the facts of
experience, that organ of cognition is developed which Kant calls “pure
reason.”

Experience is often used to denote sense-experience only; thus Kant
contrasts experience or sense-perception, which he calls _a posteriori_,
with pure reason and formal thought, which he calls _a priori_. We use
experience in the sense defined above, _so as to include the formal
element_.

I am unable to form a clear conception of Mr. Peirce’s view of the _a
priori_. Those systems of formal thought which I regard as constructions
he regards as products of analysis. He says, “They are results dependent
upon the action of reason in the depths of our own consciousness.” He
only grants that “their abstract and distinct formulation comes very
late.” He still holds that the _a priori_ is innate.

In my conception, mathematical ideas, like that of the contrivance of
logarithms, are inventions; and they are constructions as much as the
invention of the steam-engine by James Watt.

There is one peculiarity about the purely formal which is not found in
the sensory elements of experience. Our knowledge of the various spheres
of the purely formal is of a general nature; it applies to any form of
the same kind. This gives system to our formal conceptions, and enables
us to make statements which are rigidly and unequivocally determined. It
is this quality which makes them available as an organ of cognition when
dealing with facts of experience. They furnish us with methods, schedules
of reference, and plans which like blanks have to be filled out.

Science begins with the application of formal thought, viz., with
counting, measuring, and classifying. Only with the assistance of the
formal sciences can we master the material of the sensory data of
experience; and thus it happens that the formal is the condition, not of
any kind of experience, but of every systematic experience.

The formal sciences are the tools of cognition. That to which they cannot
be applied remains unexplained, and this is the ultimate reason why
processes of nature can be regarded as explained only when recognised as
processes of transformation. Cognition is the tracing of form. We can
understand a change only if it is a change of form. We cannot understand
how anything real can disappear into, or originate out of, nothing. We
have no explanation for any actual increase or decrease either of matter
or energy. Whenever we see something entirely new we regard it as a new
combination, the elements of which existed before.

If there were processes in the universe which could positively be proved
not to be transformations we should be confronted with an unfathomable
mystery; and it is a matter of course that we must not be duped so easily
by the appearance of problems which cannot be solved at first sight. The
advance of science which has resolved so many mysterious phenomena into
plain instances of transformation gives us confidence that this method
is the only reliable maxim of inquiry. It has helped us so far, and it
will help us in the future.

       *       *       *       *       *

I call my views positivism, because like the French positivists and also
like Locke and his school I maintain that all knowledge is to be derived
from the positive facts of experience. But my positivism is not of the
old kind; it is neither sensationalism nor materialism nor Comtism. It is
a new positivism broadened by a study of Kantian philosophy and Kant’s
problem of the _a priori_; and this new positivism, I hope, deserves the
attention of the thinkers of mankind.

Mr. Peirce calls it a “straddling of the question,” by which he means
that a man is “on both sides of the fence,” and has learned so to
formulate the issues, “that both parties can readily subscribe to his
propositions.”


2. DETERMINISM AND FATALISM.

Fatalism and determinism must not be confounded. We define determinism
as that view, according to which every event is determined by its
conditions. The decision of a man whose liberty is not curtailed by any
compulsion, so that he can act as he pleases exactly in agreement with
his character, is determined objectively by the motive and subjectively
by his character. A man of a certain character in a given situation will
act in a way that is perfectly determinable.

Determinism, as I take it, does not exclude free-will. Nor does it
exclude such chance as is, for instance, the incidental turning up of the
various faces of a die.

Determinism is the basis of science, and also of ethics as a science. If
the decision of a free will were merely the result of chance, why should
our teachers and preachers take so much trouble to form character?

While determinism is a sound doctrine, fatalism is a superstition.
Fatalism excludes the idea of free will. We define fatalism as that view
which regards the fate of a man, whatsoever he may do, as fixed. For
instance, we call the orthodox Mohammedan a fatalist; he looks at the
flame without quenching it, because he argues, “if it is Allah’s will
that my house burn down, it will burn down, whatever I may do.”

In my reply to Mr. Peirce (_The Monist_, Vol. II, p. 572) I approvingly
quoted from him a passage containing the word “fate,” adding that here
“the word ‘fate’ must be understood as Mr. Peirce understands it.” In
spite of this warning, Mr. Peirce employs this quotation made from _his_
writings as if it were mine, and calls attention to the inconsistency
involved in the different application of the word. This charge of
inconsistency is neither judicious nor fair!

We define “necessary” as “that which is determined.”

Determined means describable. Necessity is that feature of things which
makes it possible that we can, in proportion to our knowledge, describe
beforehand or predict the course of events.

Kant’s definition of “necessary,” as given in his “Critique of Pure
Reason,” is narrower. He says:

    “That the coherence of which with the real is determined
    according to universal conditions of experience is necessary,
    or exists necessarily.”

This means in our phraseology, “that feature of the real which is
determined by the laws of form.”

The word “determinism” has been inappropriately used in the sense of
fatalism, in which sense it has to be condemned as a superstition.
The term is needed, however, to denote a basic principle of great
value. “Determinism,” if used in the sense which the word literally
indicates, means “that view which regards all events as determined by its
conditions.” Determinism does not mean that everything is decreed by some
fate, that some Deity or other power has determined the course of events.
It means that definite conditions produce definite results, and that the
results can be ascertained and described, if _all_ the conditions are
known.

Fatalism is a peculiar kind of determinism, and, indeed, an obviously
erroneous one. Fatalism rests upon a dualistic conception, regarding
necessity as a foreign force residing outside and above things and
compelling them to act in a special way. It is the Moira of the ancients
and the Kismet of the Mohammedans. The monistic view knows nothing of
a foreign force or supermundane _fatum_ enacting a special course
of affairs. Necessity, in the monistic conception, simply denotes
the determinedness of results by its conditions; it signifies that
_Gesetzmässigkeit_, or regularity according to law, is a feature of
reality. We need not repeat again that the monistic view of determinism
excludes neither chance nor free-will. It only excludes “absolute” chance
and that indeterminable arbitrariness which is sometimes said to be
free-will.

If events were not determined, if under the very same conditions the
same causes could bring about different results, so that no regularities
formulable in laws existed, the world would be a chaos and no cosmos,
absolute chance would prevail, and science would be impossible.

Mr. Peirce not only confounds fate and necessity, but he also identifies
them with resistance, and with reality. My idea of necessity has as
little to do with the experience of, reaction as, for instance, with
the idea of density, or with pleasure and pain. To confound such
heterogeneous concepts must be productive of confusion. No wonder that
Mr. Peirce makes the confession that these ideas seem to him “of a mixed
nature.”

That my presentation of the case of Determinism _versus_ Free-will
results in “a doctrine to which the advocates of free-will will generally
subscribe as readily as their opponents,” is used as a reproach; but I do
not take it as such, for my intention is not to side with one party, but
to bring out the truth of both views.


3. NATURAL LAWS, DESCRIPTIONS.

Mr. Peirce makes the following allegation of inconsistency. He says of me:

    “The declaration (§ 198) that ‘natural laws are simply a
    description of nature as nature is,’ and that ‘the facts of
    nature express the character of nature,’ are nominalistic. But
    in another place (107-116) he says distinctly that uniformities
    are real.” (P. 531.)

I am unable to detect any inconsistency in these expressions. The gist of
these three statements is this: the formulas usually called natural laws
describe certain uniformities of reality.

The expression “description of nature” is by no means nominalistic. If
law is said to be a description, it is not a mere name, but presupposes
the existence of some objective reality for the description of which it
has been formulated.


4. CAUSATION.

Mr. Peirce’s usage of the word “cause” is very unsettled. He says (p.
538):

    “The original idea of an efficient cause is that of an agent,
    more or less like man.”

The original idea of “cause” is the struggle of reaching an end or
bringing about a certain state of things. The Latin _causa_ means “a
lawsuit.”

In a similar way, the German _Ursache_ does not mean the original thing,
but a “seeking.” _Sache_ is the English _sake_ and Gothic _sakjô_,
meaning “struggle,” or “quarrel.” It is derived from the same root as the
verb “to seek.”

Like _causa_, the word _Ursache_ was used as a legal term.

Mr. Peirce further states:

    “The modern mechanical conception, on the other hand, is
    that the relative positions of particles determine their
    accelerations at the instants when they occupy those
    positions.” (P. 538.)

    “In dynamics, it is the fixed force, gravitation, or whatever
    else, together with those relative positions of the bodies that
    determine the intensity and direction of the forces, that is
    regarded as the cause.” (P. 540.)

    “The practice which I endeavor to follow in regard to the
    word _cause_ is, to use it in the Aristotelian sense of an
    _efficient cause_ in all its crudeness.” (P. 541.)

    “When my idea is a more general and logical one, I prefer to
    speak of the explanation.” (P. 541.)

No wonder that some causes are prior to their effects, others
simultaneous, and that effects may even be prior to their causes! Using
the word in various senses, Mr. Peirce becomes so entangled about
causation, that in mustering the ideas force, position, reason, law,
cause, and explanation, he no longer knows which is which.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Peirce being unable to bring any consistency into the usage of the
term “cause,” drops it entirely as a philosophical word. This is Dr.
Ironbeard’s method, who kills his patient to save him pain.

There was a time when I felt inclined to follow that plan of dealing
with words in this predicament. But I found out very soon that there is
not one difficult word in philosophical language which is not or was not
at some time or other almost universally maltreated by the professional
thinkers of mankind. What, then, is to be done? Shall we eradicate all
old terms that are erroneously used and create a philosophical Volapük,
which will have the advantage of being unincumbered with the errors of a
long historical inheritance, but the disadvantage of being nowhere spoken
and nowhere understood, except by its inventors?

Dr. Ironbeard’s method of dealing with terms is radical. It imitates the
method of the social reformers who, on finding something wrong in society
generally, propose to tear down the entire social structure, and begin
the world over again from its beginning.

Most of the terms which have been in use for centuries and even
millenniums, I have found to correspond to a special want of expressing
some definite reality or constant group of realities or important
relation among realities. The misuse of different words almost invariably
has its origin in a consideration of the name alone, to the neglect
of the reality denoted by the name. And misuses can be mended only by
carefully investigating the realities themselves for the denotation of
which the words have been invented. If we were to make a clean sweep
of the “superstitions,” soul, God, cause, natural law, etc., because
in many minds there are superstitious notions connected with these
ideas, we should soon have to invent new terms for the realities which
necessitated the formation of the old ones. The great bulk of religious
and philosophical words originated because in each case there was an
actual want of a phrase to denote some specific reality. The errors of
the various terms arise because our ideas concerning the nature of these
realities have not as yet been matured, and it is the office of the
philosopher to contribute his mite toward their clarification.

Causation, in my conception, is transformation. Take any system of
conditions and let it somehow be changed. The event which starts the
change is called the cause, the new configuration produced, the effect.
The various factors of the system are the conditions or circumstances.

Taking this view, I _do not say_ that the effect is the cause
transformed. The total effect is the cause plus all the circumstances
transformed. The effect is something radically different from the cause.
The cause is always an event, that is a motion of some kind; the effect,
a new arrangement, a new formation, a new state of things, or perhaps the
dissolution of an old state of things.

While cause and effect are different, the whole process of causation,
including cause, circumstances, and effect, is to be viewed as one
fact, or, rather, as one system of facts; and a process of causation is
explained, (as we have seen above) as soon as it is so described that we
recognise it as a transformation.[137]

There is a popular usage which calls the cause of the falling stone
gravitation. This kind of cause is not an event, not a motion, but a law
of nature, and I prefer to call it “the reason” for the stone’s fall.

Mr. Peirce defines a reason as follows:

    “A reason, in one sense, is the replacement of a
    multiple-subject of an observational proposition by a general
    subject, which by the very conditions of the special experience
    is predicable of the multiple subject.” (P. 558.)

This somewhat stilted definition seems upon the whole to agree with what
I also call “a reason.” All the reasons by which we comprehend nature are
formulated in statements which describe those general features of reality
which we call “laws of nature.”

Who does not see that causes (i. e., events which produce effects) and
reasons (i. e., the formulas by which we comprehend the uniformities of
nature) are two radically different ideas, and who can deny that the
denotation of these two radically different ideas, by one and the same
term, must and actually does bring about lamentable confusion in the
minds of philosophers! Accordingly, let us call them by different names;
never mind what we call them, but let us distinguish them. I regard the
usage stated here as the most appropriate. We call “the cause” of the
stone’s fall that event which removed its support; but when we inquire
after the reason why the stone falls, we want to know the law of nature
which describes in a general formula that quality of stones which makes
them fall.


5. THE FUTURE IN MENTAL CAUSATION.

It seems as if some evil genius had caused Mr. Peirce to cross my
position everywhere, even where I should expect to find him in perfect
agreement.

Concerning mental and mechanical causation he first startles me with an
italicised proposition which declares:

    “_There is no mechanical truth in saying that the past
    determines the future rather than the future the past._” (P.
    539.)

Mr. Peirce apparently intends to discredit the belief that the past
determines the future. He adds:

    “We continue, for convenience, to talk of mechanical phenomena
    as if they were regulated, in the same manner in which our
    intentions regulate our actions, (which is essentially a
    determination of the future by the past,) although we are quite
    aware that it is not really so.” (P. 539.)

In other words, Mr. Peirce contends that our view of mechanical causation
is based upon an analogy with mental causation; the latter being a
determination of the future by the past, we conclude that the former is
regulated in the same manner.

This is an old error which rests on the supposition that cognition begins
with introspection or self-knowledge. The truth is that all cognition
begins with objective observation.

We have to say, (1) that man’s view of mechanical causation has not been
fashioned after the model of mental causation, and (2) that the future
actually enters as a factor in mental causation. We do not believe that
the future determines the past, but it does determine the present.

Should we judge of the causation of mechanical motions from our own
mental experience, we should certainly reach other conclusions than we
do, for the most characteristic feature of mental causation, that which
essentially distinguishes it from mechanical causation, is the fact that
the future actually enters into it as the main factor.

We as rational beings, and the lower animals also on a smaller scale,
do know to some extent the future. We know by experience the effects of
certain actions. This fact of the future’s being partly known, makes
it possible for the future to enter as a factor in mental causation.
I go so far as to maintain that there is no mental causation except
some consideration of the future be contained in the motive cause. The
presence of a plan, of an end kept in view, of an aim to be reached
in the future, is exactly what distinguishes the purposive action of
thinking beings from mechanical events.


6. MENTAL CAUSATION.

Mr. Peirce has discovered in my expositions of mechanical and mental
action what he believes to be a flagrant contradiction, and, as if
it were the exhibition of my scalp, displays it triumphantly (§ 27)
in capitals and italics. “No objection can be made,” I said, “to the
possibility of explaining the motions ... of the brain by the laws of
molar and molecular mechanics.” And “yet the simplest psychical reflexes
cannot be explained from mechanical or physical laws alone.”

Is this really a contradiction, or is it Mr. Peirce’s inability to
discover the agreement between the two statements? Let us see.

Take a little toy fish of tin with a small iron rod in its snout,
floating in the water, and push the fish so that it shoots forward with
a certain velocity in a straight line. Now take a magnet and hold it at
a short distance from the prolonged path of the fish. The fish at once
changes its course; it now describes a curve which according to the
laws of mechanics is determined (omitting any other possible modifying
circumstances) by the momentum of the push, the velocity of which is
gradually diminished by the friction of the water, and the attraction of
the magnet. These are the data, and from these data the motion of the
fish is unequivocally determined by the laws of mechanics.

Now, when we speak of the motion of the fish, we mean the motion, and
not the iron rod, or the qualities of the iron rod, in its snout. While
speaking of motion or the laws of motion, and while calculating the curve
of a motion, our ideas move in a perfectly defined sphere of abstraction
from which all other things and considerations are excluded. This method
of abstraction which is the essence of human thought and also of that
special kind of human thought called science, is the way by which alone
we are enabled to arrive at clear distinctions and lucid explanations. We
have to keep our various abstractions stored in an orderly manner in our
mind, each one in a special box. If we do not distinguish the different
spheres of abstraction and their limits, we shall soon confound all
issues in a hopeless chaos.

But we find, on further examination, that in this limitation of the
description to the abstract sphere of pure motion only a part of
the process before us is described. The description explains fully,
exhaustively, and satisfactorily the mechanical aspect of the case, but
it does not explain why the magnet attracts iron. The attraction of
the magnet consists in the definite qualities of (1) the magnet, (2)
the iron, and (3) the medium between them. When we inquire after an
explanation of the physical qualities of things, we enter into another
sphere of abstraction, viz., that of physics. That physics will have
to be explained as a domain of molecular mechanics may be mentioned
incidentally.

Take another and simpler instance: the fall of a stone. The motion of
the stone, its increasing velocity during the fall can be explained
according to the laws of mechanics; but that quality of the stone called
gravity, which is the reason of its fall, cannot be deduced from the laws
of mechanics. The gravity of a mass is treated in mechanics as the given
fact or datum, an investigation into the nature of which is excluded from
the sphere of mechanics. He who demands of mechanics an explanation of
gravity searches in the wrong box.

When we come to the investigation of psychical phenomena, we strike a
feature which is entirely absent in mechanics, physics, and chemistry.
It is the appearance of feeling. Feelings vary according to the various
impressions made by surrounding objects. The same objects making the
same impressions, special kinds of feelings come to stand for or to
represent their respective kinds of objects, and thus feelings acquire
meaning, feelings become ideas. This peculiarity of sentiency, that it
has acquired meaning, is the characteristic feature of “mind.”

When speaking of mind I refer to all those phenomena of meaning-freighted
feelings which ensoul thinking beings; and the domain of psychology is
thus again quite a distinct domain of abstraction.

Now let us return to the contradiction of which Mr. Peirce accuses me.

An idea which physiologically considered is a special brain-structure or
combination of brain-structures, reacts upon a given stimulus, which, let
us say, is the sound of a certain word. The word is a sound-symbol and
the word possesses a certain meaning. The word spoken having the same
meaning as a special idea that is thought, while its brain-structure is
agitated, possesses a quality comparable to chemical affinities. This
peculiar word will serve as a stimulus for this peculiar idea. It will
not (at least not directly) stimulate other ideas—as little as a chemical
that has no affinity for the ingredients of another chemical will cause a
reaction. Why the motion takes place calls for a psychical explanation,
but the motion itself takes place in strict accord with the laws of
mechanics.

But are not the laws of mechanics annulled by the laws of physics, and
those of physiology by the laws of psychology?

No, they are not annulled, but modified.

A piece of iron that falls to the ground with the same velocity as a
stone of equal weight will be held up by a magnet strong enough to hold
it. This is not an annulment of the gravity of the iron; it is not a
reversion of the law of gravitation; gravitation holds in this case as
good as in any other. It is only a modification and a complication. We
must remember that the law of gravity does not say, the non-supported
piece of iron or stone will drop, it says that all bodies are attracted
by the earth with a definite force depending upon their mass and
position. And this attraction takes place in our example; the iron
supported by the magnet retains all its inherent gravity, which is
constantly asserting itself, although counteracted by the force of the
attraction of the magnet.

Since the mechanical, chemical, psychical, etc. qualities represent
reality in various abstract aspects, we should know that there are no
purely mechanical, no purely chemical, no purely psychical phenomena.
Every real phenomenon, i. e. the original whole from which the
abstractions have been made, presents a complex state of things of which
many various aspects can and must be taken.

I repeat now without fear of contradiction or miscomprehension,
that brain-motions are perfectly explainable by the laws of molar
and molecular mechanics, while psychical reflexes, not being purely
mechanical processes, cannot be explained by mechanical laws. The
properly psychical and the properly mental are other elements of an
entirely different nature from the mechanical and the physical. They
belong to a radically different sphere of abstraction. He who tries to
explain the psychical by the mechanical, looks for his explanation in the
wrong box. And he who regards the proposition that the mechanical laws
hold good for all motions without any exception, but that they cannot be
called upon to explain that which is not motion, as a contradiction, has
not as yet learned practically to apply the method of abstraction.

It is strange that we have to give this little lesson in the elements
of abstraction lore to so prominent a logician as Mr. Peirce. We feel
inclined to exclaim: “Art thou a master of Israel and knowest not these
things?”


STRAY SHOTS.

There are a number of incidental comments aimed at scattered points of
my position. I call them “stray shots”; they have exploded without harm.
While going over the battle-field I shall pick them up and will throw
some of them back into Mr. Peirce’s camp, whence they came.

Mr. Peirce is in the habit of calling every approach to his views “deep,”
while divergencies are branded as “shallow.”—

Hume’s scepticism is called Leibnitz’s principle, by which latter Mr.
Peirce apparently means that innumerable single cases of experience
alone do not constitute certainty. Why Mr. Peirce demands that Hume’s
conclusion which Leibnitz never would have countenanced, should be
identified with Leibnitz’s principle from which it is derived is not
apparent.—

How easily Mr. Peirce changes his opinion! Venn’s “Logic of Chance,”
which Mr. Peirce so much admired formerly, has become “a blundering
little book.”—

Synechism and agapasticism, viz., the principle of continuity and the
idea of love as main factors of evolution are nothing new. I have
always defended them, although not in the peculiar way that Mr. Peirce
does.[138] In his article “Evolutionary Love” he appears to me unjust
toward Darwin. I do not think that I should improve my propositions,
which are in their way synechistic as well as agapastic, by adopting
either Mr. Peirce’s terms or his presentation of these principles.—

Mr. Peirce says, he does not doubt that my idea of mental causation was
intended to be an improvement on his molecular theory of protoplasm. I
can assure Mr. Peirce that I had no such intentions. I held my view long
before I ever had a chance of knowing Mr. Peirce’s molecular theory of
protoplasm. Moreover, I am unable to discover any similarity between his
views and mine.—

I took pains to explain that, if we disregard the notion of form, every
transformation, that is, every case of causation, will appear as a most
miraculous and inexplicable event. To illustrate my view I said that
“_supposing we had no idea of the laws of form or only an incoherent and
fragmentary knowledge of them_,” it would be “a very wonderful thing”
that two congruent regular tetrahedrons when put together will form a
hexahedron—a body which is something new. And I added to this statement,
“_but the laws of form do perfectly and satisfactorily explain it_.”
How great was my astonishment to see Mr. Peirce with great complacency
take up the problem and explain it! Indeed, it is true. That the
combination of two congruent regular tetrahedrons will make a hexahedron,
is wonderful _only_ to him who does not understand the laws of form.
Otherwise, it is not wonderful. I was amused at Mr. Peirce’s ingenuity to
prove to me that it is a case of 8-2=6.—

There is a difference between the combination of two tetrahedrons and
of the atoms _H₂O_. Mr. Peirce tells me, that the one is ideal, the
other real—“a difference which to his Scotistic mind is very important.”
Did Mr. Peirce think, indeed, that I was not aware of this difference,
or does he mean to establish a rule never to compare the relations as
developed in the sciences of pure forms to the relations that obtain in
reality?—

Says Mr. Peirce in one passage, there is a difference between the ideal
and the real, which to his Scotistic mind is very important. In another
passage he declares that “the nominalist alone makes a sharp distinction
between the abstract and the concrete.”—

Mr. Peirce smiles at the endeavor of reconciling religion with science.
For he thinks:

    “It is a thing which will come to pass of itself when time is
    ripe, and that our efforts to hasten it have just that slight
    effect that our efforts to hasten the ripening of apples on a
    tree may have.” (P. 545.)

Mr. Peirce forgets that the religious fruits of the conciliation between
religion and science are our own sentiments. He who says that man should
be indifferent about working out the truth, on the plea that truth will
take care of itself, is comparable to the apple-tree, that refuses to
work out the ripening of the apples. The proposition to let religion and
science work out their destinies, one of which is their mutual agreement,
of themselves, is irreligious and also unscientific. Truth will not take
care of itself if we do not strain all our efforts to find truth; and the
kingdom of heaven will never come unless (as Christ taught, Matt. 11, 12)
“it suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force.”—

The same Mr. Peirce who says that our efforts to hasten the conciliation
of religion with science are useless, believes in miracles and proposes a
theory that prayer can work miracles.—

Several philosophers, such as Locke and Hegel, have complained of the
uselessness of the logical law of identity _A_ = _A_, and also of its
barrenness for any practical purpose. The law of identity has been
invented nevertheless, because there is a want for it; and this want, in
my opinion, was felt because the statement of sameness (as set forth in
_The Monist_, Vol. III, p. 70, et seqq.) is one of the most elementary
and important forms of reasoning, being indispensable, for instance, in
mathematics where it appears as equations. We may simply laugh at the old
logicians

    “Who whirl in narrow circling trails,
    Like kittens playing with their tails.”

We may impatiently discard the whole proceeding as empty talk, yet
I submit that we had better try to understand the meaning of their
unprofitable exertions and the drift of their apparently meaningless
argumentations. If we regard the principle of absolute identity as the
formula of sameness (in the sense explained in the quoted passage, _The
Monist_, Vol. III, No. 1, p. 70, et seqq.) emptied of its contents we
shall understand why logicians wasted so much energy on an entirely
barren subject. We shall readily condone their mistakes in consideration
of the importance of the subject. It is difficult to say how much we have
profited by their blunders.—

Mr. Peirce uses the terms analytical and synthetical in a new sense for
reasons which he explains at greater length in his “Theory of Probable
Inferences.” He says, “analytical reasoning depends upon associations
of similarity; synthetical reasoning upon associations of contiguity.”
I willingly grant to the scientist and the philosopher the liberty to
change the historical meaning of terms if the traditional usage is
not helpful in our dealings with the facts which they were invented to
describe. However, we must not change a term without good and sufficient
reasons. In the present case, I still prefer the traditional usage of the
terms “analytical” and “synthetic.”—

Mr. Peirce takes the liberty of changing terms for himself, but he
resents it in others.—

Mr. Peirce disapproves of the usage of the word “construction” in the
sense of systems of formal thought, such as the decimal system, etc.,
etc. “Because,” he says, “the word is imperatively required in the
theory of cognition to denote a mathematical diagram framed according to
a general precept.” On the strength of this argument we might as well
disapprove of calling churches, mosques, houses, cottages, or any kind of
edifice, “building,” because the word “building” is imperatively required
to denote business-buildings.—

Mr. Peirce says that according to my statement (in ¶ 163) “every element
of compulsion is to be excluded from the conception of necessity.” Having
never made such a statement, I looked up the passage, which is the last
but one paragraph in _The Monist_, Vol. III, No. 1, page 86, and find
that Mr. Peirce must have misread the sentence, “compulsion excludes
free will, and necessity does not,” which, of course, has an entirely
different meaning.—

Mr. Peirce identifies evolution with real growth, regarding it as opposed
to the law of the conservation of energy. He regards everything as a
product of such growth, or _Erzeugung_, and adds, “I fancy it is this
cautious reflectiveness of my procedure which especially displeases Dr.
Carus.” Mr. Peirce does not use the word “bold.” He says, “cautious
reflectiveness.”—

I did not say that causation is to be explained from the law of the
conservation of matter and energy. I said (_The Monist_, Vol. II, No.
4, p. 566) that the law of the conservation of matter and energy throws
light upon the problem of causation. The law of the conservation of
matter and energy and the law of causation describe the same thing under
two different aspects. If we understand the one, it will help us to
understand the other.—

Kant’s chapter on the Architectonic of Pure Reason is well known to me,
but I think that Kant was possessed of a peculiar love of architectonic
which has contributed not a little to rendering the system of his
philosophy unnecessarily labyrinthine.—

It is surprising to find a man whom I always regarded as a Kant scholar
of first degree saying that “Kant makes space a necessary form of
thought.” Now, as a matter of fact, Kant does not make space a form of
_thought_, but of _Anschauung_ or intuition. We cannot understand Kant
unless we understand this distinction.[139]—

Kant conceives of causation as a necessary sequence. Mill, who objects to
the idea of necessity, replaces Kant’s words “universal” and “necessary”
by “invariable” and “unconditioned,” a substitution which was made with
the outspoken intention of radically changing the meaning of the phrase.
Mill’s terms are _not_ “more exact,” as Mr. Peirce says, but different.
They are worse than less exact to a Kantian, and can appear more exact
only to those who take Mill’s view, which is nominalistic. And this
substitution of Mill’s is regarded by realistic Mr. Peirce as a mere
“rewording of Kant’s definition”!—

Mr. Peirce makes too much of the idea of “_Erzeugung_, which,” as he
correctly says, “is Kant’s word for the sequence of effect from cause.”
Yet Kant’s idea of _Erzeugung_ does not conflict with “the modern
mechanical doctrine.” Kant says in that very same chapter, “_Aller
Wechsel (Succession) der Erscheinungen ist nur Veränderung_,” i. e., “All
change (succession) of phenomena is only transformation.” (!) Does not
Mr. Peirce know that Kant calls every world-conception that stands in
contradiction to the mechanical principle “a philosophy of indolence,” or
“_faule Weltweisheit_”?—

The same Kant who proposed a mechanical explanation of the evolution of
the starry heavens, objected very strongly to that kind of explanations
“which derive all order from chance”; and speaking of Epicurus’s
“absolute chance”(!) he adds: “Epicurus was even so reckless (_so
unverschämt_) as to demand that the atoms should deviate from their
straight course without any cause.” Mr. Peirce has either overlooked in
Kant these passages, or, if he has read them, he has never taken them to
heart.—

Mr. Peirce objects to my statement that according to his philosophy the
domain of mind is characterised by absence of law. He argues: “Is not one
of my papers entitled ‘The Law of Mind?’” Yet this law of mind, he states
two lines further on, “requires its own violation.” (P. 552.)—

The “sporting” of the primeval chance, Mr. Peirce says on page 552
of this number, is “not undetermined and indeterminable,” because
“its ultimate result must be an entire elimination of chance from the
universe.” Shall we understand that the “arbitrary sporting” of the
primeval chaos, with which Mr. Peirce (according to _The Monist_, Vol. I,
No. 2, p. 175) begins his cosmogony, was determined? If absolute chance
is determined, why not call such a philosophy “determined Indeterminism”?
We try hard to understand Mr. Peirce, but sometimes we really have to
give it up.—

Physiology teaches that memory alone changes feeling into consciousness,
but the consciousness of Mr. Peirce’s original Chance is without memory
and habit.—

Chance, a being living and conscious, has, according to Mr. Peirce,
created the world, but the ultimate result of evolution must be an
entire elimination of Chance from the universe. Thus it appears that the
creation of the world is an act of divine suicide. The world-process is a
slow degeneration of God, finally ending in his complete annihilation.


RETROSPECT.

In summing up the result of the whole battle, we find that there is not
a single question on which we have to yield or even modify our position.
Our position remains the same, while Mr. Peirce’s position has become
glaringly untenable. There is one point, however, in which justice
demands that we should recognise that he is right. I should not have
called Hamilton “Mr.,” but “Sir William.” I can, however, assure Mr.
Peirce that this mistake of mine (which in all my allusions to Hamilton
occurs only once) was a mere slip of the pen; it was not ignorance on my
part and still less was it any disregard of the rules of politeness.

We are obliged to reject the favorite ideas of Mr. Peirce, and have only
to add that our esteem for him has not been lessened, in spite of all
disagreements, and notwithstanding the flaws we have detected in his
reasoning. On the contrary, our admiration for him as a dialectitian
has been greatly increased, for, in truth, we have never before seen
propositions so untenable in their nature, so odd and almost bizarre, as
those of “absolute chance,” of “matter as effete mind,” of “feeling as
being the inner aspect of chance,” and of “real growth as opposed to the
conservation of energy,” defended with greater adroitness.

Mr. Peirce is unusually familiar with certain branches of learning, of
which he has made a specialty, and also with general philosophy; but he
has original ideas, and he prizes them too highly. Where he makes no use
of his originality, he does extraordinarily good Work. Thus, most of his
papers on logic, published in sundry magazines, are, in their critical
as well as constructive parts, strictly scientific and almost free from
apocryphal speculations. Only slight hints in them have been a puzzle to
me and other readers of his essays. Of late, however, Mr. Peirce has come
out more explicitly with his peculiar philosophy, and we regret to say
that the more he allows his original ideas to enter into his thoughts,
the more warped are his theories.

While we regard Mr. Peirce’s original ideas as erroneous, we must
say that they are nevertheless highly interesting and stimulating.
His propositions are presented so vigorously, so attractively, so
brilliantly, that while perusing his articles, we find them remarkably
suggestive; we enjoy them as we do poetry. They read like a romance of
the origin of the world or a fairy-tale of metaphysics.

Mr. Peirce’s views should receive the consideration of all earnest
students of philosophy; for he goes to the root of its main problems, and
his very errors are instructive.

                                                                   EDITOR.


FOOTNOTES:

[125] Kepler’s scheme is, that all the regular solids, icosahedron,
dodecahedron, octohedron, tetrahedron, and cube should be placed one
within the other at such distances that spheres could be described
between them so as to touch the corners of each respective interior and
the planes of each respective exterior solid. He found, by placing the
sun in the centre and allowing the planets to move in great circles on
the spheres, (making the circle between the icosahedron and dodecahedron
equal to the orbit of the earth,) that then the distances between the
planets would, upon the whole, agree with astronomical observations.

This theory is as ingenious, as fascinating, and as original as Mr.
Peirce’s propositions. It has only one little fault; it does not agree
with facts. And Kepler afterwards abandoned his original theory.

[126] Like Mr. Peirce, Kepler had, in his days, too, thought of the
possibility of making the world evolve from chance. When, in 1604, a new
and brilliant fixed star suddenly appeared in Ophiuchos, he took up the
problem of star-evolution. We will let Kepler tell the story in his own
words as it appears in his treatise on the new star:

“Yesterday, while pondering over the problem, I was called to dinner, and
my young wife served the salad. ‘Do you think,’ I asked her, ‘if since
the origin of creation, pewter platters, salad leaves, oil and vinegar,
and also hard-boiled eggs had been flying in a chaotic mixture through
space that _Chance_ would have been able to collect them to-day in a
salad?’ ‘Certainly not in such a good mixture as this is,’ was the reply
of my beautiful wife.”

Kepler rejected the idea that the world could have evolved by chance.

[127] The philosophical articles of the _Century Dictionary_ do not
seem to be free of party spirit. An extraordinary amount of praise is
given to the mediæval realists which, considering the vagaries of their
propositions, they do not deserve. On the other hand, the blame for
the discredit into which scholasticism has fallen is heaped upon the
nominalists.

[128] I said in _Fundamental Problems_, page 142, “The introduction of
the word positivism into philosophy is the merit of M. Auguste Comte.
Although we cannot accept much of M. Comte’s conception of positivism
we gratefully adopt the name.” There are plenty of other passages in
which my usage of the term positivism, as distinguished from the French
positivism, is set forth, so that there could be little danger of being
misunderstood.

[129] My main objection to the term Absolute is to forestall any
hypostatising of a vague abstract notion which can only serve the purpose
of mystification. I suffer the term Absolute in a loose sense when it is
understood that it is used loosely. I do not say, as Mr. Peirce seems
to believe, “absolutely universal” or “absolutely necessary.” The words
universal and necessary are sufficiently significant to me without any
additional emphasis.

Reality is relative throughout. Absolute existences are, if the term is
taken seriously, nonentities; and the expression “The Absolute” for the
whole of existence or for those features of existence which are universal
and necessary is, to say the least, misleading. These are my reasons for
rejecting the Absolute as a philosophical term. There is, of course,
no objection to the term in chemistry, physics, mathematics, and other
sciences, where it has acquired technical meanings.

[130] Mr. Peirce correctly says that the axioms of geometry are now
exploded. This, however, does not overthrow the reliability of formal
mathematics; on the contrary, it places it on a safer basis than that of
unprovable assumptions, which must be taken for granted.

We look upon the whole system of geometry as a _product of mental
operations_. We perform some operations and note what their products are.
We do something and mind the consequences of what we do. The problem
of modern geometry is to invent a method by which we can construct in
the simplest manner possible a straight line and a plane. Euclid still
presupposes the existence of the plane and assumes it to be such that
parallel lines do not meet. When we are able to construct the plane of
Euclidean geometry, we can dispense with the axiom of parallels, for, in
that case, the plane will possess the qualities it has by construction.
We can very well execute other constructions in which parallel lines
possess other qualities, and we shall on the basis of such an altered
plan of operation be able to produce entirely different systems of
geometry.

We must distinguish between the space of our mathematicians and real
space. Experience teaches us that real space has three dimensions
which means that from a given point every other point is determinable
by three magnitudes. We might doubt (although I think there is little
occasion to do so) whether the real space of our experience is truly
three-dimensional, but we cannot doubt that the truths developed in the
one-dimensional system of numbers, in the two-dimensional system of plane
geometry, in the three-dimensional system of solid geometry, and also in
_n_-dimensional systems each in their respective domain are perfectly
reliable, for they are unequivocally determined, they are _eindeutig
bestimmt_. There is no application of the theory of probabilities in a
field where the products are not due to chance but result with certainty.

[131] I wonder why the _Century Dictionary_ does not mention the
scholastic usage of the word _univocus_ as the root of univocal.
Similarly we are not told that the word _incompossibilitas_ is an
invention of the schoolmen. Duns Scotus, Mr. Peirce’s favorite
philosopher, uses the terms _univoce_ and _incompossibilitas_ freely.

[132] We accept in this argument Mr. Peirce’s solutions, which, however,
are his own. A simpler example would have been more appropriate.

[133] The belief in a duality of truth appears quite rational from the
dualistic standpoint of the middle ages, and the arguments of Scotus are
cleverly devised, being based upon the supposition that the fall of man
had changed the entire order of the world, so that the laws of nature
prior to the Fall were different to those which obtain now.

[134] Duns Scotus was a very zealous advocate of ecclesiastical
supremacy, even advising, for instance, the prosecution of the Jews in
order to convert them. It is a strange irony of fate that the author of
the _Fons vitæ_, upon whose authority Scotus so largely depends and from
whom he derived some of his most important ideas was an Israelite. Scotus
did not know that Avicebron was a pseudonym of the Spanish Jew Salomon
ben Gebirol.

[135] I omit here a discussion as to whether or not the conservation
of energy is true or not. I need not mention that the views of our
physicists, such men as Helmholtz, Mach, Maxwell, Tait, and others differ
widely from Mr. Peirce’s presentation of the subject. Mr. Peirce rejects
the law of the conservation of energy, but retains the conservation,
or (as he prefers to say) perduration of matter. I waive the question,
whether this is consistent, and call attention only to another, most
flagrant contradiction. Mr. Peirce states that, “not only the total
amount [of matter] remains constant, but all the different parts preserve
their identity”; and yet he says that “matter is effete mind.” Thus when
mind becomes effete, the amount of matter increases; however, when the
habits of matter are broken up, mind originates, and the amount of matter
decreases. This, it seems, would make any perduration of matter and of
the identity of its different parts impossible.

[136] That my view of the _a priori_, as Mr. Peirce claims, is
“Schleiermacherian” is new to me.

[137] It is a matter of course that frequently several events coöperate
to bring about an effect. In that case we have our choice, either to
speak of several causes, or to treat the coöperation of all of them as
_the_ cause, or to select one of them to be called the cause, while the
others may be counted among the conditions.

The limitation of a system of causation depends entirely upon the purpose
of our inquiry, and we must here, as in many other things, use discretion.

Mr. Peirce concludes, that according to my view of causation we can,
in a relatively uniform motion, such as the flight of a cannon ball,
regard the motion of every moment as the cause for the motion of the
next moment. I say “relatively,” for absolutely uniform motion does not
exist. I grant this, but I do not grant what Mr. Peirce regards as a
contradiction of mine, that in that case the cause would be equal to the
effect. A man who knows the artifices of the hair-splitting Eleates and
the other conundrums of logic, should know that every second of time is
different from every other second; 12 o’clock is different from 1 second
past 12. He who denies this, has only to miss a train in order to be
converted. And how much more different than the moments of time are the
various moments of real motion, for in every moment the moving body is in
another place, with changed relations; and if that does not constitute a
difference, we should have to deny the existence of motion.

[138] See my article on “The Continuity of Evolution” in _The Monist_,
Vol. II, No 1; and also “Monism and Meliorism,” p. 73, where “the
struggle for the ideal” is contrasted with “the struggle for life.”

[139] For details see, in _The Monist_, Vol. II, No. 4, page 518, et
seqq., and 527, et seqq., my articles, “Mr. Spencer on the Ethics of
Kant,” heading iv, and “What Does Anschauung Mean?”

I now forgive Mr. Spencer; for if a Kant scholar like Mr. Peirce can
fall into this unpardonable mistake, why should not Mr. Spencer, whose
knowledge of Kant’s writings is, as he confesses himself, extremely
limited, have the same privilege?




THE FOUNDATIONS OF THEISM.


I. THE REALISM OF THEISM.

It is commonly alleged that there is deeply seated in the human mind
a belief in the existence of a supreme being, and that the prevalence
of such belief is evidence that it has a basis in supernatural
revelation. It is urged in reply to this assertion, that this belief
is not universal, and that in any case its presence cannot be regarded
as satisfactory evidence that is well founded. It is known that the
disposition to worship is aroused by grand and beautiful objects; and as
Darwin well remarks in one of his letters, the natural sentiments of the
sublime and the beautiful easily assume a personal direction. Scientific
explanations, moreover, push a personal source of things ever further
from us, and it is becoming apparently more easy to doubt or deny any
such source whatever.

Prevalent human instincts and intuitions are, however, the result of
experience imperfectly or perfectly digested, as the case may be.
In most instances they yield to analysis something of value. A more
plausible explanation of the theistic instinct is the anthropomorphic
one. Man knows that he originates many movements, both of his own body
and of other material things, and he knows of no other real source of
such movements. He therefore, in his primitive state, before scientific
explanations are attained, naturally refers motions in nature to an
original personal source. This, it may be supposed, is the natural habit
of the unsophisticated mind, and is at the bottom of theistic belief,
whether as unexplained in consciousness, and therefore an instinct, or
as a distinctly formulated belief. The phenomena of nature must have
originated somehow, and there is no other conceivable source of motion
than a personal one.

Facts developed by scientific research tend to weaken this
anthropomorphism. The indestructibility of matter means that it has never
been created. The conservation of energy states that matter has always
been in motion. The law of organic evolution is supposed to do away with
the necessity for creative intervention in the origination of plants
and animals. Finally, the observed facts of the evolution of mind show
that this, the light of the world, grew like the organic beings which
it inhabits. Nothing higher than man has been found, and there seems to
be no ground for suspecting the existence of any higher mind. And man
himself dies and undergoes dissolution, like other organic bodies. The
result of this use of the facts of science is agnosticism, at least. We
know of nothing beyond what they teach, and some agnostics go so far as
to say, “ignorabimus,” we shall never know. Agnostics, however, have
their faces set in different directions. Some rest in it as a relief
from mental toil, as persons more theologically inclined join a church.
Others, believers in the progressive evolution of knowledge as of other
phenomena, set themselves to explore the unknown country, believing that
our opportunities in this direction are practically unlimited.

Let us look again at this anthropomorphism which is so deeply seated and
so widely spread. Its essence is the fact that we control our own bodies
in a great degree and that our material organs obey the behests of our
mind. We do things for, to us, satisfactory reasons, and for satisfactory
reasons we leave many things undone, which we could readily do. What has
science done towards explaining this most ordinary phenomenon? We may
truthfully say, absolutely nothing. It remains a fact that a majority, if
not all animals, move their bodies in their entirety or in part, because
they have sensations. In the lower animals these sensations are merely
either sense-impressions from without, or they are from within, being
produced by their physical condition. We rise but little in the scale,
when effects of memory are evident, for we find that many actions are
due to experience of the result of former actions. With still higher
development, mental organisation becomes more apparent, and the reasoning
and emotional states have more and more distinct outcome in intelligent
acts. But the mechanism by which the act is called forth by the mental
state, has never been explained.

The difficulty lies here. A sensation, or a state of mind, weighs
nothing. A material body, let it be a cell or a mass of cells, as a
muscle, weighs something. How then can the former move the latter? From a
mechanical point of view, it cannot be done. For that which has no weight
to set in motion anything which has weight, is to violate the law of the
conservation and correlation of energy. And this law is not only an _a
priori_ necessity, but it has been demonstrated _a posteriori_ in so many
cases that exceptions cannot be thought of. So a school of physiologists
say that _it is not done_. No animal eats because it is hungry, or drinks
because it is thirsty. The man does not direct the muscle of his arm when
he writes, nor those of his tongue when he speaks. But it is easy to see
why such a school of physiologists includes but an infinitesimal part of
mankind.

There is a school of evolutionists who account for the whole matter
in harmony with the views of the physiologists above mentioned. I
refer to the Post-Darwinians, who account for evolution by natural
selection exclusively. That is, animals originally moved aimlessly
in all directions. Those whose movements were beneficial to them,
survived, while those whose movements were not beneficial, or which were
injurious, perished. As frequent motions in a given direction lead to
habits, so were inaugurated movements which were habitually beneficial
to the actors, which have therefore persisted and multiplied. Thus were
established the multifarious habits of animals and men. Consciousness had
nothing to do with the process. It merely acted the part of the onlooker,
being simply aware of what went on. “Like the locomotive whistle,” says
Huxley, “it made considerable noise, but did none of the work.”

To a person familiar with the facts of the evolution of the structures of
animals, this seems like a most inadequate theory. It is a commonplace
that no kind of selection, either artificial or natural, ever originated
anything. Selection simply selects between existing alternatives. The
fundamental question of evolution is, What is the origin of things?
What is the fate of things originated? is a secondary question. To
this first question the Post-Darwinian reply must be, that everything
possible has originated no one knows yet how, so that what has survived
was necessarily to be found in this _embarras de richesse_. This is an
enormous assumption, and one to which the history of the life of past
and present ages lends no support. No such multifarious and promiscuous
variation is known to have occurred in living or in extinct organic
beings. But if the variations have not been infinite, then the chance of
the existing one having been hit upon becomes greatly reduced, and the
chance of its having occurred at the same time in individuals of opposite
sex is still smaller. Finally, the chance of its not being immediately
bred out by the overwhelming numbers of individuals not possessing it, is
indeed infinitesimal. In fact, it is evident that variations of structure
must have appeared in numbers of individuals of a species at the same
time, in order to secure survival. This indicates a common cause of
general application. That such causes have existed and been effective
at all periods of past and present time is amply proved by the facts
of geology and paleontology. The most influential in effecting change
of form and structure has been the motion of the body and of its parts
necessary to secure its food, to defend or protect itself from dangers,
and to reproduce its kind. The direct mechanical effects of these motions
on all the materials of the body may be traced in the successive stages
of the forms of past ages to those of the present time.

The objections above made to the theory of multifarious variation of
organic forms, apply with equal force to the theory of multifarious
movements of organic beings as furnishing the source of intelligent
habits. An additional and especial objection to the latter hypothesis
is the fact that it does not recognise the well-known adaptability of
animals to new situations and circumstances. If the events of life were
a routine moving with mathematical precision, the theory of origin from
multifarious variations would have a better foundation; but this is not
the case. Food, friends, and enemies do not appear in stated periods,
quantities, or qualities. Emergencies are common, and variation of
circumstance is the rule. Without sensation, uniform habits would but
lead to destruction. Everything which should not be presented in the
habitual form and at the habitual time would be neglected. Food and
drink would be refused, or not obtained; defense and reproduction would
not be attempted under the proper conditions. In fact, the conduct of
living beings would be no more intelligent than that of inorganic matter
in motion, were sensation to have no share in the process. But as soon
as we believe that the habits of animals are due to hunger, thirst,
and the perception of temperature, resistance, etc., their acts become
intelligible, and the formation of habits becomes a necessary consequence
of memory or the faculty of subsequent recognition of sensations
experienced at a previous time.

It is, in this connection, of great interest to recall the diverse
effects on our mental history of sense-impressions, as compared with
the effect of thought. Sense-impressions are not remembered in the
proper sense of the term. The repetition in memory is always vastly more
indistinct than the original state of consciousness; so much so as to be
a very different thing. Thought, on the contrary, when remembered at all,
is an exact repetition in quality of its first presence. The presentative
consciousness has one quality; the representative and re-representative
have another quality. This shows us that the structural arrangement
of brain substance concerned in the latter forms of consciousness
have a far more permanent quality than that due to the former. They
thus constitute more permanent acquisitions, and this being the case,
must have a most important bearing on evolution.[140] This is because
it is a representative state which determines action. The process of
determination may become so rapid as to be almost instantaneous; but
it had to be learned and the representation was what gave the act its
character and which organised the machinery of the automatic or reflex
act.

I here refer to the low degrees of consciousness sometimes called
subconsciousness, and the expression, “the subliminal consciousness,”
introduced by F. Meyer. All shades of consciousness intervene between
the most distinct forms and the unconsciousness of the reflex state.
Intelligent subconsciousness is a low stage in this evanescent
series. Stages on the passage to and from sleep, and other forms of
unconsciousness due to physical causes, are properly termed subconscious.
There are reflexes which are due to mechanisms which we inherit from
our animal and human ancestors, which are sometimes accompanied by
consciousness. The amount of intelligence displayed will depend on
the function involved. Experiments on vertebrate animals show that
intelligent adaptation of the movements of the body have been transferred
forwards in the brain during the course of evolution. Thus, a fish which
retains the medulla only, will guide itself through the water so as
to avoid danger. If the cerebellum and thalami are left to a reptile,
it will avoid destructive acts. But if a mammal is deprived of its
hemispheres, its actions are without design, and it is incapable of
self-preservation.

It may be that in the temporary absence of the higher consciousness,
the lower forms which once existed in our ancestors may be revived, as
in some of the elements of our dreams, and in some forms of cerebral
disease, when much of the blood is withdrawn from the cortex or parts
of it. The amount of consciousness necessary to the performance of
intelligent acts depends on the novelty of the situation. Many of the
theories on this subject, however, take it for granted that intelligent
acts arise in primarily unconscious states. This is only credible on the
supposition that such acts have arisen by natural selection only, a view
which I have combated on a previous page. Some authors use expressions
which can only imply unconscious consciousness. This is of course
absurd and self-contradictory. No source but sensation can be found for
intelligent acts.

It is true that there are some movements of organic bodies which have an
intelligent appearance, to which we cannot ascribe consciousness. Such
are those of the spermatozoöids and of the leucocytes. Some of the lowest
animals and plants cannot be yet proved to be conscious. We cannot now
explain the nature of the movements which these forms exhibit, but they
will probably yield to research. Enough it is for our present purpose
to know that the majority of animals are conscious for a large part
of their lives. And we have abundant evidence to show that movements
inaugurated in conscious states may be performed, so soon as learned, in
unconsciousness, and become part of the mental furniture of the animal.

It seems, then, that the control of ponderable matter by mental states
is not the exclusive prerogative of man, but is a phenomenon of common
observation in the animal kingdom. The facts indicate that it is
characteristic of mind to move resistant and tri-dimensional matter
under suitable conditions. These conditions are rigid, but within the
limits which they define, the sequence is definite. It is difficult
to believe in anything which is in direct violation of mechanical
necessity, and a mere hypothesis to that effect would not deserve a
moment’s consideration. But the belief that the body, or parts of it, are
moved in direct obedience to mental states is founded on more numerous
observations than are most of those beliefs which we hold to be true. In
fact there is no scientific doctrine better supported by observation and
experience than this one. On this ground alone, then, we are compelled
to believe in something in the universe which is supermechanical, or
extramechanical. We may call this supernaturalism, or occultism, or
what we like, but the fact remains. We have in it the germ of theism,
anthropomorphic, if you will, but one which grows in importance as we
come to examine further into the characteristics of mental action.

Before going into this part of the subject, I will refer to the part
played by mind in evolution. From what has gone before, it is evident
that this part has been an important one. If structures are produced by
motions, it is clear that habits produce structures, and _vice versa_;
and that under the law of natural selection only the useful and harmless
ones have survived. It follows, then, that progressive evolution of
form is secured by the presence of consciousness, and must, sooner or
later, fail without it. With development of intelligence the progress
must become more continuous and rapid. The facts of paleontology confirm
such a hypothesis; since the more intelligent animals (Mammalia) have
generally supplanted the less intelligent, (Reptilia and Batrachia),
whenever brought into conflict with them. The supremacy of the
intelligent over the unintelligent Mammalia is also clearly shown by
research into their past history. The modification of type, or evolution,
has also become more and more rapid as time has advanced and intelligence
developed.

There is another reason why the intervention of supermechanics into
the process has been necessary to secure such results as we observe in
the evolution of life. The law of inorganic evolution is, as Spencer
epitomises it, “the integration of matter and the dissipation of
energy.” Natural chemical reactions when not interfered with by human
intelligence, produce solids and give out heat. In other words, they
result in death and not in life. To produce life something different from
chemical energy has been necessary. And as the case is a parallel one
to the evolution of the types of life, we may suspect that the agency
at work has been a related one. It is some form of energy of the vital
class which is able to overcome the bonds which hold dead matter in
their adamantine grasp; and it is evident that such an energy could have
been organised only in some region where mechanics of a superchemical
order prevail. If we take a large view of the universe the alternatives
of life and death present themselves clearly before us. The law of the
latter is the integration of matter and dissipation of energy. The law of
the former is the converse; the loosing of the bonds of matter, and the
production of mechanism for the raising of the type of energy. The first
is catagenesis, the latter is anagenesis. The end of catagenesis is the
extinction of all mind and all life. Anagenesis sustains both. The best
foundation for our belief in anagenesis is that it exists. Catagenesis
has not destroyed it, and this fact must lead us to suspect that it is
the product of an agency which is superchemical; and the only such that
we know is consciousness.

In the presence of such a far-reaching hypothesis we are called upon to
consider more particularly the relations of mind to its physical basis.
The essential condition of the existence of mind as we know it, is
metabolism. The substance[141] of the nervous cells must be in a state
of decomposition and recomposition; old material loosing its chemical
bonds and giving forth energy, and new material arriving to undergo
the same process. The energy thus produced displays the phenomena of
mind, and as such differs widely from the inorganic energies of heat,
light, etc. The extent to which it displays habits depends on the part
of the nervous structure where it is produced. In the spinal cord it is
strictly automatic, and as we approach the hemispheres the so-called
voluntary element becomes more apparent, until a region is reached where
conception, deliberation, and judgment have their seat. In this region
energy is purely mental in its attributes, and it unlocks the executive
mechanism of the body, and puts it in action in accordance with the needs
of consciousness. So far, mechanical laws explain the order of events.
The supermechanical resides in the mental content and its effects on the
outgoing energy. No quantitative relation can be shown to exist between
the results of the mental processes of classification, conception,
judgment, etc, and the amount of incoming or outgoing energy. Indeed it
is plain that none can exist, if the statement already made be true,
viz., that thoughts are without weight. This part of the subject requires
critical treatment, but the general result is included in the above
statement, which is sufficient for our present purpose.

Since consciousness possesses such extraordinary relations to matter we
may well suspect that it has a wider distribution than comes within the
purview of our present limited ken. Why should it not protect and nourish
itself under conditions different from those which prevail in our planet?
The one condition necessary to it is metabolism—which means free energy.
The kind of physical basis cannot be important, provided it be capable
of exhibiting this kind of non-automatic energy. Automatism and all its
reflex consequences are the death of consciousness, as every one knows.
From such a type of energy all the fixed types of energy must have been
derived, and with them the types of both mental and physical structures.
In its freest form it should have as a physical basis a form of matter
which should be without habits, but always ready to undergo a catagenetic
change into routine energy and ultimate unconsciousness. Such a medium
should be unspecialised matter, and the consciousness inhabiting it would
be a creator. Such consciousness would be readily transmitted wherever
the physical basis should be suitable, and one such substance is our
protoplasm. The probable inferiority of protoplasm as a physical basis
is indicated by the long and tedious education which has been necessary
to enable beings made of it to attain a high order of intelligence. In
such a basis anagenesis is slow, and catagenesis is easy. Other bases
might be imagined where the reverse would be the case. No assumption
can be made as to a constant and limited amount of consciousness in the
universe. That such is the case is supposable; but it is also supposable
that the amount of suitable physical basis may be increased by a process
of assimilation of non-conscious matter, as is done by animals in
digestion and reproduction. This process might continue until all matter
should be brought into that generalised condition which is necessary
to the continuance of consciousness. The entire universe would then
be conscious, and a maximum limit would be reached. In the primitive
consciousness, whatever its extent in space in the Universe, we have the
Supreme Being or Person.


II. THE IDEALISM OF THEISM.

What I mean by the above expression is the theism which is supposed
to be demonstrated by idealistic metaphysics. There are two forms of
this alleged demonstration, both of which have for their starting-point
the basis of the idealistic philosophy. This basis is the fact that we
know nothing of matter excepting as sense-impressions. From this it is
inferred that were conscious beings to become extinct, matter would
no longer exist. It is also a consequence of this belief that what we
observe of the conduct of matter, which we call by the name of natural
law, is of purely mental origin.

If now the universe consist wholly of mind, the totality of it, either
as reduced to a body of general laws, or to a single comprehensive
generalisation, or concept, is one form of idealistic God. The other
demonstration is as follows. Since matter exists as mental states, and
since these mental states are common to mankind, who are mortal; since
these mental states reproduce themselves from generation to generation,
it is inferred that a permanent mental state exists, which possesses the
permanent sensations we call matter. And this common mind of humanity is
God.

The difference between these deities is this. In the first case he is an
abstraction of the human mind and therefore not a person apart from such
men as are capable of the generalisations of which he consists. In the
second case he is a person apart from humanity. The validity of either
demonstration to the thinker depends on his point of view. To every one
but the idealist, the first proposition is atheism. The evidence for the
second is metaphysical anthropomorphism, and would be a demonstration,
were the theory of idealism well founded.

The fact that we only know matter as sense-impressions does not, in
the opinion of realists, prove that it does not exist as the resistant
and extended. Resistance of each part to the movements of other parts
(energy), and extension in space, are conditions about which we have a
great deal of information. Our lives are spent in overcoming the one, and
in getting round the other. Our methods of dealing with it represent the
antithesis of those employed in thought-processes. The latter are best
performed in the absence of the muscular exertion which is so necessary
in dealing with the former. I have referred to the well-known difference
in consciousness between sense-impressions and the representation and
re-representation of them. The difference certainly implies a difference
in the immediate sources of the respective kinds of consciousness. The
one is produced by something different from that which produces the
other. In short, the one is produced by the contact of matter external
to our physical basis, and the other is produced by a modification of
brain-structure; and in the first place by that simplest form of it
which is the cause of memory. The effect of such observation is the
conviction that matter exists as something outside of consciousness or
mind, in spite of the fact that we only know it in consciousness. In a
word, consciousness and knowledge imply the existence rather than the
non-existence of something which is known.

The fundamental actualities are, then, subject and object; or, in popular
language, mind and matter. Philosophy includes the sciences which embrace
the knowledge of both subject and object; but the practical philosophy
is the science of the mutual relations of the two. It may be said that
subject and object are opposite sides of the same reality, but this form
of expression appears to me to be no more accurate than the statement
that energy and matter are opposite sides of the same thing. As energy
is the motion of matter, mind is the intelligence of matter; and both
may be called properties of matter with equal propriety, since both are
impossible without a physical basis. Mind, however, differs from energy
in possessing some intrinsic qualities which are in essence independent
of the qualities of the physical basis; and these intrinsic qualities
are the forms of logic. These are, however, but a part of the totality
of mind, although they underlie or penetrate all its representative
activities.

While mind then cannot exist without a physical basis, it remains to
be considered whether any other objective world is necessary to its
existence. It is sometimes alleged that consciousness could not exist
without an objective, exterior to its physical basis. If, however,
consciousness is a necessary attribute of free energy, the latter purely
metaphysical speculation has no foundation. The “intuition of Being”
(Rosmini) would exist, albeit not much specialised, in the absence of
multifarious objects; but the forms of logic would characterise it
nevertheless.

It is alleged that we can never know matter as it is, because our
observation is restricted to the mutual relations of its component
parts. In this assertion our intelligence necessarily concurs, but this
need not cause us to relax our exertions in the pursuit of knowledge.
The practical philosophy is, as already remarked, the knowledge of the
relations subsisting between mind and matter, so that our most valuable
acquisition will be in the end the laws of a relation. We may well
postpone our endeavors after the absolute, even if we can ever attain a
knowledge of it. The realist is content to believe that if we do not know
“things as they are in themselves,” it is because, of the imperfection of
our senses. But we are constantly discovering new aids to research, and
we can put no limit to our power in this direction.

The research into the relations of subject and object, means to theology,
an investigation as to the existence and nature of Deity, and as to an
existence for conscious beings in other than terrestrial life. The pure
idealist reaches an affirmative answer to these problems by a short and
easy route, based on a study of the intrinsic nature of mind alone. The
pure realist reaches a negative conclusion by an equally short cut, by
considering the properties of matter alone. Not a few thinkers entertain
both doctrines at one and the same time, although they are mutually
exclusive and contradictory. No wonder that they reach what Montgomery
well terms “the puzzle of puzzles.” But the rational conclusion from this
deadlock must be, that there is something wrong with the methods of both
sides. To the practical mind it seems that the vice in both methods is
the failure to harmonise properly with their own, the facts adduced by
the opposite side in the discussion. And it is indeed evident that that
cannot be the final philosophy which restricts itself to a consideration
of mind alone; or that which restricts itself to a consideration of
matter alone. That men should pursue different lines of research is
natural. Those whose minds are capable in the fields of conception
naturally prefer idealistic studies; while those whose especial genius
lies in the direction of mechanics, easily pursue-materialistic research.
What is needed is a combination of the two fields of ability in the same
mind.

A considerable class of serious people, observing the diversities between
the schools of philosophy, regard such studies as useless. Since they
have not the disposition or ability to solve the question for themselves,
they find it best to rest in uncertainty, which has optimistic or
pessimistic tendencies according to temperament and education. The
optimist has faith that all is, and all will be, well; while the
pessimist takes the opposite view. Both are sustained in their position
by those teachers who teach the impotence of our faculties and the
uselessness of knowledge. Such appeal in support of their position to the
facts already cited; the imperfection of our senses; the relativity of
knowledge; the inscrutable nature of mind and matter, etc. This position
is, however, a plea of avoidance, and it will be time enough to listen to
it when the avenues of the increase of human knowledge are permanently
closed. This they are not at present.

The key to the position is the doctrine of evolution. Here we behold
the interaction of subject and object, both in our own persons and in
the inferior beings which are with us, and which have preceded us on
earth. That mind has not sprung full-fledged upon this planet, is clear;
and that it has made wonderful progress in power, is equally clear. Why
did it not appear with all its powers “in the beginning”? The answer
obviously is, “the intractability of matter.” Why has it progressed in
face of this obstacle? The answer is, the tractability of matter. Mind,
through its intrinsic quality, has coërced matter, in ever increasing
degree, and the limit of its capacity in this direction plainly has not
yet been reached. Its most important conquest has been that of its own
physical basis, and next to it is the conquest of the world of objects by
which it is surrounded. Its last conquest will be the knowledge of its
destiny, as a projection of its known past. To this end the knowledge
of its own constitution is essential, but this is not all, as the pure
idealist would have us believe. The knowledge of external relations is
also essential, for we can in no state of being escape them. Psychic life
is an “internal adjustment to external relations,” quite as much as is
the physical life, as it is defined by Spencer in the phrase just quoted.

The Deity of evolution indicated in the first section of this paper,
will not satisfy the pure idealist. He is not an absolute, since He
is compelled to respect relations. But we find Him to be just, which
he evidently is not if absolute. He is anthropomorphic, and not an
abstraction of the human mind. And yet as the seat of rationality, and
as the director of free energy, He possesses the function of creator
of whatever is possible. The evolution of independent human minds has
been only possible through education, and here as elsewhere, teachable
students have met with greater success than the stolid.

It has been already pointed out that the process of evolution may be
either progressive (Anagenesis) or retrogressive (Catagenesis). This is
well known to be the case with organic types, where degenerate phyla are
common. It seems, indeed, that in the order of things degeneracy has
occurred wherever it has been possible; that is, under circumstances
which permitted vegetative life through lack of stimuli to energetic
motion. There has always been “room at the top”; but only when all
the lower fields of existence have been for the time being filled,
has there been room at the top only. The history of mental evolution
has accompanied that of general structural evolution, and for similar
reasons. It is well illustrated in human society to-day. These facts
suggest that this has been the history of all evolution, since they
harmonise with the order of evolution observed in our solar system, in
which the inorganic has preceded the organic, or Catagenesis has preceded
Anagenesis. If the forms of non-vital energy represent a result of
Catagenesis, we are not bound to look on minerals as in any sense living,
as has been suggested by Haeckel and others. Most, if not all, forms
of chemical energy have sunk below the vital level, and certainly far
below the possibility of displaying consciousness. We are here looking
over unexplored territory, and one whose elucidation is entirely in the
future, but we may put our ideas in order, if we do nothing more.

Besides his relations to the impersonal materials that surround him, man
has essential relations to his fellow-man. The laws of these relations
are ethics. Much is written and spoken against the utilitarian or
evolutionary theory of ethics. I cannot, however, escape the conviction
that this theory offers the true explanation of the rise of the ethical
sentiment in mankind. But to understand it aright, we must include
the growth of the social sentiment, as well as that of the rational
element, in the evolution of justice or right. The opponents of this view
sometimes commit the error common to all those who do not understand the
nature of mental evolution. Some of them imagine that it is necessary to
suppose that, in harmony with this theory, every man decides his every
act solely in accordance with what appears to him at the time to subserve
the lowest form of selfishness of which he is capable. The doctrine,
on the contrary, maintains that habits of honesty and justice are the
result of the education of the ages, and that men obey such motives
according to their developmental status; that is, in accordance with the
evolution of the habit of preferring the higher to the lower forms of
utility. The further question of what it is that has raised the standard
of utility, is answered by what we see going on around us. The fear of
the law; the love of the approbation of our fellows; the sympathy with
our fellow-men; the fear of their indignation; all these are educators of
great potency, which have always been active. These motives, organised as
character, are compulsory, and it would be strange if they have not been
effective in producing results.

Practical ethics has to do with material beings and their material
possessions, i. e. with person and property. Without the objective,
the content of ethics is purely ideal, consisting of love and hate,
and the justice and injustice of opinion which might be the outcome of
those sentiments. These sentiments are realities of the subjective,
representing the affections, as the form of thought constitutes the
rational faculties. But if we endeavor in thought to deprive love
and hate, justice and injustice, of all material consequences and
implications, we deprive those sentiments of much of their value if we
do not abolish their occasions altogether. It appears to me at least
doubtful whether hate and injustice could exist in a society consisting
of disembodied minds, if such beings could be imagined; a supposition
which I cannot entertain.

If ethics cannot exist without material expression, it is clear that,
on the other hand, they cannot exist without a subjective foundation.
Thus ethics is the highest expression of the relation between mind and
matter. Ethics is the practical application of the mental powers to
human relations, and the more complete the evolution of mind, the more
perfect is the ethical practice. Thus the evolution of the mind is the
guarantee of ethical progress, and the more intelligent the mind, the
more easy will the evolution be. As in all education, the laggards
experience the severities of compulsion, while pains and penalties are
avoided by those who perceive their approach and do not await their
arrival. Here we have the utilitarian ground of our numerous ethical
and religious organisations. They invite men to _a priori_ subjective
theory, and objective practice, so as to preserve society from the evils
of inferior and painful methods of compulsion, which lie at the basis of
ethical evolution. It is the dread of this method which rouses a natural
repugnance in the minds of many men to the doctrine which teaches of it.
But it must be remembered that the instruments of evolution change with
the thing that is evolving, and the conditions of progressive ethics are
the stages of progress of the mind. What is necessary for the education
of the lower mind is no longer necessary for the higher. This is not only
a truth of philosophy, but the fact may be discerned in the religions
which men have made for themselves. They describe the ethical state of
their authors, and prescribe the treatment appropriate to it.

Our knowledge of some parts of evolutionary history is meagre, and on
some of its chapters we are absolutely in the dark. This is especially
true of the causes of the appearance of life and consciousness on the
earth. Spontaneous generation has not been proven, and the immediate
source of sensation is unknown. The conclusions enumerated in the
preceding pages are derived from evidence presented in more or less
complete fragments. But the thesis remains true that mind possesses a
limited control over its physical basis, but one which is sufficient to
account for the main direction of the evolution of those organic forms
which possess it. And it is also true that the essential forms of the
rational mind are not due to corresponding qualities of the physical
basis. These forms are: the principles of identity, of abstraction, and
of generalisation or conception. These characteristics constitute the
idealistic essence of Theism. But we look to the realistic element of
Theism for the demonstration of the distinct personality of God.

                                                               E. D. COPE.


FOOTNOTES:

[140] _Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society_, 1889, p. 495

[141] Recent experiments conducted in the laboratory of the Johns Hopkins
University show that the cytoplasm of cells, which are exhausted by
labor, is vacuolated.




LITERARY CORRESPONDENCE.




GERMANY.


The name of Cesare Lombroso is now more and more mentioned in Germany,
not only in psychiatrical, juridical, and sociological works, written
for the learned public, but also in the newspapers and magazines. By the
side of occasional recognition of his doctrine of the born criminal and
genius, we meet—and these are the majority of the cases—with violent
attacks on it, which not seldom exhibit real ignorance of the views of
the celebrated Italian investigator. Lombroso himself is partly to blame
for this unfortunate circumstance, for his writings, with their mountains
of undigested material, are so lacking in unity and perspicuity that
misconceptions are very apt to arise.

The German translator of Lombroso, DR. H. KURELLA, psychiatrist in
Kreuzburg, in Silesia, has recently given to the world a synoptical
exposition of Lombroso’s theory of the born criminal, under the title
_Cesare Lombroso und die Naturgeschichte des Verbrechers_, Hamburg, 1892,
Richter. The author not only expounds the doctrines of Lombroso, but also
deals critically with them, and, although upon the whole his sympathies
are with the views of the Italian scientist, he nevertheless believes
that the existence of a fixed type of the _delinquente nato_, embracing
all special forms of criminality, is yet a question of doubt. On the
other hand, MAX NORDAU, a widely-read author of ours, gives unqualified
recognition to the theories of Lombroso, fully accepting the idea of
“degeneration,” first introduced by Morel into science and further
developed by Lombroso, and, in completion of the work of his master,
extending this idea to art and literature. In his work, _Entartung_, the
first volume of which was recently published by Carl Duncker, of Berlin,
and is dedicated to Lombroso, “his dear, admired master,” he says:
“Degenerate types are not always criminals, prostitutes, anarchists, and
idiots. They are often writers and artists, and these exhibit the same
mental, and frequently also the same physical, traits as those members of
the same anthropological family that satisfy their diseased instincts by
means of the murderer’s knife or the cartridge of the dynamitard, instead
of with pen and pencil.”

People who are acquainted with Nordau’s previous works will perhaps
imagine that this latest book of his is simply a mass of journalistic
ebullitions which can lay no claim to _scientific_ value. This, however,
is wrong. Nordau is not only well acquainted with the patho-psychological
literature of this province—especially with the French—but he also
turns his knowledge to scientific account, which psychiatrists like
Pelman and others have publicly admitted. Taking it as a whole, Nordau
has presented in this first volume of his work a good psychology of
mysticism—good, that is, for all who accept the association psychology.
Nordau’s expositions embrace all the psychological theories which belong
in this province, with their applications to individuals and to the
tendencies of modern literature and art. With respect to the first point,
the author is right in saying that he does not offer here anything new
to the professional psychologist, but he is wrong in his theory that
psychologists will read this chapter with impatience, for his exposition
is unquestioniably elegantly written. Of much greater interest is the
second part, in which a diagnosis of imbecility is rendered upon the
English pre-Raphaelites, the French symbolists, the Tolstois, and
Richard Wagners. The chapter on Richard Wagner will especially attract
attention for its severity. Nordau closes it with the words, “of all the
aberrations of the present time, Wagnerism is the most widely diffused
and the most important. The playhouse at Bayreuth, the _Bayreuther
Blätter_, the Parisian _Revue Wagnerienne_, are lasting monuments by
which the future will measure in wonderment the dimensions of this
degeneration and hysteria of our day.”

Nordau throws light upon numerous mooted phenomena of modern art and
literature, pointing out their diseased features. One is really surprised
at the extent of his work. All in all, it may be foreseen that Koch’s
doctrine of the “psychopathical minor factors”—or those psychical factors
which constitute the border-line between mental health and disease—will
clear up much more extensive fields than they have, when applied in the
direction indicated by Nordau. KOCH has now published the third part of
his work, (which I have repeatedly mentioned in _The Monist_) and thus
completed it. He concludes his last volume with these words: “The domain
of the ‘psychopathical minor factors’ is a wide and very interesting one.
Whosoever enters profoundly into it will learn to look at much in life
with different eyes from those with which he began, will understand many
men and many human acts, which before he did not understand. There are
yet many scientific treasures to be unearthed in this field, and I hope
that I shall win many a coadjutor. I hope, also, that qualified men will
make this theory of the psychopathical minor factors fruitful in wider
fields and for greater problems.”

It is a common belief that it is pre-eminently in our time that psychical
disorders and psychical minor factors play so great a rôle. But that in
the sense of Nordau they are not of so recent origin a careful reader
will learn from a new work of LUDWIG GEIGER, the well-known historian
of literature and civilisation (Paetel, Berlin). Its title is: _Berlin,
1688-1840: Geschichte des geistigen Lebens der preussischen Hauptstadt_.
As yet, only the first volume has appeared, which extends to the death of
Frederick the Great. The reader, however, would obtain an entirely wrong
impression of the work if he were to believe that psychiatrical points
of view are expressly dwelt upon in this book. To find them he must read
between the lines. The book is an extraordinarily painstaking history of
the civilisation of Berlin, taken from the sources, and giving especial
prominence to intellectual factors. We shall reserve the detailed
discussion of this important work for another occasion, perhaps until it
is fully completed.

                                                           CHRISTIAN UFER.




BOOK REVIEWS.


HAND-COMMENTAR ZUM NEUEN TESTAMENT. IV. EVANGELIUM, BRIEFL UND
OFFENBARUNG DES JOHANNES. Bearbeitet von _H. J. Holtzmann_. Zweite
verbesserte und vermehrte Auflage. (Freiburg I. B. and Leipsic: 1893. J.
C. B. Mohr.)

The fourth gospel, of all the sacred writings of the New Testament, has
always been the reviewer’s favorite book. Its profundity, its wealth of
philosophical ideas, the fervor of its author’s religious sentiment,
and the spiritual grace that pervades the whole book, exercised an
unspeakable charm on my mind. This gospel was the first to rouse my
doubts in the belief of literal inspiration, and it was again the one,
which, after the severest storms of infidelity had blown over, reconciled
me to the spirit of Christianity. Thus the perusal of Professor
Holtzmann’s commentary again arouses the recollections of former
struggles, and I find that even to-day the first chapter of the fourth
gospel has lost none of its fascination. It is a wonderful book, and its
author is a man whom I always longed to meet and shake hands with, over
a span of almost two millenniums and a world-wide abyss of difference of
opinion.

Only those who are familiar with the difficulties of the St. John
literature of the New Testament can really appreciate this latest work
of Prof. H. J. Holtzmann. He presents in a most clear and concise manner
the problems involved, together with their various solutions, critically
arranged. He carefully avoids obtruding on the reader his own views.
He stands before us as a faithful compiler only. I say “only,” but
this “only” means a great deal. It does not mean that he suppresses or
conceals his own views, it means that he states the facts with scrupulous
impartiality. If there is any partiality apparent in his treatment of
the sacred writings, it is the reverent attitude he preserves whenever
love of truth obliges him to accept the negative result of critical
investigations. And where is there a theological scholar to-day, who
is orthodox enough to dare to accept the theory that the gospel of St.
John was written by the apostle? Holtzmann carries his impartiality
to the extent of not rejecting this old traditional idea, concerning
the authorship of the fourth gospel, but the evidence against it is
overwhelmingly sufficient to satisfy the most narrowminded believer.
Holtzmann teaches us at the same time to understand the spirit of
the first and second century of our era, and thus excludes from the
beginning the old prejudice, that if the author were not the man whom
he impersonated his work must be regarded as a fraud. The historical
value of the book lies in the revelations it gives us concerning the
religious demands of the times in which it was written. The fourth
gospel originated when the Jewish religiosity of growing Christianity
began to expand into cosmic universality. The author was undoubtedly a
Jew-Christian, whose home most likely was Ephesus. Ephesus was the place
where we find the first beginnings of Christian Alexandrianism. Here the
Logos-idea was introduced into Christian thought. Philo, the Alexandrian
Jew, had already represented Moses as the incarnation of the divine
Logos. Should not now a Christian familiar with Philo’s philosophy apply
the same method to Jesus of Nazareth? Some work adapted to satisfy the
wants of the time and especially the religious yearnings for knowledge as
a means of edification was needed. The Christ-idea had taken a definite
shape in the imagination of the Christian congregations of Asia Minor,
consisting of diaspora Jews and Gentiles, and their Christ-idea found a
worthy expression in the picture of Jesus of Nazareth as we have it in
the fourth gospel.

The fact that the author of the fourth gospel was a Jew-Christian,
appears from his readiness to explain Jewish customs. He knows Judaism,
and is familiar with Jerusalem as it appeared after the destruction of
the temple. The probability is that he wrote his gospel between 120 and
140. He is comparable to Matthew in so far as both are greatly interested
in the controversy between Gentiles _versus_ Jews, yet Matthew’s
Israel has grown into the world-wide cosmos. The frequent occurrence
of the very word “cosmos” in the fourth gospel is remarkable. In the
same way the Greek term γιγνώσκειν (to know) appears besides the older
term πιστεύειν (to believe), which latter is a translation of a Jewish
conception, still employed so vigorously by St. Paul. The author of the
fourth gospel is not familiar with Galilee and does not seem to care for
consistency in the details of his accounts, for he frequently contradicts
his own statements. The most important differences between his and the
three synoptic gospels are the accounts as to the main field of Jesus’s
activity, which according to St. John was Judea, according to the
synoptic gospels Galilee, and the day of Jesus’s death, which according
to St. John is the 14th of Nisan, according to the synoptic gospels the
15th of Nisan, so that if we follow the latter, Jesus would have been
tried and condemned, against all Jewish customs, on one of the greatest
festival days. Holtzmann rightly warns the reader, that whatever may
speak in favor of the synoptic gospels as being, in general, historically
more correct, the author of the fourth gospel might have had some special
source for this particular fact.—

The Revelation of St. John has given more trouble to the Christian
exegesis than any other book, and light was not shed upon its plan and
construction, until it was found to be one instance only of a whole class
of literary productions. When we consider the Revelation of St. John in
the same line with other apocalyptic works, and when we understand the
mental disposition of the pious Jews shortly before and after Christ, we
have a clew to the enigmatic visions which are unrolled before our eyes.

The expectations of the Jews in the times of the Maccabees were
disappointed again and again. The great events of the world did not
justify the national hopes, and God did not seem to care about fulfilling
his promises. The last prophet, who called himself Malachi, or “the
messenger of God,” proclaimed the message of the Lord, “Yet I loved
Jacob,” and he comforts the faithful who still endure in all their
tribulations, that “a book of remembrance is written before him for them
that feared the Lord and that thought upon His name.” After Malachi,
a number of revelations appeared, which, to the satisfaction of the
Messianic expectations, explained the events of the world, and prophesied
that those only who should persevere until the end would be called upon
to rule, together with the “Son of Man,” who is to come to smite the
heathens and to rule them with an iron rod. The first apocalyptic author,
who wrote in 164 B. C., impersonated Daniel, the prophet, who had lived
about 400 B. C. The powerful nations of the world are represented as
beasts, the fourth and last beast being the Macedonian empire. It has
ten horns, that is, rulers, the last one being Antiochus Epiphanes. As
soon as his power is broken, the power over the earth will be given to
Israel, which is called the Son of Man. The power of the tenth horn was
broken, indeed, yet the Messianic hopes remained unfulfilled, and thus
new prophecies were wanted, which should again explain the plans of
the Almighty, so that the faithful would still endure and hope. Thus,
Henoch was written, and after Henoch the Assumption of Moses, the book of
Baruch, and other revelations.

The apocalyptic literature is characterised by Messianic expectations and
eschatological reflections. The end of the present course of affairs is
said to be near at hand and a new order will be established in which the
faithful shall rule for a whole millennium and the wicked be tormented.

The Revelation of St. John represents this spirit of apocalyptic hopes
among the early Christians of Asia Minor. It throws much light upon the
conditions and the conceptions of a period concerning which we have
very little information. We here see Christianity in its beginnings.
The coloring of the Revelation is still Jewish. Its author stands in
a conscious contrast to the Greek spirit which is about to change the
properly Jewish character of the new doctrine. The author of the St. John
revelation is a Jew to the backbone still; he denounces the antinomistic
Christianity of the Gentiles as represented by Nocolaitanes whom, we are
told, God hateth. He does not directly mention the apostle St. Paul, but
there is little doubt that he is alluded to in Chap. II, 2, as one of
them “which say they are apostles and are not.”

The more powerful the Greek spirit grew in the church, the weaker became
these original features inherited from the diaspora Jews until they
were dropped forever through the efforts of Origenes who made a decided
and successful opposition to the belief in the millennium. Yet it took
some time for the traditional view of the Messiah to change into the
purer and more spiritual Christ-ideal There were two parties in the
early church who spoke two radically different idioms; the one still
cherished the old chiliasm, dreaming of the establishment of a millennium
on earth. Their terminology moved always in the same allegories: they
spoke of green and fat fields and of sulphurous abysses, of white horses
and terrible beasts, of trees of life, of golden cities and of war and
bloodshed, while the other party spoke of Logos, of the eternal Son
through whom the world had been made, of “the dispensation of the fulness
of the times in which God might gather together in one all things in
Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth,” of the pleroma
and of aeons.

The Revelation of St. John is an expression of the former party and it
was natural that after a complete victory of the latter party, Christian
teachers knew not what to make of this book which shows Christian views
by the side of an irreconcilable Judaism, and a worldly empire in
Jerusalem, the beloved city with twenty-four Jewish elders representing
the twelve tribes of Israel. The rest of Jerusalem is to be finally
converted while there is no hope for paganism. The difference between
Israelites and Gentiles remains a radical one even in the Holy City when
the new heaven and the new earth has been created. The Gentile-Christians
appear as citizens of a lower order. The Israelites alone live in the
city while the Gentiles only walk in the light thereof, and they shall
bring the glory and honor of the nations into it.

We have given a few glimpses of the problems of the St. John literature
only. It is impossible to go over the whole field. Nor is it necessary to
do so. Professor Holtzmann has given us so complete a presentation that
we need but refer to his work which is indispensable to all interested
in the literature of the New Testament. It will be the more valuable
and welcome as it is furnished with an index, a feature rarely found in
German books.

                                                                     P. C.


DIE WILLENSFREIHEIT UND IHRE GEGNER. By _Dr. Constantin Gutberlet_.
Fulda: Fuldaer Actiendruckerei. 1893.

Dr. Constantin Gutberlet regards the doctrine of free-will as a cardinal
doctrine of Christianity. In the present booklet he endeavors to show
that all attacks made upon it by unchristian savants have failed. He
criticises Höffding, Lombroso, Wundt, Münsterberg, Lotze, P. Ree, and
Schopenhauer, and establishes as his own view a theory of free-will which
he calls “freedom of choice.” He says: “There is no decision without
_sufficient_ reason, but there may be without _rational_ reason. The
sufficient reason is that a greater good may be recognised as possessing
‘blind’ sides, that we can do without it and even reject it for the sake
of these ‘blind’ sides. On the other hand, a lesser good may be given as
an object of willing, and our willing by its own energy conditions the
free decision of the will” (p. 25). Freedom of will is not a reversal
of causation, which latter, according to Gutberlet, is “an absolutely
necessary law” (p. 8 and _passim_).

It is difficult to understand how Gutberlet, taking this view, can class
himself among the indeterminists. From his premises, we should expect
him to take the view which we have defended, that freedom of will is not
contradictory to determinism. If freedom of will means freedom of choice,
in which “we ourselves, as the contents of our ideas, feelings, and
dispositions, are the cause not only of our activities, but also of our
free decision” (p. 19), then our decisions are most certainly determined
by our character. Gutberlet’s criticism of Wundt (pp. 167-171), who
defends freedom of will and determinism, is wide of the mark, and it
seems that Gutberlet is either not clear on this point himself or he does
not draw the consequences of his own standpoint. Says Gutberlet: “Only
on the supposition that there is no other than ‘mechanical’ causation of
natural forces, can the determinist maintain that freedom abolishes the
principle of causation. In the application of the principle of Causation
‘what happens has a cause’ to natural forces, the principle can be
inverted thus: ‘when all sufficient causes are given, the effect follows
with necessity.’ Yet if there are spiritual agents which stand above the
mechanical causation of nature and natural forces, we cannot _a priori_
declare that their effects follow with the same necessity from their
character as is the case with nature. Accordingly, unless we assume the
questionable theory that free causation is impossible, we cannot invert
here the principle of causation and use it against free decision” (p.
168).

How does this sentence agree with Mr. Gutberlet’s statements that
causation is an absolutely necessary law and that “we ourselves ...
are the cause of our free decision.” Our decisions are determined by
“our ideas, feelings, and dispositions,” and yet a sufficient cause
determines its effect only if the causation is mechanical, not if it is
spiritual. Gutberlet explains the difficulty as follows: “Certainly, if
we did not reduce the free decision _once made_ (die _eingetretene_ freie
Entscheidung), to an adequate cause, we should sin against logic and
psychology. But we understand by ‘adequate cause of a decision’ not only
the influence of motives, but also the energy of a free will.” Very well
then, Mr. Gutberlet would be a determinist as much as Wundt. Decisions
are determined by two factors: (1) by the motives (i. e. the objects
which act as stimuli upon the will) and (2) by the character of the
agent. Not everybody is affected by the same stimulus in the same way.
One chooses this and another that motive, and his character determines
the choice; and a man of a certain character, under definitely given
conditions, will freely and yet necessarily choose a certain motive. Dr.
Gutberlet, it appears to us, says yes and no in one breath.

Dr. Gutberlet is the editor of the _Philosophisches Jahrbuch_, a Roman
Catholic periodical. He belongs to that class of men who by partisans of
free thought are regarded as especially dangerous. He is not as narrow
as the common type of _defensores fidei_. He studies the works of modern
savants “whose intellectual superiority,” as he confesses, he “admires
in many respects.” He is broader than most of his _confreres_, and thus
he makes the creed of his church appear broader than it practically is.
We can see no danger in the appearance of such men. It is true, he will
make converts among the educated, or at least, he will keep some wavering
elements within the pale of the church; for the Roman church is, upon the
whole, still very hostile to progress. But, on the other hand, such a man
is in his circles a missionary of science; he will help to broaden the
views of his brethren. He is learning, and they will learn from him.

                                                                     P. C.


GRUNDZÜGE DER PHYSIOLOGISCHEN PSYCHOLOGIE. By _Wilhelm Wundt_. Leipsic:
Wilhelm Engelmann. 1893.

Wundt’s “Physiological Psychology” is perhaps justly regarded as his
best and most valuable work. We have just received the first part of the
fourth edition and may expect that the second part will soon appear. We
intend to review the whole work as soon as completed, and will state
here only that this new edition contains, among many emendations and
additions, an explicit account of the modern methods of psychological
investigations, with descriptions and illustrations of the most important
instruments invented for that purpose.

                                                                      κρς.


VERGLEICHEND-ENTWICKELUNGSGESCHICHTLICHE UND ANATOMISCHE STUDIEN IM
BEREICHE DER HIRNANATOMIE. 3. RIECHAPPARAT UND AMMONSHORN. Abdruck
aus _Anatomischer Anzeiger_. By _Dr. L. Edinger_. (Jena: 1893. Gustav
Fischer.)

Dr. Edinger proves in this essay that in the cerebral evolution of
animals the cortex makes its first appearance in the formation of the
cornu ammonis. This convolution being the centre of smell, it is more
than merely probable that smell sensations, or something analogous to
smell sensations, were phylogenetically the first psychical functions.

                                                                      κρς.


ÉTAT MENTAL DES HYSTÉRIQUES LES STIGMATES MENTAUX. By _Pierre Janet_.
Paris: Rueff & Co. 1892.

M. Pierre Janet, one of the most prominent disciples of Professor
Charcot, presents in this little volume of two hundred and thirty-three
pages a summary of the results of modern psychical research as it is
understood at the Salpétrière. Charcot himself recommends the book to the
medical profession. Janet investigates anæsthesia (Chap. I), amnesia,
abulia, the diseases of motion, and the modifications of character. The
author proposes to “describe the phenomena and endeavors to establish a
rigorous determinism of their relations. The moral view of a diseased
person,” he says, “ought to constitute a part of the clinical diagnosis
while the psychical state must be closely investigated in its connection
with physiological facts. This is the only way in which the physician
can gain a knowledge of the entire man and understand the diseases which
affect his organism.”

Professor Charcot states that Professor Janet’s researches on the mental
state of hysterical persons were begun long ago and completed under his
supervision; that they were expounded by M. Janet in the Spring of 1892
in a few lectures at the Salpétrière; that they tend to confirm the
idea, often expressed in his own teachings, that hysteria is upon the
whole a mental disease.

Hypnotism has long enough been regarded not only as harmless but even as
a panacea for almost all the ailments of mankind. It would be well to
heed Charcot’s warning, as hysterical diseases may be treated with better
success, if the mystery that still surrounds them disappears before calm
and scientific investigation.

                                                                        ς.


L’ÉCOLE D’ANTHROPOLOGIE CRIMINELLE. By _l’Abbé Maurice de Baets_. Gand:
P. van Fleteren. 1893.

Dr. de Baets, Professor of Philosophy of the Gregorian University
of Rome, Italy, and Secretary to the Bishop of Ghent, criticises in
this elegantly printed little volume the modern school of criminal
anthropology. He believes with Herbert Spencer that, if a great number
of people accept certain errors, these errors must contain a kernel of
truth. Professor de Baets says that he does not deny crime to be an
outgrowth of the organism, to be inherited, to be closely connected with
insanity, etc., but he cannot approve of criminal unaccountableness. The
denial of responsibility, he says, is the denial of the wrong, and the
denial of the wrong is the denial of morality. He sums up his view in
italics on page 48: “Man is responsible for his acts in the measure that
his acts depend on a free will.”

                                                                      κρς.


AGAINST DOGMA AND FREE-WILL. By _H. Croft Hiller_. London: Williams and
NORGATE. 1892.

The author has much to say against ecclesiasticism and sacerdotalism, and
while he repudiates such men as Wundt and Ribot, he “begs to thank Drs.
Weismann, Luys, and Ferrier from whose labors the views expressed in this
treatise derive that scientific authentication without which they would
be worthless.” The book is apparently a first venture into the stormy
ocean of literary pursuits.

                                                                        ς.


THE PHILOSOPHY OF INDIVIDUALITY, OR THE ONE AND THE MANY. By _Antoinette
Brown Blackwell_. New York and London: G. P. Putnam’s Sons. 1893.

The author trusts that she has “_demonstrated_ a conscious immortality.”
In a former book of hers entitled “The Physical Basis of Immortality,”
1876, she propounded “the theory of persistent mind-matter individuals”
which are to be conceived as ultimate atoms. The present volume of five
hundred and nineteen pages is written to show that “this conception of
the ultimate atoms could consistently explain and harmonise mental and
material phenomena and by coördinated interpretations of the most diverse
processes simplify and unify nature and her manifestations.” The theory
of the correlation of matter and mind is accepted; “Nature,” the author
says, “is nothing if not mathematical,” and there are many passages to
which no monistic thinker would take exception. Along with them we find
statements, e. g. on the rhythmic motion of atoms, etc., which it will be
difficult to prove. Her peculiar view is characterised in the following
sentence: “All ultimate individualities _may_ be identical in kind, but
no obvious necessity decides that they _must_ be, and in an order of
things where other varieties are prevalent, the weight of evidence for
the present is on the side of varieties, even in the ultimate units.”
The author’s theory (if we rightly understand her) has been tried
before. Some suggestions of Goethe’s seem to indicate that he believed
in soul-monads, and the German psychologist Herbart erected on the
assumption of material soul-atoms his system of a mathematical psychology
in which sound science was curiously mingled with improbable vagaries.
The author of “The Philosophy of Individuality,” although apparently
quite well informed otherwise, has, strange enough, not taken notice
either of Goethe or of Herbart. Perhaps she would have abandoned her
theory if she had been fully familiar with Herbartism and the critique
which it has received; for Herbart’s soul-atoms are to-day regarded as a
thing of the past.

                                                                      κρς.


DIE GRUNDBEGRIFFE DER GEGENWART. By _Prof. Rudolf Eucken_. Leipsic: Veit
& Co. 1893.

Prof. Rudolf Eucken discusses in this volume such topics as
“Subjective—Objective”; “A priori—A posteriori”; “Monism—Dualism”;
“Idealism, Realism, and Naturalism”; “Theoretical—Practical,” and
so forth. It seems to us that Eucken has not yet fully succeeded in
reconciling his philosophy with natural science. We are glad to notice
that he has a critical eye for the shortcomings of naturalists under
whose methods of classification and mechanical conceptions the properly
spiritual of man would be eliminated. He is judicious in his exposition
of the various problems, but we miss a final solution, such as would
clearly state and recognise the truth in both. Nevertheless the book is
sound, full of valuable information, and its perusal is to be recommended
to every student of philosophy.

                                                                      κρς.


THE ÆSTHETIC ELEMENT IN MORALITY. By _Frank Chapman Sharp, Ph.D._ New
York: Macmillan & Co. 1893.

The book contains chapters on: (1) the theory of altruism; (2) the
intrinsic worth of character; (3) an analysis of moral beauty; (4)
an examination of the æsthetic method of ethics; and (5) the idea of
obligation in æsthetics and ethics. The author’s knowledge of ethical
theories appears to be limited. Duns Scotus, the Realist, is called a
thoroughgoing Nominalist. In spite of such defects, we find much that
is good in the book. In the end of his discussion the author says with
truth: “When the element of the _good_, or that which is capable of
clothing itself in the form of an ideal, is taken out of the conception
of obligation, this latter degenerates into what is nothing more than
mere submission to an arbitrary imperative....Prometheus, chained to the
rocks for bringing the gift of fire to the wretched barbarous inhabitants
of the earth, in defiance of the will of the ‘Father of gods and men,’ is
one of the grandest productions of the human imagination, and were the
Supreme Being such a one as Augustine and Calvin imagined him, we should
despise the wretched slaves that licked the dust at his feet.”

                                                                      κρς.




PERIODICALS.


ZEITSCHRIFT FÜR PSYCHOLOGIE UND PHYSIOLOGIE DER SINNESORGANE.

CONTENTS: Vol. V. Nos. 1 and 2.

    DIE STABILITÄT DER RAUMWERTE AUF DER NETZHAUT. By _Franz
    Hillebrand_.

    UEBER EIN OPTISCHES PARADOXON. (Second Article.) By _Franz
    Brentano_.

    LITTERATURBERICHT. (Hamburg and Leipsic: Leopold Voss.)

This second article, “On an Optical Paradox,” is a rejoinder of Franz
Brentano of Vienna to Th. Lipps. We gave an account of this interesting
discussion in _The Monist_, Vol. III, No. 1, p. 153 et seqq. Professor
Brentano insists on explaining the optical illusion concerning distances
between two points, as seen in Fig. 1-3, by an overestimation of
small and an underestimation of large angles. He complains of being
misunderstood by Professor Lipps who substitutes “acute” for “small” and
“obtuse” for “large”; for, says he, in comparisons both angles may be
obtuse or both may be acute. Professor Brentano adds some more puzzling
figures to prove his case; and, as in his first article, his propositions
are ingenious and thought-stimulating; but his arguments do not suffice
to convince us of the validity of his theory. We do not exactly
intend to deny the general rule as to the overestimation of large and
underestimation of small angles, but are inclined to believe that it will
not serve as a sufficient explanation. We reproduce the most important
figures devised by Brentano, and take the liberty of adding a few remarks
and additional figures of our own.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

[Illustration: Fig. 2.]

[Illustration: Fig. 3.]

Fig. 4 represents two right angles, one of which is divided into nine
angles of 10° each. Brentano claims that we so overestimate the nine
small angles as to take the undivided right angle as an acute one. I can
only say that however much I have tried, I am not subject to the illusion.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]

In Fig. 5 we have on the straight line _AB_ a series of stations which
are connected with a common centre. The line _AB_ is not a curve, but
this figure reminds us of a perspective view of the sector of a circle.
The drawing appears as the diagrammatic picture of a shield, the buckle
of which is in _C_. Thus _AB_ is conceived as representing a curve. It
does not seem that a comparison of the angles has anything to do with the
illusion.

How much perspective interferes with the optical illusions under
discussion, impresses itself upon my mind, when I think of figure 5 as
the diagram of a mountain, rising above the plane _AB_. If I imagine I
stand below the plane, which may be a high table-land, the line _AB_
appears to my eye straight. But when I imagine I am looking down upon the
plane, the curvature of _AB_ becomes very strongly marked.

[Illustration: Fig. 5.]

In Fig. 6 we can detect no optical illusion. The line _AB_ appears
straight to us. The drawing reminds us of a sunrise on the ocean.

[Illustration: Fig. 6.]

The same must be said about Figure 7. Brentano, in agreement with Lipps,
claims that we are inclined to regard the distance between the ends of
the two lines as larger than between the points. If there is any illusion
at all, it seems to me, that on the contrary, the distance between the
ends of the lines appears shorter. And why? We measure the distance by
allowing our eyes to run from one point to the other and then comparing
the measurements. This comparison is geometrically effected by combining
the respective starting points, and thus judging as to the parallelism
of these two lines mentally constructed. Whether or not the dots appear
equidistant, depends upon the execution of all these operations. While
directly measuring the distances between the points, we have an easier
measurement where the lines are attached. The lines give to the points
a certain vim; they almost appear to move with a velocity indicated by
the length of the little lines, while the isolated dots present a very
phlegmatic appearance.

[Illustration: Fig. 7.]

In order to see what effects other positions of the lines produce, let
us compare in Fig. 9 the several relations by covering the rest. If
there is any illusion as to _a_ and _b_, we should say that the points
of _a_ appear at a greater distance; as to _b_ and _c_, we see the
greater distance in _c_, as to _c_ and _d_, we feel doubtful, while
any comparison with _e_, tends strongly to convince us of their equal
distance. The reason is obvious. The lines in _e_ assist us in drawing
the parallels, which we consciously or unconsciously construct in order
to compare the distances.

[Illustration: Fig. 8.]

[Illustration: Fig. 9.]

A comparison like that of α and β in Fig. 8, where the equal length of
the combining lines is very apparent, induced Brentano to regard the
illusion which is observed in Figures 1-3 as due to the angles. In our
opinion he is mistaken. For the illusion actually takes place in α and
β; only it is quickly corrected with the help of the parallels, which,
as in ε, assist the imagination in making an exact comparison. When we
place α and β either at a sufficient distance, or are somehow prevented
from making use of the parallel lines, we shall have the same illusion
as appears in Figures 1, 2, 3. To prove this, we have but to bring the
figure α in a slanting position, as is shown in λ, and the illusion
is so strong that many will find it difficult to believe that λ is an
electrotyped duplicate of α.

The mooted illusions are not sense-illusions, but illusions of judgment;
and we believe that the explanation of these curious phenomena must be
sought in the elements which unconsciously enter into the make-up of our
judgments.

Lipps says that lines are felt to be movements. If a line is continued,
albeit with a slight declination, the motion appears “free and
victorious,” aspiring beyond itself; while, if confined in the corner
of an acute angle, it seems cut off and impeded. The victoriously
progressive motion is overestimated; the checked motion is underestimated.

Brentano, in order to meet Lipps’s objections, proposes a few additional
figures, of which we reproduce the most important ones in Fig. 10-14.

[Illustration: Fig. 10.]

[Illustration: Fig. 11.]

[Illustration: Fig. 12.]

[Illustration: Fig. 13.]

[Illustration: Fig. 14.]

It seems to us that the main part which the angles play in these or any
other similar figures, consists in leading our imagination astray. The
parallel lines which we attempt to construct for our comparison, switch
slightly off with an inclination toward the angles.

But that is not all; there are other elements that affect our judgment
at the very outset. In measuring a distance we do something, and in
looking at a diagram we think something. The diagram is suggestive of
some reality to which we compare it. All these ideas, be they conscious,
subconscious, or even unconscious, affect our judgment and are sometimes
apt to lead it astray.

In addition we have to mention two things, the influence of which upon
our verdict cannot be doubted; the one is the size of the entire figure,
the other the vacuity of the distance to be measured: both tend to make
the distance appear longer than it really is. To illustrate this, we add
the three Figures 15, 16, 17 which contain no angles and yet show the
same illusions.

[Illustration: Fig. 15.]

[Illustration: Fig. 16.]

[Illustration: Fig. 17.]

The distance between the points in Figure 17 appears longer than in
Figure 16, and in Figure 16 again longer than in Figure 15. The fact is,
that before starting on our measurement-journey, we have in Figure 17
already traversed a good distance after having noted the extraordinarily
lengthened boundary marks. The town _A_ may be exactly as far as the town
_B_, yet the journey to _A_ will appear longer, if I have to ride an hour
before I reach the station, while I may live opposite the terminus of the
railroad to _B_.

When our eyes glide down from one point to the other, we pass in one
case through an empty desert the dreariness of which is not interrupted.
We almost lose our way and become lonesome in its monotony. If our way,
however, is full of variations, we are pleasantly entertained and regard
our journey as so much shorter. The contrast is most obvious in figure
10. The time-illusions as to the swiftness of hours of work or amusement
and the slowness of moments of _ennui_ have become proverbial among all
nations. The more dreariness, the more marked is the lengthening of the
distance, while even a partial accompaniment shortens the traversed road.

                                                                      κρς.

CONTENTS: Vol. V. Nos. 3 and 4.

    THEORIE DES FARBENSEHENS. By _H. Ebbinghaus_.

    UEBER DEN MUSKELSINN BEI BLINDEN. By _Paul Hocheisen_.

    LITTERATURBERICHT. (Hamburg and Leipsic: Leopold Voss.)


VIERTELJAHRSSCHRIFT FÜR WISSENSCHAFTLICHE PHILOSOPHIE.

CONTENTS: Vol. XVII. No. 2.

    EINIGES ZUR GRUNDLEGUNG DER SITTENLEHRE. (First Article.) By
    _J. Petzoldt_.

    KRITIK DER GRUNDANSCHAUUNGEN DER SOCIOLOGIE H. SPENCER’S. By
    _P. Barth_.

    WERTHTHEORIE UND ETHIK. (Second Article.) By _Chr. Ehrenfels_.
    (Leipsic: O. R. Reisland.)


THE AMERICAN JOURNAL OF PSYCHOLOGY.

CONTENTS: Vol. V. No. 3.

    ON ERRORS OF OBSERVATION. By _Prof. James McKeen Cattell_.

    MINOR STUDIES FROM THE PSYCHOLOGICAL LABORATORY OF CLARK
    UNIVERSITY.

    ON THE DISCRIMINATION OF GROUPS OF RAPID CLICKS. By _Thaddeus
    L. Bolton_.

    STATISTICS OF DREAMS. By _Mary Whiton Calkins_.

    ON THE PRESSURE SENSE OF THE DRUM OF THE EAR AND “FACIAL
    VISION.” By _F. B. Dresslar_.

    ON REACTION-TIMES WHEN THE STIMULUS IS APPLIED TO THE REACTING
    HAND. By _J. F. Reigart and Edmund C. Sanford_.

    EXPERIMENTS UPON PHYSIOLOGICAL MEMORY BY MEANS OF THE
    INTERFERENCE OF ASSOCIATIONS. By _John A. Bergström_.

    A NEW INSTRUMENT FOR WEBER’S LAW; WITH INDICATIONS OF A LAW OF
    SENSE MEMORY. By _James H. Leuba_.

    A NEW PENDULUM CHRONOGRAPH. By _Edmund C. Sanford, Ph. D._

    LABORATORY COURSE IN PHYSIOLOGICAL PSYCHOLOGY. (Fourth Paper.)
    By _Edmund C. Sanford, Ph. D._ (Worcester, Mass.: J. H. Orpha.)


THE PHILOSOPHICAL REVIEW.

CONTENTS: Vol. II. No. 3.

    GERMAN KANTIAN BIBLIOGRAPHY. By _Dr. Erich Adickes_.

    THE EPISTEMOLOGY OF NEO-KANTISM. By _Prof. Andrew Seth_.

    MENTAL MEASUREMENT. By _Prof. J. McK. Cattell_.

    BOOK REVIEWS. (Boston, New York, Chicago: Ginn & CO.)


REVUE PHILOSOPHIQUE.

CONTENTS: Vol. XVIII. No. 5.

    PSYCHOLOGIE DU MUSICIEN. 1. L’EVOLUTION DES APTITUDES
    MUSICALES. By _L. Dauriac_.

    LA SOCIABILITÉ ET LA MORALE CHEZ LES ANIMAUX. By _Houssay_.

    SUR LES IDÉES GÉNÉRALES. By _Marchesini_.

    QUESTIONNAIRE SUR L’AUDITION COLORÉE, FIGURÉE ET ILLUMINÉE. By
    _Gruber_.

    L’ATTENTION ET LES IMAGES. By _F. Paulhan_.

    UNE ILLUSION D’OPTIQUE. By _B. Bourdon_.

    SCIENCE ET SOCIALISME. _G. Sorel_.

    ANALYSES ET COMPTES RENDUS. (Paris: Félix Alcan.)

CONTENTS: Vol. XVIII. No. 6.

    LA NOUVELLE THÉORIE DE L’HÉRÉDITÉ DE WEISMANN. By _Y. Delage_.

    UN CALCULATEUR DU TYPE VISUEL. By _J.-M. Charcot and A. Binet_.

    PSYCHOLOGIE DU MUSICIEN.—II. L’OREILLE MUSICALE. By _L.
    Dauriac_.


REVUE DE MÉTAPHYSIQUE ET DE MORALE.

CONTENTS: Vol. I. No. 2.

    LE MOUVEMENT ET LES ARGUMENTS DE ZÉNON D’ÉLÉE. By _G. Noël_.

    LE PROBLÈME MORAL DANS LA PHILOSOPHIE DE SPINOZA. By _V.
    Delbos_.

    LE CONCEPT DU NOMBRE CHEZ LES PYTHAGORICIENS. By _G. Milhaud_.

    LE DIALOGUE DANS L’ENSEIGNEMENT DE LA PHILOSOPHIE. By _C.
    Mélinand_. (Paris: Librairie Hachette et Cie.)

CONTENTS: Vol. I. No. 3.

    LES PRÉTENDUS SOPHISMES DE ZÉNON D’ÉLÉE. By _V. Brochard_.

    SPIR ET SA DOCTRINE. By _A. Penjon_.

    ESSAI SUR LE CARACTÈRE GÉNÉRAL DE LA CONNAISSANCE. By _G.
    Remacle_.


PHILOSOPHISCHES JAHRBUCH.

CONTENTS: Vol. VI. No. 2.

    BEGRIFF DER PHILOSOPHIE. By _Uebinger_.

    DIE OBJECTIVITÄT UND DIE SICHERHEIT DES ERKENNENS. By
    _Isenkrahe_.

    DER BEGRIFF DES “WARREN.” (Concluded.) By _Franz Schmid_.

    DER GRUNDPLAN DER MENSCHLICHEN WISSENSCHAFT. By _Bahlmann, S.
    J._

    HANDSCHRIFTLICHES ZU DEN WERKEN DES ALANUS. By _Bäumker_.
    (Fulda, 1893.)



