III.

The question now arises,—and this brings us back to the considerations
of the first part of this essay,—Does this rationalised Christianity of
to-day really meet the demands of science, and if it does not, is it in
the power of the modern scientific world-conception to furnish from its
own resources some substitute for the religious views of the past?

My answer to this question will be short and concise; for the existence
of _The Monist_, the fundamental idea of its management, and the
total character of the efforts which it has hitherto made, speak with
sufficient emphasis. And we may, therefore, with the greatest respect
for the scientific zeal and the personal ability of many of the
representatives of this mediatory theology, say, without further ado:
This rationalised Christianity of yours also is myth and symbol; it still
adheres to that “dramatic” division of the world which our imaginations
produced, and to the metaphysical dualism of God and man; it cannot
lift itself to a rigorous conception of the All in One, for which God
is in the same sense a simple function of human thought as thought is a
function of the human organism. The God on whom all depends in religion,
the God whose name is “Father,” the God of love and goodness, the God
from whom all great thoughts and all grand resolves spring, the God who
sanctifies us and lifts us above the earth—to displace this God from
the world in which he has no place, into the inward being of humanity
seems at this day so strange, nay, inconceivable, only because we have
accustomed ourselves (and down to the times of Mill and Feuerbach, even
strict monistic thinkers like Spinoza fell victims to this illusion) to
mingle together in the idea of God two wholly distinct ideas—the ideas,
namely, of nature and of an ethical ideal. To preserve this latter
inviolate, and to secure it from all encroachments of human caprice,
one thing alone seemed to the naïve dramatic modes of thought of early
times a competent safeguard: the ideal must in some locality be real; the
highest to which human thought and aspiration can exalt itself must be
sought and must exist in some superhuman reality. And what reality could
be better adapted to this than one on which even nature was conceived to
be dependent? The entire history of the development of the idea of God in
the Græco-Roman and Hebrew worlds, the confluence of these two streams
of thought in Christian speculation, exhibit in the clearest possible
manner these motives, which here I can only lightly touch upon.

But this combination of the law of nature and the law of ethics in the
idea of God, although solving some of the difficulties of humanity, has
plunged it into incomparably greater ones. Through all the centuries
of Christian thought a succession of desperate attempts may be traced
to establish a theodicy, that is to say, attempts to demonstrate the
existence in nature and in history of a God which harmonises with the
ethical ideal. Even Kant could undertake to demonstrate the “necessary
failure of all attempts at a theodicy,” and whoever might still have
entertained any doubt as to the correctness of this demonstration, such a
one must surely have been convinced of it by the scientific development
of the past century. That which was indissolubly welded together in
the Christian idea of God is to-day disintegrated into its component
elements. The Lord _above_ nature, the Spirit _behind_ nature, have been
rendered inconceivable by the modern notions of the conformity to law of
all natural occurrences and of the unity of all existence. The spirit
immanent in the All no thinker will deny, for this spirit manifests
itself in an indisputable manner in the fact that this All is a cosmos,
not a chaos, that not only the caprice of chance but also the laws of
necessity rule in it, and that the personal self-conscious mind springs
from its midst. But from this recognition of mind in the All, there is no
bridge that leads to the old idea of God. We cannot worship the All as a
moral ideal. We involve ourselves in absurd complications when we attempt
to derive the actions of natural events and their conformity to law from
ethical categories, and it is no less a desperate undertaking to imagine
that we can draw impulses for our moral thought and conduct from nature.
The adaptation of means to ends, the teleology, that rules in the All, is
veiled for us in the deepest obscurity. All that we can unravel of it has
no resemblance to that which, according to our notions, is ethical:

    “_Denn unfühlend ist die Natur_,”

she does not know what love or mercy is; she knows only the omnipotent
power of universal laws; she knows only the rights of the whole, to
which she sacrifices with unconcern the individual; she revels in the
double pleasure of unceasing creation and unceasing destruction; she arms
unpityingly the strong against the weak; in crises of annihilation she
restores the disturbed equilibrium of things; but the palm of peace no
one has ever seen in her hand. And we? We stand amazed at her might and
greatness, at the plentitude of her powers of creation, at her myriad
play of forces, at the inexhaustible wealth of the relations with which
she binds being to being, creates and mediates contrarieties, and amidst
the most varied change and alternation, ever remains one and the same!
But our prototype, our God, she can never be. To him we must look up;
but on nature, despite her might, despite her stupendous grandeur, we
look down. She did not whisper in our ears that in us which is best and
highest. That did not come to us from heaven; _we ourselves_ won it
by hard struggles, by terribly severe, self-imposed discipline. It is
not _of_ nature; it is _above_ nature. Through _us_ something has come
into the world that before us did not exist—something that the most
exuberant creative magic, or nature’s grandest mechanical dreams, could
never replace. The day on which first a human being pressed his weaker
fellow-man to his breast and said, “Brother, not mine, but thy will be
done; I will give up my desires that thou also mayst be glad”; the day
on which man first lifted up his head and said, “Let us make the world
_good_ in the likeness of the picture that has become living in us, just
as it should be”; this is the great and sanctified day in the history of
our race on earth, the Christmas day on which God was born. But not as
the religious fancy has expressed it, the day on which God became man,
but the day on which man began to become God, that is the day on which he
began to feel spiritual powers in his breast that transcended his animal
impulses—powers to which the majority of humanity was still as remote as
heaven from earth.

This strict anthropological conception of God as the ideal which is
always newly creating itself in the struggles of humanity, which is no
Being but a Becoming, solves the innumerable difficulties which the idea
of God has hitherto placed in the way of rigorous scientific knowledge
and the construction of a unitary conception of the world. This God has
nothing to do with the All. We need not seek him in the All or behind the
All, and need not fear that any progress of our knowledge will make his
existence a matter of doubt with us. Concerning the real validity of this
idea we need not bother ourselves with more or less weak and insufficient
demonstrations: the whole history of humanity is evidence of it if we
but know how to rightly interpret it, and the stumbling block of the old
theological idea of God has become the corner-stone upon which the new
scientific conception is built.

Nature and human history the work of an omnipotent and all-kind being
that is mediately and immediately active in all events, nay, sacrificed
himself in his own person that he might realise in this world his
purposes! Compare the principle, the active force of this world-drama,
pictured by the religious fancy as the highest power, the highest wisdom,
and all-merciful love, with the real spectacle of the world! Is there
anywhere a more pronounced contradiction, an obscurer riddle, a more
inconceivable contrast between purpose and accomplishment? This world
of cruelty and woe, in which one creature feeds on the heart-blood of
another, in which here and there from seas of mud and dirt a form of
light springs up, in which every nobler production must be bought with
torrents of blood and tears; this revelation and self-manifestation of
God in humanity, which everywhere appears joined to definite historical
suppositions, which lacks all the conditions of true universality and of
indisputable evidence, so that instead of forming a means of union it
has become the source of dreadful contentions; this work of salvation
and sanctification which is so restricted in its effects that “the
kingdom of God” is still a dreamy vision of humanity, so restricted
that we still see the majority of men, despite the most extraordinary
supernatural dispositions, still remain far behind the simple ideals
of natural ethical commandments, that hate and dissension, cruelty and
selfishness, perform their unhallowed work—is this the work of infinite
power and infinite wisdom? What claims theodicy makes on human thought!
And how different the picture is, the moment we abandon the false
theocentric point of view and assume the anthropocentric! Instead of a
belief which all facts contradict—an idea which elucidates them all.
No one can say how we are to interpret facts as the work of a holy and
absolutely perfect being; but it can be shown, step by step, how in this,
our human world, more perfect things spring from imperfect things, moral
and mental laws from the blind play of natural forces and powers, the
conscious energy of will from blind and unreasonable impulse, law and
love of man from the selfishness and warring of all against all, and the
notion of the unity of the race from infinite disruption and disunion.
We must not allow ourselves to be led astray or discouraged here by the
changing undulations and tremendous crises of this battle for the good.
The ideal springs out of a dark abyss. The roots of our being are deep
laid in nature, yet we struggle to exalt ourselves above it. No wonder,
therefore, that time and again it draws us back.

The greatest and sublimest spectacle! A tragical one, one filled with
struggle and suffering, and yet one infinitely full of hope. For it shows
us the inexhaustible grandeur of the human mind; it shows us the good,
the ideal, as a tremendous real power, a power eternally becoming, surely
forming itself out of an infinitude of individual deeds, a power fully
incarnate in no one person, yet active and living in humanity. Not a
tangible activity, and yet one of the realest of facts. A supersensuous,
nay, if you will, a supernatural realm of thought; not the faded
reflection or shadow of a grandeur and power beyond us, but the fruit
of the noblest activities and powers of this given, existing world,
antagonised in life, but grand and powerful in thought; imperfect even in
its boldest flights, but bearing within it the germ of greater things to
come.

Here is the true point of union for Christian dogma and science. Here is
the God in which science also may, nay, must, believe. Not humanity in
its empirical reality, but the ideal world developed within the human
realm of things—the spirit of humanity. This is the only true object
of worship. Before it we are humiliated, and by it we feel ourselves
exalted. From it we receive all the good that life bestows upon us; it
gives us light and peace and lucid thought. And what higher, nobler thing
can a life produce than the feeling that it has not been unworthy of this
great ancestry, that it has helped to keep alive this holy fire, that it
has helped, perhaps, to fan by its own life this living flame to greater
heights?

Here is the true source of the ideas of accountability and of salvation.
We are not responsible to a being outside and above us, but to our own
selves and to humanity, from which we have received the best that it had
to give, and for which we must return what we ourselves have produced.
This consciousness of being thrown utterly on the resources of one’s own
self, on one’s own powers, was first created in the human mind by science
and the technical arts, (as that most venerable and most sacred of all
myths, the legend of Prometheus, so profoundly indicates,) and this
consciousness will, by the progress of knowledge and power, be made more
and more the dominating one of humanity. This is not a consciousness of
omnipotence; it does not exclude the subjection of man to the inexorable
laws of the universe; but it demands the enlistment of all the powers
of the race: for nature does not give us more than we wrest from her by
arduous toil.

And as humanity is accountable only to itself, so do the means of its
salvation lie only in itself. Not in any one individual, but in the
spirit in it which ever works onward and upward. Yet this spirit is
not an unpersonal existence; it must be possessed again and ever again
by living men. And no one can serve humanity or augment its spiritual
treasures or reincarnate in himself its holiest possessions without first
having and feeling within himself the blessing of what he has done.
And thus the profoundest significance of human life on earth may be
formulated and embraced in that saying of the poet which was throughout
conceived in the spirit of our times, and would have been wholly
incomprehensible to the mind of those who gave us our faith—in the words:

    “_Erlösung dem Erlöser._”

                                                                  F. JODL.


FOOTNOTES:

[59] _Wesen des Christenthums._ First edition. 1841. Pp. 288-289.

[60] Translation published by Swan, Sonnenschein & Co., London, 1891.




THE RELIGION OF SCIENCE.


Are religion and science indeed as contrary as they are often represented
to be, and is the proposition to reconcile them a hopeless and futile
undertaking? Professor Jodl, in his article “Religion and Modern
Science,” (pp. 329-351 of this number,) says:

    “That civilised humanity to-day is separated into two groups
    which no longer understand each other, which do not speak the
    same language, and which live in totally different worlds of
    thought and sentiment.”

There are those who cling to the old religions and those who supplant it
by a new idealism. Between both, he adds:

    “A third class stands which plays the part of a mediator.”

Professor Jodl does not approve of reconciling the historical forms of
religion with science. He rightly says:

    “The ‘pure doctrine of Christ,’ the genuine, primitive form of
    Christianity, is a Utopia of biblical criticism.”

We heartily agree with him in his remarks concerning the part which the
miraculous and supernatural play in the Gospels:

    “These things are so intimately interwoven with the modes
    of thought of the synoptic writers that it is impossible to
    separate them therefrom without doing violence to the internal
    connection of their doctrines.”

We also concur upon the whole with Professor Jodl in his criticism of
the methods of Speculative Theology. No compromising with traditional
errors, no covering or extenuating of the results of historical criticism
is allowable merely for the love of tradition and for the preservation of
errors that have become dear to a large number of people.

We do not condemn the work of any mediator; on the contrary, we rather
encourage it. We observe with pleasure in the latest phases of the
religious evolution of Speculative Theology the prevalence of a more
modern spirit, and we follow with a keen interest also the progress of
biblical critique in its truly valuable labors: but we do not expect that
either the one or the other will accomplish any regeneration of religion.

Professor Jodl knows very well that the editors of _The Monist_ and
_The Open Court_ have not undertaken any work of compromising between
the errors of the past and the ideal of the future. Our idea of a
reconciliation between religion and science is of a different nature. We
are not blind to the errors of the old religions, and we do not mean to
gloss them over, or to make old-fashioned views acceptable by presenting
them in a new garment. We do not even stop to bury the dead, for we
have better things to do than to trouble with problems that have been
definitely settled. We keep our hands to the plough to accomplish the
work needed to-day.

While we are not blind to the errors of the old religions, we recognise
at the same time that they contain in the language of parables some great
truths which will remain forever. These truths constitute the backbone of
religion, and we regard it as a very important duty of ours to preserve
them. These truths must be preserved, not because they were believed in
by our fathers, nor from any respect for tradition, nor from any regard
for our sentiments, but simply because they are truths, because they can
be proved to be true according to the methods of scientific inquiry.

What is religion? Religion consists of all those ideas which regulate
our conduct. In the savage these ideas are very crude and superstitious,
and often self-contradictory. The higher a man rises, the clearer, the
more scientific and consistent do these ideas become, until they develop
into a systematic world-conception. Every scientific idea that changes
our world-conception will change also our religion and with it our rules
of conduct. Thus, for example, the idea of evolution has become to us an
eminently religious idea.

In order to indicate that the criterion of truth for religion is the very
same thing as the criterion of truth for science, we have proposed to
call the religion we advocate, “The Religion of Science.” (For details
see the editorial of Vol. VII, No. 1, of _The Open Court_.)

Our procedure appears to many as an annihilation of religion in favor of
science. But it is not. And why not?

We have learned many truths first from religion, long before science
could ever think of proving them. In several respects science took the
lead, and religion remained at a long distance behind, awkwardly, very
slowly, and unwillingly limping onward on the road of progress. Instances
are, the acceptance of the Copernican system and of the evolution theory.
But in other respects religion took the lead, and science was unable to
follow its ingenious flight. As instances of this we cite such moral
truths as the love of enemies, which were not preached by scientists
as scientific truths, but by religious teachers, by Confucius, Buddha,
and Christ. There are scientists even to-day who regard what we would
call “moral truths” as maxims that are contrary to the established views
of science. Professor Huxley, for instance, is very emphatic in his
declaration that the facts of nature do not teach morality.[61]

This leads us to a point in which we disagree with Professor Jodl. He
speaks of the illusion “of mingling together in the idea of God two
wholly distinct ideas—the ideas namely of nature and of an ethical
ideal”—an illusion to which “even strict monistic thinkers like Spinoza
fell victims.”

Professor Jodl’s position reminds us of John Stuart Mill’s “Essay on
Nature,” in which he exposes the old doctrine _naturam sequi_ in all its
absurd meanings and carefully avoids a discussion of the only rational
conception of the precept. Thus his tirades appear most convincing, and
to be sure they are quite correct—so far as they go. Says Mill:

    “In sober truth, nearly all the things which men are hanged or
    imprisoned for doing to one another, are nature’s every-day
    performances. Killing, the most criminal act recognised by
    human laws, Nature does once to every being that lives....

    “Nature impales men, breaks them as if on the wheel, casts them
    to be devoured by wild beasts, burns them to death, crushes
    them with stones like the first Christian martyr, starves them
    with hunger, freezes them with cold, poisons them by the quick
    or slow venom of her exhalations, and has hundreds of other
    hideous deaths in reserve, such as the ingenious cruelty of a
    Nabis or a Domitian never surpassed.”

Mill must indeed have felt the need of beginning these sentences with the
words “In sober truth”; otherwise he might be suspected of humor.

Similarly comical is Mill’s proposition to regard every voluntary action
of man as a direct infringement upon nature. Man’s reason in that case
would be the most unnatural phenomenon in the world, and the term
“nature” would be confined to the lowest realms of existence exclusively.
If the usage of reason were indeed an infringement upon nature, man’s
appearance upon earth would mark the beginning of a supernatural realm;
and Professor Jodl seems to accept this consequence when he says:

    “It is not _of_ nature, it is _above_ nature.”

If man’s rationality and his ethics were not born of nature, if their
conditions were not founded in the very existence of nature, if they were
not the natural product of evolution, then indeed I see no escape from a
dualistic world-conception, in which a supernatural God introduces the
spark of divinity which appears in the soul of man from spheres beyond.

We have devoted to these vagaries of John Stuart Mill an elaborate
discussion in another place and do not feel the need of repeating our
arguments in this connection.[62]

We agree with Professor Jodl that no rationalising of old dogmas will
help us in the establishment of “a new idealism, formed in harmony
with the spirit of science.” We must build our religion anew (as every
generation had to build its religion anew) out of the best materials
which are furnished by the maturest and most reliable knowledge of
to-day. Says Professor Jodl:

    “Through _us_ something has come into the world that before
    us did not exist—something that the most exuberant creative
    magic, or nature’s grandest mechanical dreams, could never
    replace. The day on which first a human being pressed his
    weaker fellow-man to his breast and said, “Brother, not mine,
    but thy will be done; I will give up my desires that thou also
    mayst be glad”; the day upon which man first lifted up his head
    and said, “Let us make the world _good_ in the likeness of the
    picture that has become living in us, just as it should be”;
    this is the great and sanctified day in the history of our race
    on earth, the Christmas day on which God was born.”

Certainly the origin of man on earth, and again the evolution of the
moral man, is something quite new, which before did not exist. But did
humanity originate out of nothing, as sometimes the imaginations of
a poet are supposed to be created, or is there a prototype in whose
image man has been created? Man’s reason, his ethics, and his humanity
are something that did not exist before, but there is a feature in
existence which makes it possible that rational and moral beings develop.
Should there be sentient beings on other planets, and we have little
reason to doubt it, we can be sure that they also will develop rational
minds, and that they also will learn, perhaps as we did, through many
bitter experiences, the same truths which constitute our main maxims of
morality,[63] including such precepts as the love of enemies. And why are
we sure that on other planets not only reason, but also the fundamental
rules of ethics will be the same as with us here on earth? Simply because
we know that there is a certain feature in reality which creates rational
beings and moral beings as naturally as it creates rocks and seas on the
surface of planets. Man’s reason and also man’s morality are not original
inventions of his, but the result of many experiences which he had to
learn. And the world in which he lives is such that he can acquire reason
and morality, and if a being should acquire a wrong kind of reason or a
wrong kind of morality, it will by and by be blotted out of existence.
Accordingly there is a prototype of reason and of morality, and this
prototype of the humanity of man is exactly that which in the language of
the old religions has received the name “God.”

We must make a distinction between ideals and dreams. Those creations
of our fancy which are woven without any regard to reality are dreams.
They have no value beyond whiling away a leisure hour or pleasing our
imagination. But those creations of our mind which construct realisable
formations such as machines or clocks or higher conditions of human
society, are not mere dreams, they are ideals. What, then, is the
difference between a dream and an ideal? A dream is a useless ebullition
of an idle brain composed of ideas to which there is no correspondent
reality; but an ideal is a potent factor in the living presence to shape
the future: it is a combination of ideas which are correct descriptions
of actual realities. The moral aspirations of mankind are not empty
dreams, they are true and veritable ideals. There are certain qualities
in nature which make their realisation possible and these qualities
constitute the Divinity of nature.

Professor Jodl speaks of the origin of morality as of the birth of God on
earth. Truly that is the meaning of Christianity. But this birth of God
into the world of human evolution as “the Son of Man” is possible only
because of the existence of the God in nature whom Christian mythology so
beautifully calls God the Father. The appearance of the Son of Man upon
earth, the birth of morality, is a revelation of the divinity of nature.

True enough, as Professor Jodl says, that we ourselves won the best and
highest we have by hard struggles, by terribly severe, self-imposed
discipline. As Prometheus says:

    “_Hast du nicht alles selbst vollendet,_
    _Heilig glühend Herz!_”

That, too, is part of the divinity of nature, that every creature has
to work out its very being itself, and that man must search for the way
of salvation with great anxiety, under bitter tribulations and through
extreme afflictions. But he cannot invent a new way of salvation, he has
to find it, and there is but one that is the right one. The nature of
morality is such as it is, and no other morality could be invented to
replace it. And this feature of existence which makes morality quite a
determined thing is a real presence in the world, it is an actual quality
of the universe.

Some of our liberal friends, foremost among them Professor Haeckel, deny
the existence of a personal God and then proceed to declare that the God
of science is nothing but matter and energy. We agree with Professor
Haeckel in his rejection of anthropotheism; God is no supernatural being
nor is he a huge world-ego. But we cannot accept his view of God as being
only matter and energy. The idea of God is and always has been a moral
idea. Thus we have come to regard all those features of nature as divine
which condition the origin and existence of morality and we define God
as the authority of moral conduct. This authority is not a person, not
a sentient being, let alone a sentimental philanthropist; but it is,
nevertheless, a reality, and, indeed, a stern reality.

Such is the God of science. God is that quality of existence through
which we originated as feeling, thinking, and aspiring beings. He is the
prototype of the human soul, and the condition under which develop man’s
reason and morality. Obedience to him is indispensable for a continued
existence, for further progress and a higher evolution of the human
soul. That these features of reality can by a great number of keen and
fearless modern thinkers be supposed to be a non-entity is difficult
to understand. This negation of the reality of qualities of existence
which are not individual things but intrinsically inherent in all the
individual things, it appears to us, is an old heirloom of nominalism.
The nominalistic philosophy represented by Roscellinus was suppressed
at the council at Soissons 1092, only to rise more powerfully in the
fourteenth century in William of Occam, and finally to exterminate
realism with all its rubbish of errors together with the truth contained
in these errors. Kant marks in many respects the culmination of the
victorious movement of nominalism. With all the benefits modern thought
derived from the philosophical work of nominalism, a reaction is needed
against its purely negative spirit. There is a truth in the old realism
which cannot be neglected with impunity.[64]

God (viz., the name of God) is, as Kant said, a noumenon, a thing of
thought, an abstraction. God is not a thing, a concrete object, or an
individual person. All the views of God which regard him as an individual
being of some kind, or as a person only of infinite dimensions, are,
closely considered, pagan notions which belittle God. But the name of
God as a noumenon, a thought, an abstract idea, has a meaning. Abstract
ideas are not nonentities, they represent some real features, some actual
qualities, or properties, or relations; otherwise they would not be
ideas, but unmeaning sounds.

Some of our abstract ideas are of a very delicate fibre, so that the
coarse mental vision of the average Philistine is unable to see them in
their reality and potency. But it so happens that exactly they are of a
more important, more powerful, and inevitable presence than the simple
generalisations of things that visibly and corporeally surround us.
This, their peculiar nature, makes such ideas mysterious to those who
instinctively feel their reality without being able to point it out and
understand it. And the most subtle, imponderous, and sublimated of all
ideas is the idea of God.

We have defined God as the ultimate authority of conduct, as the
condition of our existence as rational and moral beings, as the
all-power that enforces obedience, etc.; but we cannot in any one of our
definitions exhaust the significance of the idea. We would by no means
exclude from the idea of God anything without which reality would cease
to be real. The qualities of matter and energy constitute that element
in the God-idea which justify the old religions in speaking of him as
omnipotent and everlasting. Thus they ought not to be excluded. But these
qualities alone are insufficient to characterise his being. The sum-total
of matter and energy as such and as such alone does not constitute any
moral authority. Nature in her immeasurable greatness and oppressive
vastness affects us with awe; but, after all, we look down upon her
massive sublimity. Man is more than the biggest heap of crude matter and
unintelligently operating energy. Says Professor Jodl:

    “We stand amazed at her might and greatness, at the plentitude
    of her powers of creation, at her myriad play of forces, at the
    inexhaustible wealth of the relations with which she binds
    being to being, creates and mediates contrarieties, and amidst
    the most varied change and alternation, ever remains one and
    the same! But our prototype, our God, she can never be.”

This grandeur of nature is part of her divinity, but it alone does not
constitute the character of God. Yet, observe that throughout nature
there is an imponderable quality present which makes every atom move in
a definite way, so that the whirl of gaseous masses, apparently a chaos,
will be recognised as a cosmic whole developing in a certain way and
describable in what is generally called natural laws. This subtle quality
is the condition of the regularities which are found in all the infinite
varieties and innumerable particularities, and all these regularities
conceived in their systematic unity are called the order of the universe.

Man exists as a thinking being only because the immeasurable universe
of which he is a part possesses this quality of order, and his reason
is closely considered only a copy of it. Man’s reason was shaped into
the image of the cosmic order, and suppose—a supposition which is very
difficult to make and regarded by many as impossible or inconceivable—yet
suppose that the world-order were radically different from what it
actually is, man’s reason would accordingly be different too. Further,
suppose that the whole frame and fundamental interrelations of the
particles of reality were different from what they are, would not
correspondingly the basic rules of conduct be changed too?

The author of this article, in the eyes of the so-called orthodox
Christian, is most certainly an atheist. And if theism means the belief
in a personal or extramundane God he is an atheist indeed. If there is
any opprobrium in the name atheism we are willing to accept it; and
certainly, we do not reject the label of atheism in order to escape any
odium attached to that name. We do reject atheism simply because we
see a great and potent truth in the idea of God which is but too often
disregarded.

With Professor Haeckel and Professor Jodl we reject the conception of
an anthropomorphic Deity. The anthropomorphic idol is doomed before the
tribunal of science. But we see a deeper meaning in the idea of God which
has formed through millenniums the very centre of the greatest religions
on earth. Science has to recognise the reality of an all-presence in
existence which is analogous to that which in a religious language is
called God.

Considering the fact that humanity owes many great truths to religion,
let us not be hasty in condemning the religions of the past as pure
superstition. There are valuable seeds in the chaff. If we discard the
wheat together with the tares, we shall have to rediscover them, for it
is little probable that humanity can for any length of time be satisfied
with beautiful phrases or live in its moral aspirations in a realm of
mere dreams.

                                                                   EDITOR.


FOOTNOTES:

[61] For a discussion of this point see _Fundamental Problems_, pp.
219-226.

[62] See the article in Nos. 239, 241, and 242 of _The Open Court: Nature
and Morality_. An Examination of the Ethical Views of John Stuart Mill.
I. The Meaning of Basing Ethics Upon Nature. II. The Ethics Taught by
Nature. III. Intelligent Action and Moral Action. IV. The Anthropomorphic
Standpoint of Mill.

[63] I purposely do not say _all_ maxims of conduct, because we can very
well imagine that different conditions may produce some very important
variations in the rules of conduct; but the main foundation of morality
would be the same.

[64] There are two men at present who boldly fly the flag of the old
realism again, both having our full sympathy in their aspirations,
although we cannot agree with many of their teachings. The one is Mr.
Charles S. Peirce, the other Dr. Francis E. Abbot.




THE SUPERSTITION OF NECESSITY.[65]


Lest my title give such offense as to prejudice unduly my contention, I
may say that I use the term in the way indicated by its etymology: as
a standing-still on the part of thought; a clinging to old ideas after
those ideas have lost their use, and hence, like all superstitions,
have become obstructions. For I shall try to show that the doctrine
of necessity is a survival; that it holds over from an earlier and
undeveloped period of knowledge; that as a means of getting out of and
beyond that stage it had a certain value, but, having done its work,
loses its significance. Halting judgment may, indeed, at one time have
helped itself out of the slough of uncertainty, vagueness, and inadequacy
on to ground of more solid and complete fact, by the use of necessity as
a crutch; once upon the ground, the crutch makes progress slower and,
preventing the full exercise of the natural means of locomotion, tends
to paralyse science. The former support has become a burden, almost an
intolerable one.

The beginning of wisdom in the matter of necessity is, I conceive, in
realising that it is a term which has bearing or relevancy only with
reference to the development of judgment, not with reference to objective
things or events. I do not mean by this that necessity refers to the
compelling force with which we are driven to make a given affirmation:
I mean that it refers to the content of that affirmation, expressing
the degree of coherence between its constituent factors. When we say
something or other _must_ be so and so, the “must” does not indicate
anything in the nature of the fact itself, but a trait in our _judgment_
of that fact; it indicates the degree with which we have succeeded in
making a whole out of the various elements which have to be taken into
account in forming the judgment. More specifically, it indicates a
half-way stage. At one extreme we have two separate judgments, which, so
far as consciousness is concerned, have nothing to do with each other;
and at the other extreme we have one judgment into which the contents
of the two former judgments have been so thoroughly organised as to
lose all semblance of separateness. Necessity, as the middle term, is
the midwife which, from the dying isolation of judgments, delivers the
unified judgment just coming into life—it being understood that the
separateness of the original judgments is not as yet quite negated,
nor the unity of the coming judgment quite attained. The judgment of
necessity, in other words, is exactly and solely the transition in our
knowledge from unconnected judgments to a more comprehensive synthesis.
Its value is just the value of this transition; as negating the old
partial and isolated judgments—in its backward look—necessity has
meaning; in its forward look—with reference to the resulting completely
organised subject-matter—it is itself as false as the isolated judgments
which it replaces. Its value is in what it rids judgment of. When it has
succeeded, its value is nil. Like any go-between, its service consists in
rendering itself uncalled for.

All science can ultimately do is to report or describe, to completely
state, the reality. So far as we reach this standpoint regarding any fact
or group of facts, we do not say that the fact _must_ be such and such,
but simply that it _is_ such and such. There is no necessity attaching
to the fact either as whole or as parts. _Qua_ whole, the fact simply is
what it is; while the parts, instead of being necessitated either by one
another or by the whole, are the analysed factors constituting, in their
complete circuit, the whole. In stating the whole, we, as of course,
state all that enters into it; if we speak of the various elements as
_making_ the whole, it is only in the sense of making it _up_, not
of causing it. The fallacy of the necessitarian theory consists in
transforming the determinate in the sense of the wholly defined, into the
determined in the sense of something externally made to be what it is.

The whole, although first in the order of reality, is last in the order
of knowledge. The complete statement of the whole is the goal, not the
beginning of wisdom. We begin, therefore, with fragments, which are
taken for wholes; and it is only by piecing together these fragments,
and by the transformation of them involved in this combination, that we
arrive at the real fact. There comes a stage at which the recognition
of the unity begins to dawn upon us, and yet, the tradition of the many
distinct wholes survives; judgment has to combine these two contradictory
conceptions; it does so by the theory that the dawning unity is an effect
necessarily produced by the interaction of the former wholes. Only as the
consciousness of the unity grows still more is it seen that instead of
a group of independent facts, held together by “necessary” ties, there
is one reality, of which we have been apprehending various fragments in
succession and attributing to them a spurious wholeness and independence.
We learn (but only at the end) that instead of discovering and then
connecting together a number of separate realities, we have been engaged
in the progressive definition of one fact.

There are certain points upon which there is now _practical_ agreement
among all schools. What one school has got at by a logical analysis of
science, another school has arrived at by the road of a psychological
analysis of experience. What one school calls the unity of thought
and reality, another school calls the relativity of knowledge. The
metaphysical interpretation further given to these respective statements
may be quite different, but, so far as they go, they come to the same
thing: that objects, _as known_, are not independent of the process
of knowing, but are the content of our judgments. One school, indeed,
may conceive of judgment as a mere associative or habitual grouping of
sensations, the other as the correlative diversification and synthesis of
the self; but the practical outcome, that the “object” (anyway as known)
is a form of judgment, is the same. This point being held in common,
both schools must agree that _the progress of judgment is equivalent
to a change in the value of objects_—that objects as they are for us,
as known, change with the development of our judgments. If this be so,
truth, however it be metaphysically defined, must attach to late rather
than to early judgments.

I am fortunate in being able to quote from authors, who may be taken as
typical of the two schools. Says Professor Caird in his article upon
“Metaphysic,” (lately reprinted, “Essays in Philosophy and Literature,”):

    “Our first consciousness of things is not an immovable
    foundation upon which science may build, but rather a
    hypothetical and self-contradictory starting-point of
    investigation, which becomes changed and transformed as we
    advance.” (“Essays,” Vol. II, p. 398.)

On the other hand, Mr. Venn writes (in the first chapter of his
“Empirical Logic”):

    “Select what object we please—the most apparently simple in
    itself, and the most definitely parted off from others that we
    can discover—yet we shall find ourselves constrained to admit
    that a considerable mental process has been passed through
    before that object could be recognised as being an object, that
    is, as possessing some degree of unity and as requiring to be
    distinguished from other such unities.”

He goes on to illustrate by such an apparently fixed and given object
as the sun, pointing out how its unity as a persistent thing involves
a continued synthesis of elements very diverse in time and space, and
an analysis, a selection, from other elements in very close physical
juxtaposition. He goes on to raise the question whether a dog, for
example, may be said to “see” a rainbow at all, because of the complex
analysis and synthesis involved in such an object. The “mental whole” (to
use Mr. Venn’s words, the “ideal unity” as others might term it) is so
extensive and intricate that

    “One might almost as reasonably expect the dog to ‘see’ the
    progress of democracy in the place where he lives, of which
    course of events the ultimate sensible constituents are
    accessible to his observation precisely as they are to ours.”

As Mr. Venn is not discussing just the same point which I have raised,
he does not refer to the partial and tentative character of our first
judgments—our first objects. It is clear enough, however, that there
will be all degrees between total failure to analyse and combine (as,
say, in the case of the dog and rainbow) and fairly adequate grouping.
The difference between the savage whose synthesis is so limited in scope
that he sets up a new sun every day and the scientific man whose object
is a unity comprehending differences through thousands of years of time
and interactions going on through millions of miles of space is a case
in point. The distinction between the respective objects is not simply
a superimposition of new qualities upon an old object, that old object
remaining the same; it is not getting new objects; it is a continual
qualitative reconstruction of the object itself. This fact, which is the
matter under consideration, is well stated by Mr. Venn, when he goes on
to say:

    “The act of predication, in its two-fold aspect of affirmation
    and denial, really is a process by which we are not only
    enabled to add to our information _about_ objects, _but is also
    the process by the continued performance of which the objects
    had been originally acquired, or rather produced_” (italics are
    mine).

This statement cannot be admitted at all without recognising that the
first judgments do not make the object once for all, but that the
continued process of judging is a continued process of “producing” the
object.

Of course the confused and hypothetical character of our first objects
does not force itself upon us when we are still engaged in constructing
them. On the contrary, it is only when the original subject-matter has
been overloaded with various and opposing predicates that we think of
doubting the correctness of our first judgments, of putting our first
objects under suspicion. At the start, these objects assert themselves
as the baldest and solidest of hard facts. The dogmatic and naïve
quality of the original judgment is in exact proportion to its crudeness
and inadequacy. The objects which are the content of these judgments
thus come to be identified with reality _par excellence_; they are
_facts_, however doubtful everything else. They hang on obstinately.
New judgments, instead of being regarded as better definitions of
the actual fact and hence as displacing the prior object, are tacked
on to the old as best they may be. Unless the contradiction is too
flagrant, the new predicates are set side by side with the old as simply
additional information; they do not react into the former qualities. If
the contradiction is too obvious to be overlooked the new predicate
is used, if possible, to constitute another object, independent of the
former. So the savage, having to deal with the apparently incompatible
predicates of light and darkness, makes two objects; two suns, for two
successive days. Once the Ptolemaic conception is well rooted, cycles and
epicycles, almost without end, are superadded, rather than reconstruct
the original object. Here, then, is our starting point: when qualities
arise so incompatible with the object already formed that they cannot be
referred to that object, it is easier to form a new object on their basis
than it is to doubt the correctness of the old, involving as that does
the surrender of the _object_ (the fact, seemingly) and the formation of
another object.

It is easier, I say, for there is no doubt that the reluctance of the
mind to give up an object once made lies deep in its economies. I shall
have occasion hereafter to point out the teleological character of the
notions of necessity and chance, but I wish here to call attention to the
fact that the forming of a number of distinct objects has its origin in
practical needs of our nature. The analysis and synthesis which is first
made is that of most practical importance; what is abstracted from the
complex net-work of reality is some net outcome, some result which is of
value for life. As Venn says:

    “What the savage mostly wants to do is to produce something
    or to avert something, not to account for a thing which has
    already happened. What interests him is to know how to kill
    somebody, not to know how somebody has been killed.” (P. 62 of
    “Empirical Logic.”)

And again:

    “What not only the savage, but also the practical man mostly
    wants, is a _general_ result, say the death of his enemy. It
    does not matter whether the symptoms, i. e., the qualifying
    circumstances, are those attendant on poison, or a blow from a
    club, or on incantation, provided the death is brought about.
    But they do desire _certainty_ in respect of this general
    result.” (P. 64.)

Now it is this “general result,” the net outcome for practical purposes,
which is _the_ fact, _the_ object at first. Anything else is useless
subtlety. That the man is dead—that is the fact; anything further is
at most external circumstances which happen to accompany the fact.
That the death is only a bare fraction of a fact; that the attendant
“circumstances” are as much constituent factors of the real fact as
the mere “death” itself (probably more so from the scientific point of
view)—all this is foreign to conception. We pluck the fruit, and that
fruit is the fact. Only when practical experience forces upon us the
recognition that we cannot get the fruit without heeding certain other
“conditions” do we consent to return upon our assumed object, put it
under suspicion and question whether it is really what we took it to be.
It is, we may presume, the savage who in order to get his living, has
to regulate his conduct for long periods, through changes of seasons,
in some continuous mode, who first makes the synthesis of one sun going
through a recurring cycle of changes—the year.

As time goes on, the series of independent and isolated objects passes
through a gradual change. Just as the recognition of incompatible
qualities has led to setting up of separate things, so the growing
recognition of similar qualities in these disparate objects begins to
pull them together again. Some relation between the two objects is
perceived; it is seen that neither object is just what it is in its
isolation, but owes some of its meaning to the other objects. While in
reality, (as I hope later to point out,) this “relationship” and mutual
dependence means membership in a common whole, contribution to one and
the same activity, a midway stage intervenes before this one fact,
including as parts of itself the hitherto separate objects, comes to
consciousness. The tradition of isolation is too strong to give way at
the first suggestion of community. This passage-way from isolation to
unity, denying the former but not admitting the latter, is necessity or
determinism. The wall of partition between the two separate “objects”
cannot be broken at one attack; they have to be worn away by the
attrition arising from their slow movement into one another. It is the
“necessary” influence which one exerts upon the other that finally rubs
away the separateness and leaves them revealed as elements of one unified
whole. This done, the determining influence has gone too.

The process may be symbolised as follows: _M_ is the object, the original
synthesis of the elements seen to be of practical importance; _a_, _b_,
_c_, etc., to _h_ are predicates of constantly growing incompatibility.
When the quality _i_ is discovered, it is so manifestly incompatible
with _a_ that all attempt to refer it to the same subject _M_ is
resisted. Two alternatives are now logically open. The subject-matter
_M_, as the synthesis of the qualities _a_-_h_, may be taken up; it may
be asked whether the object is really _M_ with these qualities; whether
it is not rather Σ, having instead of the predicates _a_, _b_, etc., the
qualities ρα, ρβ, with which the new quality _i_ is quite compatible. But
this process goes against the practical grain of our knowledge; it means
not only that we do not know what we thought we knew; it means that we
did not _do_ what we thought we did. Such unsettling of action is hardly
to be borne. It is easier to erect a new object _N_, to which the more
incompatible predicates are referred. Finally, it is discovered that
both _M_ and _N_ have the same predicates _r_ and _s_; that in virtue
of this community of qualities there is a certain like element even in
the qualities previously considered disparate. This mutual attraction
continues until it becomes so marked a feature of the case that there
is no alternative but to suppose that the _r_ and _s_ of one produces
these qualities in the other, and thereby influences all the qualities
of the other. This drawing together continues until we have the one
reconstructed object Σ, with the traits ρα, ρβρ, etc. It is found that
there is one somewhat comprehensive synthesis which includes within
itself the several separate objects so far produced; and it is found that
this inclusion in the larger whole reacts into the meaning of the several
constituting parts—as parts of one whole, they lose traits which they
seemed to possess in their isolation, and gain new traits, because of
their membership in the same whole.

We have now to consider, more in detail, how the intermediate idea of
necessity grows up and how it gives away upon the discovery of the one
inclusive whole. Let us continue the illustration of the killing. The
“general result,” the death of the hated enemy, is at first the fact; all
else is mere accidental circumstance. Indeed, the other circumstances
at first are hardly that; they do not attract attention, having no
importance. Not only the savage, but also the common-sense man of
to-day, I conceive, would say that any attempt to extend the definition
of the “fact” beyond the mere occurrence of the death is metaphysical
refinement; that the _fact_ is the killing, the death, and that that
“fact” remains quite the same, however it is brought about. What has
been done, in other words, is to abstract part of the real fact, part of
_this_ death, and set up the trait or universal thus abstracted as itself
_fact_, and not only as fact, but as _the_ fact, _par excellence_, with
reference to which all the factors which constitute the reality, the
concrete fact, of _this_ death, are circumstantial and “accidental.”[66]

A fragment of the whole reality, of the actual fact individualised and
specified with all kind of minute detail, having been thus hypostatised
into an object, the idea of necessity is in fair way to arise. These
deaths in general do not occur. Although the mere death of the man, his
removal from the face of the earth, is the _fact_, none the less all
_actual_ deaths have a certain amount of detail in them. The savage has
to hit his enemy with a club or spear, or perform a magic incantation,
before he can attain that all-important end of getting rid of him.
Moreover, a man with a coat of armor on will not die just the same way
as the man who is defenseless. These circumstances have to be taken into
account. Now, if the “fact” had not been so rigidly identified with
the bare practical outcome, the removal of the hated one, a coherent
interpretation of the need for these further incidents would be open. It
could be admitted that the original death was a highly complex affair,
involving a synthesis of a very large number of different factors;
furthermore, the new cases of murder could be employed to reconstruct
the original analysis-synthesis; to eliminate supposed factors which
were not relevant, and to show the presence of factors at first not
suspected. In other words, the real fact would be under constant process
of definition, of “production.” But the stiff-necked identification of
the fragment, which happened to have practical importance with the real
object, effectually prevents any such reaction and reconstruction. What
is to be done, however, with these conditions of spear, of stone, of
armor, which so obviously have something _to do_ with the real fact,
although, as it would seem, they are not the fact? They are considered
as circumstances, _accidental_, so far as death in general is concerned;
_necessary_, so far as _this_ death is concerned. That is, wanting simply
to get the net result of the removal of my enemy, so that he will no
longer blight the fair face of nature, it is accidental how I do it;
but having, after all, to kill a man of certain characteristics and
surroundings in life, having to choose time and place, etc., it becomes
necessary, _if_ I am to succeed, that I kill him in a certain way, say,
with poison, or a dynamite bomb. Thus we get our concrete, individual
fact again.

Consider, then, that tortuous path from reality to reality, _via_
a circuit of unreality, which calls the thought of necessity into
existence. We first mutilate the actual fact by selecting some portion
that appeals to our needs; we falsify, by erecting this fragment into
the whole fact. Having the rest of the fact thus left on our hands for
disposal, when we have no need of the concrete fact we consider it
accidental, merely circumstantial; but we consider it necessary whenever
we have occasion to descend from the outcome which we have abstracted
back to the real fact, in all its individuality. Necessity is a device
by which we both conceal from ourselves the unreal character of what we
have called real, and also get rid of the practical evil consequences of
hypostatising a fragment into an independent whole.

If the purely teleological character of necessity is not yet evident,
I think the following considerations will serve to bring it out. The
practical value, the fruit from the tree, we pick out and set up for the
entire fact so far as our past action is concerned. But so far as our
_future_ action is concerned, this value is a result _to be_ reached;
it is an end to be attained. Other factors, in reality all the time
bound up in the one concrete fact or individual whole, have now to be
brought in as means to get this end. Although after our desire has been
met they have been eliminated as accidental, as irrelevant, yet when the
experience is again desired their integral membership in the real fact
has to be recognised. This is done under the guise of considering them as
means which are necessary to bring about the end. Thus the idea of the
circumstances as external to the “fact” is retained, while we get all the
practical benefit of their being not external but elements of one and the
same whole. Contingent and necessary are thus the correlative aspects
of one and the same fact; conditions are accidental so far as we have
abstracted a fragment and set it up as the whole; they are necessary the
moment it is required to pass from this abstraction back to the concrete
fact. Both are teleological in character—contingency referring to the
separation of means from end, due to the fact that the end having been
already reached the means have lost their value for us; necessity being
the reference of means to an end _which has still to be got_. Necessary
means _needed_; contingency means no longer required—because already
enjoyed.

Note that the necessity of the means has reference to an end still to
be attained, and in so far itself hypothetical or contingent, while the
contingent circumstances are no longer needed precisely because they have
resulted in a definite outcome (which, accordingly, is now a fact, and,
in that sense, necessary) and we begin to see how completely necessity
and chance are bound up with each other.

Their correlation may thus be stated: _If_ we are to reach an end we
_must_ take certain means; while so far as we want an undefined end,
an end in general, conditions which accompany it are mere accidents.
Whichever way the relationship be stated, the underlying truth is that we
are dealing with only partial phases of fact, which, having been unduly
separated from each other through their erection into distinct wholes,
have now to be brought back into their real unity.

In the first place, then, _if_ I am to reach an end, certain means
_must_ be used. Here the end is obviously postulated; save as it is
begged (presupposed), the necessity of the means has no sense. If,
when starving, I am to live I must steal a dinner, but, having stolen,
the logical but unsympathetic judge may question the relevancy (that
is, the necessity) of my end, and thus cut the ground out from under
the necessity of my means. My end requires _its_ justification, the
establishing of its validity, before the necessity of the means is
anything more than hypothetical. The proximate end must be referred to a
more ultimate and inclusive end to get any solid ground. Here we have our
choice: we may deny the existence of any organic whole in life and keep
chasing in a never-ending series, the _progressus ad infinitum_, after
an end valid in itself. In this case we never get beyond a hypothetical
necessity—something is necessary _if_ we are to have something else,
the necessity being relative to the implied doubt. Or, being convinced
that life is a whole and not a series merely, we may say there is one
comprehensive end which gives its own validity to the lesser ends in
so far as they constitute it. While, on the other alternative, we
reach only a hypothetical necessity, on this we reach none at all. The
comprehensive end is no end at all in the sense of something by itself
to be reached by means external to it. Any such end would be simply one
in the infinite series and would be itself hypothetical. Whenever minor
ends cease to be in turn means to further ends it is because they have
become parts, constituent elements, of the higher end and thus ceased to
be steps towards an end and beyond and outside of themselves. Given a
final (i. e., inclusive) end, eating and drinking, study and gossip, play
and business, cease to be means _towards_ an end and become its concrete
definition, its analytic content. The minor activities state the supreme
activity in its specific factors.

Our dilemma is the choice between an end which itself has no existence
save upon presupposition of another end, (is contingent,) and an end
which as an end in itself simply _is_.

The externality of means to end is merely a symptom of lack of
specification or concreteness in the end itself. _If_ I am going to
invent some improvement in a type-writer, the necessity of going through
certain preliminary steps is exactly proportionate to the indefiniteness
of my conception of what the improvement is to be; when the end is
realised, the operations which enter into the realisation cease to be
means necessary to an end and become the specific _content_ of that end.
The improvement is a _fact_, having such and such elements defining it.
If I simply want, in general, to get my mail I _must_ take this path
(there being but one road); but if my end is not thus general, if it is
individualised with concrete filling, the walk to the office may become
a part of the end, a part of the actual fact. In so far, of course, it
loses all aspect of necessitation. It simply _is_. And in general, so
far as my end is vague, or abstract, so far as it is not specified as
to its details, so far the filling up of its empty schema to give it
particularity (and thus make it fact) appears as a means necessary to
reach an end outside itself. The growth in concreteness of the end itself
is transformed into ways of effecting an end already presupposed. Or, to
state it in yet one other way, determination in the sense of definition
in consciousness is hypostatised into determination in the sense of a
physical making.

The point may come out more clearly if we consider it with the emphasis
on chance instead of upon necessity. The usual statement that chance is
relative to ignorance seems to me to convey the truth though not in the
sense generally intended—viz., that if we knew more about the occurrence
we should see it necessitated by its conditions. Chance is relative to
ignorance in the sense rather that it refers to an indefiniteness in
our conception of what we are doing. In our consciousness of our end
(our acts) we are always making impossible abstractions; we break off
certain phases of the act which are of chief interest to us, without
any regard to whether the concrete conditions of action—that is, the
deed in its whole definition—permits any such division. Then, when in
our actual doing the circumstances to which we have not attended thrust
themselves into consciousness—when, that is to say, the act appears in
more of its own specific nature—we dispose of those events, foreign to
our conscious purpose, as accidental; we did not want them or intend
them—what more proof of their accidental character is needed? The falling
of a stone upon a man’s head as he walks under a window is “chance,”
for it has nothing to do with what the man proposed to do, it is no
part of his conception of that walk. To an enemy who takes that means
of killing him, it is anything but an accident, being involved in
_his_ conscious purpose. It is “chance” when we throw a two and a six;
for the concreteness of the act falls outside of the content of our
intention. We intended _a_ throw, some throw, and in so far the result
is not accidental, but this special result, being irrelevant to our
conception of what we were to do, in so far is contingent. The vagueness
or lack of determinateness in our end, the irrelevancy of actual end to
conscious intent, chance, are all names for the same thing. And if I
am asked whether a gambler who has a hundred dollars upon the outcome
does not _intend_ to throw double sixes, I reply that he has no such
intention—unless the dice are loaded. He may _hope_ to make that throw,
but he cannot intend it save as he can define that act—tell how to do it,
tell, that is, just _what_ the act is. Or, once more, if I intend to get
my mail and there are four paths open to me it is chance which I take,
just in proportion to the abstractness of my end. If I have not defined
it beyond the mere “general result” of getting mail, anything else is
extraneous and in so far contingent. If the end is individualised to the
extent, say, of getting the mail in the shortest possible time, or with
the maximum of pleasant surroundings, or with the maximum of healthy
exercise, the indifferency of the “means,” and with it their contingency,
disappears. This or that path is no longer a mere means which _may_ be
taken to get a result foreign to its own value; the path is an intrinsic
part of the end.

In so far as a man presents to himself an end in general, he sets up an
abstraction so far lacking in detail as (taken _per se_) to exclude the
possibility of realisation. In order to exist as concrete or individual
(and of course, nothing can exist except as individual or concrete)
it must be defined or particularised. But so far as consciousness is
concerned the original vague end is _the_ reality; it is all that the man
cares about and hence constitutes his act. The further particularisation
of the end, therefore, instead of appearing as what it really is, viz.,
the discovery of the actual reality, presents itself as something
outside that end. This externality to the end previously realised in
consciousness is, taken as mere externality, contingency, or accident;
taken as none the less so bound up with the desired end that it must
be gone through before reaching that end, it is necessary. Chance, in
other words, stands for the irrelevancy as the matter at first presents
itself to consciousness; necessity is the required, but partial, negation
of this irrelevancy. Let it be complete, instead of partial, and we
have the one real activity defined throughout. With reference to this
reality, conditions are neither accidental nor necessary, but simply
constituting elements—they neither may be nor must be, but just are. What
is irrelevant is now not simply indifferent; it is excluded, eliminated.
What is relevant is no longer something required in order to get a result
beyond itself; it is incorporated into the result, it is integral.

It now remains to connect the two parts of our discussion, the logical
and the practical consideration of necessity, and show that, as
suggested, logical necessity rests upon teleological—that, indeed, it
is the teleological read backwards. The logical process of discovering
and stating the reality of some event simply reverses the process which
the mind goes through in setting up and realising an end. Instead of the
killing of an enemy as something to be accomplished, we have the fact of
a murder to be accounted for. Just as on the practical side, the end, as
it first arises in consciousness, is an end in general and thus contrasts
with the concrete end which is individualised; so the fact, as at first
realised in consciousness, is a _bare_ fact, and thus contrasts with the
actual event with its complete particularisation. The actual fact, the
murder as it really took place, is one thing; the fact as it stands in
consciousness, the phases of the actual event which are picked out and
put together, is another thing. The fact of knowledge, it is safe to
say, is no _fact_ at all; that is, if there had been in reality no more
particularisation, no more of detail, than there is consciousness, the
murder would never have happened. But just as, practically, we take the
end in general to be the real thing, (since it is the only thing of any
direct interest,) so in knowledge we take the bare fact as abstracted
from the actual whole, as _the_ fact. Just as the end of the savage is
merely to kill his enemy, so the “fact” is merely the dead body with
the weapon sticking in it. The fact, as it stands in consciousness, is
indeterminate and partial, but, since it is in consciousness by itself,
it is taken as a whole and as the certain thing. But as the abstractness
of the “end in general” is confessed in the fact that means are required
in order to make it real—to give it existence—so the unreal character of
the “fact” is revealed in the statement that the causes which produced
it are unknown and have to be discovered. The bare fact thus becomes
a result to be accounted for: in this conception the two sides are
combined; the “fact” is at once given a certain reality of its own while
at the same time the lack of concreteness is recognised in the reference
to external causes.

The gradual introduction of further factors, under the guise of causes
accounting for the effect, defines the original vague “fact,” until,
at last, when it is accounted for, we have before us the one and only
concrete reality. This done, we no longer have an effect to be accounted
for, and causes which produce it, but one fact whose statement or
description is such and such. But intermediate between the isolation and
the integration is the stage when necessity appears. We have advanced,
we will suppose, from the bare fact of the murder to the discovery of a
large amount of “circumstantial” evidence regarding that fact. We hear of
a man who had a quarrel with the deceased; he cannot account for himself
at the time when the murder _must_ have been committed; he is found
to have had a weapon like that with which the murder _must_ have been
committed. Finally we conclude he _must_ have been the murderer. What
do these “musts” (the “must” of the time, weapon, and murderer) mean?
Are they not obviously the gradual filling-in of the previously empty
judgment, through bringing things at first unconnected into relation
with each other? The existence of the man M. N. is wholly isolated from
the “fact” of the murder till it is learned that he had a grudge against
the murdered man; this third fact, also distinct _per se_, brought
into connection with the others (the “fact” of the murder and of the
existence of M. N.) compels them to move together; the result is at
first the possibility, later, as the points of connection get more and
more marked and numerous, the “necessity,” that M. N. is the murderer.
Further, it is clear that this “must” marks not a greater certainty or
actuality than a mere “is” would indicate, but rather a doubt, a surmise
or guess gradually gaining in certainty. When the fact is really made
out to our satisfaction, we drop the “must” and fall back on the simple
_is_. Only so long as there is room for doubt, and thus for argument
do we state that the time and weapon must have been such and such. So
when we finally conclude that the murderer must have been M. N., it
means that we have woven a large number of facts, previously discrete,
into such a state of inter-relationship that we do not see how to avoid
denying their discreteness and incorporating them all into one concrete
whole, or individual fact. That we still say “must” shows, however, that
we have not quite succeeded in overcoming the partial and indefinite
character of the original “fact.” Had we succeeded in getting the whole
fact before us the judgment would take this form: The murder _is_ a fact
of such and such definite nature, having as its content such and such
precise elements. In this comprehensive whole all distinction of effect
to be accounted for and causes which produce clean disappears. The idea
of necessity, in a word, comes in only while we are still engaged in
correcting our original error, but have not surrendered it root and
branch; this error being that the fragment of reality which we grasp is
concrete enough to warrant the appellation “fact.”

A great deal of attention has been directed to the category of cause
and effect. One striking feature of the ordinary consideration is, that
it takes for granted the matter most needing investigation and aims the
inquiry at the dependent member of the firm. The effect seems to be so
clearly _there_, while the cause is so obviously something to be searched
for that the category of effect is assumed, and it is supposed that only
the idea of causation is in need of examination. And yet this abstraction
of certain phases of fact, the erection of the parts thus abstracted into
distinct entities, which, though distinct, are still dependent in their
mode of existence, is precisely the point needing examination. It is but
another instance of the supreme importance of our practical interests.
The effect is the end, the practical outcome, which interests us; the
search for causes is but the search for the means which would produce
the result. We call it “means and end” when we set up a result to be
reached in the future and set ourselves upon finding the causes which
put the desired end in our hands; we call it “cause and effect” when
the “result” is given, and the search for means is a regressive one. In
either case the separation of one side from the other, of cause from
effect, of means from end, has the same origin: a partial and vague idea
of the whole fact, together with the habit of taking this part (because
of its superior practical importance) for a whole, for a fact.

I hope now to have made good my original thesis: that the idea of
necessity marks a certain stage in the development of judgment; that
it refers to a residuum, in our judgments and thus in our objects,
of indeterminateness or vagueness, which it replaces without wholly
negating; that it is thus relative to “chance” or contingency; that its
value consists wholly in the impulse given judgment towards the _is_, or
the concrete reality defined throughout. The analysis has been long; the
reader may have found it not only tedious, but seemingly superfluous,
since, as he may be saying to himself, no one nowadays regards necessity
as anything but a name for fixed uniformities in nature, and of this view
of the case nothing has been said. I hope, however, that when we come
to a consideration of necessity as equivalent to uniformity, it will be
found that the course of this discussion has not been irrelevant, but the
sure basis for going further.

                                                               JOHN DEWEY.


FOOTNOTES:

[65] This article, as the title may indicate, was suggested by Mr.
Peirce’s article upon “The Doctrine of Necessity Examined.” As, however,
my thought takes finally a different turn, I have deemed it better to let
it run its own course from the start, and so have not referred, except
indirectly, to Mr. Peirce’s argument. I hope this will not be taken as a
desire to slur over my indebtedness to him.

[66] The reason of this abstraction is in practical nature, as already
indicated. For all the savage _cares_ about it, the death in general,
_is_ the real fact. It is all that interests him. It is hardly worth
while to attempt to persuade the savage; indeed, if he were not only a
savage, but also a philosopher, he might boldly challenge the objector
to present _any_ definition of object which should not refer objectivity
to man’s practical activity; although he might, as a shrewd savage,
admit that some one activity (or self) to which the object is referred
has more content than another. In this case, I, for one, should not care
about entering the lists against the savage. But when the common-sense
philosopher, who resists all attempts to reconstruct the original object
on the ground that a fact is a fact and all beyond that is metaphysics,
is also a case-hardened nominalist (as he generally is), it is time to
protest. It might be true that the real object is always relative to the
value of some action; but to erect this pure universal into the object,
and then pride one’s self on enlightenment in rejecting the “scholastic
figment” of the reality of universals is a little too much.




THE ISSUES OF “SYNECHISM.”


In a late number of _The Monist_, (Vol. II, No. 4,) there appears a
singularly acute and profound article, from the pen of one of the ablest
of American logicians and mathematicians, Mr. Charles S. Peirce. Its
subject is “The Law of Mind”—the idea of continuity. The writer tells
us, (p. 534,) “the tendency to regard continuity, in the sense in which
I shall define it, as an idea of prime importance in philosophy, may
conveniently be termed _Synechism_.” With this _synechistic_ philosophy,
as applied to mind, the paper is occupied, to the exclusion, for the
nonce, of Mr. Peirce’s companion doctrine of _Tychism_,[67] which was
dealt with, by him, in the January, 1891, and April, 1892, issues of _The
Monist_. These conceptions are, both of them, to be viewed as essential
to philosophy as a whole, but the latter is; for the present, allowed
to drop out of sight, in order to allow of the due elaboration of the
former.[68]


THE FORMULA OF SYNECHISM.

The formula of Synechism, with which the article begins, is as follows:

    “Logical analysis applied to mental phenomena shows that there
    is but one law of mind, namely, that ideas tend to spread
    continuously, and to affect certain others which stand to them
    in a peculiar relation of affectibility. In this spreading they
    lose intensity, and especially the power of affecting others,
    but gain generality, and become welded with other ideas.” (Vol.
    II, No. 4, p. 534.)

The individuality and continuity of ideas are, then, shown respectively
to involve no contradiction; an idea once past—in the sense of an
event in an individual consciousness—is not wholly past, it is only
going—“infinitesimally past, less past than any assignable past date.”
Thus the conclusion is reached that “the present is connected with the
past by a series of real, infinitesimal steps.” Again, “We are forced to
say that we are immediately conscious through an infinitesimal interval
of time. This is all that is requisite.” (_Ibid._, pp. 535-536.)

All that it is necessary to say at the outset is, that this view is
supported by an elaborate inquiry into the nature of infinity and
continuity in general, into which, for the purpose of the present paper,
it is not needful to enter. And this for two reasons: (1) The synechistic
philosophy, by itself, does not profess to be monistic. Its expounder
does not, even if his Tychism were not in reserve, profess to carry it
beyond the realm of mind, with all that is implied in such a reservation.
Now, it is the bearing of Mr. Peirce’s Synechism upon a monistic solution
of the universe with which the present article is concerned. And (2)
Mr. Peirce’s method of treatment, though precise and logical in the
direction of its own path, is too purely technical to be summarised for
the general reader’s benefit. But withal, Synechism is far too fertile,
not so much in respect of what it makes clear, as suggestively, and, if
the expression may be allowed, _obliquely_, to be passed over without
comment. Its excogitator is eminently frank; he does not conceal the
difficulties which, ever and anon, occur in his statement. Sometimes
his theory seems a trifle too wide for the facts encountered, sometimes
rather too scanty to contain them. Such phrases as the following: “No, I
think we can only hold”—p. 552; “we are driven to perceive”—p. 555; “this
obliges me to say”—p. 557; “the principle with which I set out requires
me to maintain”—p. 558; “the only answer that I can, at present, make
is”—p. 559, etc., etc., do every credit to the writer’s candor, but they
would scarcely occur in an exposition, which, in the mind of its author,
made the rough places altogether plain. Synechism, even with Tychism in
the background, probably does not, in Mr. Peirce’s own mind, completely
solve the world-riddle, at least, as yet. Still these very pauses
themselves, on the part of a thinker of such ability, are eminently
suggestive. To use his own words: “the present paper is intended to show
what Synechism is, and what it leads to.” Let us emphasise this latter
clause, as likely to be more fruitful than the former.


MR. PEIRCE’S POSITIVISM.

Mr. Peirce, in spite of his theory of chance, is, in his Synechism,
almost severely a positivist;[69] but his positivism, like most of that
current nowadays, does not go deep enough. He is positivist, _after_ he
has got externality—fertile in excitations—comfortably disposed around
his subject; and vibrations, undulations, attractions, etc., ready to
play upon the thousand-stringed harp, _but not before_. For, “we must not
tax introspection,” he tells us, p. 548, “to make a phenomenon manifest,
which essentially involves externality,” when the real problem at issue
is: Is there externality, in the vulgar sense, at all, or is it only that
_rationalised externality_ which _circumspection_, within the limits
of egoity, reveals? Now, upon this a good deal hinges. At all events
the difference in question, or, rather, that there _is_ a difference,
has been mooted, to say the least. And, this being the case, it is a
little tedious, when the really vital point of the spatial extension of
feelings is being debated, to have this illustration brought in, (p.
548,): “Moreover, our own feelings are focused in attention to such a
degree, that we are not aware that ideas are not brought to an absolute
unity. Just as nobody, not instructed by special experiment, has any idea
how very, very little of the field of vision is distinct.” Why, that is
reasoning in a circle, if some systems are true; and it is a begging of
the question, if they are the reverse.

If the system of so-called objective reality were, at sight, wholly
veracious, if everything existed just as it seems, this positivism of
Mr. Peirce’s might be workable. Then no one would seek to go beneath
the process of the apparent, the actually visible, for a _rationale_.
But modern science teaches, in its very primer, that many things are,
and act, quite otherwise than as they seem to be, and do. Appearances
_rationalised_ are alone to be accepted. The sun does not “rise”
and “set,” as it seems to do. The earth is not, as it appears to be,
an immovable plane, and so on. And, this once allowed, where is the
principle to end? If the superficial judgment may be thus corrected,
or reversed, it is liable to revision or reversal _ad infinitum_,
unless reason be shown to the contrary. It may thus be disputed whether
our author is quite in order in writing, as he does, and using the
statement to support his theory—“Precisely how primary sensations, as
colors and tones, are excited, we cannot tell, in the present state of
psychology.... As far as sight and hearing are in question, we know that
they are only excited by vibrations of inconceivable complexity; and the
chemical senses are probably not more simple.” (P. 557.)

To argue, we cannot tell precisely _how_ they are excited, but we know
that they _are_ excited, is somewhat feminine; seeing that the said
“excitement” is not patent on the surface of ordinary perception. And,
this being the case, the excitement, or its mode rather, not being given
immediately, but only mentally annexed, Mr. Peirce is not consistently
positivist. It is equally open to an opponent to “annex” something else
of his own to the “given” thing, or altogether to deny the necessity of
anything whatever being thus annexed. In any case that (if anything)
which is sought to be annexed must stand the test of positivism; we must
know _if_ such a thing is, and _what_ it is precisely. And this is just
what Mr. Peirce cannot do for us. He cannot tell us exactly what the
“excitant” of feelings _is_; he can only guess what it is “_something
like_,” viz.: the feelings themselves. Hence the following:

    “The principle with which I set out [that of continuity]
    requires me to maintain that these feelings are communicated to
    the nerves by continuity, _so that there must be something like
    them in the excitants themselves_. If this seems extravagant,
    it is to be remembered that it is the sole possible way of
    reaching any explanation of sensation, which otherwise must be
    pronounced a general fact absolutely inexplicable and ultimate.
    Now absolute inexplicability is a hypothesis which sound logic
    refuses, under any circumstances, to justify.” (P. 558.—The
    italics are not in the original.)

There must be something like the feelings in the excitants of the
feelings. Now, this point is worthy of the closest attention. Note that
“the excitant” _alone_ is mentioned. _Vibrations_ excite sight and
hearing. Yet, from what follows, it is plain that Synechism is not
inconsistent with belief in a fixed objective. “Even the least psychical
of peripheral sensations, that of pressure, has, in its excitation,
conditions which, though apparently simple, are seen to be complicated
enough when we consider _the molecules and their attractions_,” pp.
557-558. Can there, then, be any doubt that we have here three distinct
things: (1) a subjective, (2) an “excitant,” and (3) an objective; the
middle term being a vehicle of communication between the first and third?
It does not affect this presentation of Mr. Peirce’s position that,
at an earlier stage of his argument, he speaks of matter—synonymous,
presumably, with the objective—as being “not completely dead, but merely
mind, hide-bound with habits,” as “partially deadened” or “effete,”
mind; or that the editor of _The Monist_ says that, with Mr. Peirce,
“mind is the beginning of all.” (_The Monist_, Vol. III, No. 1, p.
95.) The question, at present, is not regarding origins, but regarding
co-existences. So that there is a distinct _hiatus_ here, arising from
the confusion of the stimulant, or excitant, of sensation with the
objective itself.[70] Now, the stimulant of sensation is never the object
perceived. Hence, once an objective is admitted, a trinity of entities is
unavoidable, since still less can the “stimulant” be the subject. This
special difficulty, in the present writer’s opinion, is inseparable from
dualism in every form. How it besets Mr. Peirce’s theory is evident from
his hazarded suggestion: “There must be _something like_ the feelings
in the excitants.” He thus uses only two of his cosmical terms, and
gives the third the go-by! All dualism halts, but surely there is here a
palpable stumble.

In a recent article in _The Open Court_[71] I have pointed out the
vanity of introducing a vehicle of communication between object and
subject, especially emphasising the fact that, once this intermediate
term is brought in, the veritable objective disappears. “Once you bring
in vibrations,” I remarked, “you practically provide a _second_ object,
which is really a part of the subject, and, in order to do this, you
have taken from the original objective all that composed it.”[72] (_The
Open Court_, p. 3361.)

Is it any wonder, then, that Mr. Peirce should suppose the excitants
to be “something like” the excited feelings? Since he, practically,
surrenders the objective, what could more closely resemble the subjective
than the subjective itself? If he had adopted the position of Hume,
and made impressions and ideas all-in-all, his principle of continuity
might hold. But this he does not do, since (1) he implicitly admits the
objective element, and (2) even if he did not do this, there must be
something other than the idea or feeling in his system, since, otherwise,
there could be no ground for the charge of seeming “extravagance,” which,
he admits, may be leveled against, at least one of, his conclusions.


FEELINGS SPATIALLY EXTENDED.

This leads us to Mr. Peirce’s conclusions regarding subjective spatial
extension—the spatial extension of feelings—as the result of observation
of irritated protoplasm. Our attention is directed to an excited mass of
protoplasm,—an amœba, or a slime-mould,—which “does not differ in any
radical way from the contents of a nerve-cell, though its functions may
be less specialised.” (P. 547.) The irritation is induced when, say, the
amœba is “quiescent and rigid,” and we note its behaviour under it. That
feeling passes from one part of this amorphous continuum of protoplasm to
another, we are led to believe. And this conclusion follows: “Whatever
there is in the whole phenomenon to make us think there is feeling in
such a mass of protoplasm,—_feeling_, but plainly no _personality_,—goes
logically to show that that feeling has a subjective, or substantial,
spatial extension, as the excited state has.” This is a chain of
reasoning. Let us examine its links. We have:

(1) The behaviour of the amœba under immediate, mechanical irritation—the
spread, or spatial extension, of the state of irritation.

(2) We are asked to identify this spread-out irritation, this field of
excitation, with “feeling” on the part of the amœba, because there is “no
doubt that it feels when it is excited.”

(3) From the spatial extension of the irritation, thus identified with
feeling, we are asked to conclude that the feeling, in the amœba, has a
subjective, spatial extension as the excited state has, and, finally,
passing from the feeling of the amœba to our own feelings, by inference,
we are asked to admit:

(4) Not that we have necessarily a feeling of bigness, but that “the
feeling [inferentially arrived at from the spread-out irritation on the
part of the amœba] as a subject of inhesion is big.” (P. 548.)

After this, we are disposed to agree with Mr. Peirce when he says: “This
is, no doubt, a difficult idea to seize”; not, as he goes on to say, “for
the reason that it is a subjective, not an objective, extension,” but on
the ground that the reasoning involves, plainly, not only the subjective
and objective, but what Clifford calls the “ejective,” as well, and this
assumption, _inter alia_, that the last-named lies on the same plane as
the former. Never, surely, was the conclusion that feelings have spatial
extension more easily reached. It is only when we find that in (1) we
are dealing with the objective pure and simple, observed phenomena; that
in (2) the connection between irritation or excitation, and feeling
is assumed, in the object, because feeling, subjectively, is found to
accompany irritation; that (3) as the irritation, in the amœba, is spread
out, so is the feeling to be viewed; and (4) that, as the feeling of the
amœba, so is our feeling to be considered, viz.: that the feeling, “as
a subject of inhesion, is big,” we are led to say after all this, that,
by such a process, anything, or everything, could be demonstrated,—the
_field_ of spatial extension, for example, having no more claim to be
assumed than the _point_ at which the irritation admittedly begins. Why
should the _middle_ stage of the irritation be selected in preference to
the _initial_ and _final_ ones? The irritation originates in a point,
spreads, and then dies out. Thus our feeling, (we purposely use Mr.
Peirce’s nomenclature,) or idea, of an elephant, is unquestionably,
as a subject of inhesion, “big.” _But only for a time, and not at
first._ Really, our idea, or feeling—in Synechism—of an elephant, must
logically commence as a minute speck, and return to this vanishing-point
again. There is no other way out of it. For must not the analogy of the
irritated amœba be followed throughout, and if not, why not?


DUALISM AND THE WAY OUT.

The _crux_ of philosophy, from the time of Hume to the present day, has
been, what may be summarised as, the consciousness of succession _as_
succession. The hours pass over the mental dial, but, though one succeeds
the other, something is needed besides the succession of the terms of the
series to give consciousness of the series _as a series_, to give the
synthesis of the day made up of hours. Hume virtually gave up the problem
in eviscerating the subjective. Prof. T. H. Green only missed the point
at issue when he placed his eternal consciousness, which was to “have
and to hold” the terms of the cosmical series, as it were in solution,
for the human organism, _out of time altogether_. Mr. Peirce puts the
matter boldly when he says: “An idea once past is gone forever, [in the
sense of an event in an individual consciousness,] and any supposed
recurrence of it is another idea.” (P. 534.) In order, then, that an
idea past may be present really, and not vicariously, the notion that
consciousness necessarily occupies an interval of (finite) time must be
given up; since, to put it briefly, a second past is as much past as a
year. According to Mr. Peirce then, and his contention is supported by an
elaborate inquiry into the nature of infinity and continuity generally,
“we are immediately conscious through an infinitesimal interval of time.”
For the complete _rationale_, reference must necessarily be made to the
article itself.

Even the above outline, however, is sufficient to show that, here as
elsewhere, Mr. Peirce’s dualism is his snare. Nothing but this could lead
to a disintegration so complete as the following:

    “In this infinitesimal interval, not only is consciousness
    continuous in a subjective sense, that is, considered as a
    subject, or substance, having the attribute of duration; but
    also, because it is immediate consciousness, its object is
    _ipso facto_ continuous.” (P. 536.)

This is to admit, practically, that there is something in consciousness
other than the consciousness itself. And this is evident, because at
one and the same time, (whether an interval of finite time, or an
infinitesimal interval,—whether an “instant” or a “moment,”—does not
matter,) these two entities are different. For:

    “This mediate perception is objectively, or as to the object
    represented, spread over the four instants; but subjectively,
    or as itself the subject of duration, it is completely embraced
    in the second moment.” (_Ibid._)

But this “mediate” and “immediate” cannot simultaneously exist, unless
there is something else _to which_ they do so exist. It is only paltering
with us in a double sense to speak of “instant” and “moment” in this
connection. The one may pass into the other, but there is “a time when”
(it matters not whether the interval be finite or infinitesimal) they do
not coexist. Hence, they are not the same, but different.

According to Mr. Peirce’s notation, for all ordinary purposes we may
write, if _a_ is a finite quantity, and _i_ an infinitesimal, _a_ + _i_
= _a_. “That is to say, this is so for all purposes of measurement.” Be
it so; the infinitesimal may be neglected for purposes of calculation.
But such a formula can only be experimental. The theory which embodies
it cannot avail for a world-scheme; to admit it would be to grant that
a thing is, and is not, at one and the same time. Surely the most
superficial reader will see that, to put it popularly, a world-scheme
admits of no alternative subject to accept, or to reject, a neglectable
quantity.

And this is not the only instance of dualism in Mr. Peirce’s world-scheme
as a totality. For have we not Synechism and Tychism as well? With the
latter Mr. Peirce does not deal in the paper now under consideration. He
must, however, be credited, or debited, with it, as held in reserve. For
our present purpose it is not necessary to examine Tychism in detail. Its
alleged existence is sufficient. For, and here let the significance of
what follows be noted, in Mr. Peirce’s view, as opposed to determinism,
Tychism exists as a principle. It _is_, otherwise it could not be
expounded as operative. But it also exists as an idea, first, it may be,
in our author’s mind, and subsequently in the minds of his disciples.
Thus it falls into the synechistic province: “As an idea it can only be
affected by an idea, by anything but an idea it cannot be affected at
all.” (“The Law of Mind,” p. 557.) Yet to affirm Tychism thus impotent,
because unaffectible, outside the synechistic sphere, is to contradict
Mr. Peirce’s conclusions, for if Tychism is nothing outside the ideal
realm, it is altogether inside it. Hence Synechism is everything
practically, and Tychism nothing. But that Mr. Peirce will not have. He
has a two-fold Tychism, that is the fact; actual and operative on the one
hand, ideal on the other. And this is dualism confessed.

Mr. Peirce’s method is quite fertile in duplication of the subjective
entity. His latest paper, “Man’s Glassy Essence,” (_The Monist_, Vol.
III, No. 1,) contains some typical instances.

    “Viewing a thing from the outside, considering its relations of
    action and reaction with other things, it appears as matter.
    Viewing it from the inside, looking at its immediate character
    as feeling, it appears as consciousness.” (P. 20.)

This is the strictly empirical view. And it may be possibly defended
with the contention that all problems, to be duly examined, must, in
the first place, be viewed from that standpoint. But it must be plainly
manifest to any unprejudiced thinker that, even granted a total cosmical
problem made up of separate problems of an individual nature, the same
method of solving the sum cannot be employed which is used in solving
its constituents. In the above instance, considering matter in its
totality, and consciousness in its totality, what is left to view them
indifferently from “outside,” or “inside”? Plainly nothing. Still more
transparent an example is the following:

    “The consciousness of a habit involves a general idea. In
    each action of that habit certain atoms get thrown out of
    their orbit, and replaced by others. Upon all the different
    occasions it is different atoms that are thrown off, but they
    are analogous from a physical point of view, and there is an
    inward sense of their being analogous. Every time one of the
    associated feelings recurs, there is a more or less vague sense
    that there are others, that it has a general character, and of
    about what this general character is.” (P. 20.)

This is part of the answer to the query: How do general ideas appear in
the molecular theory of protoplasm? Now, without discussing the value
of this _rationale_, as affecting Mr. Peirce’s own theories, it is not
difficult to see what its acceptance would “lead to.” Certain atoms of
a molecule get thrown out and are replaced by _others_. This happens
repeatedly. On different occasions _different atoms_ come and go. Yet
they are “analogous,” and there is “an inward sense” of this. Upon whose
shoulders is the burden of proving the analogy placed, or of experiencing
it even? With whom or what is there “an inward sense”? Perhaps it is
better not to answer otherwise than to say that if this faculty be
not present in the ever changing molecule to begin with, it cannot be
logically reached by any process of multiplying it.


THE MONISTIC SOLUTION.

Monism, as a unitary system of the universe, does not necessarily commend
itself to acceptance simply _as_ monism. To say, this is dualism,
_therefore_ it cannot be a correct _rationale_ of the universe, since
the only true one must be monistic, is to start with an unphilosophical
prepossession. The true solution may be two-fold, or it may be manifold.
But it is not too much to say, perhaps, on the other hand, that, even as
causes may not be multiplied without necessity, even so phenomena must
not logically be divided into independent groupings without sufficient
reason given. Preference should be accorded to a monistic, rather than
to a dualistic, system, not on the ground alone of the simplicity of
the former, but on the ground that a theory which has one explanation
for one set of phenomena and another explanation for a second set, must
first demonstrate that a unitary conception of the universe is, at
least, improbable, otherwise it will always be hinted that the dualism
in question has not gone deep enough to find a synthetic bond wherewith
to unite the apparently diverse. Mr. Peirce, throughout his article on
Synechism, constantly touches, despite his latent dualism, the margin
of a truth so great as to merit the title of transcendent. As often he
misses it. And his concluding words are, in this connection, almost
wistful: “The facts that stand before our face and eyes and stare us
in the face, are far from being, in all cases, the ones most easily
discerned. That has been remarked from time immemorial.” (P. 559.) But
though thus “remarked,” the maxim has, as immemorially, been neglected
in practice. To none can this remark be more fitly applied than to the
excogitator of Synechism, himself seeing that, having arrived at the
point of asserting that “there must be _something like_ the feelings in
the excitants themselves,” he does not see that the excitant and the
feeling are one and the same; and that there is no second or third term
in the cosmical equation.

Does this seem “extravagant”? If so, the reply must be _not_ that it is
the only escape from an otherwise inexplicable difficulty, but that there
is really no difficulty at all. What Mr. Peirce’s own Synechism “_leads
to_” is that the past, the present, and the to-come, alike of matter and
idea, are not reconciled by “time and its flow,” or even by the logic
of infinitesimals, subtle though that may be, but that the contents of
each and all, with all their apparently infinite variety, resolve into a
consistent unity.


THE “MISSING LINK.”

Pushed to a logical conclusion, the excitants and the feelings owe
their apparent variety to their assigned position in a series, the
correspondence or relation between them being _only another link in
the self-same chain_. Vulgar realism never fathoms this explanation.
It always harps upon the one string that idealism, and more especially
idealistic monism, fails to account for variety or difference;
forgetting, or rather never seeing, that difference or variety which
is its essence, is only one more added perception on the same plane
with ordinary perceptions; so that given _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_,—sundry
perceptions,—their essential variety may be stated as _e_. Or this may
be stated numerically; variety, as a whole, being nothing more than
the sum of differences, which is always something other than the terms
differentiated, but always on the same level with them—the difference
between any continuous number, above unity, and another number being a
third number, which is different from either. Variety in numbers cannot
be expressed otherwise than numerically. So, in the last recess, the
variety of colors is only colorable, of tones audible, and so on. The
“vibrations of inconceivable complexity” which, according to Mr. Peirce,
“excite sight and hearing,” can be approximately stated numerically,
so that the difference between red and, say, yellow, is a number
corresponding to another color, which may be orange or not; it being
part of the present scientific theory of light that any specific number
of ethereal undulations happening between the colors of the ocular
spectrum, corresponds to a possible color, although the retinal expanse
may be insensible to these particular rates of tremor. To Mr. Peirce it
may appear “extravagant,” but the difference between any two colors and
tones is another color, another tone; just as the difference between any
two numbers is a third number. This is the logical outcome of his own
Synechism; _this_, in part, is what it “leads to.”


TIME AND ITS “FLOW” RATIONALISED.

Excitants and feelings being unified, and the element of variety,
hitherto supposed to be the exclusive copyright of vulgar realism, shown
to be nothing but another term added to the series, or, numerically, a
concurrent series—so that should _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_ ... be a series,
the variety of the series may be expressed as _e_, or the individual
differences as _f_, _g_, _h_ ...—it only needs an examination of what
Mr. Peirce terms “time and its flow,” to render his system a completely
monistic one, and this although true monism is much more than the
negation of determinism, synechistically expressed.

In Mr. Peirce’s article under examination, “The Law of Mind,” the
notation of infinitesimals, which forms the keystone of Synechism, is
only introduced after a lament over the incapacity, or unworkableness
rather, of finite time, when the duration of consciousness is involved.
If _finite_ time is to come in as a factor—“an idea once past [in the
sense of an event in an individual consciousness] is gone forever, and
any supposed recurrence of it is another idea” (p. 534). And the problem
which Mr. Peirce sets himself to solve is how in effect to bring _back_
this past idea—not vicariously—but in all its pristine freshness, into
the now-time. This is sought to be accomplished by the explanation that
the past idea is “not wholly past, it is only going, less past than any
assignable past date”—and so on through the intricacies of Mr. Peirce’s
infinitesimal theory, into which we need not enter at present. But the
statement of the, supposed, difficulty which finite time presents in this
connection,—the past idea really past and gone, and the recurrence of it
another idea,—if put in a slightly different form, hints a solution, in
continuity with the foregoing pages, without the aid of the infinitesimal
at all. _That an idea is once past and gone_, any occurrence, or
recurrence, of this idea, _is another idea_.[73]

But, in the meantime, let us see what Mr. Peirce has to say regarding
“time and its flow”:

    “One of the most marked features about the law of mind is, that
    it makes time to have a definite direction of flow from past
    to future. The relation of past to future is, in reference
    to the law of mind, different from the relation of future to
    past. This makes one of the great contrasts between the law
    of mind and the law of physical force, where there is no more
    distinction between the two opposite directions in time than
    between moving northward, and moving southward” (p. 546).

This for once is not very clear. It is difficult to see how “the law of
physical force” can be spoken of as “in time,” to the exclusion of mind;
not easy, also, to understand the distinction further insisted upon. But
the intention is evident, viz., to perpetuate, if not to originate, a
cosmical duality. Time, it would seem, marches indifferently in at least
two directions, though it is not very clear how this is accomplished.
And then the old fiction follows, that “Time, as the universal form of
change, cannot exist unless there is something to undergo change, etc.”
(p. 547.)

The same notation suits in this case as in the foregoing. Time is only
another term in the series. If _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_ be a series, _e_
is the variety, _f_ the whole time involved, and _g_ the individual
intervals. Of course all this is not a simple series, it is an infinitely
complicated one; the above arrangement is only intended to show that
difference, variety, time, etc., are no mysterious entities pervading
events, acting as their “form” or carrying them in their “flow,” but
simply percepts, or concepts, on a level with others.

This is not patent on the surface, it may be. Time has the appearance
of a current in which events float. But this is an illusion dispelled
by examination. Events cannot be submerged in time. Time cannot be
the vehicle of events. It is impossible to conceive time as existing
simultaneously with an event. It always follows it. What to Mr. Peirce
appears as a “flow,” arises from the foregoing. Take events, percepts,
or concepts, as a hypothetical series, _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_ ... and their
times as _a´_, _b´_, _c´_, _d´_ ... the first series contains the event
_per se_, or as happening; the “time when” is contained in the second
series, practically inseparable from the first, but the time when
necessarily follows—consequently if the first be _a_, the second must
be, at least _a_. But no concept or percept is abstract, except the
concept time itself, which, being unconnected, _seems_ anywhere, and,
like its fellow-abstract space, is spread out, to us, tri-dimensionally,
as past, present, and to come. And, as in space the position is simply
spectral,[74] a question of perspective or adjustment, so, in time, the
timal series is adjusted to the substantive idea. But this two-fold
spectral succession breeds by comparative intensity (which is another
complex series) the sense of a flow, where there is none, but only the
idea of a flowing, which is another matter. Thus, the so-called “veil
of the future” is no more a veil than it is a brickbat. It is simply
the indeterminateness of an unconnected adjective—as if one should say,
white—and the query arises, _What_ is it that is white? When the noun is
supplied you have something definite. Just so, when the future lapses
into the present.

Thus there is never anything without, at least, these three additions:
first, variety or difference; second, time; third, relation, spatial
or otherwise. These are all terms in a series, or set of concurrent
series. Nothing can be, practically, isolated, for everything runs in a
series. But this is a much broader theory of continuity than that which
Synechism affords.[75] All apparent perplexities vanish. The difficulty
no longer exists that to perceive a series we must hold it, as it were,
in solution. Since other than series nothing is. Hence the cosmos is
an illimitable series or complex of series. But inasmuch as the timal
element (as also the spatial) occurs through the series having time-term
and space-term resident within it, all difficulty in apprehending it as
a series vanishes. The impracticability, if any, would be in viewing any
term as isolated.


THE RESULT _RE_ TYCHISM.

What a flood of light does such a system shed indirectly upon Tychism,
since the controversy between the latter and determinism mainly hinges
upon the “must be,” the imperative, as it were, of the series! It has
been very ably pointed out by Dr. Carus in his article _re_ Mr. Peirce’s
“Onslaught on the Doctrine of Necessity” (_The Monist_, Vol. II, No.
4, pp. 573-4.) that the formula adopted by Mr. Peirce in his Tychism,
“chance is first, law is second, the tendency of habits is third,”
involves its author in the admission of a law in a system professing to
be, in its inception at all events, chanceful and _lawless_. Mr. Peirce’s
“Synechism” professes to be the law of mind. Parenthetically, however,
it may be remarked, that the distinction as to law, and lawlessness or
“chance,” narrows itself to the plane of one term more or less in a
series, or _even to less than that subordinate place_. For, although,
for convenience sake, and for facility of contrast, we have followed
Mr. Peirce’s figure of a series, to show more clearly also to what his
theory leads, it is nevertheless plain, that time and its accompanying
relations being placed on their proper level, that of integral percepts
and concepts, the figure of a series is simply a matter of convenience
of arrangement. Certainly as the “time when” is necessarily annexed to
every percept and concept the timal element may be said to follow, not
to precede, its fellow-term. Really, however, they may be said to be
simultaneous, since the timal refinements of finite, infinite, past,
present, and future are each of them contained in a percept of its own.


EXTERNALITY A SERIAL TERM.

But if the timal element be independent as a separate percept, the
spatial as another, and so on, it follows that, although the terms of the
series may, as it were, _run_, though we cannot conceive them separated,
or as, in practice, otherwise than as continuous in their flow, still,
theoretically, a series or complex of series it _is_, and a series may
be interrupted at any term. Thus externality itself being a spatial
relation, is but _one term more_, non-essential in theory, to the term
preceding. So that when the Neo-Kantians speak of the “constitution of
the objective” it ought to be added that it is not only the content
of the objective which is thus constituted by consciousness, but that
externality, all that goes to make up what is termed “out-sidedness,” is
constituted by consciousness also.


THE NOW-TIME.

“_The present is half past, and half to come_,” (p. 546) like the color
of a curved boundary line on a particolored surface; i. e. “betwixt
and between” the two. It is here that the theory of Synechism shows
its chief defect. Up to this stage we have been dealing with ideas,
feelings, _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_ ... successively passing through a point
of consciousness _e_. And the infinitesimal notation suits the required
process fairly well. It is complicated enough, but it is ingenious, and
at least plausible. Nothing up to this stage would lead us to suppose
that any additional element was to be imported into the _rationale_ which
Mr. Peirce presents. As we have seen, finite time would not serve his
purpose. By however minute a _finite_ interval have _a_, _b_, _c_ or _d_
passed the point _e_, all chance of their recovery is hopeless. Well, we
have recourse to infinitesimals, and find (to put it popularly, and not
in Mr. Peirce’s technical terms) that _a_ past the point of consciousness
by an infinitesimal interval heralds _b_. So that _e_ is simultaneously
confronted with the disappearing form of the first and the appearing
form of the second, and the same with _b_, and _c_, in turn, and so on.
Thus the present, in the sense of ideas successively passing through
consciousness, is half _a_ and half _b_, then half _b_ and half _c_, this
infinitesimal gradation ultimately ensuring the presence of the whole
series in the last “moment.”

But this will not avail with the concept time itself as distinguished
from timed succession. That these two are separate with Mr. Peirce it is
impossible to doubt. He says, e. g., “Time with its continuity logically
involves some other kind of continuity than its own,” (p. 547) and
speaks of “time and its flow,” and of “time as the universal form of
change.” And it is confusing, to say the least, when we are shifted
without warning from what is practically the perceptual to the conceptual
region. Granted the ideas, the feelings, or what not, “gliding almost
imperceptibly” (as did the late Mr. Bardell to another sphere) past the
central point of consciousness, yet not wholly past, only going, less
past than any assignable past date, granted this, the assertion is not
consequently warranted that time itself, the _present_, as time, not
as involving the succession of ideas, is “half past and half to come.”
The ideas, the feelings, of which Mr. Peirce writes, successively pass
through the stage of being thus half past and half to come, but that
is by no means the same thing as saying that the present is half past,
half to come, as Synechism avers. With our theory, as presented in the
foregoing pages there is indeed no such difficulty, but Mr. Peirce, on
the other hand, has elected to stand by infinitesimally measuring time,
as applied to ideas etc., as separate from conceptual time, and must take
the consequences of his decision. He says _the present, not the present
idea_.

Now, in the concept time as a whole, in its entire range, a definite
point may be selected—to the exclusion of other points—a point having
position but not extension, as _the present_. Is it, then,—the
present,—half past, half to come, as a timed idea is? Certainly not.
There is nothing of the flow of a series in it. Further, this selection
of the “now,” as a point, does not interfere with its permanence.
“Nowness” may persist. And the moment it partook, even infinitesimally,
of the character of the past or of the future, it would cease to be the
present. In the case of a series of ideas in time the difficulty is to
get them all in present solution, as it were, without detriment to their
evident continuity, but the definition of the present as a point in time
presents no such difficulty. The conditions are quite distinct. Yet
regarding this time point—the present—Mr. Peirce assures us that it is
“half past, half to come,” which is just that of which it is the precise
negation, if words are to have any meaning.

Again, Mr. Peirce’s _rationale_ shows, upon the face of it, that there
is (1) finitely divisible time and, (2) time divided infinitesimally,
for what finite time could not do, in that it had limitations,
the infinitesimal notation readily accomplishes. In its ulterior
consequences, this is somewhat unfortunate for Synechism, inasmuch as the
consciousness of ideas in continuity being confined to the infinitesimal
theory, where, it may be asked, is the place, in consciousness, for
the succession of finite intervals? Consciousness must be practically
doubled, so to speak, if it is to hold both of these together. This
is what comes of making one’s world-scheme hang upon a mathematical
subtlety—the subtlety in question partaking as a rule, more or less of
the nature of an escape from the difficulties of the vulgar notation, the
vulgar notation remains to be reckoned with, and both have to be credited
to consciousness. As an instance of this take the following from Mr.
Peirce’s late article,[76] “Man’s Glassy Essence”—p. 15:

    “In order that a sub-molecule of food may be thoroughly and
    firmly assimilated into a broken molecule of protoplasm,
    it is necessary not only that it should have precisely the
    right chemical composition, but also that it should be at
    precisely the right spot _at the right time_ and should be
    moving in precisely the right direction with precisely the
    right velocity. If all these conditions are not fulfilled, ...
    it will be in special danger of being thrown out again” (The
    italics are not in the original).

Now here is a “time when” which can be exactly specified in accordance
with the conditions. Certain results follow unless it is kept to.
This is what Mr. Peirce would doubtless consider as a timed physical
event, part and parcel of the regularity of matter, and yet an event
which, in its own time and way, goes to account for both feeling and
habit-taking—capable, therefore, of being stated in terms of finite
time, as happening at a given instant, and neither before nor after it.
But when this same molecule is, by virtue of keeping its appointment
punctually, safely installed in feeling protoplasm, the succession of
ideas, or feelings, of which, as subject, it is capable, obeys another
rule—a given _instant_ obtains no longer; it is the _moment_ which is
everything[77]—a moment half its predecessor, half its successor. Even
granted the function of the infinitesimal, this looks very much like a
reduction to absurdity. For, if the above mentioned timed coalescence
of the sub-molecule with the broken molecule were _also_ a matter of
subjective feeling, passed as process through a consciousness, the
conclusion follows that the juncture of the molecules happens at two
different times! There is no escape from this. Given the _instant_ in
the one case, the _moment_ in the other, these two cannot possibly be
the same point in time. The moment partakes, however insensibly, of the
preceding and succeeding stages, the instant does not. Hence they are not
the same but different times.


OTHERNESS.

The foregoing has a distinct bearing upon the question of “other selves”
of which Mr. Peirce writes as follows:

    “The recognition by one person of another’s personality takes
    place by means to some extent identical with the means by which
    he is conscious of his own personality. The idea of the second
    personality, which is as much as to say that second personality
    itself, enters within the field of direct consciousness of
    the first person, and is as immediately perceived as his ego,
    though less strongly. At the same time, the opposition between
    the two persons is perceived, so that the externality of the
    second is recognised.” (“The Law of Mind,” p. 558.)

This is the scheme of “otherness” which, in the case of the Neo-Kantians,
particularly the French section, represented by M. Pillon, M. Renouvier,
and others, has proved such a snare. To these thinkers, (as indeed to
the late Prof. T. H. Green, of Oxford, though in a less degree,) the
so-called external world lies in “other” thinking subjects—in “foreign
centres of representations.” The free-trade doctrine has verily
penetrated to the philosophic region—the wholesale admission of foreign
wares to the detriment of home products. Why should I place the content
of that so-called external world, which, external or internal, is my
very own inalienably, in a centre of representation other than my own,
thus making my cognition of it rest entirely upon the “ejective” plane?
It is only when I discover, as I must sooner or later, that there is
nothing in the report of an “outsider” (or in any number of them) beyond
what I credit him or her with in my own consciousness; and that the
outsider is on the same plane as other objects, it is only then that
the mystification is cleared up. I do _not_ cognise, or recognise, the
external at second-hand. The “note” of otherness is simply another term
more or less in the cosmical series.

It is, however, not only with the familiar “other selves” of ordinary
life that we are confronted in Synechism. In the creed of animism

    “Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth,”

and Mr. Peirce speaks of “spiritual influences” (p. 559) as having at
least no hindrance presented to them by his doctrine. But he has some
other shadowy personalities at command, which, it must be confessed, are
well calculated to give us pause. “There should be something like[78]
personal consciousness in bodies of men who are in intimate and intensely
sympathetic communion.... None of us can fully realise which the minds
of corporations are.... But the law of mind clearly points to the
existence of such personalities.” It is probably true that the “minds of
corporations,” must ever present an insoluble riddle of perversity to the
suburban dweller, vexed with the mockery of paving and lighting. But we
need not linger over this speculation, for there are other shades behind.

    “If such a fact is capable of being made out anywhere it
    should be in the Church.... Surely a personality ought to have
    developed in that Church, in that ‘bride of Christ,’ as they
    call it.” (“Man’s Glassy Essence,” pp. 21-22.)


A PERSONAL CREATOR.

Bearing our ecclesiastical divisions in mind, it is difficult to conceive
the unity of a “corporate personality” of this kind, but, to let that
pass, it may be remarked that, when any one begins to imagine that there
are others in the universe besides himself, he is not, as a rule, content
with two or three companions of his solitude. They come in battalions.
Thus, behind the other selves, corporate personalities and spiritual
influences of Synechism, there looms a transcendent personality. “A
genuine evolutionary philosophy,” we are told, “... is so far from being
antagonistic to the idea of a personal Creator, that it is really
inseparable from that idea.” And a philosophy of pseudo-evolutionism is
“hostile to all hopes of personal relations to God.” (“The Law of Mind,”
p. 557.)

Mr. Peirce thus assigns to his first cause a place in the _continuum_ of
ideas, and says that if there is a personal God we must have a direct
perception of that person and “indeed be in personal communication
with him.” The difficulty, he admits, is that if this be so, how is it
possible that the existence of this being should ever have been doubted
by anybody. And the only answer he can at present make is, that “facts
that stand before our face and eyes, and stare us in the face, are
far from being in all cases the ones most easily discerned. That,” he
adds, “has been remarked from time immemorial.” (“The Law of Mind,” pp.
558-559.)

One of the ablest of living philosophical writers, Professor Veitch,
of Glasgow University, puts it somewhat similarly, though with his own
realistic coloring, when he says:

    “God, if at all, must rise above the line of finite regress; He
    cannot be a cause in that; He cannot be a cause dependent on
    another cause; He must be somewhere, or at some point, in the
    line of an otherwise endless scientific regress, there, above
    it, yet related to it, and in it; otherwise He is nothing for
    us.” (“Knowing and Being,” p. 320.)

The parallelism is worth noting. Those views embody what has been the
contention of the present writer throughout this paper, _with this most
notable difference_: that no term of a series may thus transcend the
series, or be other than on a level with the other terms, being itself
only a term, a link, in the series itself. And with this falls forever
the idea of a cause uncaused.

Yet am _I_ not _in_ the series? For all that is in the series is
mine every percept, every concept; so that, “extravagant” as it may
appear, it is _I who am the series_. In other words, the ego is the
universe-synthesis, and the universe-synthesis the ego.

Is Mr. Peirce prepared to take the consequences of that which his
Synechism leads to?

                                                             G. M. MCCRIE.


FOOTNOTES:

[67] From τύχη, chance.

[68] _Tychism_ again comes to the front in the succeeding number of _The
Monist_, (Vol. III, No. 1,) in an article by Mr. Peirce, entitled “Man’s
Glassy Essence.”

[69] Dr. Carus, in his review of Mr. Peirce’s doctrines, (_The Monist_,
Vol. II, No. 4, p. 575,) notes this positivistic-constructionism.

[70] Cf. T. H. Green, _Prolegomena to Ethics_, Ch. II, p. 63.

[71] Nos. 258, 59, 61, August, 1892. _Miss Naden’s World-Scheme._

[72] In a note to this passage was appended a quotation from a pamphlet
by Dr. E. Cobham Brewer as a practical instance of the objective being,
on the antiquated subject-object plane, actually superseded. Suppose a
very remote star to become extinct, the “vibrations” would continue to
“travel” towards a spectator situated on our planet for years, it may
be for centuries. So that the spectator, ultimately, “sees” that which
does not even exist. Dr. Brewer’s comment, which cannot be considered any
contribution to a satisfactory _rationale_, is: “the objects, however,
must have existed, or no messenger could have been sent from their
courts.” Evidently, in this case, that which is sent is, at least, as
good as the sender—is, in fact, the self-same thing. Only, in that case,
what of the extinct object?

[73] Or to put it in another form, any one idea, and the timing of this
idea are really two ideas, although, as we shall see later, they may be
inseparable in practice.

[74] Cf., in this connection, the results of experiments by Cheselden,
as far back as 1727 on congenitally blind persons, couched for double
cataract.

[75] Much more inclusive, also, than the Relational Theory of the
Neo-Kantians.

[76] _The Monist_, Vol. III, No. 1.

[77] Mr. Peirce uses the word “instant” to mean a point of time, and
“moment” to mean an infinitesimal duration.

[78] The phrase, “something like,” is significant, when we remember, (see
_ante_,) that with Mr. Peirce the excitants were “something like” the
excited feelings.




THE FOURTH DIMENSION.

MATHEMATICAL AND SPIRITUALISTIC.


INTRODUCTORY.

The tendency to generalise long ago led mathematicians to extend the
notion of three-dimensional space, which is the space of sensible
representation, and to define aggregates of points, or spaces, of more
than three dimensions, with the view of employing these definitions as
useful means of investigation. They had no idea of requiring people to
imagine four-dimensional things and worlds, and they were even still
less remote from requiring of them to believe in the real existence of
a four-dimensioned space. In the hands of mathematicians this extension
of the notion of space was a mere means devised for the discovery and
expression, by shorter and more convenient ways, of truths applicable to
common geometry and to algebra operating with more than three unknown
quantities. At this stage, however, the spiritualists came in, and coolly
took possession of this private property of the mathematicians. They
were in great perplexity as to where they should put the spirits of the
dead. To give them a place in the world accessible to our senses was not
exactly practicable. They were compelled, therefore, to look around after
some _terra incognita_, which should oppose to the spirit of research
inborn in humanity an insuperable barrier. The residence of the spirits
had to be a place inaccessible to our senses and full of mystery to the
mind. This property the four-dimensioned space of the mathematicians
possessed. With an intellectual perversity which science has no idea of,
these spiritualists boldly asserted, first, that the whole world was so
situated in a four-dimensioned space as a plane might be situated in
the space familiar to us, secondly, that the spirits of the dead lived
in such a four-dimensioned space, thirdly, that these spirits could
accordingly act upon the world and, consequently, upon the human beings
resident in it, exactly as we three-dimensioned creatures can produce
effects upon things that are two-dimensional; for example, such effects
as that produced when we shatter a lamina of ice, and so influence some
possibly existing two-dimensioned _ice_-world.

Since spiritualism, under the leadership of the Leipsic Professor
Zöllner, thus proclaimed the existence of a four-dimensioned space, this
notion, which the mathematicians are thoroughly master of,—for in all
their operations with it, though they have forsaken the path of actual
representability, they have never left that of the truth,—this notion
has also passed into the heads of lay persons who have used it as a
catchword, ordinarily without having any clear idea of what they or any
one else mean by it. To clear up such ideas and to correct the wrong
impressions of cultured people who have not a technical mathematical
training, is the purpose of the following pages. A similar elucidation
was aimed at in the tracts which Schlegel (Riemann, Berlin, 1888) and
Cranz (Virchow-Holtzendorff’s Sammlung, Nos. 112 and 113) have published
on the so-called fourth dimension. Both treatises possess indubitable
merits, but their methods of presentation are in many respects too
concise to give a lay mind any profound comprehension of the subject. The
author, accordingly, has been able to add to the reflections which these
excellent treatises offer, a great deal that appears to him necessary for
a thorough explanation in the minds of non-mathematicians of the notion
of the fourth dimension.


