I.

THE CONCEPT OF DIMENSION.

Many text-books of stereometry begin with the words: “Every body has
three dimensions, length, breadth, and thickness.” If we should ask the
author of a book of this description to tell us the length, breadth, and
thickness of an apple, of a sponge, or of a cloud of tobacco smoke, he
would be somewhat perplexed and would probably say, that the definition
in question referred to something different. A cubical box, or some
similar structure, whose angles are all right angles and whose bounding
surfaces are consequently all rectangles is the only body of which it can
at all be unmistakably asserted that there are three principal directions
distinguishable in it, of which any one can be called the length, any
other the breadth, and any third the thickness. We thus see that the
notions of length, breadth, and thickness are not sufficiently clear and
universal to enable us to derive from them any idea of what is meant when
it is said that every body possesses three dimensions, or that the space
of the world is three-dimensional.

This distinction may be made sharper and more evident by the following
considerations: We have, let us suppose, a straight line on which a
point is situated, and the problem is proposed to determine the position
of the point on the line in an unequivocal manner. The simplest way to
solve this is, to state how far the point is removed in the one or the
other direction from some given fixed point; just as in a thermometer
the position of the surface of the mercury is given by a statement of
its distance in the direction of cold or heat from a predetermined fixed
point—the point of freezing water. To state, therefore, the position
of a point on a straight line, the sole datum necessary is a single
number, for beforehand we have fixed upon some standard line, like the
centimetre, and some definite point to which we give the value zero,
and have also previously decided in what direction from the zero-point,
points must be situated whose position is expressed by positive numbers,
and also in what direction those must lie whose position is expressed by
negative numbers. This last mentioned fact, that a _single_ number is
sufficient to determine the place of a point in a straight line, is the
real reason why we attribute to the straight line or to any part of it a
single dimension.

More generally, we call every totality or system, of infinitely numerous
things, _one_-dimensional, in which _one_ number is all that is requisite
to determine and distinguish any particular one of these things amidst
the entire totality. Thus, time is one-dimensional. We, as inhabitants
of the earth, have naturally chosen as our unit of time, the period of
the rotation of the earth about its axis, namely, the day, or a definite
portion of a day. The zero-point of time is regarded in Christian
countries as the year of the birth of Christ, and the positive direction
of time is the time _subsequent_ to the birth of Christ. These data
fixed, all that is necessary to establish and distinguish any definite
point of time amid the infinite totality of all the points of time, _is
a single number_. Of course this number need not be a whole number, but
may be made up of the sum of a whole number and a fraction in whose
numerator and denominator we may have numbers as great as we please. We
may, therefore, also say that the totality of all conceivable numerical
magnitudes, or of only such as are greater than one definite number and
smaller than some other definite number, is one-dimensional.

We shall add here a few additional examples of one-dimensioned magnitudes
presented by geometry. First, the circumference of a circle is a
one-dimensional magnitude, as is every curved line, whether it returns
into itself or not. Further, the totality of all equilateral triangles
which stand on the same base is one-dimensional, or the totality of
all circles that can be described through two fixed points. Also, the
totality of all conceivable cubes will be seen to be one-dimensional,
provided they are distinguished, not with respect to position, but with
respect to magnitude.

In conformity with the fundamental ideas by which we define the notion
of a one-dimensional manifoldness, it will be seen that the attribute
_two_-dimensional must be applied to all totalities of things in
which _two_ numbers are necessary (and sufficient) to distinguish
any determinate individual thing amid the totality. The simplest
two-dimensioned complex which we know of is the plane. To determine
accurately the position of a point in a plane, the simplest way is to
take two axes at right angles to each other, that is, fixed straight
lines, and then to specify the distances by which the point in question
is removed from each of these axes.

This method of determining the position of a point in a plane suggested
to the celebrated philosopher and mathematician Descartes the fundamental
idea of analytical geometry, a branch of mathematics in which by the
simple artifice of ascribing to every point in a plane two numerical
values, determined by its distances from the two axes above referred
to, planimetrical considerations are transformed into algebraical. So,
too, all kinds of curves that graphically represent the dependence of
things on time, make use of the fact that the totality of the points in
a plane is two-dimensional. For example, to represent in a graphical
form the increase of the population of a city, we take a horizontal axis
to represent the time, and a perpendicular one to represent the numbers
which are the measures of the population. Any two lines, then, whose
lengths practical considerations determine, are taken as the unit of
time, which we may say is a year, and as the unit of population, which
we will say is one thousand. Some definite year, say 1850, is fixed
upon as the zero point. Then, from all the equally distant points on
the horizontal axis, which points stand for the years, we proceed in
directions parallel to the other axis, that is, in the perpendicular
direction, just so much upwards as the numbers which stand for the
population of that year require. The terminal points so reached, or the
curve which runs through these terminal points, will then present a
graphic picture of the rates of increase of the population of the town
in the different years. The rectangular axes of Descartes are employed
in a similar way for the construction of barometer curves, which specify
for the different localities of a country the amount of variation of the
atmospheric pressure during any period of time. Immediately next to the
plane the surface of the earth will be recognised as a two-dimensional
aggregate of points. In this case geographical latitude and longitude
supply the two numbers that are requisite accurately to determine the
position of a point. Also, the totality of all the possible straight
lines that can be drawn through any point in space is two-dimensional, as
we shall best understand if we picture to ourselves a plane which is cut
in a point by each of these straight lines and then remember that by such
a construction every point on the plane will belong to some one line and,
_vice versa_, a line to every point, whence it follows that the totality
of all the straight lines which pass through the point assigned are of
the same dimensions as the totality of the points of the imagined plane.

The question might be asked, In what way and to what extent in this
case is the specification of _two_ numbers requisite and sufficient
to determine amid all the rays which pass through the specified point
a definite individual ray? To get a clear idea of the problem here
involved, let us imagine the ray produced far into the heavens, where
some quite definite point will correspond to it. Now, the position of
a point in the heavens depends, as does the position of a point on all
spherical surfaces, on two numbers. In the heavens these two numbers are
ordinarily supplied by the two angles called altitude, or the distance
above the plane of the horizon, and azimuth, or the angular distance
between the circle on which the altitude is measured and the meridian
of the observer. It will be seen thus that the totality of all the
luminous rays that an eye, conceived as a point, can receive from the
outer world is two-dimensional, and also that a luminous point emits
a two-dimensional group of luminous rays. It will also be observed,
in connection with this example, that the two-dimensional totality of
all the rays that can be drawn through a point in space is something
different from the totality of the rays that pass through a point but
are required to lie in a given plane. Such a group of objects as the
last-named one, is a one-dimensional totality.

Now that we have sufficiently discussed the attributes that are
characteristic of one and two-dimensional aggregates, we may, without any
further investigation of the subject, propose the following definition,
that, generally, _an n-dimensional totality of infinitely numerous
things is such, with respect to which the specification of n numbers
is necessary and sufficient to indicate a definite individual amid the
totality of all the infinitely numerous individuals of the group_.

Accordingly, the point-aggregate made up of the world-space which we
inhabit, is a three-dimensional totality. To get true bearings in this
space and to define any determinate point in it, we have therefore to lay
through any point which we take as our zero-point three axes at right
angles to each other, one running from right to left, one backwards
and forwards, and one upwards and downwards. We then join each two of
these axes by a plane and are enabled thus to specify the position of
every point in space by the three perpendicular distances by which the
point in question is removed in a positive or negative sense from
these three planes. It is customary to denote the numbers which are the
measures of these three distances by _x_, _y_, and _z_, the positive
_x_, positive _y_, and positive _z_ ordinarily being reckoned in the
right hand, the forward, and the upward directions from the origin.
If now, with direct reference to this fundamental axial system, any
particular specification of _x_, _y_, and _z_ be made, there will, by
such an operation, be cut out and isolated from the three-dimensional
manifoldness of all the points of space a totality of less dimensions.
If, for example, _z_ is equal to seven units or measures, this is
equivalent to a statement that only the two-dimensional totality of the
points is meant, which constitute the plane that can be laid at right
angles to the upward-passing _z_-axis at a distance of seven measures
from the zero-point. Consequently, every imaginable equation between _x_,
_y_, and _z_ isolates and defines a two-dimensional aggregate of points.
If two different equations obtain between _x_, _y_, and _z_, two such
two-dimensional totalities will be isolated from among all the points
of space. But as these last must have some one-dimensional totality in
common, we may say that the co-existence of two equations between _x_,
_y_, and _z_ defines a one-dimensional totality of points, that is to say
a straight line, a line curved in a plane, or even, perhaps, one curved
in space. It is evident from this that the introduction of the three axes
of reference forms a bridge between the theory of space and the theory of
equations involving three variable quantities, _x_, _y_, _z_. The reason
that the theory of space cannot thus be brought into connection with
algebra in general, that is, with the theory of indefinitely numerous
equations, but only with the algebra of three quantities, _x_, _y_, _z_,
is simply to be sought in the fact that space, as we picture it, can only
have three dimensions.

We have now only to supply a few additional examples of _n_-dimensional
totalities. All particles of air are four-dimensional in magnitude
when in addition to their position in space we also consider the
variable densities which they assume, as they are expressed by
the different heights of the barometer in the different parts of
the atmosphere. Similarly, all conceivable spheres in space are
four-dimensional magnitudes, for their centres form a three-dimensional
point-aggregate, and around each centre there may be additionally
conceived a one-dimensional totality of spheres, the radii of which can
be expressed by every numerical magnitude from zero to infinity. Further,
if we imagine a measuring stick of invariable length to assume every
conceivable position in space, the positions so obtained will constitute
a five-dimensional aggregate. For, in the first place, one of the
extremities of the measuring stick may be conceived to assume a position
at every point of space, and this determines for one extremity alone
of the stick a three-dimensional totality of positions; and secondly,
as we have seen above, there proceeds from every such position of this
extremity a two-dimensional totality of directions, and by conceiving the
measuring-stick to be placed lengthwise in every one of these directions
we shall obtain all the conceivable positions which the second extremity
can assume, and consequently, the dimensions must be 3 plus 2 or 5.
Finally, to find out how many dimensions the totality of all the possible
positions of a square, invariable in magnitude, possesses, we first give
one of its corners all conceivable positions in space, and we thus obtain
three dimensions. One definite point in space now being fixed for the
position of one corner of the square, we imagine drawn through this point
all possible lines, and on each we lay off the length of the side of
the square and thus obtain two additional dimensions. Through the point
obtained for the position of the second corner of the square we must
now conceive all the possible directions drawn that are perpendicular
to the line thus fixed, and we must lay off once more on each of these
directions the side of the square. By this last determination the
dimensions are only increased by one, for only one one-dimensional
totality of perpendicular directions is possible to one straight line
in one of its points. Three corners of the square are now fixed and
therewith the position of the fourth also is uniquely determined.
Accordingly, the totality of all equal squares which only differ from one
another by their position in space, constitutes a manifoldness of six
dimensions.


