letter itself is, unfortunately, not available. This letter, no doubt,
says that the chamber was removed from Dachau in May, while the
prosecution alleges that the experiments continued until August. Then
there is a certain pause in Rascher’s and Himmler’s efforts, because
Rascher is busy with the cold experiments. When the film is shown in
Berlin in the Air Ministry, Rascher does not forget to tell Milch again
of his wishes in regard to the low-pressure chamber. But hardly has the
first phase of the cold experiments—the series with Holzloehner—been
finished, when he writes to Himmler again on 9 October. (_1610-PS, Pros.
Ex. 73._) He asks Himmler to get him the low-pressure chamber so that he
can continue his experiments and qualify as a professor. In the letter
of 21 October 1942 (_NO-226, Pros. Ex. 75_), Sievers writes to Brandt
about the continuation of the high-altitude experiments which Himmler
wants, but knowing of the existing difficulties, or for other reasons,
he adds that Himmler will no doubt have to write to Milch personally in
order actually to get the chamber. This happens on 27 November 1942
(_NO-269, Pros. Ex. 78_)—a letter from Wolff to Milch, on behalf of
Himmler. The definite request for the low-pressure chamber, which is
expressed in this letter, is given definite emphasis by mention of the
opposition of the Luftwaffe doctors. I learned from a telephone call
from Sievers, which he mentioned in his testimony, that he was to buy a
low-pressure chamber for Rascher on behalf of Himmler. I was greatly
astonished at this telephone call at the time, because I knew very well
that Rascher certainly didn’t want to have this made public in any way.
Now, this telephone call has been cleared up. Then I informed Ruff of
this call and he had Becker-Freyseng take further steps, as he said here
yesterday. In an official letter to various SS agencies, dated 13
December 1942 (_1612-PS, Pros. Ex. 79_), Rascher is given the assignment
by Himmler personally to carry out high-altitude experiments. On 14
March 1943 (_NO-270, Pros. Ex. 110_), Rascher tells of his discussions
with Hippke and again says that he wants to carry out low-pressure
chamber experiments, together with me; and finally, on 18 November 1943
(_NO-1057, Pros. Ex. 463_), he tries again, through the Reich Research
Council in agreement with Himmler, to get a mobile low-pressure chamber
in order to carry out experiments. Those are Rascher’s and Himmler’s
efforts but, nevertheless, Rascher never again had a low-pressure
chamber at his disposal for experiments.

Q. Well, what do you want to prove by these statements?

A. This no doubt proves clearly how great Rascher’s and Himmler’s
efforts were and that my conduct under these circumstances was not only
not cowardly, but that it was much more clever and much more successful.
Even if I had had any legal obligations to prevent him by force, if I
had had any obligations to attack Rascher and if I had tried and been
unsuccessful, then I would have been locked up or killed and Rascher
would have been able to continue his experiments for a long time without
any restriction.

Q. At that time, was there any possibility in Germany to resist, and in
what did you see such possibility?

A. There were only three types of resistance possible. First of all,
emigration for a person who was able; second, open resistance which
meant a concentration camp or the death penalty, and to my knowledge,
never met with any success; third, passive resistance by apparent
yielding, misplacing and delaying orders, criticism among one’s friends,
in short, what writers today call “internal emigration.” But that really
doesn’t have much to do with the question. As far as the direct question
of prevention is concerned, I would like to say something more. To take
a comparison from the medical field, it is unknown to me and I cannot
imagine, for example, that an assistant of a scientific research worker
who is performing infections with a fatal disease, for example, leprosy,
on a prisoner, that this assistant should prevent the scientist from
carrying out this infection by force—perhaps by knocking the hypodermic
syringe out of his hand and crying “You mustn’t do that, the man might
die!” I could imagine that some assistant might, for personal reasons,
refuse to participate in such experiments, but I cannot imagine that if
there were a trial against this doctor the prosecution would demand that
the assistant should have prevented the scientist in this manner.

Q. Then, you are convinced that prevention by force was impossible?

A. Yes.

Q. But could you not have filed charges, for example, with the police or
with the public prosecutor, against Rascher?

A. Yes, of course, I could have, but if I had gone there and said,
“Rascher has performed experiments ordered by Himmler—by the Chief of
the German Police and whatever else he was—the Reich Leader SS, the
State Secretary in the Ministry of the Interior,” they would probably
have said: “Well, we can’t do anything about it. If he has orders, then
we can’t do anything about it.”

                 *        *        *        *        *

-----

[18] Jews who had had sexual intercourse with German women with their
consent.

[19] Very similar arguments were advanced by counsel for defendant
Romberg.

[20] The witness Neff was called to testify as a Tribunal witness and
not as a prosecution witness.

[21] See Vol. II, judgment is case of United States _vs._ Erhard Milch.

[22] Last sentence is crossed out and replaced by one in German
shorthand.

[23] Translator’s Note: “Terminal” as used here means “resulting in
death”.

[24] These studies were carried out in conjunction with the research and
educational society “Ahnenerbe.”

[25] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, December
17-18, 1947, pp. 595-695.

[26] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, March
24, 25, and 26, 1947, pp. 4869-4994.

[27] Complete testimony is recorded in mimeographed transcript, May 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, 1947, pp. 6764-7032.

                        2. FREEZING EXPERIMENTS

                            a. Introduction

The defendants Karl Brandt, Handloser, Schroeder, Gebhardt, Rudolf
Brandt, Mrugowsky, Poppendick, Sievers, Becker-Freyseng, and Weltz were
charged with special responsibility for and participation in criminal
conduct involving freezing experiments (par. 6 (B) of the indictment).
On this charge the defendants Handloser, Schroeder, Rudolf Brandt, and
Sievers were convicted. The defendants Karl Brandt, Gebhardt, Mrugowsky,
Poppendick, Becker-Freyseng, and Weltz were acquitted.

The prosecution’s summation of the evidence on the freezing experiments
is contained in its final brief against the defendant Sievers. An
extract from this brief is set forth below on pages 199 to 206. A
corresponding summation of the evidence by the defense on these
experiments has been selected from the closing briefs for the defendants
Sievers and Weltz. It appears below on pages 207 to 217. This
argumentation is followed by selections from the evidence on pages 219
to 278.

         b. Selection from the Argumentation of the Prosecution

       _EXTRACT FROM THE CLOSING BRIEF AGAINST DEFENDANT SIEVERS_
                         _Freezing Experiments_

Before the high-altitude experiments had actually been completed, the
freezing experiments were ordered to be performed by the defendant Weltz
and his subordinate Rascher. This can be seen from a letter of 20 May
1942 from Milch to Karl Wolff. (_343-A-PS, Pros. Ex. 62._) A short time
later, Rascher had a conference with Hippke and the experimental team
was changed to include Jarisch, Holzloehner, and Singer. Rascher
reported these orders to Himmler on 15 June 1942, and passed on Hippke’s
request to have the experiments conducted in Dachau. He stated: “It was
also decided that the inspector [Hippke] would issue orders to me at all
times during the experiments.” (_NO-283, Pros. Ex. 82._) The research
assignment was issued by the Department for Aviation Medicine (2 II B)
under Anthony, with the defendant Becker-Freyseng as his deputy.
(_NO-286, Pros. Ex. 88._)

The cold-water freezing experiments began on 15 August 1942 and
continued until the early part of 1943. They were performed by
Holzloehner, Finke, and Rascher, all of whom were officers in the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe. Holzloehner and Finke collaborated
with Rascher until December 1942. As Rascher said in a paper on his
medical training: “By order of the Reich Leader SS and
Generaloberstabsarzt Professor Dr. Hippke, I conducted ‘Experiments for
the Rescue of Frozen Persons’ (started on 15 August 1942), in
cooperation—for 4 months—with the Professor Dr. Holzloehner and Dr.
Finke both of Kiel University.” (_NO-230, Pros. Ex. 115._) Rascher also
said that: “Since May 1939 till today I have been in military service
with the Air Force.” The memorandum was dated 17 May 1943. It should
therefore be borne in mind that during all of the high-altitude and
substantially all of the freezing experiments, Rascher was on _active
duty_ with the Luftwaffe, not the SS. It was not until after May 1943
that he went on active duty with the Waffen SS. He was of course
supported by both the Luftwaffe and the SS in these experiments.

The witness Neff, who was an inmate assistant in the experiments,
testified that freezing experiments in the concentration camp Dachau
started at the end of July or in August 1942. They were conducted by
Rascher, Holzloehner, and Finke. In October, Holzloehner and Finke left
and Rascher proceeded alone to conduct freezing experiments until May
1943. Rascher, Holzloehner, and Finke used ice-cold water for their
freezing experiments. The experimental basin had been built 2 meters
long and 2 meters high in Rascher’s experimental station, Block 5. (_Tr.
pp. 626-8._) The experiments were carried out in the following manner:
The basin was filled with water and ice was added until the water
measured 3° C. The experimental subjects, either dressed in a flying
suit or naked, were placed into the ice water. Narcotics were frequently
not used. It always took a certain time until so-called “freezing
narcosis” made the experimental subjects unconscious, and the subjects
suffered terribly. The temperature of the victims was measured rectally
and through the stomach by galvanometer. They lost consciousness at a
body temperature of approximately 33° C. The experiments actually
progressed until the experimental persons were chilled down to 25° C.
body temperature. An experiment on two Russian officers who were exposed
naked to the ice-cold water in the basin was particularly brutal. These
two Russians were still conscious after 2 hours. Rascher refused to
administer an injection. When one of the inmates who attended the
experiment tried to administer an anaesthetic to these two victims,
Rascher threatened him with a pistol. Both experimental subjects died
after having been exposed at least 5 hours to the terrible cold. (_Tr.
pp. 629-631._) Approximately 280 to 300 experimental subjects were used
for this type of freezing experiment, but in reality, 360 to 400
experiments were conducted since many experimental subjects were used
two or three times for experiments. Approximately 80 to 90 experimental
subjects died. About 50 to 60 inmates were used in the
Holzloehner-Finke-Rascher experiments and approximately 15 to 18 of them
died. Political prisoners, non-German nationals, and prisoners of war
were used for these experiments. Many of the inmates used had not been
“condemned to death.” The subjects did not volunteer for the
experiments. (_Tr. pp. 627-8._)

Even though one assumes that prisoners condemned to death were used in
all of the experiments, which is not true, the “defense” that they
volunteered on the agreement that their sentences would be commuted to
life imprisonment is invalid. During the high-altitude experiments,
Himmler had directed that in further experiments where the long
continued heart activity of subjects who were killed was observed,
criminals condemned to death should be used and, if they were revived,
they should be “pardoned” to concentration camp for life. (_1971-B-PS,
Pros. Ex. 51._) Rascher apparently construed this order to apply to the
freezing experiments also. On 20 October 1942, Rascher advised Rudolf
Brandt that until then only Poles and Russians had been used for such
experiments and that only some of these persons had been condemned to
death. He inquired whether Himmler’s “amnesty” applied to Russians and
Poles. (_1971-D-PS, Pros. Ex. 52._) Brandt told him that it did not
apply. (_1971-E-PS, Pros. Ex. 53._)

Dry-freezing experiments were carried out by Rascher in January,
February, and March 1943. One experimental subject was placed on a
stretcher at night and exposed to the cold outdoors. He was covered with
a linen sheet, but a bucket of cold water was poured over him every
hour. He remained outdoors until the morning and then his temperature
was taken with a thermometer. In the next series the experimental plan
was changed, and experimental persons had to remain naked outdoors for
long hours without being covered up at all. One series was carried out
on 10 prisoners who had to remain outdoors overnight. Rascher himself
was present during approximately 18 to 20 experiments of that type.
Approximately three experimental subjects died as a result of the
dry-freezing experiments. (_Tr. pp. 636-7._)

On the order of Grawitz and Rascher, a mass experiment on 100
experimental subjects was to be carried out. As Rascher was not present,
Neff was in the position to frustrate the experiment by taking the
experimental subjects indoors, and therefore no deaths occurred during
this experimental series. The longest period that experimental subjects
were kept outdoors in the cold was from 6 p. m. of one day to 9 a. m. of
the following morning. The lowest temperature Neff can recollect during
the dry-freezing experiments was 25° body temperature. As Rascher had
prohibited that experiments were to be carried out under anaesthetics,
the experimental subjects suffered great pain and screamed to such an
extent that it was impossible to carry out further experiments. Rascher
therefore requested Himmler’s permission to carry out such experiments
in the future in the Auschwitz concentration camp. Non-German nationals
and political prisoners were among the experimental subjects. None of
them was sentenced to death. They had not volunteered for the
experiments. (_Tr. pp. 637-9._)

In connection with the freezing experiments, Neff further testified that
in September 1942 he received orders from Sievers to take the hearts and
lungs of five experimental subjects who had been killed in the
experiments to Professor Hirt in Strasbourg for further scientific
study. The travel warrant for Neff had been made out by Sievers, and the
Ahnenerbe Society paid the expenses for the transfer of the bodies. One
of the five experimental subjects killed had been a Dutch citizen. (_Tr.
p. 633._) Sievers visited the experimental station quite frequently
during the freezing experiments. (_Tr. p. 635._)

Neff’s testimony is corroborated by the affidavits of the defendants
Rudolf Brandt and Becker-Freyseng (_NO-242, Pros. Ex. 80_; _NO-448,
Pros. Ex. 81_) and the testimony of the witness Lutz (_Tr. pp. 266-76_),
Vieweg (_Tr. p. 431_), and Michalowsky (_Tr. pp. 878-83_), and by the
documentary evidence in the record.

On 15 June 1942, Rascher informed Himmler that the Inspector of the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe, Hippke, sought permission for cold
experiments to be conducted by Rascher and Holzloehner in the Dachau
concentration camp. (_NO-283, Pros. Ex. 82._) On 10 September 1942,
Rascher submitted his first intermediary report on the freezing
experiments to Himmler. In the covering letter Rascher stated that
Holzloehner, who participated in the execution of the experiments on
behalf of the Luftwaffe, intended to lecture on the subject of freezing
in the “cold conference” of the Luftwaffe on 26-27 October in Nuernberg.
Rascher informed Himmler that “Sievers, who surveyed the experiments in
Dachau last week, believed that if any report was to be made at a
meeting, I should be called upon to submit the report.” (_NO-234, Pros.
Ex. 83._) The intermediary report itself shows on its face that
fatalities occurred as a result of the Rascher-Holzloehner-Finke
experiments and advocated rapid rewarming of severely chilled persons.
Rascher considered that rewarming with animal heat would be too slow,
and that experiments in this respect would be unnecessary. He voiced a
similar opinion as to the use of drugs for the purpose of rewarming.
(_1618-PS, Pros. Ex. 34._) Himmler, when acknowledging the receipt of
Rascher’s report on 22 September, directed nevertheless that the
experiment with rewarming by means of drugs and body heat should be
made. A copy of this order of Himmler’s was forwarded to Sievers on 25
September. (_1611-PS, Pros. Ex. 85._)

On the basis of this order Rascher approached Sievers to make
arrangements for four female gypsies to be procured at once for the
purpose of rewarming experimental subjects. (_NO-285, Pros. Ex. 86._) It
was apparently Sievers’ effort in this regard which resulted in a series
of telegrams to transfer these women from the Ravensbrueck concentration
camp to Dachau. Rudolf Brandt actually directed the transfer. (_1619-PS,
Pros. Ex. 87._) The four women arrived in November 1942 in Dachau. Three
of them were used for rewarming of frozen experimental subjects, one
being excluded because she was a “Nordic” type. That the experimental
subjects were not volunteers is plain from a remark of one of these
women. “Rather half a year in the brothel than half a year in the
concentration camp.” (_NO-323, Pros. Ex. 94._) This series of
experiments, which was not only murderous but obscene, was carried out
by Rascher between November 1942 and February 1943. His report to
Himmler reveals that one of the experimental subjects died as a result
of this series of experiments. (_1616-PS, Pros. Ex. 105._)

On 8 October 1942, Stabsarzt Professor Anthony of the Medical
Inspectorate of the Luftwaffe approached Himmler with the information
that the results of the wet-freezing experiments carried out by Rascher
in cooperation with Holzloehner and Finke were to be lectured upon by
Holzloehner during the “cold conference” on 26-27 October in Nuernberg.
(_NO-286, Pros. Ex. 88, compare NO-234, Pros. Ex. 83._) On 16 October
Rascher also asked Himmler’s permission to release the results of the
freezing experiments during these “cold conferences.” (_NO-225, Pros.
Ex. 89._) On the same day Rascher submitted to Himmler his final report
on the freezing experiments as far as they had been carried out in
collaboration with Holzloehner and Finke. This report did not include
experiments for rewarming by means of drugs and of animal body heat,
which at that time were still in progress. (_1613-PS, Pros. Ex. 90._)

This report on “Cooling Experiments on Human Beings” by Holzloehner,
Rascher, and Finke, corroborates fully the testimony of Neff concerning
this series of the wet-freezing experiments and proves that many
fatalities occurred. It shows that some of the experimental subjects
were exposed to this terrible type of experimentation without receiving
anesthetics, which would have alleviated their pain considerably. The
sufferings of the experimental subjects were vividly described. Foam
appeared round the mouths of the experimental subjects, and breathing
difficulties and lung oedema resulted. The cooling of the neck and back
of the head of the experimental subjects caused especially painful
sensations. Progressive rigor, which developed very strongly in the arm
muscles, cyanosis, and total irregularity of the heart activity were the
symptoms observed by the experimenters. Hot baths were advocated as the
best treatment for severely chilled persons. Fatalities resulted from
heart failure and brain oedema, and measures for protection against such
results were discussed at great length. (_NO-428, Pros. Ex. 91._)

Sievers denied that Rascher reported to him on the freezing experiments
but admitted that he received occasionally Rascher’s reports from
Himmler. (_Tr. pp. 5684-5._) But by the testimony of the witness Neff it
is not only proved that Rascher submitted to the Ahnenerbe monthly,
quarterly, and semi-annual reports, describing in detail the nature and
status of his experimental research (_Tr. p. 635_), but also that the
final report of Rascher, Holzloehner, and Finke (_NO-1428, Pros. Ex.
91_) was forwarded to him. (_Tr. p. 681._)

On 24 October Himmler acknowledged the receipt of this report which he
had read “with great interest” and charged Sievers with arrangements for
“the possibility of evaluation at institutes which are connected with
us.” (_1609-PS, Pros. Ex. 92._)

On 26 and 27 October 1942, the conference on “Medical Problems Arising
from Distress at Sea and Winter Hardships,” sponsored by the Inspector
of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe, Hippke, under the chairmanship
of Anthony and with the assistance of Becker-Freyseng, took place in
Nuernberg. At this conference Holzloehner delivered his lecture on the
freezing experiments under the title “Prophylaxis and Treatment of
Freezing in Water.” The very detailed clinical observations described by
him excluded the possibility that only observations on human beings _who
were rescued_ had been made, and made it clear that experiments on human
beings had been conducted. (_NO-401, Pros. Ex. 93._) Moreover, Rascher
made a statement following Holzloehner’s lecture, which clearly revealed
that the experiments had been carried out on concentration camp inmates.
This report caused a sensation among the officials present at the
lecture. It was made clear that deaths had occurred. (_Tr. p. 272._)
Sievers has denied having received a report on this conference (_Tr. p.
5689_), but the entry of 12 January in his diary for the year 1943 shows
that he discussed with Rascher the “procurement of memoranda on the
conference concerning the effects of cold in Nuernberg.” (_NO-538, Pros.
Ex. 122._)

On 6 November 1942, Rascher forwarded a memorandum to Himmler’s personal
staff, the office of the defendant Rudolf Brandt, regarding cooperation
with Dr. Craemer of the Medical Research Station for Mountain Medical
Troops at St. Johann. This was a school subordinated to Handloser as
Army Medical Inspector. In this memorandum Rascher advocated
dry-freezing experiments on concentration camp inmates in the mountain
region of Bayrischzell. The purpose was to investigate whether injuries
of the extremities due to freezing would have a better prognosis on
persons accustomed to cold than on persons unaccustomed to it. Rascher
said that Craemer had heard the report in Nuernberg and was very
enthusiastic about the experiments. He requested to see some in
progress. (_NO-319, Pros. Ex. 96_; _1579-PS, Pros. Ex. 97_.) Himmler
gave his permission for this type of dry-freezing experiment in an order
dated 13 December 1942, in which he lists Rascher’s assignment for the
execution of high-altitude and three different types of freezing
experiments. Copies of this order were submitted to various SS agencies
and to the Ahnenerbe Society. (_1612-PS, Pros. Ex. 79._) Himmler’s
